 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Phalguna, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
173 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026-27 (DEMAND NO. 47) 
OF THE 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
  
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March 2026) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail :rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

DEPARTMENT
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Phalguna, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026-27 (DEMAND NO. 47)
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
  
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
  
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March 2026
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March 2026
  
Y STANDING 
AND FAMILY WELFARE 
THIRD REPORT 
27 (DEMAND NO. 47) 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
March 2026) 
March 2026) 

 
CONTENTS 
     
  Page Nos. 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2.  PREFACE  ii 
3.  ACRONYMS iii – iv 
4. REPORT  
 Chapter -I        Introduction 1-17 
 Chapter- II       Analysis of Budgetary Allocations  18-40 
 Chapter- III  Schemes/ Projects of Department of Health    
Research  (DHR)  
41-76 
 Chapter –IV    Indian Council of Medical Research  (ICMR), New 
Delhi  
77-116 
 Chapter –V      Way Forward for DHR 117-132 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 133-161 
  6. MINUTES* 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at later stage 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  -  Chairman  
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri  
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar    Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth. Under Secretary 
 
 
 
  

ii 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, have been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
its behalf, hereby present this 173rd Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants for 
the year 2026-27 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare. 
 
2.  The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees are entrusted with the 
constitutional role of ensuring accountability of executive to the Parliament.  In this regard, 
Rule 270 (a) of Rules & Procedure and Conduct & Business in the Council of States (Rajya 
Sabha) empowered the Department-related Standing Committees to consider the Demands for 
Grants of the related Departments/Ministries with the objective of ensuring financial 
accountability of the executive and report thereon. In exercise of its constitutional mandate, 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health & Family Welfare 
scrutinised the Demands for Grants for the year 2026-27 (Demand No. 47) of the Department 
of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, in its meeting, 
held on 23rd February, 2026 heard the Secretary, Department of Health Research and other 
Officers on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Department. 
 
3.  The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied 
upon the following documents:– 
(i) Detailed Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Department of Health Research; 
(ii) Annual Report of the Department for the year 2025-26; 
(iii) Detailed Explanatory Note on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Department 
of Health Research; 
(iv) Output-Outcome framework 2026-27 for scheme of the Department of Health 
Research; 
(v) Projection of outlays for the schemes by the Department during the Financial 
Year 2026-27; 
(vi) Written replies furnished by the Department to the Questionnaires sent to them 
by the Secretariat; and 
(vii) Presentation made by the Secretary (Health Research) and other officers 
concerned, etc. 
 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on 18th March, 2026, considered the draft report 
and adopted the same. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
NEW DELHI  
18th March 2026 
Phalguna, 1947 (Saka)                                                 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav                                                                                       
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 

iii 
 
                          ACRONYMS 
 
AMR Antimicrobial Resistance 
ABSL3 Animal Biosafety Level 3 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AAR 
ART 
ABR 
AMB 
ANRF 
Age Adjusted Incidence Rates 
Assisted Reproductive Technology 
Auditory Brainstem Response 
Anaemia Mukt Bharat 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist  
BSL-3 Biosafety level 3 
CSSS Central Secretariat Stenographer Service 
CS Central Sector 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CoE Centre of Excellence 
CoRE Centres of Research Excellence 
CDSCO 
CTRI 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
Clinical Trial Registry- India 
DHR    Department of Health Research 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DDG Deputy Director General 
DISHA Demography Integrated Surveillance for Health Assessment 
DDESS Development and Environmental Surveillance Systems 
DoH&FW Department of Health and Family Welfare 
DIAMONDS     ( DHR-ICMR) Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services 
EAR Estimated Average Requirement 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FRBM Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
HPV  Human Papillomavirus 
HTA Health Technology Assessment 
HTAIn Health Technology Assessment in India 
HEPR Health emergency preparedness and response 
IDA Institute for Defense Analyses 
IEC Information Education Communication 
ISA International Solar Alliance 
ITRC India tuberculosis Research Consortium 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IHME Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation 
ISTC International Science and technology Center 
IHCI India Hypertension Control Initiative 
IRCS Indian Red Cross Society 
IHCI India Hypertension Control Initiative 
IPEA International Preliminary Examination Authority 
IKS Indian knowledge Systems 
IISF India International Science Festival 
InDIAB The Indian Diabetes Study 
LRAC Local Research Advisory committee 
MBA    Management by Activities 
MRUs Multi-disciplinary Research Units 
MRHRUs    Model Rural Health Research Units 
MDVAS    Mega-dose Vitamin A Supplementation 

iv 
 
MoSPI Ministry of Statistics and Planning Implementation 
MIDAC Medical Innovations Development Acceleration Company 
NCDIR 
NDCT 
National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research 
New Drug Clinical Trial Rules 
NRI Non-resident Indian 
NICHDR    National Institute of child Health and Development research 
NIRBI National Institute for Research in Bacterial Infections 
NIE National Institute of Epidemiology 
NIV National Institute of Virology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NITVAR National Institute of Translational Virology & AIDS Research 
NCDs Non-communicable diseases 
NCVBDC    National Centre for Vector Borne Disease Control 
NIRDHDS    National Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science 
NCRP National Cancer Registry Program 
OCI Overseas Citizen of India 
PIO Persons of Indian Origin 
PHFI Public Health Foundation of India 
PM-ABHIM Prime Minister-Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
PCT Patient Care Technician 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PCT Patient Care Technician 
RDA Recommended Dietary Allowances 
RMRC Regional Medical Research Centre 
RMNCH Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent Health and Nutrition 
SSE Social Stock Exchange 
SUGAM Portal System for Unmanned Gateways Approval of Manufacturers 
STW Standard Treatment World 
SFC    Standing Finance Committee 
TSA Transportation Security Administration 
TAEI-SMART TN-Stroke Mobilization & Rapid Treatment 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UIP Universal Immunization Programme 
VRDLs     Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories 
WINGS Women and Infant Integrated Interventions for Growth 
WHO World Health Organization 
WASH Water and sanitation hygiene  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Department of Health Research (DHR) 
 
1.1 The history of the Department of Health Research (DHR) traces back to 1911, when 
the Indian Research Fund Association (IRFA) was established to sponsor and coordinate 
medical research across the country (IRFA was later renamed the Indian Council of Medical 
Research in 1949).  In its present form, the DHR was created as a separate department under 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare on September 17, 2007, through an amendment to 
the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules,1961. The department was formally 
launched on October 5, 2007, by the Minister for Science & Technology and Earth Sciences 
during a ceremony presided over by the Minister for Health & Family Welfare. However, the 
DHR became fully operational only in November, 2008, following the appointment of its 
first Secretary, who also served as the Director General of the ICMR. 
 
1.2 Vision and Mission of DHR 
 
1.2.1 Vision of DHR: to bring modern health technologies to the people through research 
and innovations related to diagnosis, treatment methods and vaccines for prevention; to 
translate them into products and processes and, in synergy with concerned organizations, 
introduce these innovations into public health system. 
 
1.2.2 Mission of DHR:  
1. Promotion and co-ordination of basic, applied and clinical research including clinical 
trials and operational research in areas related to medical, health, biomedical and 
medical profession and education through development of infrastructure, manpower 
and skills in cutting edge areas and management of related information thereto. 
2. Promote and provide guidance on research governance issues, including ethical issues 
in medical and health research. 
3. Inter-sectoral coordination and promotion of public- private – partnership in medical, 
biomedical and health research related areas. 
4. Advanced training in research areas concerning medicine and health, including grant 
of fellowships for such training in India and abroad. 
5. International co-operation in medical and health research, including work related to 
international conference in related areas in India and abroad. 
6. Technical support for dealing with epidemics and natural calamities. 
7. Investigation of outbreaks due to new and exotic agents and development of tools for 
prevention. 
8. Facilitating scientific societies and associations, charitable and religious endowments 
in health research areas. 

2 
 
9. Coordination between organization and institutes under the Central and State 
Governments in areas related to the subjects entrusted to the Department and for the 
promotion of special studies in medicine and health. 
10. Administering and monitoring of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). 
11. Health Technology Assessment 
 
 
1.2.3 The Rules/Regulations/Guidelines where the Department has a nodal/administrative 
role:- 
 
1. Clinical Trial Registry- Registration of all regulatory clinical trials is mandatory as 
per the drug licensing authority in India i.e. the Drugs Controller General (India) 
(DCGI). In addition, several journal editors, ethics committees and medical colleges 
have made it mandatory to register clinical studies in the CTRI. 
 
2. Bioethics -Chapter IV of New Drug Clinical Trial Rules 2019 under Drugs and 
Cosmetic Act 1940, came into effect from 14th September 2019, according to rule 15 
of NDCT 2019, Any institution or organisation which intends to conduct biomedical 
and health research shall be required to have an Ethics Committee to review and 
oversee the conduct of such research as detailed in National Ethical Guidelines for 
Biomedical and Health Research Involving Human Participants. 
 
3. ART/Surrogacy Registry- It acts as Central Database of all the ART Clinics, Banks 
and Surrogacy Clinics in the country through which the details of all the clinics and 
banks of the country including nature and types of services provided by them, 
outcome of the services and other relevant information shall be obtained on regular 
basis. The data generated from the National Registry shall be utilized by the National 
Board for making policies, guidelines and shall help in identifying new research areas 
and conducting research in the area of assisted reproduction, surrogacy and other 
related fields in the country. 
 
1.2.4 The Committee enquired whether any post-legislative impact assessment of the 
Rules/Regulations/Guidelines for which the Department has a nodal/administrative role has 
been carried out. DHR informed that no specific post-legislative impact assessment has been 
c 
DHR established in 2007 Promoting, coordinating and translating research into action for improving the health of population.         e       * 1,5, 6 & 7 are largely implemented through ICMR 11 Health Technology Assessment 

3 
 
undertaken. However, DHR added that in view of large no. of cases in the country, holistic 
view is being taken for amending the Acts. 
 
1.2.5 The Committee understands that DHR has nodal/administrative role regarding 
various Rules/Regulations/Guidelines, including the Acts like Assisted Reproductive 
Technology (Regulatory) Act 2021 and Surrogacy (Regulatory)Act 2021.The 
Committee also notes that DHR has not undertaken any post-legislative impact 
assessment of the Acts/Rules/Regulations/Guidelines, as on date. But, the Department, 
taking into consideration the large no. of cases in the country, a holistic view is being 
taken for amending the Acts. The Committee lauds the view of the Department and 
recommends that necessary steps maybe taken towards specific post-legislative impact 
assessment and bring in appropriate amendments to the 
Acts/Rules/Regulations/Guidelines keeping in mind the requirements of the changing 
time on account of scientific, technological  and medical advancements. 
 
1.3 Opportunities, Strength and  Challenges of DHR as an organization 
 
1.3.1 According to the Department, the SWOT analysis of the functioning of DHR along 
with its opportunities and strength to achieve the vision, mission and goals of the department 
in the stipulated time frame are as mentioned below. 
1.  Strengths- 
a. Strong Institutional Framework: DHR is a core department under the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare with a clear mandate to advance health research, 
innovation, diagnostics, vaccines, and evidence-based guidelines. 
b. Nationally Recognized Schemes & Networks: Established schemes such as 
Model Rural Health Research Units, DIAMONDS, HTAIn, grant‑in‑aid 
programs for innovative health research. 
 
c. Nationwide infrastructure: Backed by 28 institutes of ICMR and network of 
MRUs/MRHRUs, VRDLs, etc across the country. 
2.  Weaknesses-  
a. Lack of effective mechanism for partnership with industry and private sector- 
owing to which many research leads do not get translated into products for 
public use 
 
b. Low budget-This is inadequate (at 0.02% of GDP) compared to the health 
research budget in developed countries and in the context  ofcountry’s needs 
 
c. Limited Human Resource Capacity: Need for more skilled researchers, faculty 
training, and sustained HRD efforts, as highlighted by the need for specialized 
skill‑building schemes. 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
3.  Opportunities –  
With its 5-years strategic action plan, DHR prioritizing affordable health 
technologies, India can reduce import dependency in diagnostics, vaccines, other 
medical technologies and products. 
a. Through its strong One Health institutional framework, coordination 
mechanism andexpertise as well as effective biosecurity infrastructure of NIV 
Labs and VRDLs, DHR can play an important role in Pandemic Preparedness. 
DHRcan leverage, strengthen and integrate existing R&D and manufacturing 
capabilities of the country to bolster India’s pandemic preparedness and 
response against disease “X”.  
 
b. The proposed Section 8 company of DHR- MIDAC will provide 
comprehensive support for converting research leads/ innovationsrelated to 
national health priorities into approved products through public-private 
partnerships (PPP)mode. 
c. The development of evidence-based guidelines by DHR will be helpful in 
enhancing healthcare quality, optimizing treatment strategies, and ensuring the 
efficient use of resources. It will also bring in the uniformity and scientific 
rigor in clinical practice. 
d. The capacities of DIAMOnDSCentres can be enhanced to conduct genome 
sequencing for cancer diagnosis through biomarker analysis, contributing to 
precision medicine. 
e. The expansion of HTAIn through a separate scheme would catalyse the aim of 
maximizing health in the population, reducing out of pocket expenditure 
(OOP) and reducing inequity. 
 
f. Growing Global Recognition and Collaboration: As a national research hub 
with rapidly growing capabilities, DHR is well‑placed to deepen South–South 
collaborations partnerships among developing nations in Asia, Africa, and by 
sharing affordable and scalable health technologies aligned with the Action 
Plan’s emphasis on indigenous solutions. 
 
4. Threats 
a. Emerging Health Challenges: Rapid evolution of AMR, NCDs, 
climate‑related illnesses, and new pathogens pose threats if research 
advancements lag. 
 
b. Ad-hoc staff: A significant proportion of the research workforce consists of 
project‑based staff, employed on short‑term contracts. This result in high 
turnover, which disrupts research continuity, weakens institutional memory, 
and increases costs due to repeated recruitment and retraining. 
 
1.3.2 The Department also informed about key concern areas related to its functioning and  
the strategy can be adopted to overcome those problems. Those beingAd‑hoc/Project-Based  
Staffing Challenges: A considerable segment of the research workforce is engaged on 
short‑term, project‑linked appointments, leading to instability. This heavy reliance on 
temporary staff results in:  

5 
 
 
(i) Frequent churn and loss of trained personnel 
(ii)    Disruptions in ongoing research  
(iii)  Higher administrative and training overheads. This structural dependence on 
short-term roles mirrors wider global public‑health staffing issues, where 
integrating temporary workers into permanent institutional frameworks remains 
difficult and adds operational burdens. 
1.3.3 The Committee finds that DHR considers Ad‑hoc /Project-Based Staffing to be 
one of its biggest challenges. According to the Department this results in high turnover, 
which disrupts research continuity, weakens institutional memory, and increases costs 
due to repeated recruitment and retraining. The Committee endorses the view of DHR 
that the contractual staff, either project-based or as part of Secretariat weakens 
institutional memory due to frequent change and loss of trained personnel causing  
disruption in ongoing research, besides having  higher administrative training and skill 
development overhead. It is of the considered opinion of the Committee that permanent 
work force is an asset to any organization, especially, in offices like DHR and ICMR 
where institutional memory and research continuity is a requirement for a long term 
result oriented research. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department 
shall continue its efforts to acquire permanent workforce both for DHR Secretariat as 
well as scientific research activities.  
1.4 Human Resource Management of DHR  
 
1.4.1 Taking note of the submission of DHR regarding Ad‑hoc /Project-Based staffing, the 
Committee sought to know if there was any approved plan or timeline to fill the posts under 
the Department permanent basis. In regard, the Committee also wanted to know the different 
modes of recruitment to fill up posts that were vacant and scientists engaged on contractual/ 
consultant/ ad-hoc basis in DHR and its subordinate organisations/schemes.    
 
1.4.2 In response, the Department submitted that it has 22 sanctioned posts of scientist 
distributed among three divisions namely- DHR Secretariat, HTAin Attached Office and 
Ethics Committee. The distribution and vacancy position of these posts is as follows: 
 
Name of 
division 
No. of 
posts of 
Scientists 
Classification of 
posts 
Posts created 
in  
No. of posts filled 
as on November, 
2025 
Posts 
vacant 
DHR 
Secretariat 
06 Scientist C-02 
Scientist D-02 
Scientist E- 02 
December 
2017 
02 04 
HTAIn 
Attached 
Office 
12 Scientist F-02 
Scientist E-02 
Scientist D-04 
Scientist C- 04 
September 
2023 
0 12 
Ethics 
Committee 
04 Scientist D- 01 
Scientist C- 01 
Scientist B-02 
June 2023 0 04 
 
 

6 
 
1.4.3 It has been informed that the posts for scientists in HTAIn and Ethics committee were 
created in 2023, however, the Recruitment Rules (RRs) for these posts are yet to be notified. 
The Recruitment Rules for the posts of Scientist C, D and E in DHR Secretariat were notified 
in 2021. As per the RRs, these posts are to be filled on Deputation (including short term 
contract) basis and direct recruitment is not applicable to these posts. Further, DHR has 
engaged contractual scientists in the various schemes and divisions of the Department, the 
scheme wise details in this regard are as follows: 
 
Name of 
Project Management and Implementation unit (PMIU) of Scheme/ 
Division 
Contractual Scientist 
Sanctioned 
Strength as per 
scheme guidelines 
In -position 
Model Rural Health Research Unit Scheme (MRHRU)    2 2 
Multi-Disciplinary Health Research Unit (MRU) 2 2 
Human Resource Development scheme (HRD) 1 1 
Grant In Aid scheme (GIA) 2 2 
Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL) 3 3 
Health Technology Assessment in India (HTAIn) 3 2 
ART and Surrogacy division 5 4 
Centre for Guidelines 6 6 
Total 24 22 
 
1.4.4 The Committee also enquired about the efforts undertaken by DHR to fill up the posts 
during the last 5 years. The reply of DHR is as under: 
 
The Department has been making regular efforts for filling up the posts of Scientist 
C, D and E in DHR Secretariat on Deputation (ISTC) basis and has advertised the posts five 
times over the period of last five years since 2021. The details regarding action taken by 
DHR to fill the posts from 2021 till date is as follows: 
 
(i) Vacancy circular for posts of Scientist C, D and E (2 post each) was issued for the 
first time in October 2021. After receiving applications for Scientists C, D and E, the 
proposal for appointment to the post of Scientist C, D & E in DHR on deputation 
(Including Short Term Contract) basis was submitted to the Appointments branch, UPSC 
under the single window system on 04.05.2022. Vide their letter no.3/40(6)/2022-ADT-1 
dated 23.08.2022, UPSC recommended Dr. M. Kalaivani, Senior Scientific Officer, Indian 
Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad for appointment to the post Scientist D in DHR 
on Deputation (including short term contract) basis. Offer of appointment was issued to 
the recommended candidate, however, the recommended candidate did not join and all 
posts of Scientists remained vacant. 
 
(ii)  The vacancy were advertised for second time by vacancy circular dated 
16.02.2023. The last date for submission of application for the above referred circular was 
18.04.2023 which was extended further for 60 days i.e. to 17.06.2023. 
Accordingly, circular dated 17.04.2023 extending the date of submission to 17.06.2023 
was issued. The last date was once again extended for a second time upto 17.07.2023. In 
the meanwhile, DoPT issued the notification dated 13.07.2023 wherein post upto level 

7 
 
13A to be filled by Deputation or Deputation (ISTC) were exempted from UPSC 
consultation. Further, these posts were revived for second time as per revival of the 
post order of Department of Expenditure dated 15.02.2024. The applications received for 
the post were shortlisted and personal talk held with the eligible candidates on 27.12.2023. 
The Selection Committee recommended 02 candidates for the post of Scientist C and 01 
candidate for the post of Scientist D. These selected candidates joined DHR in March 
2024, however, incumbent for the post of Scientist D resigned in June 2024 due to 
personal reasons and both posts of Scientist D & E once again remained vacant. 
 
(iii) Upon repatriation of Scientist D in June 2024, vacancy circular dated 23.08.2024 
was issued for the post of Scientist D & E, with closing date of application being 24 
October 2024. However, as only 1 application was received through proper channel, the 
last date for submission of application was extended by 1 month till 25 November 2024. 
In November 2024, the last date was once again extended till 09 January 2025. 2 
applicants were eligible for post of Scientist E and 1 for Scientist D. However, only one 
applicant joined the post of Scientist E. 
 
(iv) Vacancy for post of Scientist D & E was advertised for fourth time vide circular 
dated 14.08.2025 with last date of application as 30.09.2025. The last date was further 
extended twice to 31.10.2025 and again to 15.11.2025. However, only one eligible 
applicant was found during this period. Upon interview by the Selection Committee, the 
applicant was recommended for selection as Scientist D and joined DHR on 16.01.2026. 
 
(v) Vacancy for post of Scientist C, D and E (1 post each) is currently being 
advertised for fifth time w.e.f. 03.01.2026. The last date for applying for the posts was 
02.02.2026.  
 
1.4.5 Further, it has also been submitted that for HTAIn, Department of Expenditure had 
approved 12 Scientific posts (Scientist-F-2, Scientist-E-2, Scientist-D-4, Scientist-C-4). The 
posts were advertised as per the recruitment rules on deputation basis on the 25thJanuary 
2025. A total of 24 applications were received (Scientist-11, scientist-D-6 and Scientist-E-7). 
After screening by a committee, no candidate was found to be eligible. In continuation, 
recruitment rules have been re-drafted for Direct Recruitment also. The recruitment rules will 
be uploaded in UPSC portal for approval. The Recruitment Rules for the post of Scientists in 
the Ethics committee attached office are yet to be formed. These posts are currently vacant. 
 
1.4.6 When the Committee wanted to know when the last Cadre Review of scientific posts 
in DHR was conducted/scheduled and whether the issue of vacancies and creation of a 
permanent scientific cadre be specifically addressed in it, DHR submitted that despite 
advertising the posts of Scientists multiple times, the posts have remained vacant as less 
number of eligible applicants have applied for these posts. Accordingly, a committee has 
been formed in DHR to review the Recruitment Rules of Scientists in November 2025. The 
review of the RRs by the committee is under process. 
1.4.7 Based on the submission of the Department, the Committee feels that 
contractual (or project-based) appointments are the new norm. The Committee is not in 
agreement with such ad-hoc or contractual arrangement. The Committee reckons the 

8 
 
practical point of view that for time-bound specific scheme contractual appointments 
may contain operational merits and should have cost effectiveness. However, the 
Committee expresses concern to observe that the contractual scientists are now 
outnumbering the permanent/deputation staff. The Committee is in favour of 
permanent staff in DHR secretariat and permanent scientist for continuity in research 
activities.   
1.4.8 In the view of the Committee, a permanent scientific workforce in research 
offers significant merits for an entity like DHR. Wherein institutional knowledge, 
sustained progress in mission-oriented, complex, long-term research are of critical 
importance in general. Further, job security encourages researchers to pursue novel 
and high-impact ideas which should curtail migration of brighter minds to abroad due 
to lack of stability and career progression. The Committee acknowledges that 
permanent positions involve upfront costs and less flexibility for the Government but in 
research, where breakthroughs often require patience and accumulated wisdom, the 
long-term benefits of sustained scientific advancement cannot be overlooked. Hence, the 
Committee recommends a sustainable approach on the issue like hybrid model of 
appointments including permanent and deputation with less dependency on contractual 
scientists. The service conditions for contractual appointees can be based on the New 
Labour Codes which may include fixed term contracts, social security network and 
performance-based conversion to permanent posting after a fixed period on the lines of 
CSIR model. 
1.4.9 The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by the Department to fill up the 
various post of scientist but is disappointed to perceive the reasons for the posts to 
remain vacant like difficulty in attracting eligible and qualified candidates, lack of 
interest on the part selected candidate to join, etc. Meanwhile, the Committee 
recognises the pro active approach adopted by the Department in addressing the issue 
and revisiting and reviewing the Recruitment Rules of HTAIn to include direct 
recruitment as well. Accordingly, the Committee supports and recommends the revision 
of recruitment rules of HTAIn Attached Office to include direct recruitment keeping in 
account the importance of assessment of AI technologies/tools by HTAIn.  
 
1.4.10 Considering the relevance of Ethics Committee in the era of emerging AI 
technologies and digital health platforms in the public health system, the Committee 
feels that while formulating the Recruitment Rules for the post of Scientists in the 
Ethics Committee, the Department should opt for direct recruitment on the lines of 
HTAInAttached Office. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Recruitment 
Rules for the post of Scientists in the Ethics Committee needs to be formulated 
including direct recruitment, at the earliest, and these posts are to be populated as soon 
as possible.The Committee also recommends that time to time updation of the 
Recruitment Rules should be a conscious effort to contemporise the conditions of 
service for development of a permanent scientific workforce in Health Research sector 
of the country. 
 

9 
 
1.4.11 Subsequently, the Committee sought to know about any recent shift in paradigm and 
philosophy of working of the Department and to the extent the same is in consonance with 
global trend of health research. In response submitted as under:- 
 
1)   The paradigm shift in philosophy of working - 
 
a. Reassignment of roles: -Roles of different bodies under DHR including ICMR 
have been explicitly differentiated according to comparative advantage. DHR has 
retained stewardship functions—research infrastructure, human resource 
development and governance frameworks. Centre for Guidelines has been set up for 
Evidence synthesis, and Health Technology Assessment in India (HTAIn) attached 
office is established for cost effectiveness studies. ICMR has been aligned primarily 
to generation of research evidence through intramural and extramural mechanisms. 
 
b. From problem description to solution orientation: - The most visible doctrinal 
shift is the inversion of the research mix. Translational research now accounts for 
~70% of the portfolio compared with ~30% earlier.  
 
c. From centralized science to distributed capacity:- Extramural funding has 
expanded from 26% (2017) to 64% (2024) of the ICMR budget. Dedicated 
governance through an Additional DG (Extramural) and mission programmes such 
as the National Health Research Programme have made multi-centric, multi-state 
implementation the norm rather than the exception. 
 
d. From investigator autonomy to priority alignment: - Competitive intramural 
grants and structured review processes have shifted emphasis from individual 
curiosity-driven proposals toward institutional and national priorities. 
 
2) Instruments that operationalize the shift- The philosophical change is backed by   
machinery. 
a. Mission-mode research:- The National Health Research Programme organizes 
large, multi-disciplinary projects across priority areas—child health, cancers, 
anemia, mental health, AMR, vector-borne diseases, tuberculosis, maternal and 
elderly health, emergency care, and health systems. The design spans discovery to 
delivery. 
b. Innovation pathway support:- Through partnership with Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organization, the MedTechMitra platform provides regulatory 
navigation, mentoring, and evaluation. Quantitatively, hundreds of innovators have 
engaged; technologies have moved into test licensing, clinical evaluation, and HTA 
referral. 
c. Patent facilitation, infrastructure sharing (I-RISE), collaborating centres of 
excellence, and device fabrication capacity (e.g., mPRAGATI at Indian Institute of 
Technology Delhi) collectively reduce barriers between lab insight and market entry. 
d. Evidence architecture:- Creation of a Centre for Evidence-Based Guidelines, 
nationwide technical hubs, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses embeds 
methodological rigor into national recommendations. 

10 
 
e. Health Technology Assessment;-HTAIn’s formal positioning within DHR, 
expansion of resource hubs and centres, and completion of dozens of studies create 
an economic and outcomes-based filter for adoption. 
f. Human capital pipeline:- The HRD consolidation, fellowship expansion, 
women scientist awards, Young Medical Faculty PhD programme, and Faculty of 
Medical Research under Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research represent 
structural investment in physician-scientists. 
g. Pandemic preparedness & One Health:- Under DHR leadership, integrated 
surveillance, BSL-3 networking, mock drills, genomic concepts such as I-COG, and 
vaccine/diagnostic pipelines show a move toward anticipatory capability. 
h. Data as infrastructure:- The national repository introduces standardized, 
privacy-screened, reusable datasets to accelerate secondary research. 
i. Financial efficiency:- Utilization of 99.75% of allocation in 2024-25 indicates 
high absorptive and execution capacity. 
3)  Consonance with global trends in health research 
The described reforms to widely recognized directions in contemporary international 
practice: 
(i) emphasis on translation and impact, 
(ii) mission-driven consortia, 
(iii) regulatory and commercialization facilitation, 
(iv) HTA-anchored reimbursement logic, 
(v) One Health security frameworks, 
(vi) data platforms enabling reproducibility, and 
(vii) cultivation of clinician-scientists. 
 
Further, DHR also stated that it largely operates in line with Management by Objectives 
(MBO) through its schemes, guidelines, and attached offices to translate mission goals into 
programs with defined outputs (MRU/MRHRU labs, HRD schemes, grant-in aid, HTAIn, 
evidence‑based guidelines), which is characteristic of objective‑driven management in 
healthcare administration. 
1.4.12 The Committee is appreciative of the working ecosystem of DHR. Reassignment 
of roles, problem description to solution orientation, centralized science to distributed 
capacity are effective management tactics. Further, the Committee finds that operation 
mechanism for these tactics like mission-mode research, patent facilitation, Health 
Technology Assessment, human capital pipeline, data as infrastructure are bringing in 
expected benefits at ground level. The Committee also notes that the Department 
operates through the concept of Management by Objectives (MBO). This management 
approach is based on setting specific and measurable goals and, according to the 
Committee, is an effective requirement in healthcare administration. 
1.5 Health Research Challenges In India       
 
1.5.1 Health Research in India has covered many milestones in the last few decades. Still 
challenges are in abundance, primary being dearth in skilled work force, followed by the 
need to translate research findings into evidence-based practices; development and safe usage 
of emerging technologies, like AI; analyzing the various ethical component of research; etc.  

11 
 
 
1.5.2 As part of understanding these challenges, the Committee sought the details of the 
efforts made by DHR to ensure that research findings are consistently translated into 
evidence-based practices and implemented across all states, addressing the current policy-to-
practice gap. In reply, the Department submitted that Health Technology Assessment in India 
(HTAIn) has been established to systematically collect and analyse the evidence on cost, 
clinical effectiveness and safety of health interventions. By collaborating closely with State 
Health Departments, HTAIn facilitates capacity building, identifies regional priorities, and 
aids evidence-based decision-making by evaluating both clinical efficacy and cost-
effectiveness. HTAIn has provided strategic recommendations for a diverse range of 
community health interventions and diagnostic technologies like: 
 
i. Chronic Disease Screening: Screening of Type-2 diabetes, hypertension, and oral 
cancer. 
ii. Infectious Disease Management: Screening of Hepatitis B and C. 
iii. Indigenous Diagnostic Innovations: Locally developed Point of Care (PoC) test 
kits for Hemophilia A, Von Willebrand Disease (VWD), and Sickle Cell Disease. 
iv. Community-Based Technologies: 
a) Neonatal Care: Portable automated ABR devices for newborn hearing 
screenings. 
b) Respiratory Health: Handheld X-ray devices and AI-driven interpretation 
tools for the detection of Tuberculosis in field settings. 
 
1.5.3 Apart from HTAIn, DHR also has a Centre for Evidence Based Guidelines to 
promote consistency and methodological rigor in evaluating evidence for national health 
guidelines. Further, DHR plays a crucial role in mainstreaming implementation research to 
facilitate the promotion and implementation of research within its partner institutions which 
involves capacity building, co-production and community engagement, structured evaluation 
and monitoring and dissemination to policymakers. District-level tools such as risk 
stratification systems and dashboards are being tested in partnership with State Governments 
to improve outcomes. DHR has supported direct programme evidence generation, including 
development of operational guidelines for IV iron use in pregnancy, review and refinement 
of Anaemia Mukt Bharat (AMB) strategies, and updating treatment algorithms for anaemia 
in pregnant women and children. Under AMB multi-state PRAKASH study, ASHAs and 
frontline workers have also been involved in routine programme settings to generate 
actionable evidence, and the findings are systematically shared with states and M/o HFW 
through structured feedback mechanisms, enabling timely programme strengthening and 
closing the policy-to-practice gap. Further, the multi-state NECCTAR trial generates 
implementation-ready evidence by strengthening the nutritional quality of take-home rations 
alongside structured behaviour change interventions within existing government platforms, 
enabling States to directly adopt or adapt findings. Overall, DHR’s approach ensures that 
research outputs directly inform programme design, operational guidelines, and scale-up 
decisions, thereby, systematically bridging the evidence-to-implementation gap. 
 
1.5.4. According to DHR, there are several examples of research findings from MRHRUs 
that contributed to addressing the current policy to practice gap. These are as follows:  
 

12 
 
1. MRHRU Dahanu: Implemented a comprehensive programme in Dahanu Block 
covering prevention, early management, and surveillance of snakebite. Research contributed 
to WHO recognition of snakebite as a notifiable disease. 
 
2. MRHRU Chandragiri: Conducted a state-wide assessment of better diet program 
that focused on children from deprived settings in Andhra Pradesh Social Welfare 
Residential Educational Institutions Society. The findings have resulted in an informed 
policy revision in food package distribution practices.  
 
3. MRHRU Puducherry: Implemented a school-based dengue reduction programme 
combining education, awareness, and community participation. This has been recognized as 
a scalable inter-sectoral model for vector-borne disease prevention.  
 
4. MRHRU Tirunelveli: Developed an Android Applications for early stroke 
identification and adverse pregnancy outcomes by using Bateman’s Obstetric Comorbidity 
Index.  
 
5. MRHRU Tigiria: Developed the Demography Integrated Surveillance for Health 
Assessment (DISHA). This has facilitated real-time monitoring of dengue and chikungunya 
trends at the community level. 
 
1.5.5 The Committee recognises the work done by DHR through HTAIn and MRHRU 
towards systematic collection of data and analysis of evidence thereby addressing the 
current ‘policy to practice’ gap. Having said that, the Committee feels more can be 
done to track whether research findings are actually incorporated into 
national/state/district health policy/plans. The Committee observes the need and 
existence of programmes addressing malnutrition, infectious diseases, and maternal 
mortality point to this. Taking this into account, the Committee recommends that DHR 
should create an “Evidence-to-Action Dashboard” that maps research outputs against 
national health priorities. Further, every ministry/department involved in the 
implementation of a particular programme/scheme should submit an action-taken 
report on relevant ICMR/DHR studies within six months of its publication, with public 
disclosure and Parliamentary review. The Committee is of the considered view that 
such measures would bridge the critical translation gap and ensure that India’s robust 
health research ecosystem directly strengthens evidence-based community interventions 
and delivers measurable public health gains. The Committee is of the firm conviction 
that research must ultimately translate into affordable medicines and accessible 
therapies for citizens. 
 
1.5.6 Another concern area of Health Research is development of AI technologies/ tools 
and integration of digital health platforms into the existing public health system. One of the 
crucial steps in this direction is setting up ICMR-National Institute for Research in Digital 
Health and Data Science (NIRDHDS) and entrusting it with the task of developing India-
specific AI-based solutions for strengthening the healthcare system with an overarching goal 
of achieving Universal Health Coverage. The Committee wanted DHR to share a few 
flagship AI-based solutions or pilots that NIRDHDS has already deployed or is piloting in 
public health facilities. In response, the Department a few ongoing scientific works for 
development or piloting AI-based solutions are the: 

13 
 
 
(i) Eye-Platter Dataset, which is a comprehensive, multimodal dataset that has been 
developed to facilitate the evaluation of ocular diseases though the collaborative 
research initiative led by IIT Jodhpur and Director, ICMR-NIRDHDS, in partnership 
with PGIMER Chandigarh, AIIMS Guwahati and Sri Sankaradeva Nethralaya.  
 
(ii) Another ongoing project that focuses on developing an AI-based system for the early 
diagnosis of chronic kidney disease (CKD) through retinal images, with the aim of 
improving healthcare access and delivery, particularly in underserved and remote 
areas. 
 
(iii) Another ongoing project, PrAimaan, aims to create a national platform for the 
continuous evaluation, benchmarking, and adaptation of health AI models in India, 
embedding ongoing validation and contextual relevance into AI governance.  
 
(iv) A national-level open-access databank hosting over 2500 annotated medical images 
from 35 institutions across 26 states Indian annotated Medical-image Repository for 
Imaging and Telepathology (i-AMRIT) has been developed.  
 
(v) A GGIS-based digital platform mapping over 600 government diagnostic laboratories 
in Delhi, Diagnostic Services in Healthcare: Availability & Mapping (DISHA) portal 
has been launched. It aims to enhance access, policy planning, and rationalisation of 
diagnostic services aligned with the National Essential Diagnostics List (NEDL). 
 
(vi) An AI-based tool for diagnosis of oral and breast cancer has been developed using 
YOLO-NAS, UNet-ResNet34, and ResNet50. 
 
(vii) Multicentric study in seven states of Northeast India Bioimpedance-Based 
Diagnostic Innovation has piloted a novel, portable bioimpedance device for 
classification of oral lesions among tobacco users.  
 
(viii) A study that is under planning is the validation of the Roshni AI system to assess its 
diagnostic accuracy, impact on cataract screening and treatment uptake, usability for 
ASHAs, and real-world performance, and by comparing community-based results 
with federated AI testing conducted at IIT Kanpur. 
 
1.5.7 According to DHR, research targets of ICMR-NIRDHDS include development of 
standard guidelines for data curation, anonymisation, and sharing for unlocking health data 
for research, and the development of standard guidelines for scientific evaluation of AI 
solutions at each stage of their lifecycle in health to enable adoption and scale up of safe and 
responsible solutions.  
 
1.5.8 Further, the Department also informed the Committee about other initiatives from 
NIRDHDS that are as under: 
 
Establishment of Centres of Collaborative Research (CCR): 
 
1.5.9 As a part of the intramural initiative of ICMR, the institute has proposed an initial 
establishment of three CCRs which is under review. Through these centres, ICMR-
NIRDHDS has proposed to collaborate with premium institutions and centres across the 
country for focused research in the following areas: 
 

14 
 
 The CCR with IIT Madras, IISc Bengaluru, and ISB Hyderabad aims to 
establish a first-of-its-kind programme generating HTA-informed evidence for a 
Responsible AI framework in Indian healthcare. It will evaluate AI's real-world 
effectiveness, safety, equity, fairness, explainability, and governance, adapting 
conventional methods for evolving AI systems across diverse settings. The CCR will 
carry out health systems research, implementation research, and economic evaluation, 
and will complement this by examining operational workflows, organisational 
readiness, behavioural responses, and resource implications that determine real-world 
effectiveness, value, and sustainability at scale. 
 
 The CCR with C-DAC, ECHO, and Intelehealth will work to strengthen 
access, continuity, and quality of care for priority non-communicable diseases, 
specifically diabetes and hypertension, by leveraging India’s existing national digital 
health infrastructure. The work will examine how eSanjeevani, ABHA, ABDM, and 
the National NCD Portal can be more effectively linked to support longitudinal NCD 
care pathways rather than episodic consultations.  
 
1.5.10 The Institute will lead rigorous clinical, implementation, and health systems research 
to assess feasibility, safety, clinical relevance, and governance considerations. The overall 
objective is to generate actionable evidence to inform national policy and program design on 
how telemedicine and digital public infrastructure can be leveraged to close persistent access 
gaps in NCD care within the public health system. 
 
 The CCR with IIT Ropar, AIIMS Delhi, and PGIMER Chandigarh will have 
the centre functioning as a data-integrated ecosystem, focusing initially on athletics 
(running and javelin), swimming, and fencing, while remaining scalable to other 
Olympic disciplines. Core components include sports cardiology, biomechanics and 
orthopaedics, precision nutrition, and artificial intelligence-enabled analytics. A 
central deliverable will be a National Digital Athlete Performance Dashboard, 
enabling longitudinal tracking of cardiovascular load, biomechanical efficiency, 
injury risk, training response, and recovery metrics. By integrating multidisciplinary 
clinical data with real-time performance analytics, the Centre seeks to systematically 
reduce performance variance, improve peak readiness, and translate India’s 
expanding sports infrastructure into measurable international medal outcomes. 
 
Establishment of a dedicated Unit for Evaluation of AI-driven solutions in healthcare: 
 
1.5.11 The proposed Unit aims to collaborate closely with key stakeholders, including a 
network of healthcare institutions across India (such as TMH and National Cancer Grid 
(NCG), AIIMS Delhi and other centres, PGIMER Chandigarh, etc.), network of technical 
partners (such as IITs, IISc Bengaluru, IIIT Delhi, etc.), development partners, and line 
ministries at Centre and State levels (IndiaAI Mission, NHA, State health Authorities/ 
Missions, etc.). Through this comprehensive network, ICMR-NIRDHDS will engage in 
systematic planning and conduct of technical, clinical, and economic evaluations of AI 
solutions in health through research studies. The institute is also in the process of establishing 
a Clinical Trials Unit to conduct trials of digital health solutions and advance methodological 
research in this emerging field. This Unit will complement the proposed Evaluation Unit by 
strengthening our institutional capacity for high-quality evaluations of digital and AI-enabled 
health technologies. 
 
Intramural projects:  
 
1.5.12 ICMR-NIRDHDS has submitted eight proposals under the intramural grant call of the 
ICMR which pertain to development and evaluation of India-specific AI-driven solutions and 

15 
 
strengthening of research data infrastructure for enabling AI in the health research ecosystem 
in the country. Additionally, the institute has submitted a proposal under the ICMR-
Intramural MedTech Development Grant-2025, and it has been selected for the grant.  
 
1.5.13 In this connection, the Department also brought to the notice of the Committee the 
main challenges in AI and Digital Health Integration which are as follows: 
 
(i) Data Quality, Privacy, and Security: AI models require vast amounts of high-quality, 
diverse, and representative data for training and validation. 
(ii) Regulatory and Ethical Concerns: The rapidly evolving nature of AI technology 
outpaces traditional regulatory frameworks for medical devices. 
(iii) Interoperability and Integration: A lack of standardised data protocols hinders 
effective data exchange between different systems and providers. 
(iv) Clinical Validation and Reliability: Rigorous, real-world validation through 
prospective studies and randomised controlled trials (RCTs) is needed to demonstrate 
a tool's clinical and economic utility and ensure it is safe and reliable for diverse 
populations. 
(v) Workforce Skills and Acceptance: There is a significant shortage of healthcare 
professionals with expertise in AI and data science. 
 
1.5.14 The Committee is pleased to note the work in progress towards the development 
of India-specific AI-based solutions for strengthening the healthcare system in the 
country. Having said that, the Committee feels that emerging technologies such as AI 
diagnostic tools and digital health platforms in India remain in their early stages due to 
issues like poor data management, algorithmic bias, ethical challenges, and limited 
internet access in semi-urban, rural, hilly and tribal areas. Alongwith these factors, the 
Committee also hold the view that callous electronic health records maintenance and 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities compromise trust and safety towards AI tools & digital 
health platforms. Accordingly, the Committee opine that there should be data driven 
healthcare planning with strict privacy safeguards. For the success of these data driven 
healthcare policy, the country also needs technology empowered scientist, doctors, 
support staff and patients consolidating Protective Research Equilibrium (PRE). 
 
1.5.15 As steps to make AI tools & digital health platforms more reliable the 
Committee recommends that DHR should make pre and post-market HTA mandatory 
for all AI diagnostics seeking to integrate with public health system. DHR must update 
and enforce Ethics Guidelines for Application of Artificial Intelligence in Biomedical 
Research and Healthcare, 2023 by ICMR with compulsory bias audits, diverse dataset 
requirements, and ‘Human-in-the-Loop’ features for every government funded or 
publicly integrated AI tool. Health data/record being a sensitive subject, the Committee 
recommends for more region-diseases specific studies by DHR/ICMR on health data 
bias, maintenance and usage. 
 
1.5.16 The Committee notices that inspite of Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
(ABDM), internet in rural/tribal areas is still unreliable. Another concern in rural area 
is digital literacy gaps and inadequate training for frontline workers like Accredited 
Social Health Activist (ASHAs) and Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM).  This results in 
urban-centric development and continued exclusion of millions in the rural belts from 

16 
 
benefits of tools like AI-powered chest X-ray analysis or clinical decision support 
systems like eSanjeevani. To address these, the Committee recommends that DHR 
should develop offline-capable indigenous AI solutions and launch a nationwide AI 
training programme designed for last-mile integration beginning with the aspirational 
districts for frontline workers (ASHAs, ANMs) through Model Rural Health Research 
Units. 
 
1.5.17 On the sensitive issue of ethical concerns related to Health Research, DHR further 
stated to the Committee that NIRDHDS coordinates with IndiaAI Mission (MeitY), 
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) and Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
(ANRF) to avoid duplication and ensure interoperability of datasets and AI models. 
NIRDHDS functions as a technical integrator and standards steward, aligning with IndiaAI 
on AI safety and evaluation, with ABDM/NHA on interoperable health data pipelines, and 
with national research funding frameworks, thereby minimising duplication, enabling reuse 
of public datasets, and ensuring interoperable, trustworthy AI development for health in 
India.  
 
1.5.18 The Committee further queried on the safeguard measures built into NIRDHDS 
projects to prevent re-identification of health & research data, especially when datasets are 
shared with private partners. In reply, DHR submitted that as of now, data has not been 
shared by NIRDHDS with any private partner. However, the institute, as per its mandate, has 
been taking up research projects to develop standard guidelines and frameworks for data 
curation, anonymisation, and sharing to enable safe and ethical use of data. The institute has 
constituted a technical working group on data curation, sharing &governance. The group is 
working on the preparation of standard guidelines and frameworks for data curation, 
anonymisation, and sharing pipelines. The work on the federated benchmarking platform for 
testing SI models in health with IIT Kanpur and NHA is a step towards creating a safe 
environment for model testing without giving data access to the model developers. Similarly, 
another federated model training platform is under development by iSpirit where developers 
can train their models on datasets without being able to see or retrieve data. Under the 
guidance of DG, ICMR, the institute along with ICMR headquarters is facilitating the 
planning and testing of the platform. As part of infrastructure, a federated model where data 
is secure and accessible is being built. The institute has been targeting Anusandhan National 
Research Foundation (ANRF) support to bridge the gap between policy design and technical 
execution. The institute has been aligning central and state entities through standardised 
docking guidelines for data management. 
 
1.5.19 It was also submitted that ICMR-NIRDHDS has initiated the work for development 
of an India-specific AI risk-classification framework for health through a dedicated “Risk, 
Monitoring & Evaluation” working group. This initiative is unique in that it proposes a risk-
tiered model linked to clinical use and potential patient harm, rather than technology type 
alone. The framework will establish lifecycle-based approval and oversight mechanisms and 
mandate standards for data quality, transparency, and bias mitigation for high-risk health AI 
systems. 
 

17 
 
1.5.20 According to DHR, apart from NIRDHDS it also woksin collaboration with the 
National Health Authority (NHA) and ICMR, is addressing theethicalchallenges in the 
Health Research through initiatives like: 
 
a) Establishing Regulatory and Ethical Frameworks: DHR adheres to existing national 
digital and data protection frameworks, including the ICMR's ethical guidance for 
biomedical AI, the IT Act 2000, and the Digital Personal Data Protection Act.  
 
b) Developing an Interoperable Digital Ecosystem: Through the Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABDM), the government is building a national digital health 
infrastructure that uses a unique Ayushman Bharat Health Account (ABHA) ID for 
citizens to link and access their digital health records across various facilities. 
 
1.5.21 The Committee realises that AI is revolutionizing health sector as in every other 
field. However, like any technology, it comes with both advantages and challenges. In 
the opinion of the Committee, besides the considerable efforts on the part of DHR and 
its institutions, strengthening oversight and the capacity of Ethics Committees is one of 
the measures needed to ensure consistent ethical review standards of emerging Al 
technology. Foremost, the Committee recommends thorough monitoring by DHR of 
registration/ re-registration of Ethics Committees across India with the National Ethics 
Committee Registry for Biomedical and Health Research (NECRBHR) and enforce 
penalties for non-compliant institutions. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
country lacks appropriate number of accredited and functional Ethics Committees in 
comparison to the volume of regulatory and academic trials, resulting in delayed 
approvals and increased risk of ethical lapses. 
 
1.5.22 Since there is an involvement of various Ministries/Bodies like DHR, MeitY, 
ICMR, National Health Authority (NHA), Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF), etc, the Committee recommends a 
dedicated AI Surveillance & Ethics Monitoring Cell with inter-ministerial 
representation and mandated annual Action Taken Report submission to an 
Appropriate Authority for real time performance tracking and periodic ethical audits 
and to create safety benchmarks & roadmaps for AI integration for health sector as a 
whole.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER – II   
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS 
 
Funding pattern of DHR 
 
2.1 National Health Policy 2017 has recommended 2.5 % of GDP on health by 2025. 
According to Economic Survey 2025-26, India’s Total Public Health Expenditure (Centre + 
States) is at 1.8 % of GDP in 2025-26. The Budgetary Allocation of DHR for 2026-27 is 
Rs.4, 821 crore, which is an increase of Rs. 893.57 crore compared to 2025-26. In spite of the 
hike, budget allocation to DHR is mere 4.52 % of the Total Health Budget of the country and 
0.02% of GDP of India as the table shown below. 
(In Crores) 
Year BE BE as % of Total Health 
Budget 
AE AE as % of 
GDP 
2024-25 3301.73 3.62 3383.92 0.02% 
2025-26 3900.69 3.90 3786.00  
(till 20.02.2026) 
0.02% 
2026-27 4821.21 4.52 - - 
 
2.2 Statement indicating projected demand of the DHR and actual allocation at BE stage 
during last five years and BE allocation w.r.t percentage of GDP of India (last five years) is 
given below: - 
(Rs. In Crores) 
Year Projected Demand Actual Allocation at BE 
Stage 
GDP* BE allocation 
w.r.t % of GDP 
 
2021-22 3312.33 2663.00 1,47,53,535 0.02% 
2022-23 3467.65 3200.65 1,57,60,000 0.02% 
2023-24 3080.00 2980.00 1,73,82,000 0.02% 
2024-25 3876.82 3301.73  1,84,88,000 0.02% 
2025-26 4970.03 
 
3900.69 2,01,90,000 0.02% 
 
2.3 The Committee finds that the public expenditure on health research has been 
maintained at a modest 0.02% of GDP and has contributed to the slow progress in the area of 
Health Research in the country. In this regard, the Committee wished to know from DHR the 
measures adopted by them to bridge the significant funding gap to support cutting-edge 
research and infrastructure development across the country.     
 
2.4 In response, the Department submitted that it has employed a multi-pronged approach 
to bridge the health research funding gap, primarily through fostering public-private 
partnerships, and implementing targeted grant-in-aid schemes for research and infrastructure 
development. The key initiatives are as under: 
 
i. Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs): DHR is actively promoting PPP models to 
augment infrastructure and expertise, encouraging private equity investments into 
underfunded segments of the healthcare system. 
ii. Inter-Sectoral Convergence Scheme: DHR provides grant-in-aid to encourage 
research partnerships among different government agencies, NGOs, and industry 
to translate existing health knowledge into deliverable products and processes. 

19 
 
iii. During the 15th Finance Commission (FC) period, an allocation of Rs 324 crore 
was made for the VRDL Scheme. For the 16th FC period, the DHR has proposed 
Rs 980.91 crore, which includes an expanded scope covering syndromic 
surveillance activities, recurring support to Infectious Disease Research and 
Diagnostic Laboratories (IRDLs), and the establishment of new VRDLs, among 
other initiatives. If the proposed allocation is approved, there would be sufficient 
funding to support cutting-edge research and infrastructure development under the 
VRDL Scheme, effectively bridging the current funding gap. 
iv. Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs): DHR continues to establish and fund 
MRUs in government medical colleges and research institutions across the 
country. These units aim to strengthen health research infrastructure, build 
capacity, and focus research on national priorities like non-communicable 
diseases (NCDs). 
v. Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs): To bridge the urban-rural 
research gap, MRHRUs are being established in the vicinity of 
Primary/Community Health Centres. These units focus on transferring technology 
to the rural level and improving health services for the rural population. 
vi. Human Resource Development (HRD) Scheme: This initiative aims to create a 
pool of talented health research personnel through fellowships, scholarships, and 
specialized training for medical faculty, mid-career scientists, and students in 
priority areas such as clinical trials, genomics, and stem cell research. 
 
2.5 Further, DHR-ICMR 2024-29 Action Plan directed research toward critical national 
health challenges: promoting indigenous and affordable health technologies, providing 
solutions for difficult health problems like anaemia, antimicrobial resistance (AMR), and 
child malnutrition, advancing digital health solutions and technology-driven surveillance, 
ensuring research evidence is translated into practical action and policy.  
 
2.6 The Committee also sought to know the specific steps DHR has been taking to ensure 
better utilization of allocated capital funds to develop tangible healthcare assets and research 
facilities. In reply, the Department stated the following: 
 
i. Improved Financial Discipline: DHR has emphasised adhering to financial 
discipline and administrative due diligence as outlined in GFRs. 
ii. DHR ensures that key projects and programmes are sufficiently funded based on 
the initial budgetary allocations and plans to approach the Ministry of Finance for 
additional funds at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage and through supplementary 
grants, if necessary, depending on the progress of ongoing missions, R&D 
projects, and facility build-up. 
iii. The Department is actively involved in building new infrastructure and 
establishing state-of-the-art equipment. This includes the establishment of a 
network of Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) for managing 
epidemics and pandemics, development of Multi-Disciplinary Research Units 
(MRUs) in government medical colleges and Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs) in rural areas. 
iv. The Government of India conceptualized and introduced an umbrella scheme for 
development of Infrastructure for health research since 2013-14.  It has 02 sub-

20 
 
schemes namely (i) establishing Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in 
Medical Colleges/Research Institutes, and (ii) establishing Model Rural Health 
Research Units (MRHRUs) in rural areas. While MRUs are established in a 
Medical College, MRHRUs are standalone buildings in vicinity of a Community 
Health Centre/Primary Health Centre.  Both the sub-schemes promote creation of 
tangible health research assets. Currently there are 123 MRUs and 39 MRHRUs 
across the country. 
v. To ensure effective utilisation of capital support provided under the Viral Research 
and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL) Scheme, DHR has adopted measures such as 
mandatory assessment of laboratory space, phased release of funds, and 
infrastructure readiness, periodic monitoring of progress, and physical site visits. 
vi. An inter-ministerial committee has been constituted to monitor the implementation 
of action plans. 
vii. Dedicated project monitoring units to track progress and swiftly resolve 
administrative hurdles in scheme implementation. 
viii. Reforms in government budgeting, such as focusing on outcomes through an 
improved outcome budget document, are being implemented. 
 
2.7 The Committee observes that since Government is spending only 0.02% of GDP 
for Health research for the last 5 years, a large proportion of existing schemes would 
naturally suffer from implementation gaps, poor last-mile delivery, and suboptimal 
progress in semi-urban, rural, hilly and tribal areas. Despite the funds being hard to 
come, DHR has always ensured best utilization of the allocated funds and the 
Committee is appreciative of the efforts of DHR. Having said that, the Committee 
believes that the shortfall in Health Research Funding is not only a budgetary issue but 
reflects weak evidence on the returns of existing schemes/programmes as well, both 
physical and financial. DHR should be able to persuade the Ministry of Finance in pre-
budget consultations, that every additional fund allocated, yields promotion of 
indigenous affordable health technologies and digital health solutions which is 
translated into practical health policies and actions, all of these ultimately translating to 
saving of public funds. Accordingly, the Committee recommends a dedicated cell in 
DHR to bring forth periodic reports on both the physical and financial aspects of public 
health spending on bio-medical research. The reports should give emphasis on the 
outcome of schemes/programmes and utility of innovations and technology emanating 
from bio medical research for practical use on the ground level. 
 
2.8 To improve the fund utilization of DHR, the Committee recommends measures 
like teaming of seasoned scientists with early-career researchers in 
programmes/schemes to bridge knowledge gaps and variant insights in the funding 
landscaping, real-time tracking of projects outcomes involved in assets creation via 
GIS-enabled portal, developing scorecards and linking the same to annual performance 
appraisals of institutes/individuals concerned, introduction of automatic forfeiture and 
reallocation of unutilised capital grants after a certain period as well as blacklisting of 
defaulting institutes for future projects. For the Committee, the success of any research 
endeavour is inextricably linked to adequate funding. By addressing the challenges 
inherent in the funding process through these recommended methods, DHR should be 
able to strengthen their position which may catalyse the Ministry of Finance to dedicate 

21 
 
more funds for the Department for the stated strategic purpose based on actual 
outcome intending to make the healthcare more accessible and affordable. 
 
2.9 Regarding the issue of only less than 25% of the health and education cess collections 
being transferred to the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN) and its 
consequences on DHR-funded schemes, the Department replied that its schemes are not 
directly funded by the PMSSN. But the Department expressed its concern that its 
schemes/programmes are part of the larger health ecosystem that experiences increased 
financial pressure when the dedicated cess funds are not fully utilised as intended. This can 
lead to greater competition for limited Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) funds, potentially 
hindering the DHR's ability to secure increased funding for expanding its research initiatives 
and human resource development programmes. 
 
2.10 The Committee understands that currently DHR schemes are not benefitting 
from by the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN). However, the 
Committee is of the firm opinion that the DHR schemes are in no way less important in 
the endeavours to attain inter- alia the targets of National Health Policy, 2017, which is 
one of the salient features of PMSSN. Hence, the Committee recommends that DHR 
should submit a formal proposal to the Ministry of Finance for ring-fencing an 
appropriate percentage of the health component of cess from PMSSN for its schemes/ 
programmes. The Committee feels that such a proposal would hold weightage since 
PMSSN is the primarily a non-lapsable reserve fund which has been conceived to cover 
broader aims like National Health Policy 2017, Emergency & Disaster preparedness 
and response during health emergencies, etc. These aims of PMSSN directly impinge 
implementation of evidence-based interventions in urban/rural/tribal areas and 
translation of research outcomes into policy and practice. 
 
2.11 Regarding 70% of the research funding of DHR being urban centric, the Department 
submitted measures taken by them to mitigate this bias. According to DHR,ICMR provides 
financial support to medical colleges, universities and research institutions across the 
country. These institutions are generally located in Tier I, II and III cities; however, the 
geographical location of an institution does not limit the population coverage of research 
activities.  Available data indicates that nearly 60% of ongoing research projects are funded 
in institutions situated in Tier II and Tier III cities. Furthermore, many studies conducted by 
institutions located in urban areas involve extensive field components covering both rural and 
underserved populations. The National Health Research Projects portfolio is designed to 
ensure representation across geographical regions, including urban, rural and remote 
communities. 
 
2.12 In addition, several ICMR institutes and regional centres specifically undertake 
research addressing the health needs of tribal and other underserved populations. These 
include the ICMR-National Institute of Research in Tribal Health, ICMR-Centre for 
Research Management and Control of Hemoglobinopathies, ICMR-Vector Control Research 
Centre, ICMR-National Institute for Implementation Research on Non-Communicable 
Diseases, ICMR-Regional Medical Research Centre Sri Vijaya Puram and ICMR-Regional 
Medical Research Centre Bhubaneswar. These institutes generate evidence on disease 
burden, nutrition, maternal and child health, genetic disorders and health-system 

22 
 
strengthening among tribal populations, including Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
(PVTGs).Moreover, DHR implements an umbrella scheme for development of infrastructure 
for health research.  It has two sub-schemes namely (i) establishing Multidisciplinary 
Research Units (MRUs) in Medical Colleges/Research Institutes, and (ii) establishing Model 
Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs). The MRUs are predominantly located in urban 
areas and MRHRUs are located in rural areas. The allocation of funds for the two sub-
schemes is Rs. 288.11 Cr and Rs. 192.36 Cr, respectively, for the 15th Finance Commission 
Period, which amounts to 60% and 40% allocation to the two sub schemes, respectively. 
MRHRU supports research projects through funding. The 36 MRHRUs are supporting 
research activities primarily in rural settings. They aim to build research infrastructure in 
rural India, focusing on health issues relevant to local communities and bridging the gap 
between researchers and rural health systems. 
 
 2.13 The Committee considers the submission of the Department that as far as 
research programmes/schemes are concerned, even though institutions are generally 
located in Tier I, II and III cities, the population coverage of research activities and 
field components includes both rural and underserved populations. Also, the 
submission made by the Department of 60% and 40% fund allocation to MRUs and 
MRHRUs respectively, under Development of Infrastructure for Health Research 
during the 15thFinance Commission Period suggests appropriately earmarked funding 
pattern for both urban and rural belts. Still the Committee feels that lack of proper 
monitoring mechanism when research is conducted in rural areas leads to 
infrastructure and human resource gaps at the time of its implementation. To address 
this, DHR can launch a real-time portal linked to all MRHRUs and Ayushman Bharat 
Health & Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) and accessible to the Centre and States. 
Moreover, to bring in more transparency in fund allocation, the Committee 
recommends mapping of funding patterns and to make available in public domain, 
institute-wise, State-wise, and rural/urban break-up data of sanctioned funds. Further, 
an independent annual equity audit by CAG should be institutionalised, with findings 
presented to the Parliament. 
 
2.14 The Committee is of the considered view that when research funding remains 
concentrated in urban-based institutions and research centres it may result in health 
challenges innate to rural and tribal areas such as vector-borne diseases, malnutrition, 
maternal mortality and sickle cell anaemia, not getting its needed share of funding. 
More research institutions in the tribal and aspirational districts will ensure the area 
specific research gets needed attention and no region is left behind in healthcare 
preparedness. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DHR should notify a 
policy mandating that at least 40% of all extramural research grants be awarded to 
projects led by or implemented in rural/tribal institutions. These projects can also be 
partnered by State Medical Colleges and Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs).  
 
2.15 As perceived by the Committee, another downside for rural and tribal areas is 
that their medical colleges and research units lack trained manpower, equipment, and 
administrative support, making them less competitive for DHR grants thereby 
reinforcing the urban funding dominance. In this regard, the Committee recommends 

23 
 
that DHR should provide extra weightage in grant evaluation for proposals from these 
institutions and special incentives like hardship allowance, fast-track promotion for 
scientists opting for rural postings to aggressively handhold them. 
 
2.2 Projected Demands and Actual Allocations of DHR 
 
2.2.1 The Department of Health Research has been allocated as BE 2026-27 Rs. 
4821.21crores against the Projected Demand of Rs. 5523.88 crores. Details of the Projected 
Demand, BE, RE and Actual Expenditure pertaining to DHR for the financial years, 2024-25, 
2025-26 and 2026-27 has been illustrated below: - 
 
(In Crores) 
Year Projected Demand BE RE AE 
2024-25 3876.82 3301.73 3391.64 3383.92 
2025-26 4970.03 3900.69 3927.64 3682.04 
as on 31.01.2026 
2026-27 5523.88 4821.21 - - 
 
2.2.2 The total allocation of DHR of 2026-2027 of Rs 4821.21crore has increased by 
42.4% from Actuals of 2024-2025 of Rs 3383.93 crore and around 23% from BE of Rs 
3900.69 crore and RE of Rs 3927.64crore2025-2026. The Committee wished to know from 
the Department, the major factors that have led to this. In response, DHR submitted that the 
expenditure on DHR schemes of Human Resource and Capacity Development, 
Establishment of Infrastructure (MRU/MRHRU) was minimal in 2021-22 and 2022-23 
owing to Covid-19 situation as the resources of both DHR as well as its grantee institutions 
were pre-occupied with tackling of the pandemic and there was restricted activity owing to 
lockdowns, etc. The expenditure continued to be low in the third year (2023-24) also being 
the recovery year and minimum carry forwarding of liabilities (2nd/3rd year grants) of 
previous years. The normal activity of the Schemes could be resumed in the last two years 
and the expenditure, accordingly, picked up. 
 
2.2.3 The major factor that has led to year-on-year growth in ICMR budget is more 
investments in research activities at Intra-Mural and Extra-Mural projects. Post pandemic the 
focus is to promote research in health priorities and to develop affordable, innovative, 
indigenous health technologies and products. To achieve this ICMR has prioritise new 
research initiatives like- First in the World, Development of Frontier Technologies, 
MedTechMitra, Patent Mitra, Centre for Advanced Research (CAR), National Health 
Research Priority Projects (NHRP) etc. Further, marginal increase has been in salary 
component due to inflation adjustments. 
 
2.2.4 Thereafter, the Committee wanted to know the specific Heads under which this 
increased fund of Rs. 893.57 crore of the BE of DHR for 2026-27 has been allocated and the 
details of re-calibration of such schemes in terms of their physical and financial targets for 
the ensuing year. For which, DHR submitted that ICMR budget has been enhanced by 850 Cr 
Rupees. This additional amount will be utilized in the following manner-  
 

24 
 
a) Extramural Research Projects: Rs 475 Cr 
1. Affordable health technologies (develop frontier technologies, First in the 
World Challenge, MedTech Mitra 
2. Solutions for difficult and resistant health problems 
3. Achieve high global ranking of Indian Institutions in Medical Research  
b) Intramural Research Projects: Rs 150 Cr 
1. New research at rejuvenated 8 National Institutes of Health Research (NIHR) 
2. Enhanced Intramural Grants 
3. Centres for Collaborative Research (CCR) scheme 
 
c) GIA Capital: Rs 200 Cr  
1. Relocation & establishment of NIV, Pune at Pashan, Pune 
2. Infrastructure creation for Institute of Digital Health at Delhi NCR 
3. Infrastructure development at ICMR Headquarters & ongoing construction 
activities at 28 institutes 
4. Data Centre at ICMR Headquarters 
5. Procurement of equipment at 28 ICMR institutes and centres 
 
d) GIA Salaries: Rs 25 Cr: notional increase on account of annual increment and 
increase in DA.  
 
A. There is an enhancement of Rs 12.765 cr in VRDL scheme. This is incremental 
enhancement taking into consideration that the scheme of Development of Tools /Support 
to Prevent Outbreaks & Epidemics,” which is proposed to be discontinued from the 
XVIEFC cycle, with its core components being integrated into the VRDL Scheme.  
 
B.  In the HRD scheme, it is stated that the total budget for FY 2025-26 was Rs. 93.00 
crore and for FY 2026-27 the budget (RE) has been provisioned as Rs. 105.00 crore. The 
increase of budget by Rs. 12.00 crore over previous year is a normal increase and has been 
planned toutilize as per EFC plan. The comparative rise in physical target is reflected in-
100 additional fellowships.  
 
C. PM ABHIM Scheme- In the 16thFC period, new research infrastructure activities 
have been proposed- 
 
1)  Setting up of 30 lnfectious Disease Research & Diagnostic Laboratories- 
These expands diagnostic capacity beyond virology to include bacteriology, 
mycology, and parasitology. 
 
2)  Launch of "National lnitiative for Reliable Medical Device Development & 
Assessment Network (NIRMAN)' – To accelerate the development of indigenous 
medicaldevices. 
 
3)  Establishment of National-Grade Data Centre and Disaster Recovery 
infrastructure for ICMR's Research & Digital Health Ecosystem- to safeguard 
sensitive biomedical research data against emerging cyber threats. 
 
4)  Establishment of National Virus Resource Facility (NVRF)- A central 
repository for authenticated viral strains is proposed to accelerate the development of 
indigenous diagnostics and vaccines during future public health emergencies 
 

25 
 
2.2.5 Further, the Department was asked about any reappropriation of funds they are 
planning related to schemes under it in the last FY or for this FY.The details for the same as 
provided by DHR is as under:- 
 
1. Development of Tools/Support to Prevent Outbreaks of Epidemics (CS) 
Under the scheme “Development of Tools / Support to Prevent Outbreaks & 
Epidemics”, DHR had sought an additional provision of ₹1.50 crore as Revised 
Estimates (RE) for the year 2025–26 to support ongoing research, diagnostic 
development and outbreak preparedness activities. However, an amount of ₹18 
lakh was approved, hence RE is 3.67 crore. 
 
2.  Human Resource and Development Scheme (HRD): 
It is stated that during FY 2024-25, no reappropriation of funds related to HRD 
scheme have been done. However, for FY 2025-26 so far, DHR-HRD is able to 
utilize the allocated funds and if there is any saving in the department under 
different schemes, the same will be utilized to the extent of shortfall. 
 
2.2.6 Based on the figures of Projected Demand, BE, RE and Actual Expenditure 
pertaining to DHR for the financial years, 2024-25, 2025-26 and 2026-27, the 
Committee observes that the gap between the funds projected by DHR and the budget 
allocated by the Ministry of Finance has narrowed from Rs 1069.34 crore in 2024-25 to 
Rs. 702.67 during 2026-27. The Committee views such trend as a positive move and 
hopes that the funds get translated into measurable outcomes like affordable treatment, 
strong disease surveillance and world class research infrastructure. The Committee also 
observes that the utilisation of funds by Department which remained below par owing 
to various emergent and unprecedented constraints initially has picked up in the post-
pandemic period.  
 
2.2.7 The Committee observes that the enhanced BE for 2026-27 of Rs 4,821.21 crore 
(increase of 42.2 % over the Actuals of 2024-25 and 23% over RE of 2025-26) is 
overwhelmingly research-driven (Rs. 850 crore to ICMR, including Rs. 475 crore 
extramural, Rs 150 crore Intramural and Rs. 200 crore GIA-Capital funds), with 
targeted scaling of new initiatives, MedTechMitra, First-in-the-World, Centre for 
Advanced Research (CAR), National Health Research Priority Projects (NHRP), 
NIRMAN, National Virus Resource Facility (NVRF), etc.) and HRD fellowships. The 
Committee expects DHR to devise proactive steps to efficiently utilise the increased 
funding received for the ensuing year. Ensuring the assessment of capacity to utilise 
including institutional infrastructure, financial compliance, project progress roadmap, 
etc,this should be ensured before funds are released. Such measures would be especially 
pivotal in case of new Schemes like MedTechMitra, Patent Mitra, etc. The key concerns 
areas of utilisation leading to under absorption of resources that needs to be identified 
and sorted out. The Committee also strongly favours and recommends the creation of 
an institutional mechanism to monitor progress of GIA and PM-ABHIM projects, 
which have consistently witnessed project delays in the past. Realtime Outcome 
Dashboards would be a great tool for the purpose of monitoring the schemes. This step 
may be in addition to the time proven, periodic utilisation review mechanisms that may 
be in place for expected results. A dedicated monitoring mechanism would help to 
convert the ₹200+ crore GIA-Capital spike into tangible assets within the financial year, 
avoiding RE-stage surrenders and supporting long-term research capacity. 

26 
 
 
2.2.8 The Committee further observes that to make optimal utilisation of the funds 
allocated, the Department may explore channelising money from schemes making 
sluggish progress, despite best efforts, to schemes making better headway. The 
Committee recommends such move can be made when required with the due 
consultation and approval of the Ministry of Finance, wherever required. 
 
2.2.9 The Committee takes into account the submission of DHR about the proposed 
new research infrastructure activities under PM-ABHIM Scheme for the 16th Finance 
Commission period viz. NIRMAN, NVRF, National Grade Data Centre and Disaster 
Recovery Infrastructure and establishment of Infectious disease Research & Diagnostic 
Labs. All are critical initiatives that can act as stepping stones in the nation’s progress 
towards self-reliance in the health sector in combating its challenges.  
 
2.2.10 With regard to the capital expenditure (Rs 1.81crore) remaining negligible at less than 
0.04% of total allocation despite the overall increase in total allocation of DHR for 2026- 
2027, the DHR informed that the comparatively low capital expenditure of the Department 
amounting to approximately ₹1.75–1.81 crore in 2026–27 (less than 0.04% of the total 
allocation of ₹4821.21 crore), may appear disproportionate in isolation. However, it does not 
indicate any policy preference for revenue or grant-based spending at the cost of 
infrastructure development. DHR is primarily a policy, coordination and funding department 
under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and does not maintain independent 
laboratory campuses or buildings. Accordingly, its direct capital outlay is limited to essential 
administrative requirements and is expected to be suitably adjusted at the Revised Estimates 
(RE) stage and in subsequent years as required. The creation and strengthening of physical 
research infrastructure is undertaken through the Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) and national health research missions, and therefore the bulk of capital formation is 
reflected under those programme heads rather than under the DHR administrative budget, 
including GIA (Capital) of ₹200 crore earmarked for the relocation and establishment of NIV 
Pune at Pashan, development of the Institute of Digital Health in Delhi NCR, infrastructure 
expansion at ICMR Headquarters along with ongoing construction across 28 institutes, 
establishment of a Data Centre at ICMR Headquarters, and procurement of essential 
equipment for 28 ICMR institutes and centres. 
2.2.11 Substantial investments are, in fact, being made towards strengthening national 
research capacity. Under the Human Resource and Capacity Development (HRCD) Umbrella 
Scheme of ICMR, an allocation of ₹105 crore for 2026–27 supports development of a trained 
health research workforce through Short-Term Studentships, medical thesis support, PhD and 
post-doctoral fellowships, women scientist schemes, training workshops and funding of 
ongoing research projects, with several hundred to more than a thousand fellowships being 
supported during the year. In addition, ₹24 crore has been provided for inter-sectoral 
convergence and research grants to promote development of new technologies and affordable 
healthcare solutions, and ₹21 crore for the DIAMONDS programme supporting 25 hubs and 
establishing new centres, along with international cooperation activities. Ongoing grant-in-
aid projects with national institutions such as CSIR laboratories, ICAR institutes and state 
medical colleges cover drug discovery, cancer therapeutics, pulmonary fibrosis, probiotics, 
chronic kidney disease biomarkers and treatment of kala-azar, thereby strengthening 
translational and collaborative research. 

27 
 
2.2.12 Further, significant infrastructure development is being undertaken under the PM-
Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) with an allocation of ₹221.32 
crore, including completion of zonal National Institute of Virology facilities, establishment 
of a BSL-3 laboratory at NITVAR Pune, creation of Infectious Disease Research and 
Diagnostic Laboratories, a Health Research Data Centre, the National Virus Resource 
Facility at NIV Pune and the National Initiative for Reliable Medical Device Testing and 
Assessment Network (NIRMAN).These initiatives substantially enhance national biosecurity 
preparedness, diagnostics, medical device evaluation and research capability. 
2.2.13 Therefore, the present budgetary pattern reflects a structured division of 
responsibilities: DHR focuses on policy guidance, funding support and human resource 
development, while ICMR and national missions undertake infrastructure creation and 
laboratory expansion. The approach emphasizes development of skilled human resources and 
a distributed national research network rather than centralised administrative infrastructure. 
In the long term, this model is expected to strengthen health research capacity, accelerate 
translational research, improve disease surveillance and pandemic preparedness and promote 
indigenous innovation. Accordingly, the low capital expenditure under DHR should be 
viewed as a matter of budgetary classification within an integrated national health research 
architecture and not as an indication of inadequate investment in research infrastructure. 
 
2.2.14 With respect to the matter of capital investment in health research, the 
Committee reckon from the submission of DHR that while DHR is primarily a policy, 
coordination and funding entity and do not maintain independent laboratory 
infrastructure. Physical research infrastructure is undertaken through ICMR and 
national health research missions which reflect the bulk of capital formation. PM-
ABHIM also involves significant infrastructure developments. Hence, the present 
budgetary pattern reflects a division of responsibilities between DHR and ICMR on 
these lines. The Committee makes the observation that DHR and ICMR shoulder a very 
significant component of national advancement that would contribute towards the 
Viksit Bharat vision of the Government and should take all measures to bring out the 
expected outcomes. 
 
2.3 15 th Finance Commission period vs 16th Finance Commission in respect of DHR. 
 
2.3.1 Details of projected demands, allocated fund in BE and RE and Actual Expenditure, 
till date for the 15th Finance Commission period in respect of Department of Health Research 
is as under: - 
Rs. In crores  
S. 
No. 
Department 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 Tota l 15th FC 
period (2021-22 
to 2025-26) 
1. Projected 
Demand 
3312.33 
 
3467.65 
 
3080.00 
 
3876.82 
 
4970.03 
 
18706.83 
2. Budget 
Estimates  
 
2663.00 3200.65 2980.00 3301.73 3900.69 16046.07 
3. Revised 
Estimates  
 
3080.00 2775.00 2892.83 3391.64 3927.64 16067.11 

28 
 
4. Actuals 2690.61 2432.11 2857.47 3383.92 3682.04 
(till 31.01.2026) 
15046.15 
 
2.3.2 Details of financial and other requirements for 16th Finance Commission (F.C) period 
(2026-27 to 2030-31) in respect of Department of Health Research is as under: - 
 
2.3.3 DHR Schemes: The draft EFC Memos of DHR schemes for 16th F.C. Period have 
been sent for inter-ministerial comments. The requirements stated in the EFCs for the next 5 
years are as follows- 
1. Human Resource & Capacity Development: Rs. 991.95 Cr 
2. ⁠Development of infrastructure for promotion of health research: Rs. 985.02 Cr 
3. Setting up and strengthening of nation-wide network of laboratories for managing 
epidemics and national calamities: Rs. 980.91 Cr 
4. PM-Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM): DHR 
Components: Rs. 1446.86 Cr 
 
2.3.4 DHR is also implementing R&D Scheme for National One Health Mission with total 
SFC allocation from 2023-24 to 2027-28 of Rs 386.86 Cr. Moreover, the concept note of new 
proposed scheme, Integrating Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology 
Assessment in Programme⁠ and Policy for Rs. 379 Cr (2026-27 to 2030-31) has been 
submitted to Department of Expenditure.  
 
2.3.5 A new scheme of DHR named Strategic Alliance for Nurturing Medical Innovations 
and Translational Research Acceleration (SANMITRA) has been appraised by DoE with 5-
years outlay of Rs 359.01 Cr. It will be implemented by new Section 8 company of DHR-
MIDAC (Medical Innovations Development Acceleration Council) which has also been 
appraised by Committee on Establishment Expenditure with initial 5-years outlay of Rs 67.9 
Cr. The Cabinet Note of MIDAC has been circulated for inter-ministerial consultations.  
2.3.6 The Committee notes that DHR, apart from its existing schemes/programmes, 
has inter alia submitted proposed new schemes, like, Integrating Evidence-based 
Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme⁠ and Policy and Strategic 
Alliance for Nurturing Medical Innovations and Translational Research Acceleration 
(SANMITRA) for the 16th Finance Commission period (2026-27 to 2030-31). The 
financial statistics of 15th Finance Commission period in respect of Department of 
Health Research shows that all through the period, the Department has never been 
allocated their Projected Demand. The Committee’s inference on the aspect is that the 
components of the schemes are getting compromised. The Committee, therefore, would 
expect that the Department is more realistic in their physical & financial proposals for 
the 16th Finance Commission period. The Committee recommends that the Department, 
on their part should adopt broad measures like concentrating on high-impact areas and 
aligning them with the national priorities, linking resources to measurable components, 
resorting to modern public financial management, turning to performance-linked 
incentives to retain skilled scientist/researches, etc. Thereby, the Department must 
enhance the performance of their schemes/programmes and be more assertive of their 
financial requirement. 

2.4 A Comparative study of research budget of DHR with other major research Ministries/Organizations.  2.4.1 A comparative table of budgetary allocationother key ministries and departments involved in research, such as the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of Space (DoS), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), MinUnion Budget, 2026-27 in terms of projected demand, total allocation and also as a percentage of their respective Ministry's total budget is shown below.Ministry / Department Research Agency / Activity Department of Health Research (MoHFW) ICMR, national biomedical research, HTA, disease surveillance Department of Science & Technology (DST) Scientific research programmes, SERB grants, national missionsDepartment of Biotechnology (DBT) Biotechnology research, BIRAC innovation, genomics & translationalresearch Department of Space (DoS/ISRO) Space science, launch vehicles, satellite R&DDepartment of Atomic Energy (DAE) Nuclear science, reactors, radiation technologies, strategic researchMinistry of Education UGC research grants, research universities, fellowships, R&D schemes Ministry of AYUSH CCRAS, CCRH, CCRUM, CCRYN, CCRS research councils*source:https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/doc/eb/stat3a.pdf 2.4.2 The Department further submitted before the Committee the Government of India for FY 2026departments and agencies such as DST, DBT, CSIR, DAE, ISRO, ICAR, ICMR/Health Research, M/o Earth Sciences, etc., as reflected in the Union Budget Demands for Grants). For FY 2026–27, the Department of HeaGovernment of India’s total public R&D budget. This indicates that health research constitutes a moderate but significant share of national scientific expenditure, though it remains smaller than sectors such as space, atomic energy and defence R&D.
A Comparative study of research budget of DHR with other major research A comparative table of budgetary allocations for research activities to DHR against other key ministries and departments involved in research, such as the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of Space (DoS), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), Ministry of Education and Ministry of AYUSH in the 27 in terms of projected demand, total allocation and also as a percentage of their respective Ministry's total budget is shown below. Research Agency / Projected Demand /Research Allocation   Total Ministry Budget   ICMR, national biomedical research, HTA, disease 4,821.21 ~99,858 (M/o HFW total incl. Health & Family Welfare) Scientific research programmes, SERB grants, national missions ~6,200 ~6,450 Biotechnology research, BIRAC innovation, genomics & translational ~3,446 ~3,500 Space science, launch vehicles, satellite R&D ~13,416 ~13,416 Nuclear science, reactors, radiation technologies, strategic research ~24,968 ~24,968 UGC research grants, research universities, fellowships, R&D ~13,500 (research components approx.) ~1,48,000 CCRAS, CCRH, CCRUM, CCRYN, CCRS research councils ~1,350 (research components approx.) ~3,650 *source:https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/doc/eb/stat3a.pdf The Department further submitted before the Committee the total R&D outlay  of FY 2026–27which is about ₹63,381 crore (sum of major science departments and agencies such as DST, DBT, CSIR, DAE, ISRO, ICAR, ICMR/Health Research, M/o Earth Sciences, etc., as reflected in the Union Budget Demands for Grants). 27, the Department of Health Research accounts for approximately 7.6% of the Government of India’s total public R&D budget. This indicates that health research constitutes a moderate but significant share of national scientific expenditure, though it uch as space, atomic energy and defence R&D. 
A Comparative study of research budget of DHR with other major research s for research activities to DHR against other key ministries and departments involved in research, such as the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of Space (DoS), istry of Education and Ministry of AYUSH in the 27 in terms of projected demand, total allocation and also as a (₹ Crore) Total Ministry Research Allocation as % of Ministry Budget (M/o HFW total Health & ~4.8% ~96% ~98% ~100% ~100% ~9% ~37% total R&D outlay  of ₹63,381 crore (sum of major science departments and agencies such as DST, DBT, CSIR, DAE, ISRO, ICAR, ICMR/Health Research, M/o Earth Sciences, etc., as reflected in the Union Budget Demands for Grants). lth Research accounts for approximately 7.6% of the Government of India’s total public R&D budget. This indicates that health research constitutes a moderate but significant share of national scientific expenditure, though it  


 Comparison of budgets for the DHR/ICMR to that of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)for the last decade is as under:Source: Finance Ministry website  Over the last decade, DHR allocations have increased severalmid-2010s, particularly after 2020).2.4.3 The Committee endorses DHR’s submission regarding policy recommendations that arise from comparing the Department’s research budget with that of other major Ministries/Organizations in the country to improve/enhance its total allocation. According to the Department, although health research carries high social and economic impact, its allocation remains relatively modest within the broader science and technology funding landscape. Based on such assessment, a number of policy directions may be considered to strengthen and enhance the Department’s overall allocation in a structured manner. 2.4.4 First, health research may be recognised as a strategic national priority comparable to sectors such as space, atomic energy and industrial research. Given the demonstrated role ofbiomedical research in pandemic preparedness, disease surveillance, diagnostics, and indigenous technology development, it would be appropriate to adopt a missionfunding approach with a multiincremental budgeting. This would allow stable planning of clinical research networks, 
0.005,000.0010,000.0015,000.0020,000.0025,000.0030,000.00Projected Demand/Research Allocation (Cr)Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 Comparison of budgets for the DHR/ICMR to that of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)for the last decade is as under:- (Amounts in Crores)Over the last decade, DHR allocations have increased several-fold (roughly tripling since the 2010s, particularly after 2020). endorses DHR’s submission regarding policy recommendations that arise from comparing the Department’s research budget with that of other major Ministries/Organizations in the country to improve/enhance its total allocation. According to hough health research carries high social and economic impact, its allocation remains relatively modest within the broader science and technology funding landscape. Based on such assessment, a number of policy directions may be considered to enhance the Department’s overall allocation in a structured manner.First, health research may be recognised as a strategic national priority comparable to sectors such as space, atomic energy and industrial research. Given the demonstrated role ofbiomedical research in pandemic preparedness, disease surveillance, diagnostics, and indigenous technology development, it would be appropriate to adopt a missionfunding approach with a multi-year assured funding framework rather than annual ntal budgeting. This would allow stable planning of clinical research networks, 
Ministry/Departments DHR’s allocation at BE stage DSIR’s allocation at BE stage1500.00 4446.003216.00(excluding recoveries) 4795.973374.65 (excluding recoveries) 4895.892100.00 5385.002663.00 5224.273200.65 5636.462980.00 5746.513001.73 6323.413900.69 6657.784821.21 6765.62 Comparison of budgets for the DHR/ICMR to that of the Council of Scientific and Industrial (Amounts in Crores) fold (roughly tripling since the endorses DHR’s submission regarding policy recommendations that arise from comparing the Department’s research budget with that of other major Ministries/Organizations in the country to improve/enhance its total allocation. According to hough health research carries high social and economic impact, its allocation remains relatively modest within the broader science and technology funding landscape. Based on such assessment, a number of policy directions may be considered to enhance the Department’s overall allocation in a structured manner. First, health research may be recognised as a strategic national priority comparable to sectors such as space, atomic energy and industrial research. Given the demonstrated role of biomedical research in pandemic preparedness, disease surveillance, diagnostics, and indigenous technology development, it would be appropriate to adopt a mission-mode year assured funding framework rather than annual ntal budgeting. This would allow stable planning of clinical research networks, 
allocation at BE stage  4446.00 4795.97 4895.89 5385.00 5224.27 5636.46 5746.51 6323.41 6657.78 6765.62 

31 
 
biorepositories, cohort studies and translational research programmes that require long 
gestation periods. 
2.4.5 Second, the allocation mechanism may be strengthened through outcome-linked 
budgeting. DHR programmes such as diagnostic development, vaccine support, health-
technology assessment and public-health research directly influence affordability of care, 
reduction in disease burden and savings in public health expenditure. Systematic 
documentation of economic returns—such as cost savings to national health programmes, 
import substitution of medical technologies and support to indigenous manufacturing—can 
justify higher public investment in health research relative to traditional laboratory-based 
research sectors. 
2.4.6 Third, enhanced inter-ministerial convergence may be institutionalised. Creation of 
joint national missions for diagnostics, medical devices and clinical trials infrastructure may 
further strengthen this approach. DHR has already undertaken such initiatives. For example, 
Ayush - ICMR Centre for Integrative Health Research has been established as a joint 
initiative between the Ministry of Ayush and ICMR to generate robust scientific evidence on 
integrative and traditional medicine approaches through collaborative research, clinical 
studies, and policy guidance. Similarly, Med-Tech Mitra is a joint initiative by ICMR and 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) launched in December 2023. Over 
400 innovators, start-ups, and industry partners have been engaged through this platform 
helping them overcome challenges in the process of developing regulation compliant 
products, their clinical validation, and scaling-up.  
2.4.7 Fourth, a dedicated capital funding window for national health research infrastructure 
may be considered. While laboratory infrastructure is currently created through ICMR and 
national health missions, establishment of permanent national centres for clinical trials, 
regulatory science, health data analytics and evaluation of medical technologies would 
improve long-term institutional capacity and justify enhanced allocations. This may be 
complemented by public-private partnerships, especially for device testing facilities, bio-
banks and advanced laboratories. 
2.4.8 DHR’s HTAIn should be viewed as a prerequisite for efficient rollout of AB-PMJAY, 
National Health Mission, and national health programmes, and not as a discretionary research 
scheme. Evidence generation through it is a very small fraction of what it guides. Therefore, 
a fixed share of major centrally sponsored health schemes can be routed to HTAIn for 
evidence generation and budget impact analyses. 
2.4.9 Finally, strengthening translation and commercialization pathways may improve 
budget justification. Facilitating technology transfer, start-up incubation, and integration with 
the domestic pharmaceutical and medical device industry would demonstrate tangible 
economic benefits from health research investment. Evidence of improved programme 
efficiency, indigenous innovation, and reduced healthcare costs can support a case for 
progressively increasing the Department’s share within the national R&D expenditure. 
2.4.10 Already, DHR has proposed for Medical Innovations Development Acceleration 
Council (MIDAC) for steering translational research partnerships and technology 
development with focus on priority health conditions for the nation. It will support industry 
collaboration to bridge critical gaps in product development, assist researchers in validation 
and evaluation products and also manage royalty and equity for ICMR.  

32 
 
 
2.4.11  The Committee takes into account DHR's budgetary allocations for research 
activities vis-a-vis other key ministries and departments involved in research, such as 
the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT), Department of Space (DoS), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), Ministry of 
Education and Ministry of AYUSH in the Union Budget 2026-27, is the lowest to DHR. 
Comparison of the similarly structured Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and 
Ministry of Education is more thought provoking, as both cater to infrastructural 
development as well as research. Even, Ministry of Education is spending 9% of its 
total allocation for research activities while Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
shares only 4.8% with DHR. Having said that, the Committee observes that out of the 
total Government of India R&D outlay (all scientific ministries combined) for the FY 
2026–27 at ₹63,381 crore, DHR is allocated to the tune of Rs. 4,821.21 crore which is 
approximately 7.6%. When compared to 2017-18, the BE for the DHR/ICMR has more 
than tripled in 2026-27.However, the allocation over the years has been chequered. 
Whereas the growth in BE for CSIR/DSIR for the corresponding period has been 1.5 
times but their increase has been linear. 
 
2.4.12 Overall, the Committee feels that the DHR's share of budgetary allocations for 
research activities can be considered only as modest compared to other key ministries 
and departments involved in the field. Funding for the sake of enhanced budget 
allocation is not proper without relevant outcome. To improve/enhance its total 
allocation DHR has adopted many policy directions like recognition of health research 
as a strategic national priority comparable to sectors such as space, atomic energy and 
industrial research,  strengthening of allocation mechanism through outcome-linked 
budgeting, institutionalisation of enhanced inter-ministerial convergence, 
conceptualisation of a dedicated capital funding window for national health research 
infrastructure complemented by public-private partnerships, viewing of schemes like 
HTAIn as a prerequisite for efficient rollout of AB-PMJAY, National Health Mission, 
and national health programmes and not as a discretionary research scheme, etc. Also, 
DHR/ICMR should consider raising its own resources by tying up with major private 
players in the industry. The Committee is of the considered view that these policy 
directions of DHR can accelerate the pace of activities in the field of medical research in 
the country that would ultimately lead to global standard of healthcare. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that DHR should strive for Medical Innovations 
Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC) for steering translational research 
partnerships and technology development and equity for ICMR. 
 
Establishment Expenditure of the Centre 
 
2.5 Secretariat 
 
2.5.1 The Head- Secretariat is for establishment related expenditure on the Secretariat of 
the Department. The Budget Estimate for 2026-27 at Rs 51.80 crore shows a 10.8% increase 
over Revised Estimatefor2025-26 at ₹46.73 crore—the highest year-on-year jump. Further, 
the allocation under this Head has grown by 21.4% from Actual Expenditure (AE) 2024-25 
at Rs 42.67 crore to Budget Allocation (BE) of 2026-27 at Rs 51.80 crore.  

33 
 
 
2.5.2 On enquiry about the surges, DHR informed that the revenue expenditure object 
heads of Allowances, Office Expenses, Rent Rates and Taxes and Professional Services and 
capital expenditure heads of Information, Computer, Telecommunications (ICT) equipment 
and Furniture & Fixtures are the major contributors towards the 21.4% increase from AE 
2024-25 to BE 2026-27. The details of the increase are as under:  
 
1. Allowances - To cater to the increase in Dearness Allowance, House Rent 
Allowance and Transport Allowance from 2024-25 to 2026-27. 
2. Office Expenses - The meetings and conferences organised by the Department 
have increased both in numbers and magnitude. Further, there has been increase in 
number of outsourced support staff like DEO, MTS, housekeeping and security. 
3. Rent Rates and Taxes - The increase is due to increment in the rate of rent. 
4. Professional Services - In the SFC proposal for continuation of DHR schemes, an 
increase has been proposed in the number of employees in the PMIUs and their 
remuneration. Further, the Department as also hired Consultants and IT 
Professionals through NICSI. 
5. Information, Computer, Telecommunications (ICT) equipment – All the ICT 
devices which have exceeded or nearing its usable life are to be replaced in 
compliance with cyber security guidelines. 
6. Furniture & Fixtures – The office is likely to shift to a new location during the next 
FY which would require procurement of furniture. New furniture is also required 
to cater to the increasing staff strength of the Department. 
 
2.5.3 The Committee also sought an explanation for the Capital Expenditure for Secretariat 
being raised to ₹1.75 crore Budget Allocation (BE) 2026-27 from (RE) ₹1.36 crore in 2025-
26 along with the components under which the increase has been granted and the expected 
outcome, thereof.  
 
2.5.4 The reply of the Department was that the raise in Capital Expenditure from RE 2025-
26 to BE 2026-27 is attributable to increase in following object heads: 
 
Object Head RE  
2025-26 
BE  
2026-27 
AE  
as on 
31.01.2026 
Reasons for increase 
Information, 
Computer, and 
Telecommunic
ations (ICT) 
equipment 
0.71 1.00 14.56 All the ICT devices which have exceeded or 
are nearing its usable life are proposed to be 
replaced during FY 2026-27 in compliance 
with cybersecurity guidelines. Bids for ICT 
devices have been floated on the GeM portal 
and the budget under this head in FY 2025-
26 would be fully utilized. 
Furniture & 
Fixtures 
0.40 0.50 19.29 The office is likely to shift to a new location 
during the next FY which would require 
procurement of furniture. New furniture is 
also required to cater to the increasing staff 
strength of the department. 
 
2.5.5 The Department submitted the breakup of the 3.2% increase in the original Budget 
Estimate (₹45.27 crore) at Revised Estimate for Secretariat for 2025-26 (₹46.73 crore).  
Rs.2.20 crore was increased in the Rent, Rates and Taxes object head at RE stage which is 

34 
 
about 5% of the total BE 2025-26. However, due to anticipated savings in other heads, 
overall impact was Rs.1.46 crore, which is 3.2% increase in BE. Such increased amount was 
sought to meet there requirement of monthly rent up to March 2026 and property tax for the 
FY 2025-26 to the lessor, Indian Red Cross Society. 
 
2.5.6 The Committee takes cognizance of the reasons submitted by the Department on 
the increase of its allocation under the Head- Secretariat under various stages of 
allocation during 2025-26 and BE 2026-27. During the previous FY, DHR had funds 
under the Head kept aside for filling up vacant posts in the Department and acquiring 
an office premise of its own. The Department clarified that very little progress has been 
made on both the issues. The Committee has recommended for the filling up of the 
vacant posts and acquiring office premise of its own for the Department during the 
examination Demands for Grants, 2025-26, as well. It is discouraging to notice that the 
one of the premier Departments in a field as vital as Health Research of the nation is 
deprived of two basic infrastructural requirements, i.e., physical infrastructure and 
human resources. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department puts 
forth a better plea based on practical solutions to rectify its HR issues and get itself a 
permanent official premise and avoid recurring expenditure on rent. 
 
2.6 Health Technology Assessment (HTA)  
 
2.6.1 From the year 2024-25, in Demand No 47 of Department of Health Research, within 
Establishment Expenditure of the Centre. a sub head ‘Health Technology Assessment’ has 
been included. There is also a similar component with the nomenclature ‘governance issues, 
including Health Technology Assessment’ under the Scheme Human Resource and Capacity 
Development. The Committee wanted to know reason for the reflection of ‘Health 
Technology Assessment’, separately, under two heads. The Department explained that it had 
initiated a pilot programme on HTA in April 2017 for evaluation of appropriateness and cost 
effectiveness of available and new health technologies in the country as part of “Research 
Governance” mandate of the Department. In 2021, it was approved as the Sub scheme of an 
umbrella scheme of Human Resource and Capacity Development and scheme had a budget 
line of 3103. Thereafter, in 2023, Health Technology Assessment India was approved as an 
Attached Office under Department of Health Research and 15 regular scientific and 
administrative posts approved by Department of Expenditure. A separate Budget line for the 
attached office under establishment expenditure was approved from 1st April 2024 with a 
budget of 17.85 cr.  
 
2.6.2 According to DHR, although HTA was part of Human Resource and Capacity 
Development Scheme in 15th Finance Commission cycle, given its distinctive mandate and 
requirement of sufficient technical and financial support, concept note of a separate scheme 
‘Integrating Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme⁠ 
and Policy’ has been submitted to Department of Expenditure. With a proposed outlay of Rs. 
379 Cr (2026-27 to 2030-31), it will be implemented by HTA Attached office.  
 
2.6.3 The Committee takes into account the explanation furnished by the Department 
regarding reflection of HTA under two different heads in their Demand. HTA began as 
a pilot programme in April 2017 for evaluation of appropriateness and cost 

35 
 
effectiveness of available and new health technologies in the country and was later 
approved as an Attached Office of DHR in 2023. A separate budget line was given in 
2024. Now, given its distinctive mandate and requirement of sufficient technical and 
financial support, concept note of a separate scheme ‘Integrating Evidence-based 
Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme⁠ and Policy’ has been 
submitted to Department of Expenditure. With a proposed outlay of Rs. 379 Cr (2026-
27 to 2030-31), the scheme will be implemented by HTA Attached office. The 
Committee is in agreement with DHR and perceives HTA as a very important aspect of 
curating an effective ecosystem for ensuring quality and cost effectiveness of medical 
technology available the country through evidence-based mechanisms and recommends 
that DHR should effectively pursue approvals for the new scheme from the Ministry of 
Finance during the 16th FC Cycle. The Committee hopes that the accounting matter of 
reflecting HTA under two heads in the Demand No 47 of DHR will also be taken care of 
as HTA is now removed from the HRD scheme and the new scheme, namely,  
Integrating Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in 
Programme⁠ and Policy to the implemented by the Attached Office is approved.   
 
2.6.4 As submitted by DHR, HTA is now removed from the HRD scheme and is proposed 
as a new scheme ‘Integrating Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment 
in Programme⁠ and Policy’. A Concept Note for the same is pending with Department of 
Expenditure. The Budget over lay of the HTA attached office for the last 2 years is given 
below and thestatement indicating projected demand of the Department and BE allocated for 
2026-27 percentage variation of BE 2026-27 in comparison to projected demands:- 
 
(Amount in Crores) 
Year BE  
 
RE  
 
Actual Expenditure 
2024-25 10.00 17.25  17.01 
2025-26 18.75 18.25  12.41 
 
 
(Rupees in crores) 
Year Projected 
Demand 
BE   
 
Variation  
 
% of Variation of BE 2026-27 as 
compared to Projected Demand 
2026-27 56.63 25.00 -31.63 55.85 
 
 
2.6.5 For the FY 2026-27,the total allocation under HTA at BEis ₹25.00 crorewhich is an 
increase by 42.9% from Actual for 2024-25 at₹17.50 crore and with a particularly sharp 
39.0% rise over Revised Estimate for 2025-26 at ₹17.98 crore. The enhanced budget is 
proposed to be utilisedfor : 
 
1. Establishment of 5 additional resource centres/hubs. 
2. Undertake atleast 60 HTA studies to support the State and the central government 
programs 
3. To conduct capacity building activities for proving training to 100 Researchers 
4. To Develop 50 Policy Briefs for dissemination to the States. 
 

36 
 
2.6.6 The Committee wanted to know the reason of the disproportionately growth of the 
allocation of HTA at 33-39% in comparison to the Department's overall 23% growth in total 
allocation in2026-27 from total allocation in 2025-26. In reply, it was submitted that the 
Health Technology has been approved as an attached office and has been supporting the State 
and Central government health programs to enhance affordable and accessible health 
technologies for universal health coverage. The evidence generated by HTA studies have 
been utilisedfor:- 
 
1. Pricing and procurement-decision making for procurement of Sickle cell diagnostic 
kits and for safety engineered syringes; 
2. Introduction of innovative indigenous devices and diagnostics like Automated             
hearing screening device (Sohum), Truenat for Tuberculosis; 
3. Support health Programs forcervical cancer screening, Thiamine supplementation 
of post-partum women and 
4. Health Benefit packages-rationalization of about 867 health benefit packages under 
Ayushmann Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY). 
 
2.6.7 Now, a concept note has been submitted for the HTA new scheme titled ‘Integrating 
Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme and Policy’ – 
2026-27 to 2030-31, i.e.  the 16thFinance Commission period. The final approval for which is 
awaited from Department of Expenditure. After the approval,aStanding Finance Committee 
(SFC) will be submitted as the proposed scheme is only Rs. 379 Crore. The scheme is 
proposed to have 2 sub schemes:- 
 
1. Health Technology Assessment India and  
2. Centre for Evidence based guidelines. 
 
The proposed Financial outlays of the 2 sub schemes are as below:- 
Subscheme-1 Health Technology Assessment-The scheme is proposed for Rs. 252 Crores 
S. 
No. Description 
Amount in Crores 
2026-27 2027-28 2028-29 2029-30 2030-31 Total 
Crores 
A-Recurring Grant in crores       
1 Establishment of HTA resource 
centres/resource hubs/ Specialised 
Resource centres  for conducting 300 
HTA studies and strengthening the 
existing Resource centres/Hubs 
18 23 28 33 38 140 
2 Support primary research studies to 
fill evidence gaps for HTA studies and 
for Economic analysis studies other 
than HTA 
5 6 7 8 9 35 
3 Implementation of HTA 
recommendation for Public health 
programs 
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 15 
4 Under taking Capacity Building 
Activities-Workshops/ 
Symposium/seminars etc 
5 5 6 7 7 30 
5 PMU Salaries and Administrative 
expenses  4 5.5 6.5 7.5 8.5 32 
 Grand  total 35 43 50.5 58 65.5 252 

37 
 
 
Sub scheme 2 -Centre for Evidence based Guidelines. A tentative budget of Rs 127 crores 
for a period of 5 years will be required for establishing the centre.   
 
Description Amount in Crore 
2026-27 2027-28 2028-29 2029-30 2030-31 Total 
Resource Hubs Budget 4.2 5.6 7 7 7 30.8 
Resource Centres Budget  12 14 16 16 16 74 
Capacity building in evidence 
synthesis and guideline 
development 
1.17 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 6.97 
Guideline development and 
dissemination (Budget for 
CEfG Secretariat)  
2.46 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 15.06 
Total 19.83 23.9 27.5 27.7 27.9 126.83 
 
The deliverables as proposed in the concept note are as below:- 
 
Proposed Activities Target Justification 
Strengthening HTA Ecosystem   
HTA resource centre 
The Resource centres will be responsible 
for 
i. Undertaking HTA studies 
ii. Capacity building activities 
iii. Conducting HTA Sensitisation 
Workshop for State/ Central Government 
Health Programs  
iv. Coordinating other Economic 
Analysis studies both Multicentric and 
unicentric.  
iv. Adoption of HTA 
recommendations by State/ Central 
Government Programmes 
 
 50 HTAIn has established 8 Resource Hubs 
and 20 Resource centres in only  17   
States/UTs for conducting HTA studies as 
per the request received from the State 
and Central Government. 
In this regard, Resource centres have to 
be established in all States/UTs to 
facilitate conducting Health Technology 
Assessment. So the proposal to establish 
another 50 centres 
HTA specialized Centres- SPAARK 
The centre will be responsible for 
i. Undertaking HTA studies in 
specialized diseases only 
ii. Capacity building activities for 
HTA 
iii. Conducting workshops for 
Innovators 
iv. Adoption of HTA 
recommendations by State/ Central 
Government Programs 
10 HTAIn has been supporting National 
Priority programs like TB, Sickle Cell, etc 
and plans to establish specialized centres 
as per the National Health priority. 
HTA Resource Hubs 
The Resource hubs will be responsible for 
i. Capacity building for Resource 
Centres 
ii. Handholding the resource centre to 
Conduct first 3 HTA studies 
iii.   Conducting HTA Sensitisation 
Workshop for State/ Central Government 
Health Programs along with the Resource 
centres 
iii. Coordinating other Economic 
Analysis studies both Multicentric and 
18 HTAIn has established 8 Resource Hubs 
for conducting HTA studies as per the 
request received from the State and 
Central Government. 
The outstanding resource centres are 
planned to be upgraded to Resource Hubs 
The hubs will be uniformly distributed 
with total 3 centres in south, north, east, 
west, central and  2 centres in 

38 
 
unicentric.  
iv. Quality check of the HTA studies 
conducted by the resource centres 
associated with them 
v. Writing Policy Briefs 
vi. Adoption of HTA 
recommendations by State/ Central 
Government Programs 
northeastern zones. 
1. Criteria for selection of the Resource 
Hubs: 
The resource centres will be upgraded to 
Resource hubs fulfilling the following 
criteria- 
 The Resource centres who have 
completed more than 3 HTA studies  
 The Resource Centres who have 
conducted training 
programs/workshops on HTA 
 Atleast one HTA Recommendations 
of the Resource centre to be adopted 
by the State/ Central Government 
Health Programs  
 
HTA studies 300  The HTA studies will be conducted by the 
HTA resource centre, HUBs and the 
Specialized SPAARK centres 
Support primary research studies to fill 
evidence gaps for HTA studies and Promote 
economic analysis studies in addition to 
HTA 
 70 The health Technologies which have 
insufficient evidence on Clinical 
Effectiveness may be taken up for a field 
feasibility analysis study. 
Undertake the studies to fill up gap in 
evidence, methodology of HTA, Costing 
studies, health economic studies etc 
Implementation of HTA recommendation 
for Public health programs 
150  About 150 HTA recommendations will be 
implemented in State/ Central Government 
programs 
Capacity Building activities- 
1.workshops, online courses, Seminars, 
Symposiums- National and International. 
2. Capacity Building for LMICs 
3. Online courses for AI based HTA, Real 
world evidence, environmental impact, 
4.Fellowships for PhD in Health Economics 
and Technology Assessment 
 65 The main purpose of HTA is to provide 
scientific proof, using concrete evidence to 
support the formation of health policies, 
and to perform medical resource allocation 
under the principles of fairness and justice. 
The  HTA team at the DHR  has learned 
that the bottleneck of constructing a sound 
HTA system lies in understanding the 
value of HTA and shortage of professional 
HTA talent. About 65 Workshops/ 
seminars/symposiums will be conducted 
across the Country in 5 years. 
To support the initiative for capacity 
building about 80 JRF will be awarded for 
pursuing PhD in Health Economics and 
Technology Assessment. 
 
2.6.8 The Department also submitted the changes or improvements that have been 
incorporated in the new HTA Scheme vis-à-vis the existing schemewhich are as under:- 
 
1. HTAIn has established 8 Resource Hubs and 20 Resource centres in only 17   
States/UTs for conducting HTA studies as per the request received from the State 
and Central Government. In this regard, Resource centres have to be established in 
all States/UTs to facilitate conducting Health Technology Assessment. So the 
proposal to establish another 50 centres. 
2. HTAIn has been supporting National Priority programs like TB, Sickle Cell, etc 
and plans to establish specialized centres as per the National Health priority. 

39 
 
3. Undertake the studies to fill up gap in evidence, methodology of HTA, Costing 
studies, health economic studies, etc. 
4. Enhance implementation strategies with State HTA units. 
 
2.6.9 The Department submitted that the new scheme has proposed to establish 1 resource 
centres in each and every state and UT in the next 5 years and each new resource centre is 
proposed a budget of Rs.50 lakhs. 
 
2.6.10 The Department has submitted Health Technology Assessment Outcome Indicator(s) 
for the FY 2025-26 till 31st December 2025 as under : 
Outcome Indicator(s) Target  
2025-26 
Achievement till 
31stDecember 2025
1    Number of Resource centres established. 
3 3 
2    No. of topics received from State and Central Governments 
50 92 
3   No. of personnel trained 
60 311 
4 No. of evidence based policies issued of Health Technology Assessment 
(HTA) 20 39 
5  No of policy briefs utilized by user agencies in form of guidelines, uptake 
of technology in program and for procurement of devices/kits/technologies 10 2 
 
Further, as part of the oral submission related to the examination of Demands for Grant 2026-
27 of DHR, the Secretary also apprised the Committee on the merits of HTA that itmakes 
technologies available at lower cost to the population of India. He cited examples that 27 
medical devices were supported last year, projects were initiated for developing 28 devices 
and 52 diagnostics; cost for 11 technologies has been cut from half to 1/12th. 
 
2.6.11 The Committee observes that as of February 2026, no new separate HTA 
Scheme has been publicly notified. As on date, the new HTA Scheme titled ‘Integrating 
Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme and 
Policy’ – 2026-27 to 2030-31 is awaiting final approval of Department of Expenditure. 
Whereas the old scheme HTAIn is continuing only as a sub-scheme under the umbrella 
Human Resource & Capacity Development programme of the 15thFinance Commission 
cycle. In this scenario, the Committee is apprehensive that this change over and absence 
of a dedicated, adequately funded HTA scheme risks funding gaps, stalled HTA studies, 
etc. The Committee, over the years, has repeatedly recommended for time-bound 
planning and better coordination while seeking approval to avoid administrative delays. 
In tune with this, keeping in mind the relevance of having HTA, the Committee 
recommends that the Department should approach the Department of Expenditure to 
expedite its approval and finalise a standalone National Health Technology Assessment 
Scheme considering the growing need for evidence-based prioritisation under national 
programmes like, Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY, AB-HWCs, etc. 
 
2.6.12. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Department should revisit the 
proposed outlay of Rs. 379 Cr, if a standalone National HTA scheme is to be considered 

40 
 
in place of a mere expansion of the existing HTAIn sub-scheme for 2026–31. Taking 
into consideration the trend of allocation, the Committee notices that the Department 
hardly gets its Projected Demand for a scheme because even for the FY 2026-27, the 
proposed demand of Rs. 56.63 Cr was downsized to Rs. 25.00 Cr. Percentage of 
Variation of BE 2026-27 as compared to Projected Demand was 55.85%. The 
Committee, therefore recommends the Department to be more realistic and reasonable 
while making projections in consonance with requirement and in convincing the 
Department of Expenditure of their fund requirement with due justification. 
 
2.6.13 The Committee appreciates that the targets set under Health Technology 
Assessment for the FY 2025-26 have exceeded the mark except for the fact that no of 
policy briefs have been utilized by user agencies. The Annual Report -2025-26 of DHR 
shows that HTAIn has completed 136 studies. But the need of the hour is also that these 
studies are consumed by user agencies in the form of guidelines, uptake of technology in 
program and for procurement of devices/kits/technologies. Only then India’s goal of 
Atmanirbhar Bharat in health technology can be achieved taking the nation towards 
efficient, equitable and sustainable healthcare. To ensure that the new HTA scheme 
provides affordability, access and cost saving and  maximum value for every rupee, the 
Committee, therefore, recommends mandatory provisions of i) time-bound integration 
of every HTA recommendation into appropriate national health programmes and 
essential medicine/device lists within 6 months, (ii) periodic capacity-building for 
officials and procurement officers (iii)  introduction of a performance-linked funding 
mechanism tied to number of HTA studies translated into policy within 12 months. 
According to the Committee, scientific evaluation of drugs, devices and treatment 
protocols should be the guide for health policy decisions to ensure optimal utilization of 
public resources. 
 
2.6.14 The Committee desires that more Research Hubs & Centres be established 
under the new HTA Scheme, particularly in unserved /underserved regions such as 
Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, the North-Eastern Region (NER) and in the Islands. 
These States/UTshave region-specific health challenges like, high-altitude diseases, 
tribal health issues, difficult terrain, which are poorly represented in current HTA 
studies. At present, HTAIn operates with only 8 Regional Hubs and 20 Resource 
Centres, the majority concentrated in southern states. Now, the proposal is to establish 
another 50 centres/hubs.The Committee observes that establishment of physical hubs is 
just an initial step. Without appropriate infrastructure and trained manpower, 
evidence generation for underserved areas is not possible. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that each proposed new centres/hubs should have a core team of HTA 
professionals including epidemiologists, health economists, and clinicians. Also, these 
remote hubs will need sustained annual recurring expenditure for manpower, training, 
data systems, etc. Hence, the Committee strongly recommends that these facts are 
appropriately taken care of in the new schema of HTA. 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES UNDER DHR 
 
 
3.1 Overview of Budget Allocation for DHR Schemes 
(Rs in Crores) 
 
Name of Scheme/Programme BE 
2025-26 
RE 
2025-26 
Expenditure up to 
20.02.2026 
BE 
2026-27 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) 3125.5 3150 3148.50 4000 
NationwideNetworkofLaboratoriesforManagingEpidemicsa
ndNationalCalamities(VRDL) 
57.24 57.24 52.35 70 
 
Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research 
(MRUs &MRHRUs) 
150.18 175 164.68 171.35 
 
Development of Tools/support to Prevent Outbreaks of 
Epidemics 
3.49 3.67 3.29 0 
Human Resource and Capacity Development (HRD, GIA, 
HTAIn and International Cooperation) 
149.77 152.02 122.22 152 
 
PM-ABHIM 221.32 197.83 165.17 221.32  
National One Health Mission 124.18 124.18 80.70 124.18  
HEPR Trust Fund 4.99 2.99 - 5.56 
 
DHR Secretariat 45.27 46.73 35.27 51.8 
Health Technology Assessment – Attached office 18.75 17.98 13.94 25 
Grand Total 3900.69 3927.64 3786.11 4821.21  
 
3.1.1 An amount to the tune of Rs. 4,821 crore has been earmarked for the Department of 
Health Research for the FY2026-27. As compared to last year, the allocation of DHR has 
witnessed an increase of Rs. 893.57 crore. The Committee took cognisance that out of the 
increase of Rs. 893.57 crore, almost Rs. 850.00 crore is reflected against ICMR. The other 
components under DHR get an additional allocation of Rs 43.57 crore. While appraising the 
Committee with details of its allocation and utilization for the FY 2026-27, Secretary, DHR 
agreed that after deduction of Rs. 850.00 crore reflected against ICMR, the remaining is a 
small increase for other parts. He also assured that the Department is trying to get it 
increased. During the 16th Finance Commission, the Department have re-sent higher amounts 
based on requirement of work of the schemes and were hopeful that DHR will get some 
increase, or substantial increase, in the amount after the EFCs are done for the DHR schemes.   
 
3.1.2 As part of the examination of Demands of Grants 2026-27of DHR, the Committee 
has sought from the Department since the 16th Finance Committee Report has been tabled in 
the Parliament to provide the details of the recommendations pertaining to the schemes, 
programmes, funding, etc, of DHR. In reply, it was informed that no specific 
recommendation pertaining to DHR is stated in 16th FC report. 
 
3.1.3 The Committee, as part of the examination of Demands of Grants 2026-27, has 
appraised the Committee on the importance of the schemes of DHR and the fast 
progress of the schemes. The Committee feels that the meagre increase in the allocation 
for the schemes, apart from ICMR, is not enough considering the projects lined up 

42 
 
under these schemes by the Department. Further, while analysing the progress of the 
schemes under DHR, the Committee notes that certain schemes have been merged like 
Development of Tools/support to Prevent Outbreaks of Epidemics have been merged 
with VRDLs scheme and for other schemes like MRUs & MRHRUs draft EFC Notes 
seeking extension of the scheme for 16th FC period is awaiting approvals. According to 
DHR, the Department have re-sent higher amounts based on requirement of work of 
the schemes would be considered after the EFCs are done for the DHR schemes. 
Considering all these the Committee wants the DHR to fervently pursue the approval 
for their schemes and secure adequate funding so as to realise all the original objectives 
of the schemes to the best extent possible. 
 
Central Sector Schemes/Projects 
 
3.2 A. Establishment of Network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics and 
National Calamities- Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) 
3.2.1 VRDL Scheme is implemented to strengthen laboratory-supported disease 
surveillance, outbreak investigation, and pandemic preparedness across the country. This is a 
Central Sector (CS) Scheme approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 20th 
March, 2013. Against the target of 169 VRDLs in 15th Finance Commission, achievement of 
the scheme so far is a total of 167 VRDLs. The 167 VRDLs, comprises of 11 Regional level, 
27 State level and 129 Medical college level VRDLs, established till 23.1.2026 covering 27 
states and 6 UTs for creating requisite infrastructure in the Medical colleges/Research 
Institutes/Military hospitals etc. for timely diagnosis of existing and emerging viruses. A 
target of 02 more new VRDLs are proposed to be set up during the remaining period of the 
financial year. No has been finalized/ approved for 2026-27. More than 5 million samples 
have been tested and 2623 outbreaks have been investigated across the country so far. In 
addition, more than 60 million samples have been tested for COVID-19 by VRDL network. 
VRDLs were also involved in diagnosis of recent outbreaks of emerging/re-emerging viral 
diseases: Nipah outbreak (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023, 2025), Zika outbreak (2018, 2021), 
CCHF outbreak (2019, 2024, 2025), SARS-CoV-2 (2020), Measles outbreak (2022), Mumps 
(2024), Varicella Zoster virus (2024), Monkeypox (2024) and Avian influenza (205). 
3.2.2 VRDL serves as systematic sentinel surveillance platform in India for early detection of 
emerging/ re-emerging infectious diseases and there have been 2230 suspected outbreaks/ 
disease cluster reported, including high risk pathogens viz., MPoX, Nipah, Zika, CCHF, 
Avian influenza etc. So far 52 lakhs samples have been tested. A total of 1612 publications 
made and 23,591 personnel trained. DHR informed the Committee that 51 out of 165 VRDLs 
have established Next Generation Sequencing facilities. 
 
 
 

44/42 VRDLs (1Regional, 2 State & 41 Medical Commission period.                          The financial status of the VRDL Scheme for the last Year Projected Demand BE2023-24  60.00 60.002024-25 60.00 60.992025-26 60.00  57.242025-26262026-27 180 70   The statement indicating projected demand of the 2026-27 in comparison to Projected Demands for the VRDL Scheme:
44/42 VRDLs (1Regional, 2 State & 41 Medical college level) approved in
The financial status of the VRDL Scheme for the last three years and current year: (Rupees in Crores)BE RE & Reasons for revision at RE stage, if any AE &Reasons for underutilization of earmarked funds, if any 60.00 60.00 60.00 60.99 60.99 60.99 57.24 57.24 49.53 *Till 31.01.2026 Expenditure still in progress and it is expected that full amount of RE will be utilized by the end of financial year. - - The statement indicating projected demand of the Department and percentage variation of BE 27 in comparison to Projected Demands for the VRDL Scheme:-  
level) approved in 15thFinance VRDLs: 167 
three years and current year:- (Rupees in Crores) AE &Reasons for underutilization of    Expenditure still in progress and it is expected that full amount of RE will be utilized by the end of financial year. Department and percentage variation of BE  


44 
 
      (Rupees in crores) 
Projected Demand BE  
 2026-27 
Variation  
 
% of Variation of BE 2026-27 as compared to 
Projected Demand 
 
180 70 -110 61.11 
 
 
i. The physical status of the VRDL Scheme for the 2025–26:- 
Indicator Annual Target 2025–26  Achievement up to 31.12.2025 
Laboratories established 4 1 (1 more lab established in January 2026) 
Samples tested 3,00,000 5,55,131 
Personnel trained 250 2019 
Publications in PubMed-listed 
journals 
100 110 
 
3.2.3 The total allocation the Scheme dipped 6.5% from AE 2024-2025 for ₹60.99 crore to 
both BE at ₹57.24 crore and RE at ₹57.24 crore for 2025-2026. The Committee wanted to 
know the reason for reduction in the allocation during 2025-26, In response, the Department 
stated that the total approved cost of the Scheme during the 15th Finance Commission period, 
as approved by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC), is ₹324.60 crore. During the initial 
phase of implementation, i.e., 2021–22 and 2022–23, an expenditure of ₹90.77 crore and 
₹84.22 crore, respectively, was incurred. This phase coincided with the COVID-19 
pandemic, during which enhanced budgetary support was provided to meet unprecedented 
public health exigencies, resulting in higher allocations during those years. With the 
subsiding of the pandemic, major one-time capital investments have largely been completed, 
and the Scheme is presently focused on sustaining ongoing activities. Accordingly, the 
allocation for 2025–26 has been rationalised in line with the reduced balance available under 
the approved SFC outlay and the assessed programme requirements. 
3.2.4 For the 22.3% increase of BE 2026-2027 at ₹70.00 crore over 2025-2026 BE, DHR 
submitted that such incremental enhancement is done taking into consideration that the 
scheme of “Development of Tools / Support to Prevent Outbreaks & Epidemics,” which is 
proposed to be discontinued from the 16thExpenditure Finance Cycle, with its core 
components being integrated into the VRDL Scheme. The 48 VRDLs supported in PM-
ABHIM during 15th FC period will be supported through VRDL scheme during 16th FC 
period. 
3.2.5 For 2026–27, the Department informed that it had initially proposed a substantially 
higher Budget Estimate (BE) of over ₹180 crore, taking into account the expanded scope and 
scale of activities envisaged under the VRDL and Infectious Diseases Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratories (IRDL) networks. This expansion proposes inclusion of new components such 
as enhanced surveillance activities, support to IRDLs, NABL accreditation and External 
Quality Assessment (EQA), and contingency support for outbreak management. Many of 
these activities were earlier supported under the scheme “Development of Tools / Support to 
Prevent Outbreaks & Epidemics,” with its core components being integrated into the VRDL 
Scheme to ensure continuity and optimal utilisation of resources. 

45 
 
3.2.6 However, against this proposal, the BE for 2026–27 has been fixed at ₹70.00 crore, as 
the proposal for expansion of the Scheme is currently under examination by the Expenditure 
Finance Committee. The approved BE thus reflects a calibrated and conservative allocation 
aimed at sustaining essential ongoing activities with zero growth and no improvements. Any 
further enhancement in allocation, including to address emerging public health threats such 
as new viral strains, outbreaks, or national health emergencies requiring expanded laboratory 
capacity, will be considered after completion of the EFC appraisal and receipt of requisite 
approvals 
3.2.7 The Committee sought to understand the reason for no capital expenditure being 
earmarked for the Head considering that the Head is for setting up of a nationwide network 
of laboratories for managing epidemics and national calamities. In reply, the Committee has 
been informed that capital expenditure is proposed and released under the Scheme only when 
new VRDLs are sanctioned, covering infrastructure development and procurement of 
essential laboratory equipment. Thereafter, the Scheme provides recurring support for 
operational expenses of these laboratories. Further, during the 15th Finance Commission 
period, VRDLs that have completed five years of recurring support under the DHR Scheme 
are being transitioned to the PM–Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-
ABHIM) for long-term sustainability. Accordingly, 48 VRDLs are presently being supported 
under PM-ABHIM.Further, for the 16th Finance Commission period, it is proposed in the 
EFC that the recurring expenditure of IRDLs established under PM-ABHIM will be 
supported through the VRDL Scheme to ensure continuity and optimal utilization of the 
national laboratory network. 
 
3.2.8 The Committee has been given to understand that the 22.3% increase of BE 
2026-2027 at ₹70.00 crore over 2025-2026 BE of the scheme has been earmarked taking 
into consideration that the scheme of “Development of Tools / Support to Prevent 
Outbreaks & Epidemics,” is proposed to be discontinued from the 16thExpenditure 
Finance Cycle and its core components are to be integrated into the VRDL Scheme. 
Also, certain numbers of VRDLs are to be upgraded to IRDLs by including new 
components such as enhanced surveillance activities, support to IRDLs, NABL 
accreditation and External Quality Assessment (EQA), and contingency support for 
outbreak management. The funding pattern of the scheme suggests that the allocation 
over the past three years have been stagnant, but the utilization has been 100%. There 
has been a moderate increase of BE 2026-2027 at ₹70.00 crore against the projected 
demand of ₹180.00 crore thereby the percentage of variation of BE 2026-27 as 
compared to projected demand is 61.11 %. The Committee is of the opinion that it is 
disappointing, especially considering the significance of the scheme and some vital 
components are being merged with the scheme. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that with added responsibilities and structure of the scheme, the 
Department should make efforts to secure appropriate fund allocation under the 16th 
Finance Commission (2026-31) emphasizing the importance of investment in virology 
labs, genome surveillance and diagnostics to strengthen preparedness against future 
epidemics. 
 
 

46 
 
3.2.9 The Committee, further, observes the fact that capital expenditure is ‘nil’ under 
the scheme because capex is proposed and released under the Scheme only when new 
VRDLs are sanctioned. During the 15th Finance Commission period, VRDLs that have 
completed five years of recurring support under the DHR Scheme and for the 16th 
Finance Commission period, it is proposed in the Expenditure Finance Committee that 
the recurring expenditure of IRDLs established under PM-ABHIM will be supported 
through the VRDL Scheme to ensure continuity and optimal utilization of the national 
laboratory network. Accordingly, DHR apprised the Committee that no proposals are 
there in the pipeline for new labs under the scheme. The Committee observes that the 
map of VRDL labs shows gaps in the geographical spread of State level and regional 
level labs. India is a country with more than a billion population, extreme topographic 
and climatic diversity accompanied by rising zoonotic and climate-amplified threats 
like, Nipah, Dengue surges, Avian influenza, etc which require that the gaps of regional 
and State level labs across the country should be abridged. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that VRDLs should be upgraded to IRDLs and these factors may be given 
due consideration and even upgradation across the country should be undertaken. 
 
3.2.10 The Committee takes note of the achievements of VRDL scheme like Integrating 
of VRDLN portal with Integrated Health Information Platform (IHIP) which has 
enhanced the public health surveillance and the launching of the Quarterly VRDL 
Bulletin at the National VRDL Conclave 2025 has provided a transparent platform for 
real-time data on viral infection trends. The Committee is of the view that the viral data 
base of VRDLs must serve as systematic sentinel surveillance platform in India for 
early detection of emerging/ re-emerging infectious diseases in the ensuing year, 
keeping into consideration the veiled threat of high risk pathogens viz., MPoX, Nipah, 
Zika, CCHF, Avian influenza etc.The Committee observes that such steps would ensure 
early-warning and containment of outbreaks. 
 
3.3 B. Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research 
 
3.3.1 During the 12th Plan Period (2012-13to2016-17) the Government conceptualized and 
introduced a Central Sector Umbrella Scheme of Developing Infrastructure for Promotion of 
Health Research across the country. The umbrella scheme has 02 sub-schemes namely: 
 
(i) Establishment of Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Government 
Medical Colleges/Research Institutes, and 
(ii) Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs). 
 
3.3.2 The financial trajectory of the overall scheme over the last three years and 
allocation of the FY 2026-27 is shown below: - 
 
Year Projected 
Demand 
BE RE & 
Reasons for revision at 
RE stage, if any 
AE & Reasons for underutilization of 
earmarked funds, if any 
2023-24 80 80 70 
 
69.12 
Saving was due to receipt of less no. of 
viable proposals fulfilling the 
conditionalities of the scheme guidelines. 

47 
 
2024-25 
 
80.00 80.00 80.00 80.00 
2025-26 216.10 150.18 175 115.87                            *Till 31.01.2026 
Expenditure still in progress and it is 
expected that full amount of RE will be 
utilized by the end of financial year. 
 
 
2026-27 
100.27 
(MRUs) 
100.27 - - 
71.08 
(MRHRUs) 
71.08 - - 
 
3.3.3 The Department submitted that allocation under the Head nearly doubled in BE 2026-
2027 at Rs 171.35 crore in comparison to AE 2024-2025 at Rs 80.00 cr, due to additional 
items of expenditure proposed in BE 2026-27 in respect of MRU and MRHRU sub schemes 
viz establishment of new MRUs, setting up of Centres of Research Excellence (CoRE) and 
increase in cost of construction of MRHRUs buildings under Civil Work. Further, increase in 
cost of construction of MRHRUs buildings was the reason stated for enhancement at RE 
stage of Rs. 175.00 crore against allocation of Rs 150.18 crore at BE stage. The actual 
utilization as on 31.01.2026 is Rs. 115.88 crore and as on 15.02.2026, the actual utilization is 
Rs. 158.22 crore. 
3.3.4 The Performance Evaluation Committee (PEC) constituted vide order dated 19th 
December, 2022 by DHR had made recommendations, that will help India in achieving 
higher standard in Health Research Infrastructure. Some important recommendations in this 
regard are- 
1.Creation of Pan-India network of National Institutes of Health Research 
2. Establishment of following new institutes: 
- National Institute of Ageing and Healthy Longevity 
- National Institute for NCD Basic Science Research  
- National Institute for NCD Clinical Research 
3. Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) should be renamed as Multidisciplinary 
Medical Research Centres (MMRCs) and extended to eligible private medical 
institutions with proven research potential. 
4. Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) should be renamed as Population-
based Health Research Centres (PHRCs) and also established in urban areas to 
focus on urban health systems and population dynamics. 
5. Virus Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) should be transformed into 
Infectious Disease Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (IRDLs) with enhanced 
capabilities for diagnosis, surveillance, and infectious disease research. 
3.3.5 In this regard, DHR has undertaken various research infrastructure activities in PM 
ABHIM . Four zonal National Institutes of Virology (NIVs) at Jammu, Dibrugarh, Jabalpur 
and Bengaluru and National Institute of One Health (NIOH) Nagpur are being constructed by 
ICMR. Construction of Satellite Centre of National Institute of Translational Virology and 
AIDS Research (ICMR-NITVAR) Pune has also been undertaken. Two mobile Biosafety 
Level 3 (BSL-3) vans have already been procured and deployed at National Institute of 
Virology (NIV) Pune and Regional Medical Research Centre (RMRC) Gorakhpur, two more 
are also being procured. Besides, 25 Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) 

48 
 
have been inducted for upgradation to Infectious disease Research and Diagnostic 
Laboratories (IRDLs), and 05 VRDLs have been inducted for upgradation to Biosafety Level 
3 (BSL-3) laboratories. 5 MRUs have been set up in private medical institutions and the 
recommendations of PEC pertaining to MRU and MRHRU have already been included in 
EFC Memo for 16th Finance Commission period. The other recommendations of PEC shall 
also be taken up by ICMR in coming year. 
 
3.3.6 The Committee is pleased to note that the Development of Infrastructure for 
Promotion of Health Research is one umbrella scheme which has been granted the 
Projected Demand for the FY 2026-27 of Rs 171.35 crore as BE 2026-27. Even though 
the BE 2026-27 of Rs 171.35 crore is lesser but the RE 2025-26, it is still a good start. In 
the opinion of the Committee, accurate assessment of gaps in financial resource with 
justified projections is the reason for the Department securing the Projected Demands. 
Hence, it feels that the Department has earned the Projected Demands for the scheme 
as the utilization over the years has been close to 100%. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Department to continue with the judicious utilisation of enhanced 
funds and build confidence in its capacity to deploy and absorb resources effectively for 
nationwide research infrastructure. 
 
3.3.7 The Committee, further observes a thrust towards the funding of MRUs at Rs 
100.27 crores in comparison to that of MRHRUs at Rs 71.08 crores for the FY 2026-
27.The Committee over the time emphasised on adequate attention towards both rural 
health research and multi-disciplinary research in medical colleges. But, when more 
thrust is being given to MRUs, it by default leads to rural areas being left out as these 
areas lack in government medical colleges compared to urban areas. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends more or at least equal thrust for both areas and to ensure apt 
push is given under MRUs to government medical colleges in rural areas. This would be 
in alignment with National Health Policy goals for more research in underserved areas. 
 
3.3.8 The Committee, keeping in mind the increasing life span of the Indian 
population, has highlighted the arising need for attention towards the problems related 
to ageing and geriatrics. In this regard, it is curious to know about the 
recommendations of the Performance Evaluation Committee (PEC) constituted vide 
order dated 19th December, 2022 by DHR on the establishment of a new institute- 
National Institute of Ageing and Healthy Longevity. National Centre for Ageing, 
AIIMS, is one of the government institutions which are currently dedicated for the 
cause. The Committee wants to be appraised on the progress made on this 
recommendation of the PEC. The Committee recommends that proactive steps shall be 
taken for the establishment of the National Institute of Ageing and Healthy Longevity 
with approved traditional and integrative medical practices. Also, DHR should 
collaborate with AIIMS to create protocol of treatment to address the problems related 
to ageing and geriatrics. That is so because AIIMS has elaborate infrastructure and 
treatment experience for ageing and geriatrics. 
 
 

49 
 
 
i. Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) 
3.3.9 Originally conceptualized during the 12th Plan Period (2012–17) under the umbrella 
scheme Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research, the MRU initiative 
aims to bridge longstanding gaps in research capacity, laboratory infrastructure, and 
scientific output across medical institutions in India. Following successful implementation 
during previous plan periods—including an interim extension aligned with the 14th Finance 
Commission, the continuation of the scheme for the 15th Finance Commission cycle (2021–
22 to 2025–26) was approved. As of now, 123 MRUs including 5 MRUs in Private Medical 
Colleges have been established across various States and Union Territories. These units 
primarily focus on Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), while also addressing emerging 
public health challenges through clinical trials, multi-centre research, and capacity-building 
initiatives. The key objectives of MRUs are:- 
i. To strengthen the research environment within medical colleges by establishing 
dedicated, state-of-the-art MRUs. 
ii. To bridge infrastructural gaps that hinder the conduct of quality health research by 
creating well-equipped research facilities. 
iii. To build research capacity and human resources in the field of health research 
through training, mentorship, and hands-on project involvement. 
iv. To ensure equitable geographical distribution of health research infrastructure by 
establishing MRUs across underserved and underrepresented regions. 
v. To contribute to improved public health outcomes through the generation of 
evidence-based diagnostic methods, processes, and scientific knowledge. 
vi. To undertake clinical trials in accordance with the Allocation of Business Rules of the 
Government of India. 
vii To promote multi-centric research projects involving MRUs, medical colleges, and 
research institutions for addressing national and regional health priorities. 
3.3.10 Monitoring of MRUs is carried out at both the institutional and central level to ensure 
effective functioning, accountability, and alignment with the objectives of the sub-scheme. 
The Local Research Advisory Committee (LRAC)considers and approves research proposals. 
The Executive Committee ensures broad participation of all Departments in submitting 
research proposals to the MRU. At the central level, DHR administers and monitors the 
progress of MRUs through a structured framework, supported by the Programme Monitoring 
and Implementation Unit (PMIU) comprising of Project Manager, Finance Manager, 
Scientists, and other support staff.  
3.3.11 During the 15th FC period, 30 MRUs @ 06 MRUs per year were required to be 
established. A number of 12 MRUs were established during 2021-22. The status regarding 
establishment of MRUs during the last 04 years is as follows: 
Targets Achievements 
 
2022-23 (06) 18 (Target achieved) 
 
2023-24 (06) Target already achieved 
 

50 
 
2024-25 (06) 03 (for fulfilling Parliamentary 
Assurance) 
 
2025-26 (as on 31.01.26.) 
- Establishment of 05 new MRUs in Private Medical College. 
- Setting of 08 Centres of Research Excellence (CoRE) in MRUs. 
Target Achieved 
 
 
Network of 123 MRUs 
• 38/30 MRUs (03 MRUs for fulfilment of Parliament Assurance and 05 MRUs in 
Private Medical Colleges) 
• 2723 Research Projects undertaken/initiated and 1526 publications issued in MRUs 
during 15thFinance Commission period up to 31.12.2025. 
 
3.3.12 The MRU sub scheme is presently approved up to 15th FC 2025-26. The proposal for 
extension of the MRU sub scheme is presently under consideration. The targets for the next 
03 years will get finalized after the proposal for extension of the sub scheme into 16th FC 
period get approved by the Competent Authority.  
 
3.3.13 The Committee sought to know about the financial or human resources issues that 
hampers the smooth functioning of various MRUs. According to DHR, a Third-Party 
Evaluation of the performance of MRUs has pointed out the following key financial or 
human resources issues that are relevant for smooth functioning of the MRUs:- 
1. To increase Consumables/Contingencies/Training (CCT) grant and shift to 
performance/requirement-based funding beyond uniform allocations in 
deserving cases. 
2. To ensure continued functionality and optimal utilization of infrastructure, 
financial support may be extended for civil repairs/maintenance of equipment in 
MRUs. 
3. To review and strengthened the human resource structure at DHR. 
4. To take following initiative with regard to human resources for smooth 
functioning of MRUs: 


51 
 
a) Organize periodic workshops for awareness, orientation and capacity 
building (both online and offline) for all stakeholders. 
b) Conduct capacity-building programs in research methods, data 
management, laboratory operations, etc. 
c) Develop and disseminate communication and advocacy materials through 
official DHR social media platforms and other outreach channels. 
The above-mentioned issues have been incorporated in the draft EFC Note prepared for 
seeking extension of the scheme for 16th FC period. 
3.3.14  The Committee notes that the MRU scheme has achieved the annual targets 
throughout the 15th Financial Commission period. The projected demand of Rs 100.27 
crores for the FY 2026-27 has been allocated with one of the targets being establishment 
of new MRUs. In this regard, the Committee observes that MRUs should be more 
evenly distributed across the country. The Committee finds from the map submitted by 
DHR on MRUs across India that there are gaps in areas like western and central India. 
The Committee recommends that the Department should consider these areas for the 
establishment of new MRUs. Further, as a significant portion of funds are allocated to 
extramural projects and MRUs, proper and timely feedback on their utilization and 
outcomes are to be ensured through a well defined Utilization Report System. 
 
3.3.15  One of the ways to improve the performance of MRUs according to a Third-
Party Evaluation is going beyond uniform allocations and shifting to 
performance/requirement-based funding in deserving cases. The Committee feels that 
the contention may contain merit but, in its opinion, to ensure even ground, the varying 
constraints under which different beneficiary institutions operate has to be 
appropriately factored in while deciding upon the parameters to assess the 
performance. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department create a 
dedicated MRU monitoring cell under DHR with real-time tracking for both physical 
and financial progress for evaluating performance/requirement-based funding beyond 
uniform allocations. 
 
ii. Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) 
3.3.16 The Central Sector Umbrella Scheme for Development of Infrastructure for Health 
Research in 2013–14, comprises two sub-schemes: (i) Multidisciplinary Research Units 
(MRUs) in medical colleges and research institutes; and (ii) Model Rural Health Research 
Units (MRHRUs) in rural areas under ICMR responsible institutes. At present, 39 MRHRUs 
have been sanctioned across various States and Union Territories. The Scheme aims to: 
i.   To create infrastructure for transfer of technology to the rural levels for improving 
quality of health services to rural population. 
ii.  To ensure an interface between the New Technology Developers (Researchers in 
Medical institutions; State or Centre), Health Systems Operators (Centre or State 
Health Services) and the Beneficiaries (Communities in rural areas) and  
iii.  To ensure geographical spread of health research infrastructure in the country. 
3.3.17  Once the proposals for setting up of MRHRU are received by State Governments, 

based on proposal received, DHR designates a responsible ICMR institute to coordinate with the State Government concerned for finalisation of the proposal. Proposals are examined by a Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) comprising of senior subject experts who furnish their recommendations to DHR. Final approval is accorded by an Approval Committee chaired by Secretary, DHR. Upon approval, a Tripartite Agreement is signed between DHR, the State Government, and the ICMR Responsible institute.3.3.18 A Programme Monitoring & Implementation Unit (PMIU) at DHR oversees overall administration and monitoring, centrally.at MRHRU level considers and approves research proposals. It also monitors progress of research proposals as well as reviews and guides MRHRU activities on a regular basis. The responsible ICMR institute overseProcurement and installation of equipment, engagement of contractual manpower, active coordination with State Health/Medical Education Departments, etc. The State Government provides land/building (620 sq. metCentre/Community Health Centre.3.3.19  The target for establishment of 11 MRHRUs during the 15 FC period has been achieved. The status regarding establishment of MRHRUs during the period is as folTargets 2022-23 (02) 2023-24 (02) 2024-25 (03) 2025-26 (03) as on 31.01.26.11/11 MRHRUs approved during 15undertaken/initiated and 224 publicationsCommission period up to 31.12.2025. 3.3.20 The MRHRU sub scheme is presently approved up to FY 2025for extension of the MRHRU sub scheme is presently under consideration. The targets for the next 03 years will get finalized after the proposal for extension of the sub scheme into 16
based on proposal received, DHR designates a responsible ICMR institute to coordinate with t concerned for finalisation of the proposal. Proposals are examined by a Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) comprising of senior subject experts who furnish their recommendations to DHR. Final approval is accorded by an Approval Committee retary, DHR. Upon approval, a Tripartite Agreement is signed between DHR, the State Government, and the ICMR Responsible institute. A Programme Monitoring & Implementation Unit (PMIU) at DHR oversees overall administration and monitoring, centrally. The Local Research Advisory Committee (LRAC) at MRHRU level considers and approves research proposals. It also monitors progress of research proposals as well as reviews and guides MRHRU activities on a regular basis. The responsible ICMR institute oversees civil works and infrastructure development, Procurement and installation of equipment, engagement of contractual manpower, active coordination with State Health/Medical Education Departments, etc. The State Government provides land/building (620 sq. meters) free of cost, in close proximity of a Primary Health Centre/Community Health Centre. The target for establishment of 11 MRHRUs during the 15 FC period has been achieved. The status regarding establishment of MRHRUs during the period is as folAchievements 03 01 03 26 (03) as on 31.01.26. 03 Networkof39MRHRUs 11/11 MRHRUs approved during 15thFinance Commission period and 355 Research Projects undertaken/initiated and 224 publications issued in MRHRUs during 15Commission period up to 31.12.2025. The MRHRU sub scheme is presently approved up to FY 2025-26. The proposal for extension of the MRHRU sub scheme is presently under consideration. The targets for the ears will get finalized after the proposal for extension of the sub scheme into 16
based on proposal received, DHR designates a responsible ICMR institute to coordinate with t concerned for finalisation of the proposal. Proposals are examined by a Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) comprising of senior subject experts who furnish their recommendations to DHR. Final approval is accorded by an Approval Committee retary, DHR. Upon approval, a Tripartite Agreement is signed between DHR, A Programme Monitoring & Implementation Unit (PMIU) at DHR oversees overall The Local Research Advisory Committee (LRAC) at MRHRU level considers and approves research proposals. It also monitors progress of research proposals as well as reviews and guides MRHRU activities on a regular basis. The es civil works and infrastructure development, Procurement and installation of equipment, engagement of contractual manpower, active coordination with State Health/Medical Education Departments, etc. The State Government ers) free of cost, in close proximity of a Primary Health The target for establishment of 11 MRHRUs during the 15 FC period has been achieved. The status regarding establishment of MRHRUs during the period is as follows: 
Finance Commission period and 355 Research Projects issued in MRHRUs during 15thFinance 26. The proposal for extension of the MRHRU sub scheme is presently under consideration. The targets for the ears will get finalized after the proposal for extension of the sub scheme into 16thFC 

53 
 
period gets approved by the Competent Authority. The Committee sought to know about the 
financial or human resources issues that hamper the smooth functioning of various 
MRHRUs. According to DHR, a Third-Party Evaluation of the performance of MRHRUs has 
pointed out the following key financial or human resources issues that are relevant for 
smooth functioning of the MRHRUs: 
1. To introduce flexibility in equipment and Consumables/Contingencies/Training 
(CCT) funding norms based on specific operational needs of MRHRUs. 
2. To ensure continued functionality and optimal utilization of infrastructure, 
financial support may be extended for Civil repairs/maintenance of equipment in 
MRHRUs. 
3. To review and strengthen the human resource structure at DHR for monitoring 
and guidance purposes. 
4. To provide security personal to safeguard infrastructure and operational assets. 
The above-mentioned issues have been incorporated in the draft EFC Note prepared 
for seeking extension of the scheme for 16th FC period. 
 
3.3.21  The Committee has been given to understand that increase in cost of 
construction of MRHRUs buildings under Civil Work is one of the components under 
the MRHRUs scheme for which allocation of Rs 71.08 crores for the FY 2026-27 has 
been made. Further, the Committee observes that as per report of a Third-Party 
Evaluation on the performance of MRHRUs, one of the areas of concern is ensuring 
continued functionality and optimal utilization of infrastructure, financial support for 
civil repairs/maintenance of equipment in MRHRUs. The Committee observes that the 
ICMR responsible institution is assigned a MRHRU project to coordinate with the State 
Government concerned and that institution oversees civil works and infrastructure 
development, procurement and installation of equipment, etc, of the project. In this 
regard, the Committee recommends that the ICMR be responsible to undertake a 
comprehensive annual audit of the MRHRUs project assigned to them, including actual 
expenditure versus sanctioned grants and submit the same to be made part of DHR’s 
annual report.  
3.3.22  Another area of concern is the human resource structure for MRHRUs. The 
prerequisite of MRHRUs are adequate staff strength with posts including clinicians, 
epidemiologists, bio-statisticians, technicians, etc., as lack of human resources would 
directly affect research outputs of MRHRUs. The Committee has been recommending 
hardship allowance and fast-track promotion for rural postings to attract more human 
resource. The Committee is reiterating its earlier recommendation for hardship 
allowance, fast-track promotion and other appropriate measures for rural postings. 
Adequate human resource is essential to strengthen research institutions in tribal and 
aspirational districts. This would ensure balanced regional growth and take care that 
will no region left behind in healthcare preparedness. 
 
 

54 
 
3.4 C. Development of tools/support to prevent outbreaks of epidemics 
 
3.4.1 The scheme Development of tools/support to prevent outbreaks of epidemics operated 
as a separate central sector scheme with a small budget to the tune of Rs.50.71 cr. for five 
years, which was launched in 2015-16 to support outbreak response &management and 
contingent needs during public health emergencies. This scheme is complementary to the 
VRDL scheme i.e. Setting up and strengthening of nation-wide network of laboratories for 
managing epidemics and national calamities” which runs concurrent in emergent situation. 
The scheme provides extra support to the VRDLs in times of outbreaks. Now, in the 
proposed VRDL EFC, this scheme will be merged into the VRDL scheme. This merger will 
streamline operations, optimize resources, and strengthen the VRDL network’s capacity for 
comprehensive laboratory-supported surveillance and timely outbreak response 
 
3.5 D. Human Resource and Capacity Development Umbrella Scheme 
 
3.5.1 For the Scheme Human Resource and Capacity Development the allocation has 
increased 22.5% from AE 2024-2025 of Rs124.06 crore to of Rs 152.00 crore BE 2026-2027. 
The Expenditure of HRCD scheme as on 31.01.2026 is as under: 
 
Scheme Expenditure 
 
HRD Rs. 73.22 Crore 
GIA Rs. 17.22 Crore 
DIAMOnDSR Rs. 22.57 Crore 
International Cooperation Rs. 0.15 Crore 
Total Rs. 113.17 Crore 
 
The specific outcomes of HRD scheme in FY 2025-26 are outlined below for justifying the 
BE 2026-26:  
 
i. A total of 207 research papers were published in peer-reviewed indexed journals, and 
8 patents were filed. 
 
ii. A total of 3570 new fellowships, programs and projects have been supported so far 
and category wise breakup is given below: 
S. No.  Components of the scheme 
No. of Beneficiaries 
(FY 2025-26) till Feb 
06, 2026 
1 Short Term Studentship (STS) 2452 
2 Medical Post Graduate Thesis Support  511 
3 Medical Ph.D. Programme 57 
4 Biomedical Research Fellowships for M.Sc. Post-Graduates 0 
5 Short-Term International Training Grant 51 
6 Long-Term International Training Grant 13 
7 Short-Term Fellowship at Indian Institutes 4 
8 Long-Term Fellowship at Indian Institutes 1 

55 
 
9 Women Scientist Fellowship 64 
10 Health Research Fellowships for Diaspora Scientists 13 
11 International Travel Grant for Biomedical Researchers 268 
12 Workshops Funding Grant  58 
13 Support to Institutions for Trainings in Health Research 21 
14 Post-Doctoral Research Grant for Faculties and Scientists 57 
  Total 3570 
The specific outcomes of GIA scheme in FY 2025-26 are outlined is that a total of 110 (107 
ongoing +03 new inter sectoral) projects have been supported so far 
 
(a) Human Resource Development (HRD) for Health Research 
Outlay (BE 2026-27): Rs. 105 Crore  
 
3.5.2 The Human Resource Development Scheme for Health Research is intended to create 
a pool of talented health research personnel in the country by upgrading skills of faculty of 
Medical Colleges/Institutes, mid - career Scientists, medical students, etc., by specialized 
training in priority areas of health research in leading national and international institutions. 
The trainees are encouraged to develop and take up research projects for addressing critical 
national and local health problems.  
 
The year-wise data (2021-22 to 2025-26) on Health Research Scheme is as under: 
 
3.5.3 There has already been over 85% utilization of Rs 93 Cr. allocated in HRD scheme in 
2025-26 till 5.2.2026. The DHR, has prepared an action plan to ensure at least 95% 
utilization of allocated funds under the HRD Scheme for 2026–27 and beyond. The key 
measures on Action Plan inter alia include: 
 
i. Timely Calls for Applications will be launched on the DHR website, supplemented by a 
structured social media campaign to ensure wide dissemination and participation. 
ii. Enhanced Technical Evaluation Capacity: The number of Technical Evaluation 
Committee (TEC) meetings, including component-specific TECs, will be increased to 
evaluate a larger number of proposals and minimize delays in processing. In order to 
incentivize professors from leading medical colleges and scientists of prominent 
research institutions, proposal for allowing provisioning of sitting fees to such TEC 
members will be sent to Ministry of Finance. 
iii. Monitoring and Mid-Course Corrections: Periodic monitoring of fund utilization and 
scheme progress will be undertaken, with mid-course corrections introduced wherever 
necessary to ensure timely completion and effective use of resources. 
iv. Capacity Building and Outreach: Special emphasis will be placed on capacity building 
workshops and outreach programmes to encourage participation from diverse 
Years No. of 
applications 
received 
No. of proposals found 
technically viable 
No. of 
fellowships/grants 
awarded 
Allocation  
(Rs. In Cr.) 
Actual 
Expenditure (Rs. 
In Cr.) 
2021-22 14135 273 273 27.00 23.76 
2022-23 16804 8307 1653 30.00 26.27 
2023-24 23926 8912 1650 29.80 29.07 
2024-25 28589 10901 3961 65.00 64.70 
2025-26 17645 12382 3153 93.00 62.25* 
till 10.12.2025 

56 
 
institutions and regions, thereby broadening the base of eligible applicants. This 
structured and time-bound approach is expected to maximize efficiency, reduce delays, 
and achieve the targeted 95% utilization of funds under the HRD Scheme by 2026–27. 
 
3.5.4 The relatively low expenditure in the initial years of the Scheme was primarily due to 
the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and foreign training programmes were suspended 
during this period. Medical colleges, being part of the frontline healthcare system, were 
extensively involved in Covid-19 management, which further contributed to the reduced 
activity under the Scheme during the pandemic years.. The reasons for the sudden increase 
observed in FY 2024-25 is due to the integration of ICMR’s capacity building programmes 
into the DHR–HRD scheme in January 2024. Prior to this integration, ICMR was operating 
its international fellowship programmes separately. After integration, a total of 65 
international fellowships were recorded, reflecting the consolidated numbers from both 
schemes.  
 
3.5.5 DHR has informed that the Guidelines of HRD schemes have been amended and 
scope of inclusion has been broadened in case of Startup Grant for Induction into Biomedical 
Research Scheme. Broadening of the scope of the Start Up grant has increased the number of 
applications and beneficiaries from biomedical and health researchers. While the applications 
granted support in the year 2024-25 were only 10, there was a quantum leap to 57 in the year 
2025-26 (approx. 5 times). There was a corresponding increase in the number of 
beneficiaries from the non- metro cities with 40% in year 2024- 25; to 71% in 2025-26. The 
awardees from Medical colleges also increased from 2 in the year 2024-25 to 8 in the year 
2025-26. 
 
3.2.6 Further, the Department has conducted a third-party evaluation through the National 
Productivity Council in the Financial Year 2025–26 to assess the reasons for poor proposal 
quality and low participation from young faculty and researchers in medical colleges. 
 
Major Key Findings: 
(i) Limited Awareness and Outreach: Many young faculty members were not 
adequately aware of the schemes and opportunities available under DHR; 
(ii) Capacity Constraints: Lack of structured mentorship and limited exposure to 
proposal writing and project management skills resulted in weak technical quality 
of submissions; and 
(iii) Time Constraints: Heavy teaching and clinical responsibilities left limited time for 
young faculty to engage in research activities.  
 
Follow-up Actions Initiated: 
(i) Enhanced Awareness Campaigns: Wider dissemination of scheme details through 
workshops, webinars, and social media outreach to enhance the participation; 
(ii) Capacity Building: Training programmes on proposal writing, research 
methodology, and project management targeted at young faculty and early-career 
researchers; 
(iii) Streamlined Processes: Increasing the frequency of Technical Evaluation 
Committee (TEC) meetings and simplifying application procedures to reduce 
delays; and 

57 
 
(iv) Mentorship Support: Guidance from experts for shortlisted potential applicants 
and helping young faculties in developing competitive proposals. 
 
3.5.7 Apart from social media posts and website advertisements, the Department of Health 
Research (DHR) has planned several targeted outreach programmes to enhance participation 
from medical colleges in Tier-2/3 cities, institutions in the North-East Region, and 
government institutions that traditionally submit fewer applications. These initiatives include: 
 
(i) Mass email communication to all NMC-registered medical colleges, including those 
in the North-East Region, with the objective of enhancing participation and 
increasing awareness regarding the provisions available under the HRD scheme 
(ii) Hand-holding support to applicants through the capacity-building initiatives, 
including grant writing workshops and training programmes on research 
methodologies. 
(iii) Webinars on a regular basis to disseminate information on open calls under the 
HRD Scheme. During these sessions, the HRD Scheme team will actively engage 
with applicants, providing clarifications and addressing queries related to the 
schemes and the application process.  
(iv) The communication channels of ICMR, including ICMR radio and institutional 
networks will be actively leveraged to disseminate information about the HRD 
Scheme. 
(v) a dedicated session on the provisions and opportunities available under DHR 
schemes is being incorporated into DHR-supported workshops conducted in 
Northeast region. 
 
3.5.8 DHR through its Fellowships abroad programme under HRD scheme supports 
advanced trainings of Indian scientists and researchers in foreign countries, with condition 
that they serve back in India utilizing the skills gained. To counter the challenge of “brain 
drain” and to retain skilled researchers in India, the DHR, has undertaken several specific 
initiatives aimed at providing better facilities and competitive career prospects comparable to 
international standards. The key initiatives include: 
 
(i) NRI/PIO/OCI Research Support Programme: This programme has been launched to 
encourage Indian-origin scientists working abroad to return and contribute to 
biomedical and health research in India. It provides contractual research positions and 
financial assistance, thereby leveraging the expertise of highly trained professionals 
with exposure to advanced technologies and methodologies. 
 
(ii) Training Fellowships: Researchers are supported through various training workshops 
and travel grants programmes for international exposure, enabling them to strengthen 
their skills and contribute effectively to national research priorities. 
 
(iii) Foreign Training and Repatriation Support: Faculties and researchers are facilitated 
for foreign training opportunities and are supported upon their return to India, 
ensuring knowledge transfer and capacity building. 
 

58 
 
(iv) Financial Assistance: The scheme provides a monthly stipend of Rs. 1.2 lakhs for 
three years, along with a research grant of up to Rs. Twenty lakhs per year to support 
research studies and projects. 
 
Outcomes Achieved (FY 2021–22 to FY 2025–26) include: 
 
(i) A total of 21 NRI scientists has been supported under the programme, with the 
highest number of fellowships (13) awarded in 2025–26. 
 
(ii) Notably, five fellows have secured regular positions in premier Indian institutions 
such as AIIMS Raebareli, PGIMER Chandigarh, IIT Kanpur, and NIPER Mohali. 
 
(iii) One awardee has further received the prestigious Ramalingaswami Fellowship. 
 
3.5.9 Research and Development is promoted with schemes like First in the World 
Challenge, where startups are made eligible to apply and compete for research grants from 
ICMR, VAIBHAV Summit, incentivises scientists and diaspora for "brain gain" and circular 
migration. Investment into world-class infrastructure, labs, and computing facilities to match 
global standard, and development of clear career paths, mentorship, and competitive 
compensation packages, especially in tech and academia. 
 
3.5.10 The Committee observes that DHR along with ICMR has done much in the post 
pandemic era under the Human Resource Development Scheme for Health Research to 
encourage health research among mid - career Scientists, medical students, etc. The 
hand-holding to applicants through grant writing workshops and webinars on a regular 
basis is quite appreciable. Further, the communication channels of ICMR, including 
ICMR radio and institutional networks have actively leveraged to disseminate 
information about the HRD Scheme among the researchers. The Committee, however, 
wants to be apprised about the parameters associated with First in the World Challenge 
scheme in R&D. 
 
3.5.11 The Committee notes that the Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework 
document of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, shows Outputs 2026-27 for the 
number of fellowships awarded as 3100 and the number of fellowships awarded for 
women scientist as 30 under the scheme for the FY 2026-27. The difference in the 
number of fellowships awarded for women scientists against the total fellowships 
awarded is disappointing. The Committee recommends that special provisions for 
women, young NRI/PIO/OCI scientists/researchers and also scientists/researchers from 
underrepresented regions like the North-East and the Islands should be given more 
thrust. Further, DHR can also look into the possibility of collaboration with reputed 
private entities for co-funding fellowships, workshops, grants, etc, to reduce 
dependency on government budgets. Capacity building is another area where support 
of private entities can be factored in. The Committee also supports and recommends the 
steps taken towards reviewing the medical education curriculum to incorporate 
research training aspects among the future clinicians. 
 

59 
 
(b) Grants-in-aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Coordination for 
Promotion & Guidance on Health Research (GIA): Outlay (BE 2026-27): Rs. 24.00 
crores 
 
3.5.12 The objective of Scheme is funding of research projects to bring modern health 
technology to the people through innovations related to diagnostic, treatment methods and 
vaccines for prevention; to translate them into products and processes and, in synergy with 
organizations concerned, introduce these innovations into public health service.  
 
3.5.13 The financial trajectory of the scheme over the last three years and allocation of the 
FY 2026-27 is shown below: - 
 
Year BE RE  
 
AE Variation Excess (+)/Savings (-) w.r.t. RE 
2023-24 27.00 31.80 28.64 -3.16 
Saving was due to receipt of less no. of viable proposals 
fulfilling the conditionalities of the scheme guidelines. 
2024-25 
 
39.29 34.46 34.46 0 
2025-26 27.00 29.25 18.49 10.76 
Expenditure still in progress and it is expected that full 
amount of RE will be utilized by the end of financial year. 
2026-27 24.00 - - - 
The physical performance of the scheme during 2025-26 as under- 
Total No. of research projects funded up to 2025-26  
(up to 02.06.2026) 
 
554 
Number of research projects funded during 2025-26  
(up to 02.06.2026) 
 
123  
No. of research projects likely to be funded during the remaining 
period of 2025-26  
Subject to short- listing of 
proposals after evaluation. 
Anticipated cumulative achievement up to 2025-26 554+34=588 
 
Target for funding research projects during 2026-27 50 
 
3.5.14 Major ongoing research project funded under the Inter-sectoral co-ordination 
including funding of joint projects component of the Grant-in-Aid (GIA) Scheme for ‘Inter-
Sectoral Convergence & Coordination for Promotion and Guidance on Health Research of 
Department of Health Research during F.Y. 2024-25 & 2025-26 as under- 
Sl 
No 
Name (Title) of the Project Ministry(s)/Department(s)/ 
Institute 
Project Duration 
in Years 
1 Bulk Synthesis and Dog Toxicity Study of 
Small Molecule Smac Mimetic (S-016-1348) as 
an Anticancer IND Candidate. 
Ministry of Science & 
Technology 
CSIR-CDRI, Lucknow 
2 
2 HDAC Inhibitor a potential clinical candidate 
for Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)   
Ministry of Science & 
Technology: CSIR-Indian 
Institute Of Chemical 
Technology Telangana 
2 

60 
 
3 Clinical development of IIIM290 CDK9T1 
inhibitor for metastatic pancreatic cancer. 
Ministry of Science & 
Technology: CSIR- Indian  
Institute of Integrative 
Medicine, Jammu 
2 
4 Development of a probiotic formulation 
containing Lactiplantibacillus plantarum Lp91 
(MTCC 5690) and its preclinical safety and 
efficacy study for human use. 
Ministry of Science & 
Technology 
ICAR-National Dairy Research 
Institute, Southern Regional 
Station (SRS-NDRI),  Adugodi, 
Bengaluru 
2 
5 Pre Clinical efficacy safety and toxicity of 
colostrum whey protein derived formulations in 
animal model. 
Ministry of Science & 
Technology 
ICAR- National Dairy 
Research Institute, (NDRI)  
Karnal 
2 
6 
 
Impact of Sports Supplements on Recovery in 
Adolescent Athletes 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & 
Sports- National Centre for 
Sports Science Research 
(NCSSR) 
7 Months 
7 Chronic Kidney Disease of Unknown Etiology 
(CKDu) in Srikakulam District, 
Andhra Pradesh: Identification of Pathogenetic 
Agents and Early Detection by Novel 
Biomarkers 
 
Minister of Health, Family 
Welfare and Medical 
Education, Govt. of A.P. 
Andhra Medical College, 
Visakhapatnam, Andhra 
Pradesh 
3 
8 IND enabling studies on a novelliposomal 
amphotericin B for treatment of Kala-azar and 
fungal infections in rodents. 
Ministry of Science & 
Technology: CSIR–Indian 
Institute of Chemical Biology 
(CSIR-IICB), 4, Raja S.C. 
Mullick Road, Kolkata 
3 
 
3.5.15 As part of the examination of the Demand for Grants of DHR 2026-27, the 
Department presented a PPT, which showed that the Inter-Sectoral Collaboration Component 
of the GIA scheme has been strengthened for funding joint initiatives addressing nation’s and 
states’ pressing health challenges. Whereas the components of Public Health Research and 
Translational Research are proposed to be discontinued as similar projects are already being 
supported under ICMR’s Extra-Mural grants. 
 
3.5.16 The Committee reckons that the Grant-in-aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral 
Convergence for Health Research has been reviewed and revised by the Department 
and is hopeful that it will lead towards effective implementation of the Scheme. As per 
the revision funding for joint initiatives is given thrust. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends following collaborative research areas that need to be prioritised:- 
(i) Environmental and Occupational Health Impacts on Public Health in 
coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 
 
(ii) One Health Approaches for Zoonotic and Infectious Diseases in partnership 
with the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying &MoEFCC. 
 
 

61 
 
(iii) Nutrition, Maternal, and Child Health Interventions in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development & Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare. 
 
(iv) Geriatric care in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare's NCD programs, Department of Science and Technology. 
 
 
(v) Tribal and Rural Health Research with Focus on Traditional Medicine in 
collaboration with the Ministry of AYUSH & Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
3.5.17  In Committee’s considered opinion such inter domain studies would address 
neglected areas like workplace hazards, effects of pollution, prevention, and control of 
zoonoses, congenital malformations, herbal remedies, etc, therefore, DHR should chalk 
out Action Plan based on the suggested recommendation. 
 
(c) DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services and Research 
(DIAMOnDSR). Outlay BE 2026-27: Rs. 21 Crore 
 
3.5.18 The DIAMOnDSR scheme aimed is to set up oncopathology labs for providing basic 
as well as high-end advance diagnostic services to cancer patients and research facilities for 
basic, translational and clinical research. It also provides free of cost molecular 
oncopathology diagnostic services to the needy breast and lung cancer patients, in addition to 
encouraging cancer research. 
DIAMOnDSR Centres 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


62 
 
(A)Achievements from 2020-2025:- 
(i) 25 DIAMOnDSR Centres established in the 15th FC; 31,205 patients tested; 1,56,025 
biomarker tests performed; 3227 human resources trained. 
 
(ii) 155 Workshops/Training Programs organized/conducted, 977 Research Publications 
supported, 433 Research Projects/Clinical Trials supported 
 
(B) DIAMONDS output outcome monitoring framework achievement till 31st December 
2025:- 
 
Outcome Indicator (s) Target 
 
Achievements till 31.12.2025 
Number of DIAMOnDS centres established 3 3 
 
No. of personnel trained 50 144 
 
No. of patients tested for breast and lung cancer 3000 8495 
(Lung-3069; Breast-5426) 
 
(C) Targets for 2026-27:- 
 
 
3.5.19 The Committee queried ICMR on the methodology adopted and frequency 
maintained in the review/revision of uniform protocol cancer treatment and major changes 
made in the uniform protocol in the last five years. In reply, it was informed that Centre for 
Evidence for Guidelines under DHR has taken up the task of developing evidence-based 
national clinical guidelines for diseases. It is ongoing phased process. The first national 
evidence-based guidelines for lung cancer treatment and palliative care has been released 
with the objective of improving management, strengthening clinical decision-making, and 
reducing variations in care delivery across the country. 
3.5.20 The methodology followed for guideline development in Centre for Evidence based 
Guidelines, DHR involves three steps, i.e. collation of evidence from systematic reviews of 
existing literature on well-defined review questions, grading of evidence using GRADE 
approach to assess the certainty of evidence, and formulation of recommendations after 
applying of Evidence to Decision (EtD) framework which involves consideration of various 
contextual factors in addition to the evidence. The topics for guideline development are 
selected following a well-defined prioritization exercise chaired by Secretary, DHR. 
3.5.21 ICMR also informed that it has published a series of National Consensus Documents 
for Management of approx. 20 major Cancers in India between 2014 and 2020, covering 
major cancers based on national disease burden and clinical priority. While ICMR does not 
recommend “uniform cancer treatment protocol,” major national changes over the past five 
years has occurred through ICMR’s National Cancer Registry Programme (NCRP) and 
Activities Targets 
 
Establishing New DIAMOnDSR centres 03 
 
No. of patients tested for Breast and Lung cancer 3500 
 

63 
 
NICPR‑ICMR updates, which directly linked to national clinical guidelines. ICMR’s latest 
cancer burden, screening, and risk‑factor reports (2021–2024) improved evidence‑based 
decision making for treatment norms, especially for breast, cervical, childhood, and 
tobacco‑related cancers. In addition, new government‑ICMR initiatives—such as expanding 
district‑level Day‑Care Cancer Centres, exempting customs duty on key cancer drugs, and 
strengthening NPCDCS screening pathways—have standardized early detection and 
treatment delivery nationwide. 
3.5.22 Further, ICMR is strengthening evidence‑based oncology through priority trials, 
implementation models, and a large grants portfolio with measurable outputs. 
(i) NHRP portfolio (4 projects): (i) Stage II breast cancer care model across 13 states—
continuum‑of‑care including psychosocial support, rehab and follow‑up; (ii) ICMR–
NCG randomized trials call to scale high‑quality Indian oncology RCTs; (iii) 
prevention/screening for oral, breast, cervical cancer; (iv) Acute Lymphoblastic 
Leukemia project. 
(ii) Grants & outputs: 6 CAR, 35 Intermediate, 102 Small, 11 Cancer Consortium, 40 
RCTs, 77 Ad‑hoc, 104 Fellowships → 322 publications and 13 patents, advancing 
prevention, diagnosis, treatment and supportive care. 
3.5.23 In response to the Committee’s query whether ICMR has developed a protocol for 
cancer treatment in consultation with Tata Memorial and other leading cancer treatment 
institutions all across the global for uniform treatment of majority cancers occurring in 
India.DHR submitted that Centre for Evidence for Guidelines under it has taken up the task 
of developing evidence-based national clinical guidelines for various diseases including 
cancer. Tata Memorial Hospital is one of the Technical Resource Hubs of the Centre for 
Guidelines of DHR and is working on the evidence-based Guidelines for cancer. 
3.5.24 The Committee thereafter wanted to be updated on the status of Anti-cancer vaccine. 
In response ICMR submitted that the interest in the development of cancer is ever growing 
from a public health perspective. Efforts and scientific progress are being made globally in 
this field. At present, the availability of personalized mRNA-based vaccines for specific 
cancers and its clinical use will depend on the completion of ongoing trials and subsequent 
regulatory approvals. A generalised or universal “anti‑cancer vaccine” is unlikely to be 
introduced for public use in the coming year. It is important to distinguish these emerging 
therapeutic vaccines from preventive anti‑cancer vaccines, which are already established and 
in public health use. In this domain, the Government of India has taken a significant step 
through the planned national HPV vaccination campaign, which directly contributes to 
cancer prevention. The Government on 28 February 2026, has launched the HPV vaccination 
programme wherein all 14‑year‑old girls across the country will be offered a single dose of 
the HPV vaccine through government health facilities. This national initiative aims to 
substantially reduce the future burden of cervical cancer. 
3.5.25 The Committee takes cognisance of the work being undertaken by DHR/ICMR 
through the DIAMOnDSR scheme. According to the Department, the DIAMOnDS 
scheme focuses have been on lung and breast cancers. The Committee recommends that 
due focus maybe directed to other types of cancers as well as biomarkers.  
 

64 
 
3.5.26 On the Uniform Cancer Treatment Protocol, the Committee acquiesce with the 
submission of ICMR, being the field experts, that it does not recommend “uniform 
cancer treatment protocol”. Having said that the Committee observes that the 
treatment procedures and cost involved in a particular type of cancer in the country 
have wide gaps between a government institution and a private institution. While the 
Committee acknowledges that DHR does not have any say in the cost involved in 
treatment procedures, the Committee recommends the ICMR’s National Cancer 
Registry Programme (NCRP) along with the D/o H&FW should undertake a study to 
identify a way to address the issue of wide gaps in treatment procedures for a particular 
type of cancer between a government institution and a private institution. The 
Committee, however, is of the considered view that as a beginning, DHR should 
formulate treatment protocol for common cancers like oral, cervical and breast cancers 
and come up with a broad based for its treatment procedures and guidelines. Like the 
submission of ICMR, since National Institute of Cancer Prevention & research 
(NICPR)‑ICMR updates are directly linked to national clinical guidelines, the 
Committee perceives such a study would help to lessen the gaps. 
 
3.5.27 Regarding anti-cancer vaccine, the Committee has been impressed upon that 
efforts and scientific progress is being made in this field globally. The availability of 
personalized mRNA-based vaccines for specific cancers and its clinical use depends on 
the completion of ongoing trials and subsequent regulatory framework. The only anti-
cancer vaccination as of now available, both globally as well as in India, is the HPV 
vaccine. The Committee hopes that India, through ICMR, enters this field as the rising 
incidence of cancer among the population, especially among the youth, in recent times is 
alarmingly high. Accordingly, the Committee recommends ICMR should make efforts 
to make itself a part of on-going anti- cancer vaccination research projects globally in 
coordination with international entities like WHO and come forward for regulatory 
approval for clinical use. 
 
3.6 D. Prime Minister's Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-
ABHIM) -Bio-Security 
 
3.6.1 Under the PM-ABHIM scheme, research and diagnostic infrastructure of the 
country is being strengthened by DHR. The financial trajectory of the scheme over the last 
three years and allocation for the FY 2026-27 is shown below: - 
 
        (Rs in Crore) 
Year Projected 
Demand 
BE RE & 
Reasons for 
revision at RE 
stage, if any 
AE & Reasons for underutilization of 
earmarked funds, if any 
2023-24 324.36 324.36 
 
 
 
262.86 254.43 
Saving was due to receipt of less no. of viable 
proposals fulfilling the conditionalities of the 
scheme guidelines. 
 
2024-25 
 
212.21 212.21 187.22 181.13 
2025-26 349.50 350.49 325 248.86 
*Till 31.01.2026 
Expenditure still in progress and it is 

2026-27 221.32  221.32 National Network of BSL 3/4 Labs                        3.6.2 Component wise physical performance of the scheme for the years 2024and 2026-27 as on 31.01.26.   Component Upgradation of 05 VRDLs into BSL-3  5 VRDL’s have been upgraded. Funds released to GMC Kota, AIIMS Raipur, AIIMS Rajkot & AIIMS Bibinagar and AIIMS Rishikesh.04 Mobile BSL-3 Labs 02 mobile BSLGorakhpur, used in outbreaks in Kerala, Jammu also procured and being deployed at North east and Central India. Strengthening of existing 80 VRDLs  48 VRDLs have been inducted, performing realinvestigations, and pursued continuously preparedness for effective containment of potential outbreak
expected that full amount of RE will be utilized by the end of financial year. 221.32     National Network of BSL 3/4 Labs  
Component wise physical performance of the scheme for the years 2024Physical performance  5 VRDL’s have been upgraded. Funds released to GMC Kota, AIIMS Raipur, AIIMS Rajkot & AIIMS Bibinagar and AIIMS Rishikesh. 02 mobile BSL-3 already deployed at ICMR-NIV, Pune & ICMRGorakhpur, used in outbreaks in Kerala, Jammu as well as for trainings. 02 more also procured and being deployed at North east and Central India.48 VRDLs have been inducted, performing real-time local or regional outbreak investigations, and pursued continuously ground-level research as part of preparedness for effective containment of potential outbreak 
expected that full amount of RE will be utilized by the end of financial year. 
Component wise physical performance of the scheme for the years 2024-25, 2025-26 5 VRDL’s have been upgraded. Funds released to GMC Kota, AIIMS Raipur, NIV, Pune & ICMR-RMRC-as well as for trainings. 02 more also procured and being deployed at North east and Central India. time local or regional outbreak level research as part of 


66 
 
Regional Research 
Platform of the WHO-
SEAR Countries 
Make in India Products (Hand held X-ray, pathodetect with kits and CY TB) are 
being sent to different SEAR Countries  
Research studies being conducted on TB and dengue in India and neighbouring 
countries. 
An international event by DHR-ICMR "Health Research and Innovation in Public 
Health: Exchange of Good Practices Across RESEARCH Platform" was 
successfully conducted in, August, 2025 at Delhi 
Workshops conducted for capacity building of SEAR countries’ researchers. 
National Institute for 
One Health, Nagpur 
 
NIOH) has been made functional from its temporary office at Nagpur. A team of 
scientists along with Administrative and Finance officers have also been posted in 
the Institute and they are coordinating various activities of NOHM. 
 Construction work progress: 30%. 
Satellite Centre of 
ICMR-NITVAR Pune 
BSL 2/3 civil work in its final stage with structural work completed to 5th floor. 
Zone NIVs 
 
Bengaluru – Physical progress ~80% 
Jabalpur – Physical progress ~60% 
Jammu – Physical progress ~21%; construction (commenced after Change of 
Land Use approval) 
Dibrugarh – Physical progress ~20% 
Supporting research in 
NIV & other ICMR 
Institutes 
16 research projects were funded to study the clinical, virological, immunological 
and epidemiological characterization of viral infections such as SARS-CoV-2, 
KFD, Nipah, Dengue and JE. These studies have/will lead to understanding of 
viral infections, development of new diagnostic kits, therapeutic and preventive 
measures and establishment of genomic facility and epidemiological tools at 
ICMR institutes 
 
Support to MDMS to 
develop technologies 
for epidemiological 
diseases  
 
1. Policy and guidelines for creation of new technologies for prevention, detection 
or treatment of infectious diseases of national importance 
2. Public private forum created to develop a list of priority Medical 
Devices/Diagnostics, required to manage diseases of national importance, 
including infectious diseases 
3. New technologies developed/supported for private sector participation by 
ICMR for prevention, detection or treatment of infectious diseases of national 
importance 
4. Establishment of National Facility for Testing and Batch Manufacturing of 
Medical Devices and IVDs. 
Supporting VRDLs,  
MRUs, MRHRUs 
Total 34 sites supported for 2 years under the population-based health survey. 
The data collected annually in the population-based health survey will help in 
understanding and monitoring the local trends in common health conditions. 
 
Capacity Building 
[Trainings, Workshops 
for VRDLs and other 
stakeholders 
Undertaken 1. Induction Training Program for Technical Staff 2. Mid-Career 
Training Programs for Administrative Staff of all Institutes of ICMR 3. Mid-
Career Development Program (MCDP) for ICMR Scientists 4. Workshop at 
NIAS, Bengaluru for Directors/Heads of ICMR. 
Community 
Engagement & Risk 
Communication 
Context-specific, culturally appropriate CERC strategies developed for 5 sites, 
Insights from formative research, community engagement groups and co-
developed implementation packages (including SBCC and media components) 
provide a tested, evidence-driven framework that can be scaled nationwide, 
enhancing India’s capacity for inclusive, community-led health intervention 
 
3.6.3 Regarding the specific plans to utilise the BE of Rs. 351.06 crore for 2026-27 for 
Scheme, the Department stated that expenditure of some projects mentioned above is shifted 
to next FY. Further in the 16th FC period, new research infrastructure activities have been 
proposed- 
 

67 
 
(i) Setting up of 30 lnfectious Disease Research & Diagnostic Laboratories- These 
expand diagnostic capacity beyond virology to include bacteriology, mycology, and 
parasitology. 
(ii) Launch of "National lnitiative for Reliable Medical Device Development & 
Assessment Network (NIRMAN)' – To accelerate the development of indigenous 
medical devices 
(iii) Establishment of National-Grade Data Centre and Disaster Recovery lnfrastructure for 
ICMR's Research & Digital Health Ecosystem- to safeguard sensitive biomedical 
research data against emerging cyber threats. 
(iv) Establishment of National Virus Resource Facility (NVRF)- A central repository for 
authenticated viral strains is proposed to accelerate the development of indigenous 
diagnostics and vaccines during future public health emergencies. 
 
3.6.4 The Committee asked the Department to comment on the total allocation of funds 
under the Scheme in 2026-2027 &2025-2026 at₹351.06 crore and ₹350.49 crore, 
respectively, being stagnant as compared to a hike from 2024-2025 at₹ 212.21 crore. Also, 
whether the funding at ₹351.06 crore in 2026-2027 is sufficient for multi- sectoral and 
national platforms, given the interdisciplinary nature of One Health and Bio- security.  
 
3.6.5 As reply, DHR stated that the allocation for 2025–26 (₹350.49 crore) and 2026–27 
(₹351.06 crore) has remained broadly stable as the scheme is presently in a consolidation and 
transition phase. The objectives under the earlier plan period have largely been completed, 
and current expenditures are primarily directed towards committed liabilities and milestone-
based disbursements of projects already approved under the existing EFC/SFC framework. In 
2025–26, 207 ongoing research projects across thematic areas are being supported, and 
projects sanctioned in 2024–25 and 2025–26 are being implemented within the previously 
approved financial envelope; hence, annual allocations have not increased incrementally at 
this stage.Further, multi-sectoral/national platform components are being sequenced, with 
initial outlay kept conservative while foundational governance, interoperability, and 
institutional coordination are established. The requirement will be reviewed during the RE 
exercise, and allocations for 2026–27 may be re-assessed based on implementation progress 
and utilization trends. 
 
3.6.6 Regarding adequacy, DHR opined that ₹351.06 crore 2026-27 may be sufficient for 
sustaining ongoing projects and initiating incremental platform strengthening. However, 
given the interdisciplinary and cross-sectoral nature of One Health and bio-security, full-
scale national platforming and rapid expansion may require additional, phased investments 
and convergence with allied sectoral programs. Accordingly, funding needs will be reviewed 
at RE stage in line with the pace of platform roll-out and readiness of implementing entities 
 
3.6.7 Further, the Committee wanted to know the status of the scheme since PM-ABHIM is 
a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with a fixed terminal date of 31st March 2026. According to 
DHR, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had drafted an EFC Memo for continuation 
of PM-ABHIM Scheme at total cost of Rs.69,458.44 Crores for 2026-31. The same has been 
circulated for inter-ministerial comments. Apart from continuation of ongoing components 
till their completion, the draft EFC memo includes new proposed initiatives of DHR. 

68 
 
 
3.6.8 Reason for curtailment of the BE 2025-26 of Rs 350.49 crore to Rs 325.00 crores at 
RE for the Scheme was submitted as that the owing to procedural issues in (TSA) account 
opening for Research grants and lesser-than-targeted speed of some projects’ execution. For 
two consecutive years (2022-23 and 2023-24), the Department cited "inept tendering and 
procedural formalities" as the reason for large-scale unspent provisions under critical 
infrastructure projects (National Institute of One Health, Zonal NIVs, regional BSL-3 labs, 
etc.). In this regard, the Committee wanted to know the following:- 
 
a. The concrete administrative and procedural reforms introduced by DHR/ICMR 
since 2024 to prevent recurrence of such delays, specifically caused by tendering 
and approval processes, in the last year of the scheme. 
b. Revised timeline for each of the following pending projects: (a) National Institute 
of One Health, Nagpur (b) Four Zonal National Institutes of Virology (c) Regional 
BSL-3 laboratories (d) Upgradation of existing BSL-3 facilities. 
c. Specific incidents/bottlenecks identified as part of regular review meetings with 
CPWD and HITES, and the penalties, if any, imposed on these executing agencies 
for missing deadlines.  
 
3.6.9 In response, DHR submitted that in order to avoid tendering delays, ICMR has 
undertaken measures to involve experts and enhance its capacity to contribute to technical 
aspects of the tender. CPWD engineers have been given tours of NIV Pune to learn about the 
specialised bio-containment facilities. Validation responsibility has been taken up by ICMR 
to avoid approval delays and the phased inspection and approval process would be followed 
to ensure successful delivery of the project. Periodic meetings with CPWD at the higher level 
have also helped in enhanced scrutiny and tackling bottlenecks in the execution. 
 
3.6.10 On revised timeline for each of the pending projects: (a) National Institute of One 
Health, Nagpur (b) Four Zonal National Institutes of Virology (c) Regional BSL-3 
laboratories (d) Upgradation of existing BSL-3 facilities, DHR submitted as under:- 
 
(i) The physical progress of the NIOH Nagpur project is approximately 30%, and the 
tentative completion date assigned is 31 December 2026 
(ii) For ICMR-NIV South Zone, Bengaluru the physical status is 80% and revised 
expected timeline is 31 May 2026. 
(iii) For ICMR-NIV North Zone, Jammu the Change of Land Use has been accepted by 
the Jammu Development Authority and construction commenced on 14 July 2025. 
Currently the physical progress of the project is approximately 21% and the expected 
date of completion is 31 December 2026.  
(iv) For ICMR-NIV Central Zone, Jabalpur, the physical status is 60% and revised 
timeline is kept as 31 December 2026.  
(v) The physical progress of the ICMR-NIV East Zone, Dibrugarh is approximately 20%. 
It has taken time due to difficulty in successful tender, identification of the specialised 
agency for BSL-3/4 facilities, modifications suggested by consultant specialised 
agency and review and approval of the drawings due to cost implications The 
completion date is 12-16 months after the final drawings are approved and budgetary 
and cost implication issues are addressed.  

69 
 
(vi) ICMR has selected five VRDL that are strategically located for the upgradation of 
their laboratory infrastructure up to BSL-3 facility. The construction of the BSL-3 
facilities at AIIMS Raipur, AIIMS Rajkot and AIIMS Bibi Nagar are likely to be 
completed by May2026. The construction of the BSL-3 facility at AIIMS Rishikesh 
and GMC Kota is expected to be completed by December 2026. 
 
3.6.11 Regarding the incidents/bottlenecks identified and penalties imposed, it was informed 
that during regular review meetings with CPWD, HITES and other executing agencies, the 
following bottlenecks were identified: delay in identification of specialised BSL-3/4 
agencies, Revisions in drawings due to consultant recommendations, Budget escalation 
arising from GST increase and electrical scope changes, Change of Land Use (CLU) 
approvals (Jammu), Land documentation issues (Jabalpur),Adverse weather conditions 
(Dibrugarh), Limited participation in tendering (East Zone), Statutory and court-related 
issues. In certain cases, CPWD has withheld 1.25% of total tendered value (₹89,35,079) on 
account of delay. However, in projects progressing within revised timelines and where delays 
were attributable to statutory or approval-related factors, no penalties have been imposed. 
Regular follow-up is being undertaken with State authorities and executing agencies to 
mitigate further delays. 
 
3.6.12 The Committee has recommended that the number of mobile BSL-3 laboratories be 
"reviewed and upwardly revised" for greater inclusivity and coverage of remote/underserved 
areas. DHR-ICMR conducts regular reviews of all ongoing activities under its purview, 
including the deployment and utilisation of Mobile BSL-3 laboratory vans. During the most 
recent internal review, the requirement of Mobile BSL-3 vans has been specifically 
discussed. Based on operational experience and outbreak response needs, two Mobile BSL-3 
vans already in possession have been deployed at ICMR-NIV Pune and ICMR-RMRC 
Gorakhpur.  For the remaining two vans, ICMR has completed the tendering process and 
awarded the work to M/s Klenzaids Contamination Controls Private Limited and will be 
deployed at the Zonal ICMR-NIV, Bengaluru and ICMR-NIOH, Nagpur. These are adequate 
to cater to the entire country for outbreak response purposes. 
 
3.6.13 Since, the existing mobile BSL-3 labs are sufficient according to the current scenario, 
hence no additional Mobile BSL-3 units are proposed before March 2026. However, the 
requirement will continue to be reassessed periodically based on evolving epidemiological 
needs and outbreak situations. The procurement process for the remaining two Mobile BSL-3 
units has been completed, and delivery of these units is expected by March 2026, after which 
they will be operationalised following installation, validation, and personnel training as per 
prescribed biosafety norms. 
 
3.6.14 The Mobile BSL-3 unit stationed at ICMR-RMRC, Gorakhpur is positioned to cater 
to North India, while the Mobile BSL-3 unit at ICMR-NIV, Pune provides coverage to the 
western region of the country. The new Mobile BSL-3 vans that is to be deployed at ICMR-
NIOH, Nagpur and ICMR-NIV South Zone Bengaluru will cater to Central India, and the 
entire southern region of the country (including Lakshadweep, Andaman & Nicobar) 
respectively. For the eastern region, fixed BSL-3 laboratory are available at ICMR-RMRC, 
Bhubaneswar, ICMR-NIRBI, Kolkata, AIIMS Raipur and AIIMS, Patna, which together are 
assessed to sufficiently meet testing and outbreak response requirements in all eastern states 

70 
 
including Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand. Similarly, in the North-Eastern region, Zonal 
ICMR-NIV, Dibrugarh and ICMR-RMRC, Dibrugarh are equipped with BSL-4 facilities and 
BSL-3 facility respectively, capable of catering to the entire region. In the event of additional 
requirement, the Mobile BSL-3 unit stationed at ICMR-RMRC, Gorakhpur can be readily 
deployed to the North-Eastern States. 
 
3.6.15 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Department that the 
fund allocated under the PM ABIM scheme for 2025–26 of ₹350.49 crore and ₹351.06 
crore 2026-27 is broadly unchanged as the scheme is presently in a consolidation and 
transition phase. The objectives under the 15th FC plan period have largely been 
completed. The Committee also notes the submission of the DHR that regarding the 
adequacy of the fund of ₹351.06 crore of 2026–27 being is sufficient for sustaining 
ongoing projects and initiating incremental platform strengthening. Funding will be 
reviewed at RE stage in line with the pace of platform roll-out and readiness of 
implementing entities. The Committee, keeping into consideration the interdisciplinary 
and cross-sectoral nature of One Health and bio-security, full-scale national 
platforming and rapid expansion may require additional, phased investments and 
convergence with allied sectoral programs, recommends that DHR should persuade the 
Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as per needs at RE stage.  
 
3.6.16 Having acknowledged the statements of the Department, the Committee wants to 
point out that last year the Department had to review and revise timeline for each of the 
pending projects. The reasons being the delay in identification of specialised BSL-3/4 
agencies, revisions in drawings due to consultant recommendations, budget escalation 
arising from GST increase and electrical scope changes, change of land use approvals 
are some of them. The Committee feels that these technical/administrative delays will 
eventually culminate in budget escalation. In this regard, the Committee had 
recommended to streamline tendering/procurement and to fix responsibilities by 
imposing penalties. In view of the unchanged situation prevailing, the Committee wants 
to reiterate the same recommendation. Further, the Committee recommends the use of 
digital platforms for tendering/procurement, use Al technology for real-time 
surveillance of constructions of BSL -3/4 labs, VRDLs, etc. 
 
3.6.17  While appreciating the number of BSL-3 spread around the country as on date, 
the Committee feels that there are still areas which are underrepresented. Hence, the 
Committee recommends more BSL 3 labs in the scenario of rising zoonotic risks, 
climate-induced diseases, etc. The Committee also notes that there is only one BSL-4 lab 
in the country, in Dibrugarh. The Committee recommends that the Department should 
make efforts to construct at least three more BSL-4 labs in the 16th Plan period 
especially keeping in mind that the M/o H&FW has sought for Rs. 69,458.44 crores for 
2026-31for PM-ABHIM Scheme. 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
3.7 E. National One Health Mission 
 
3.7.1 The Projected Demand and he actual allocation of the scheme for the FY 2026-27 is 
shown below: - 
 
(Rs in Crore) 
Year Projected Demand BE RE 
 
AE 
2025-26 - 124.18 124.18 80.70 
2026-27 124.18 
 
124.18 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Collaboration of 13 Departments under PSA, DHR nodal dep. 
• National Institute of One Health 
• Integrated technology enhanced surveillance, outbreak inv. 
• Medical Counter measures development (NIPAH, KFD, Mpox) 
 
3.7.2 The Secretary, as part of his presentation on Demands for Grants 2026-27 of DHR 
informed that DHR is the nodal department for National One Health Mission. According to 
him, the Mission, which is under the leadership of Principal Scientific Advisor to 
Government of India, has multiple departments involved.  As of now there are at least13 
departments and more departments are being added; latest being ISRO. He also appraised 
that they are building a national institute of One Health in Nagpur which will be the home for 
National One Health Mission. 
 
3.7.3 The Department in its written submission also shared the key measures adopted to 
ensure co-ordination among different ministries to have maximum effectiveness of National 
‘One Health Mission’. They are as under: 
 
1. There is Steering Committee on One Health, headed by Hon. Minister for 
Health for setting the overall vision of the mission and reviews mission progress. There is 
also a Scientific Steering Committee on One Health was held under the chairmanship, 


72 
 
Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India which sets out scientific agenda 
of mission, reviews progress yearly and coordinates between different secretaries and 
heads of departments with the stakeholder ministries.  
2. There are also 4 Review and advisory committees, comprising of domain 
experts and external members set up for BSL3 lab network, Medical Countermeasures, 
Surveillance and Data sharing that are set up to review and offer recommendations on the 
work and recommend corrective measures in NOHM processes. Each R & C committee 
can also set up working groups for specific functionalities for a common objective or 
functionalities.   
3. All ministries also have a nodal officer who coordinates with PSA office and 
other department nodal officers, to coordinate scientific projects and pass information 
within ministries 
4. ICMR HQ, NIOH Nagpur and PSA office coordinate between ministries to 
inform all the ministries to invite scientific proposals on the different components of the 
mission for NOHM funding.  
5. ICMR-DHR has set up a PRC to examine the projects submitted by various 
ministries and examine inter-sectorality and recommend funding. The same PRC review 
project progress along with NIOH Nagpur.  
6. National Joint Outbreak Response Team is an outcome of NOHM 
intersectoral activity, for joint investigation of outbreaks comprising experts from NCDC, 
ICMR, DAHD, Wild life, Jal Shakti Vibhag and FSSAI. NJORT has so far contributed to 
several outbreaks like GBS Outbreak in Pune, Toxicity associated outbreak in Jammu, 
Nipah outbreak in West Bengal, ADD outbreak in Odisha. There have also been 2 mock 
drills conducted in India so far to introspect pandemic preparedness and response at 
national level in which outbreaks were simulated and system response have been 
independently assessed.  
7. The NOHM also has an network of BSL-3 labs, comprising 23 labs all over 
India, that are trained and equipped to test both human and animal samples, thus 
supporting outbreak response, faster turn around time and early integrated responses. 
3.7.4 According to the Department, the Mission has already been rolled out for integrated 
technology enhanced surveillance, for outbreak investigations and medical counter measures 
such as Nipah, KFD or MPOX. The National One Health Mission also involves creating a 
network of 23 Bio-Safety Level (BSL)-3 laboratories and forming the National Joint 
Outbreak Response Team (NJORT) with experts from relevant sectors. Other activities 
include surveillance projects at the animal-human interface, wastewater surveillance for 
antimicrobial resistance (AMR), and surveillance in slaughterhouses.  
 
3.7.5 The Committee observes that National One Health Mission has the involvement 
of around 13 Departments, and more may be added to the list in the future, also, the 
mandate of the Mission pans the whole of India. The Committee is of the firm belief that 
DHR, ably guided by the Principal Scientific Advisor to Government of India, is well 
endowed to be the nodal department for leading the mission to success. Nevertheless, the 
Committee recommends for measures like digitized procurement, expansion of 
VRDLs/IRDLs, unified platforms for real-time data accessible to all, domain specific 
research hubs, local community involvement at grassroot levels, etc., to avoid 
coordination delays and ensuring inter ministerial integration.  

73 
 
 
3.8. F. North-Eastern Areas 
 
3.8.1 The allocations and utilization of funds under various schemes for the NE Areas 
during the last three years and for the ensuing year as provided by the Department is given 
below: 
VRDL Scheme 
Name of 
State 
Name of VRDL 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
Assam Regional medical Research 
Centre, Dibrugarh 
  9680000 9680000 9680000 
Silchar Medical College 4640000 4640000     
Fakhruddin Medical 
College, Barpeta 
3140000 1710000     
Diphu Medical College 19710000   4640000 4640000 
AIIMS Guwahati 9390000 10320000 4640000 3140000 
Lakhimpur Medical College,    19710000 4640000 4640000 
Nagaon Medical College     19710000 2760000 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Tomo Riba Institute Health 
and Medical Sciences, 
Naharlagun 
19710000   3140000 4640000 
Manipur Regional Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Imphal 
4300000 2500000 4610000 6490000 
JNIMS Imphal         
Meghalaya NEIGRIMS Shillong 4300000 6800000 4300000   
Mizoram Zoram Medical College 4640000 4640000 4640000 1500000 
Nagaland Nagaland Medical College      19710000 
  Total 69830000 60000000 60000000 57200000 
 
HRD scheme 
Years Allocation 
(Rs. In Cr.) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. In Cr.) 
2023-24 3.40 3.40 
2024-25 5.00 4.70 
2025-26 9.30 3.60 
(till 15 Jan 2026) 
 
GIA scheme 
Year Allocation 
(₹. In Cr.) 
Expenditure 
(₹. In Cr.) 
2023-24 0.70 0.49 
2024-25 0.70 0.70 
2025-26 2.95 0.29 (till 31.01.2026) 
 
3.8.2 The Committee sought comments from DHR about the increased BE allocation for 
North Eastern Areas under Developmental Heads in 2026- 2027 to ₹184.25 crore from 

74 
 
₹155.17 crore at RE in 2025-2026. In response, the Department stated that BE allocation for 
North Eastern Areas under Developmental heads in 2026-27 has risen in: 
1. Grant-in-Aid (General) due to increase in new initiatives and research projects 
in North-Eastern Region. 
2. Grant-in-Aid (Salary) for inflation adjustment and allowances. 
As the allocations of MRU, MRHRU, HRD schemes and ICMR has been increased in the BE 
2026-27. The NE allocation has also been increased accordingly keeping in view the 
earmarked fund for NE region. The Department also submitted the expenditure till 
31.01.2025 is Rs. 155.17 crore against Rs. 151.67 crore RE 2024-25. 
3.8.3 Further, the Committee queried to whether BE at ₹184.25 crore in 2026-2027 for 
North Eastern Areas under Developmental Heads is proportionate to the North East's 
population and health research gaps. In this regard, DHR commented that while the 
allocation is proportionate to the prescribed formula, the Department remains fully 
committed to addressing the unique population needs, health research gaps, and institutional 
capacities within the North Eastern States. In case additional requirements arise based on 
project proposals, research priorities, or State‑specific demands, the Department is open to 
consider enhanced fund support beyond the mandatory allocation, subject to availability of 
funds and due procedure. 
3.8.4 DHR also submitted before the Committee the efforts being taken to build research 
capacity in North Eastern Region. ICMR, is actively supporting investigator-initiated and 
priority research projects in NER. Currently, 19 ICMR-funded investigator-initiated projects 
are being implemented in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram, enabling local 
institutions and researchers to build competencies in study design, implementation, data 
management, and dissemination. 
3.8.5 In addition, three National Health Research Priority projects have active sites in 
Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura, facilitating exposure to multicentre research protocols, 
standardized methodologies, and national-level collaborations. ICMR in collaboration with 
AIIMS Guwahati and state-level health authorities, launched the National Health Research 
Priority (NHRP) DIGI-CARE project—Digital technologies for optimizing the Continuum of 
CARE for Diabetes and Hypertension Management in the Public Healthcare System in India. 
As part of this initiative, a four-day Training of Trainers (ToT) programme was organized to 
strengthen research and implementation capacities of 65 field-level functionaries and 
researchers. The Discovery Division is also supporting one Centres for Advanced Research 
(CAR) on Bioengineered In-vitro Liver Models for Evaluation of Hepatotropic Infections 
and Therapeutics at Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati. 
3.8.6 MDMS under ICMR has set up a Centre for Excellence (ICMR-DHR-CoE) at IIT 
Guwahati in 2021 for 5 years for promoting development of affordable and accessible 
indigenous Medical Device & Diagnostic innovations, aligned with Nation Health Priorities. 
VRDL scheme: During 2025-26, one Medical College–level VRDL has been sanctioned at 
the Nagaland Institute of Medical Science and Research (NIMSR), Kohima. Prior to this 
sanction, no VRDL was operational in the State of Nagaland. 
 
3.8.7 The Department has also undertaken several targeted measures to strengthen research 
capacity in the North Eastern Region (NER) under the HRD Scheme. DHR has implemented 

75 
 
multiple initiatives to enhance participation, expand outreach, and support research 
institutions across the NER. The key efforts are outlined below: 
 
(i) Special emphasis has been placed on supporting research in the North-Eastern States. 
During the FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25, 33 fellowships amounting to Rs. 7.12 crore 
were awarded to 28 research institutes across the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Sikkim. 
(ii) Social media campaign has been launched exclusively for North-Eastern region on 
various platforms like Twitter (X platform) and LinkedIn platform. 
(iii) Mass email communication has been initiated to all 706 NMC‑registered medical 
colleges, including those in the North‑East Region, with the objective of enhancing 
participation and increasing awareness regarding the provisions available under the 
Human Resource Development (HRD) Scheme of the Department of Health Research 
(DHR). 
(iv) Workshop on Grant Writing aimed at encouraging participation in grant and 
fellowship opportunities has been conducted for researchers and institutions in the 
North Eastern States of India. Webinar also conducted for the North Eastern States and 
disseminated the DHR HRD Schemes. The details are as follows: 
 
Workshops/Webinars Date Target Group No. of 
Participants 
Grant writing webinar for 
institutes and medical colleges 
North-Eastern region of India 
9th Feb 2024 Young researchers and faculty 
members of different medical 
colleges and research institutes 
120 Participants 
Grant Writing Workshop for 
Capacity Building in 
Northeastern States of India, 
organized at AIIMS Guwahati 
15 Sep 2025 Young researchers and faculty 
members of different medical 
colleges and research institutes 
250 Participants 
HRD Webinar to resolve queries 
of applicants 
(Exclusively North-East) 
23 May 2025 Young researchers and faculty 
members of different medical 
colleges and research institutes 
in North-Eastern Region 
144 Participants 
Webinar on Call for Entries 
under Human Resources 
Development Scheme 
(Exclusively North-East) 
18 Nov 2025 Young researchers and faculty 
members of different medical 
colleges and research institutes 
in North-Eastern Region 
160 Participants 
Webinar for dissemination of 
HRD Schemes (Exclusively 
North-East) 
6 Sept 2024 Young researchers and faculty 
members of different medical 
colleges and research institutes 
in North-Eastern Region 
126 Participants 
3.8.8 The Committee acknowledges the work done by the Department under its 
various schemes in NER, especially setting up of VRDLs (Viral Research & Diagnostic 
Labs), activities under the HRD scheme, etc. Regarding the fund requirement, the 
Committee notes the submission of DHR that while the allocation to NER is 
proportionate to the prescribed formula, in case of additional requirements based on 
project proposals, research priorities, or State‑specific demands, the Department is 
open to consider enhanced fund support beyond the mandatory allocation, subject to 
availability of funds and due procedure. 
3.8.9 The Committee is aware that NER is prone to vector-borne disease burden due 
to its humid climate, dense forests and border proximity to high-risk areas. Considering 
this, the Committee recommends that ICMR should initiate investigator-initiated 

76 
 
research projects on vector-borne disease which can yield tailored vaccines, diagnostics, 
and prevention strategies, reducing mortality rates in NER. This would be a step 
toward the national campaign of Malaria Elimination Program.  
3.8.10 Another field in NER where DHR along with Ministry of AYUSH should invest 
is the cataloguing and testing of medicinal plants involving local universities and tribal 
communities. Such activities would be a boost to Traditional and Integrative Medicine 
practices. Research hubs for AI-driven telemedicine, mobile health apps, and remote 
diagnostics for chronic diseases are another area which can benefit the NER 
considering its terrain. NER is highly vulnerable to climate change, with frequent 
disasters exposing the people living there to conditions like malnutrition, hypertension, 
etc. Studies co-relating climate events and health outcomes, including mental health and 
nutritional security should be considered to understand and help people who are 
repeatedly exposed to natural disasters. Accordingly, the Committee recommends these 
initiatives from the part of DHR/ ICMR for NER. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR) 
 
4.1 The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), headquartered in New Delhi, is 
India's apex organization for formulating, coordinating, and promoting biomedical research. 
As one of the world's oldest medical research institutions, ICMR operates under the 
Department of Health Research (DHR) within the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Government of India. Its research agenda aligns closely with national health priorities, 
focusing on communicable diseases, fertility control, maternal and child health, nutritional 
disorders, environmental and occupational health issues, and non-communicable diseases 
such as cancer, cardiovascular conditions, diabetes, blindness, and mental health disorders. 
 
4.2 The Secretary, DHR in his oral evidence related to the examination of Demand 2026-
27of DHR submitted that in BE 2026-27, the Department has got a budgetary allocation from 
the Government of Rs.4,821 crore. Out of which, on the allocation of Rs.4,000 crores for 
ICMR, he stated that this does not include any money from revenue or from any other source 
from within the ICMR.  This is the funding from the Government to the ICMR 
 
4.3 While explaining the ICMR budgetary system, the Secretary submitted that major 
portion is Grants-in-Aid General which is basically the money spent on research i.e. research 
projects and research institutions. The remaining amount is for the salary of ICMR scientists, 
technical staff and administrative staff, capital assets, etc.  He also informed that ICMR 
pensions are not paid out of salaries head but out of the Grants-in-Aid General. Under the 
research budget, there is intramural research, which means research in ICMR institutions, 
and there is extramural research, where ICMR funds more than 300 institutions in the 
country to do research.  
 
4.4 The Committee was also informed by the Secretary, DHR that ICMR was an inward-
looking organization in the past, but now it has adapted itself to be an outward looking 
organization. ICMR are now spending majority of their funds on extramural grants, which 
means that all the other medical and research institutions in the country are funded through 
ICMR.  According to the Secretary, DHR who is also DG, ICMR, that is a very substantial 
change. Further, before 2023, ICMR was doing largely descriptive research. After that there 
has been very substantial reduction in money being spent on descriptive research. As of now, 
ICMR is spending close to 40 per cent for development research that is, actual development 
of new technologies and their clinical evaluation. 
 
4.5 A graph showing the funding of ICMR from 2017, till now is given below:- 
 
 

78 
 
 
 
28 Intramural Institutes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intramural:28institutes 
 
 


79 
 
Extramural: Investigator initiated research project that inter-aliainclude as under:-. 
 
(i) Small grants for developing proof of concept 
(ii) Intermediate grants for larger, decisive studies 
(iii) Centre of Advanced Research to solve an important healthcare 
(iv) Problem by a research team that has an excellent track record 
(v) National Health Priority Research for learning how to deliver at scale 
(vi) First in the World 
(vii) Follow-on Grants 
 
4.6 The Committee understands that over recent past, ICMR has shifted focus on 
two core areas – from descriptive to developmental research and gravitating towards 
extramural research instead of intramural. Such change in approach is appreciated and 
is viewed as a measure towards future readiness/preparedness to combat health 
challenges. The Committee is of the considered opinion that ICMR should continue 
funding more developmental and extramural projects so that larger numbers of 
research entities are encouraged to participate in the nation’s progress in health 
research.   
 
4.7   Budgetary allocation of ICMR 
4.7.1 The Department of Health Research has submitted following details w.r.t the 
budgetary allocation of ICMR: - 
(Rs.incrores) 
 
4.7.2  The statement indicating percentage variation of BE 2026-27 in comparison to 
Projected Demands of ICMR: - 
 (Rupees in crores) 
Projected Demand BE  
2026-27 
Variation  
 
% of Variation of BE 2026-27 as compared 
to Projected Demand 
 
4550 4000 -550 12.08 
 
4.7.3 During 2026-27, the total funding for ICMR saw a surge at Rs 4,000 crore compared 
to the previous years. The Committee wanted to know the utilization of the enhanced ICMR 
budget allocation of Rs 850 Cr and the specific research areas are likely prioritized with this 
increased funding. In reply, DHR submitted that the additional amount will be utilized in the 
following manner:- 
 
 
FY Projected Demands BE 
Allocation 
RE 
Allocation 
ActualExpenditure 
2023-24 2459.58 2359.58 2356.62 2343.18 
2024-25 3290.62 2732.13 2869.99 2869.56 
2025-26 3907.00 3125.50      3150.00 3148.50to (up to 20/02/26) 
2026-27 4550.00 4000.00 - - 

80 
 
 
A. Extramural Research Projects: Rs 475 Cr 
1) Affordable health technologies (develop frontier technologies, First in the 
World Challenge, MedTech Mitra 
2) Solutions for difficult and resistant health problems 
3) Achieve high global ranking of Indian Institutions in Medical Research  
B. Intramural Research Projects: Rs 150 Cr 
1) New research at rejuvenated 8 National Institutes of Health Research (NIHR) 
2) Enhanced Intramural Grants 
3) Centres for Collaborative Research (CCR) scheme 
 
C. GIA Capital: Rs 200 Cr  
1) Relocation & establishment of NIV, Pune at Pashan, Pune 
2) Infrastructure creation for Institute of Digital Health at Delhi NCR 
3) Infrastructure development at ICMR Headquarters & ongoing construction 
activities at 28 institutes 
4) Data Centre at ICMR Headquarters 
5) Procurement of equipment at 28 ICMR institutes and centres 
 
D. GIA Salaries: Rs 25 Cr: 
Notional increase on account of annual increment and increase in DA. 
 
4.7.4 The Department also submitted to the Committee, the specific research areas that are 
likely to be prioritized with this increased funding that include:- 
 
1. Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) 7.Ambulatory Non-Communicable Disease Care 
2. One Health 8. Mental Health 
3. Tuberculosis.                        9. Anaemia, Stunting and Wasting 
4. Vector-borne Diseases 10.Neonatal Mortality 
5. Cancer 11. Acute Emergency Care 
6. Oral Health  
 
4.7.5 The Committee notes the fact that out of the total allocation of DHR for the FY 
2026-27 of Rs.4,821 crores, an amount of Rs.4,000 crores is the share of ICMR. Further, 
it is also understood that amount does not include any fund from revenue or from any 
other source from within the ICMR but it is the budgetary allocation from the 
Government to ICMR. The submission of the Secretary, DHR that drew the attention 
of the Committee was that the ICMR pensions are not paid out of the salaries Head, but 
out of the Grants-in-Aid General which is basically the amount of money reflected to be 
spent on research i.e. research projects and research institutions. The Committee finds 
that the objective of Grants-in-Aid Scheme is to provide fundfor research projects. 
While Grants-in-Aid General Head cover funding for other items alongwith research 
project. The Committee seeks the Department to submit a clarification in the matter.  
 
4.7.6 The Committee is appreciative about the effective utilisation of funds by ICMR. 
Over the years ICMR has always made efforts for maximum utilization of allocated 
funds. This year the allocation is a remarkable hike from previous years, which is an 

81 
 
addition of Rs 850.00 Cr. Even though the projected demand for 2026-27 by ICMR was 
Rs. 4550 crores, it got an allocation of Rs 4000 crores. Considering that ICMR has 
demanded for more funds, the Committee reckons that it has more projects planned for 
the year. Nevertheless, going by the trend of last two years, ICMR has always been 
granted higher allocation at the RE stage. Of course, such increase at RE stage is not at 
par with the projected demand. Addition at RE stage suggests optimal utilization of 
allocated funds and project efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
ICMR keep their good track record of actual utilization of allocated fund and physical 
progress of its projects against measurable outcomes. 
 
4.7.7 On the Committee’s recommendation that ICMR is to be allowed to retain the 
revenues generated by them rather than depositing all of it to the Consolidated Fund of 
India, DHR had submitted that the revenue so generated is being appropriately 
recorded by ICMR Accounts section and shall be reflected in the Demand No 47. 
However, the Committee doesn’t find the refection of the same in the Demand No 47- 
2026-27. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendation on the issue. 
 
4.7.8 As part the examination of budgetary allocation of ICMR for 2026-27, the Committee 
sought a comparison of ICMR corresponding with research institutes of Developed countries 
on public funding of health research. The details so furnished by ICMR are that the 
Performance Evaluation Committee has often referred to corresponding Research Institutes 
of Developed countries while assessing the functioning of ICMR. It is noted that the U.S. 
National Institutes of Health receives about $47.77 billion annually (0.17% of GDP), the UK 
Medical Research Council $12.33 billion (0.36% of GDP), and Australia’s National Health 
and Medical Research Council $1.34 billion (0.07% of GDP). In comparison, India’s 
Department of Health Research (DHR) receives about$385 million annually, 0.01% of GDP. 
It is apparent that is inadequate for India’s scale, needs, future and potential. Further, the 
Performance Evaluation Committee’s prominent recommendations pertaining to its 
comparative study include- 
 
1. To improve research quality and impact, implement a peer review and monitoring 
system integrating constructive feedback, modelled on the NIH (National 
Institutes of Health), USA. 
2.  ICMR/DHR should enhance its presence, visibility and influence in the WHO 
system. Apart from continuous engagement, active participation at the World 
Health Assembly is of paramount importance to showcase India’s health research. 
3. ICMR should actively participate in other major global health forums, foster 
leadership roles in international research consortia, and increase representation in 
global policy and advisory bodies. 
 
4.7.9 The Committee notes that Performance Evaluation Committees of ICMR are 
formed every 5 years and the last committee was constituted in 2022. Its report reflects 
0.01% of GDP as Government’s spending on Health Research in India, But, on the 
examination of Demand for Grants of DHR during2026-27, it was informed that the 
Government spends 0.02% of GDP for Health Research vis-a vis U.S. National 
Institutes of Health receives about $47.77 billion annually (0.17% of GDP), the UK 

82 
 
Medical Research Council $12.33 billion (0.36% of GDP), and Australia’s National 
Health and Medical Research Council $1.34 billion (0.07% of GDP). The percentage of 
the Government’s spending on Health Research in India has been stagnant for the last 
5 years. Nevertheless, the statistics is disappointing. The Government is doing a lot of 
things in its attempt to make India a developed country. Viskit Bharat@47, which is a 
part of this attempt, is a revolutionary thought and to achieve that the nation need a 
young population as well as a healthy population. The Committee therefore 
recommends for higher budgetary support to DHR as percentage of GDP as 
comparable to leading Asian economies such as China, South Korea, Japan, etc. Efforts 
to be made to choke out a road map to bridge the research and investment gap by 
extracting measurable outcome from intramural and extramural project, especially in 
terms of publications, patents and clinical guidelines. The Committee further 
recommends for adequate budgetary support towards theoretic development advanced 
trails and indigenous innovations. Action plans should be chalked out for PPP based 
funding on mission mode to reduce long term dependency on expensive imported 
therapies.  
4.7.10 Every health scheme/program/research/study should be conceived as a step 
towards creating a healthy population who would directly/indirectly contribute to the 
GDP of the country. The Committee feels that at 0.02% of its GDP, India is at a very 
lower position compared to developed countries in the field of Health Research 
expenditure. As of now, India’s representation and contribution to the global health 
forums is not much remarkable. The Committee feels that India has no dearth of 
talents. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Department to timely fulfil their 
commitments towards the on-going projects, which would in turn help them secure 
more financial assistance from the Union Government for completing their research 
projects in time. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that ICMR should be 
allowed to retain the revenues generated by ICMR rather than depositing all of it to the 
Consolidated Fund of India as well as collaborate with prominent private players in the 
field of medical research to enhance its funds. The Committee desires that ICMR 
should strive to raise extra budgetary resources upto 25% from other sources to fulfil 
its requirements for undertaking research projects. 
4.7.11 Further, the Committee endorses the suggestions of the Performance Evaluation 
Committee on having a peer review and third party monitoring system integrating 
constructive feedback as well as enhancement of India’s presence, visibility and 
influence in the WHO system through active participation in global health forums. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends necessary steps to be taken in achieving the 
suggestions of the Performance Evaluation Committee. 
 
4.8 Physical outcomes of ICMR projects 
 
4.8.1 Subsequently, the Committee wanted to know the physical outcomes of ICMR 
projects during 2025-2026. DHR gave the details as under:- 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Disease wise outcomes-  
 
A. Nipah Virus: During the Nipah outbreaks in Kerala, rapid containment and timely 
public health interventions have been facilitated due to the deployment of mobile BSL-
3 laboratories. A colorimetric isothermal (RT-LAMP) assay for rapid detection of 
Nipah virus has been developed and the technology has been transferred for 
commercialisation through Patent Mitra. Finally, monoclonal antibodies that can be 
utilised for treatment have been developed.  
 
B. Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD): The KFD Virus Clinical Management Protocol that 
would provide a standardised framework for clinical management, diagnostic 
approaches, and therapeutic decision-making has been developed and finalised. Risk 
mapping of KFD using species distribution modelling that supports the implementation 
of targeted prevention strategies has been developed. An inactivated KFD vaccine 
candidate, which shows promising potential in preclinical studies has been developed. 
 
C. Leptospirosis: The identification of Leptospira as a major contributor to mortality 
associated with Acute Febrile Illness and Acute Encephalitis Syndrome in eastern Uttar 
Pradesh has led to the inclusion of leptospirosis testing within the diagnostic protocols. 
 
D. HIV: Results from Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) retention studies highlighted 
programme redesign with a focus on early engagement and integrated TB-HIV care 
aligns with national efforts to achieve the 95-95-95 benchmarks.  
 
E. Post Kala-azar Dermal Leishmaniasis: To support ophthalmological monitoring in 
PKDL, ICMR developed national and global databases. Field validation of three 
platforms for visceral leishmaniasis and PKDL, including qPCR-based test-of-cure, 
RPA suitcase laboratory, and cell-free DNA-based diagnostics have been completed. 
Finally, Infectious Diseases Data Observatory (IDDO)-Oxford database has been 
developed for VL, PKDL and VL-Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) for data 
sharing and reuse. 
 
F. Dengue: Development of a molecular point-of-care pan-Dengue assay that can detect 
all four Dengue Virus serotypes using RT-RNA amplification with CRISPR/Cas12a 
fluorescence detection has completed. A paper-based dengue type-2 detection kit using 
77 blinded clinical samples has been validated. Results from the school-led dengue 
prevention under the Dengue Reduction through Education, Awareness, and 
Monitoring in Schools (DREAMS) programme has showed potential for scalability 
through community engagement and policy alignment.  
 
G. Tuberculosis: ICMR has validated and deployed three indigenous handheld x-ray 
technologies which supports TB screening among the underserved populations of the 
country. Various other diagnostic technologies like the Quantiplus® MTB kit, the 
UniAMP MTB Card, the PathoDetect™ and the CyTB skin test are in various stages of 
validation. DeepCXR has been integrated into the National TB elimination Programme 
(NTEP), to provide rapid, standardised and scalable interpretation of chest x-rays. An 
ICMR clinical trial on a modified BPaL (mBPaL) regimen established that optimisation 

84 
 
of the Linezolid dose improved tolerability while maintaining efficacy and enhancing 
treatment adherence among Multidrug-Resistant TB (MDR-TB) patients. The findings 
of the Reducing Activation of Tuberculosis by Improvement of Nutritional Status 
(RATIONS) trial reinforced the correlation between nutrition and TB prevention and 
care. In Tamil Nadu, the Tamil Nadu KasanoiErappilaThittam(TN-KET) care model, 
using a severe illness triage tool, utilised five clinical indicators to identify high-risk 
patients which led to 20% reduction in early TB deaths and 10% reduction in overall 
TB-related mortality. ICMR-NIRT has entered collaborations with national and 
international partners for paediatric TB clinical trials, drug-resistance surveillance, 
diagnostic innovation, vaccine immunology, and TB innovation hubs. 
 
H. Malaria: Two CRISPR-based ultra-sensitive platforms for simultaneous detection of 
Plasmodium falciparum and artemisinin resistance has been developed. The first 
recombinant multi-stage malaria vaccine (AdFalciVax) has entered the technology 
transfer phase, and industry engagement has been initiated. A MoA have been executed 
for malaria elimination research and Phase III long-lasting insecticidal net (LLIN) 
trials.  
 
I. Enteric Diseases: A multiplex two-tube real-time RT-PCR kit (En-ViroQPlex) for 
enteric viruses has been developed. A broad-spectrum glycoconjugate vaccine effective 
against typhoidal and non-typhoidal Salmonella, and an outer membrane vesicle-based 
vaccine against Shigella, have progressed to the technology transfer stage. Adjunctive 
strategies have been evaluated to test the potential of existing antibiotics, including the 
enhancement of ciprofloxacin activity against Shigella flexneri. Preclinical evaluation 
in BALB/c mouse models demonstrated the therapeutic potential of a newly 
characterised Shigella bacteriophage.A patent has been filed for a multiplex PCR assay 
that differentiates hypervirulent and classical Klebsiella pneumoniae. 
 
J. Sickle Cell Disease (SCD): Expansion of screening services of SCD in underserved 
populations has been achieved through the validation of 25 affordable Rapid Diagnostic 
Tests (RTD). A hydroxyurea dose-optimisation trial comparing 10 mg/kg/day and 20 
mg/kg/day which optimises treatment has been completed. To address stigma-related 
barriers to care among the tribal populations, a sickle cell disease stigma scale was 
developed. The BHARAT CARES initiative has been launched as a five-year national 
cohort to track SCD progression, treatment outcomes and long-term impact of the 
disease across the country. 
 
K. Cancer: National cancer surveillance has been expanded through a network of over 600 
cancer registry sites. Drone-based medical logistics has been deployed to support the 
rapid transport of corneal grafts and oncology samples. 
 
L. Cardiovascular Disease: Under the India Hypertension Control Initiative (IHCI), 
standard treatment protocols have been established in 157 districts across the country. 
A tele-ECG enabled ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) care model that 
demonstrated the feasibility of thrombolysis at district and community health centres 
has by the Uttar Pradesh Government as HridaySetu, which is operational in 12 hubs 
across 46 districts.  

85 
 
 
M. Stroke: A public-sector Mobile Stroke Unit integrating CT-enabled ambulances with 
the 108-emergency system has been operationalised in Assam. Neurologist-led stroke 
units established across three hospitals enable early diagnosis and intervention. Stroke 
surveillance has been expanded through a network of over 100 stroke registry sites. 
 
N. Poly-Cystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS): Evidence from 75 high-impact publications 
informed updates to clinical guidance and lifestyle recommendations for the national 
PCOS cohort. 
 
O. Human Papilloma Virus: An indigenous HPV DNA point-of-care assay has been 
validated.  
 
4.8.2 On the number of research papers published, patents filed and patents granted during 
the last 3 years i.e. 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26, the Department submitted the tabulart 
information given below:- 
 
*(till December 2025) 
 
4.8.3 The Committee takes note of the progress made by ICMR in the previous years 
on various aspects like core research, research papers published, patents filed and 
patents granted, etc. The Committee also acknowledges that ICMR has contributed to 
addressing the health issues affecting the masses of the country. Nevertheless, the 
Committee is concerned to note that a portable X-Ray machine is being cited as being 
made under Make in India despite its important components like HV tank and X ray 
tube not being made indigenously. The Committee recommends that ICMR should set 
up a standardised guideline to classify its products under Make in India so that it forms 
a bench mark for the private Sector to imbibe and inculcate. Mere assembly of 
imported components should not form the basis for classification under Make in India. 
The Committee appreciates that ICMR has developed its own AI platform for rapid 
diagnosis of Chest and other X-rays. Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends 
that this AI should be provided free of cost to all CHCs/PHCs and Government 
Hospitals so that primary diagnosis can be made under the TB Muktbharat campaign. 
The Committee also recommends that the pricing of AI needs to be justified in a 
country like India where AI can be a game changer to provide affordable health care on 
a population scale. 
 
4.8.4. The Committee would like to recommend an impact assessment of the work 
carried out by ICMR, through a Third-Party, to establish a structured mechanism to 
monitor and regulate the outcomes and overall impact of these initiatives. In this 
Year Technology 
supported for 
development 
Technology supported for 
clinical validation under 
ICMR-DHR-CAR 
Patent 
Filled 
Patents 
granted 
Publications 
2023-24 27 NA 42 0 1500 
 
2024-25  27 41 23 1420 
 
2025-26* 24 40 99 16 1470 
(Intramural Research) 

86 
 
regard, the Committee wishes to be appraised also on research projects, if any, of 
ICMR that had to be discontinued and the reasons therefore. 
 
4.9 Initiatives of ICMR 
 
4.9.1 As part of the oral evidence related to the examination of Demand 2025-26 of DHR, 
the Secretary, DHR submitted the plans of ICMR for 2026-27.  Some of the initiatives 
include  a TB Research Accelerator to further innovation-driven strategies for the next three 
years, a Science Excellence for Health through Agricultural Transformation which is a joint 
programme with the Indian Council of Agricultural Research to use agricultural 
innovations and understand their impact on health, Biopharma Shakti Mission to establish  
1000 clinical trial sites,  a Grant Challenge to fight Anaemia,  particularly in women and 
girls, Centre for Collaborative Research, strengthening our intramural-extramural 
relationships, and starting Waste Water Surveillance in 47 Indian cities for multiple viruses.  
 
4.9.2 The other initiatives undertaken under the umbrella of ICMR assubmitted before the 
Committee are as under: 
 
i. Medical Innovations Patent Mitra:  
4.9.3 The Medical Innovations Patent Mitra initiative was launched in 2025for supporting 
medical innovators with end-to-end guidance on patent filing, intellectual property 
management, and technology transfer to industry. It aims to accelerate commercialisation of 
public-funded biomedical innovations and strengthen India’s medical innovation ecosystem. 
As per the provisions of the Patents Act, 1970, the statutory processing timeline generally 
extends to approximately three to four years from the date of filing of the complete 
specification, subject to the prescribed examination schedule, issuance of First Examination 
Reports (FERs), submission of responses thereto, and compliance with all statutory 
requirements.In view of the average statutory timeline stipulated under the Patents Act, 1970 
and the rules framed thereunder, none of the patent applications filed under the Patent Mitra 
initiative have been granted to date, as such applications are presently at various stages of 
examination and prosecution.However, during the past three years, ICMR has secured 39 
patent grants, which emanated from applications filed during the period 2012–2022. 
 
ii. MedTech Mitra 
 
4.9.4 MedTech Mitra is a joint initiative by ICMR and Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) launched in December 2023 to foster development of affordable and 
accessible indigenous therapeutics, vaccines, medical devices/ in vitro diagnostics, by 
providing strategic handholding support to MedTech innovators for clinical evaluation, 
regulatory facilitation and uptake of new products. Over 400 innovators, start-ups, and 
industry partners have been engaged through this platform helping them overcome 
challenges in the process of developing regulation compliant products, their clinical 
validation, and scaling-up. Since its inception, Medtech Mitra has provided support to the 
MedTech innovators as enumerated below:  
 

87 
 
(i) 24 technologies received test license as a step for regulatory approval processes. 
(ii) 24 technologies recommended for testing support in compliance with standards at 
ICMR-CAR-AMTZ centre 
(iii) 41 technologies recommended for clinical study protocol drafting and/or clinical 
evaluation 
Challenges faced by innovators applying on Medtech Mitra Platform:  
 
(i) Limited awareness of Medical Device Rules. 
(ii) Absence of clear and specific regulatory frameworks for Software as Medical devices 
(SaMD) & AI-based technologies. 
(iii) Limited no. of Medical Device Testing Laboratories (MDTLs) and CDSCO-approved 
laboratories for performance evaluation of IVDs. 
(iv) Restricted access to appropriate clinical samples required for performance evaluation 
of new IVDs. 
(v) Lack of funding opportunities for test batch manufacturing of medical devices/IVDs. 
 
Proposed solutions for these challenges are as follows: 
 
(i) Implementation of structured nationwide capacity-building programs for awareness 
on MedTech regulations for innovators and stakeholders. 
(ii) Development of dedicated, risk-based regulatory guidelines for SaMD and AI/ML 
medical devices aligned with global best practices. 
(iii) Creation of a nationwide network of public and private testing laboratories for testing 
of highly diverse In-vitro diagnostic technologies. 
(iv) Establishment of centralised biobanks and streamlined mechanisms for timely access 
to clinical samples. 
(v) Dedicated grant and shared manufacturing support schemes to bridge the gap between 
prototype development and commercialisation. 
Through the MedTech Mitra Initiative, 8 technologies have received support for 
obtaining manufacturing licences and are being commercialized. These 
technologies/products are mentioned below: 
a) CEREBO (Bioscan Research Private Limited): Detect Intracranial haemorrhages 
including Epidural, subdural, intracerebral, subarachnoid haemorrhages, and 
contusion and oedema including cerebral and cerebellar oedema. 
b) Spandan ECG (Sunfox Technologies Pvt Ltd): Portable AI Based 12-Lead ECG 
machine for Point of Care Diagnostics and Self Diagnostics. 
c) FibriTimer - Zeta 01: Multipurpose Haemostasis System for Small Throughput Labs- 
Diagnose and detects the abnormalities leading to Bleeding (Haemorrhage) and 
Thrombosis (DVT, DIC, MI, VT etc.) in a patient. It also helps in anticoagulation 
dosage management be it during surgery or oral anticoagulation management. 
d) Sample Collection Tube (M/s Lords Mark Industries Limited): The device is designed 
to collect samples which may be used for various purposes such as genetic testing. 
e) InoHeal (Inochi Care): The InoHeal wound healing device is a wound care device to 
be used for various types of chronic and acute wounds in healthcare settings under the 
supervision of a healthcare professional. 

88 
 
f) Mobilab (M/s Primary Healthtech Private Limited): It is a portable, in-vitro 
diagnostic device use for quantitative determination of multiple clinical chemistry 
analytes which help in the diagnosis of various disorders related to Kidney, Liver, 
Cardio-vascular, Diabetes, and Anaemia from the blood samples. 
g) AccuSmear (Accuster Technologies Pvt.Ltd.): Semi-Automatic Device used for 
making Blood Film or Peripheral Smear for Examination of the Blood Cells 
Microscopically. 
h) HELO MAXX (M/s Adarsa Private Limited): A Multi-parametric diagnostics device 
engineered to provide healthcare practitioners with valuable insights into a patient's 
health status swiftly and accurately. The device is supported with accessories like the 
ECG Cable, BP Probe, SPO2 Probe, High Accuracy Strain Gauge Smart Scale as well 
as consumables like Test Strips (Quantitative as well as Qualitative).   
 
4.9.5 The Committee recognizes the relevance of initiatives like MedTech Mitra and 
Patent Mitra. These are handholding measures for innovators for clinical evaluation, 
regulatory facilitation, execution of license agreements and uptake of new products. 
The Committee believes that the Department should make women, young and rural 
innovators primary beneficiaries in their handholding measures. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends phased funding at different levels of product readiness as 
innovators struggles to reach towards finished products/technology. There should be 
regional hubs related to these handholding initiatives to cater to local innovators which 
will also mitigate urban bias. The Department should seek to address the issue of low 
market penetration of new products/technology under these initiatives. This is mainly 
due to the mismatch between the demand and the final product. Last, but not the least, 
the Committee recommends effective capacity building programmes for nascent 
innovators about the various technical and procedural complexities involved in  market 
entry with new products/technology. According to the Committee, start-ups and 
innovators must be supported enough so India becomes a global hub for affordable 
health solutions. 
 
iii. Medical Innovations Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC) 
 
4.9.6 Medical Innovations Development Advancement Company (MIDAC) is envisioned 
as a Section-8 company under the Companies Act, 2013, MIDAC aims to serve as a catalyst 
for translational research and technology development. MIDAC will operate through the 
implementation of strategic schemes such as the Candidate Development Scheme, IP and 
Technology Transfer Facilitation Scheme, Clinical Validation and Evaluation Support 
Scheme, and MedTech Mitra Scheme. 
 
4.9.7 The Committee noted that MIDAC was introduced in Budget 2025-26 and wanted to 
know the status of the final approval for establishing MIDAC. In reply, DHR informed that a 
CEE/EFC meeting convened under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of 
Expenditure on 17.11.2025, appraised the Section 8 Company MIDAC’s proposal. The 
Minutes of Meeting conveying appraisal was received on 5th January 2026. In pursuance 
thereof, a draft Cabinet Note has been prepared and upon the approval of competent 
authority, has been circulated to the different Ministries/Departments concerned for their 
comments vide. OM No. M-11013/15/2023-CG(pt.)/8255524 dated 3rd February 2026, as per 

89 
 
the prescribed procedure. As soon as the inputs of different Ministries/Departments are 
received, the cabinet note will be submitted for final approval from Union Cabinet. All 
timelines and procedural requirements as laid down in O.M. No. 1/50/2/2024 Cab. Dated 
14.5.2025 regarding revised timelines for Inter-ministerial consultations have been duly 
followed. The time taken reflects the required stages of several inter-ministerial 
consultations, CEE/EFC consideration, budgetary alignments, and thoughtful deliberations in 
the preparations of the Cabinet Note.  
 
4.9.8 The Committee recalls that Medical Innovations Development Advancement 
Company (MIDAC) was presented before it as a transformative initiative of DHR last 
year during the examination of DFG of DHR. MIDAC, envisioned as a Section-8 
company under the Companies Act, 2013, aims to serve as a catalyst for translational 
research and technology development. Within five years, it intends to support the 
development of 25 regulation-compliant products, including formulations, vaccines, and 
medical devices, and 50 regulation-compliant diagnostics. However, the Committee 
finds that the much-anticipated company is still entangled in procedural matters 
connected to approvals. The Committee is of the considered view that DHR should not 
linger the formation of MIDAC, a Section-8 company under the Companies Act, 2013. 
It is apparent to the Committee that DHR has taken shelter behind the caveat of every 
procedural requirement being followed. In view of this, the Committee strongly 
recommends that DHR shall vigorously pursue the final approvals for MIDAC and 
ensure that the delay should not extend beyond a month with the Registrar of 
Companies and the Company must see the light of the day during the ensuing financial 
year. 
 
iv. Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (INTENT):  
4.9.9 As part of examination of Demand of Grants of DHR, 2026-27,  the Secretary, DHR 
informed the Committee that ICMR - INTENT was initiated to establish a robust ecosystem 
for clinical trials by integrating institutions, investigators, and resources across India to 
conduct high-quality, multicentric, regulatory-compliant trials with 45 sites and later 
expanded to 75 institutions, including public and private medical colleges, hospitals, research 
institutes, and ICMR institutions.  
 
4.9.10 In this regard, the Committee wished to understand the role DHR played in regulating 
clinical trials and ethical guidelines for biomedical research in India. In reply, DHR stated 
that it registers Ethics Committees involved in the review of Biomedical and Health Research 
involving human participants through the NAITIK portal. This ensures that the registered 
Ethics Committees are appropriately constituted and provides accountability and 
transparency. DHR issues provisional registration for newly registered Ethics Committees, 
which is valid for 2 years, and final registration, which is valid for 5 years. DHR also 
monitors compliance through periodic review of submissions, scrutiny of documents, and 
renewal processes to ensure continued adherence to prescribed ethical and regulatory 
standards. 
 
4.9.11 On the Clinical Trials Registry - India (CTRI) established by ICMR, it was submitted 
that it registers trials prospectively, providing public access to necessary trial information, 

90 
 
reducing publication bias, selective reporting and strengthening public trust in 
research.  CTRI is one of the Primary registries of WHO's International Clinical Trials 
Registry Platform (ICTRP).  At present more than one lakhs trials have been registered with 
CTRI.  Mandatory disclosure of WHO Trial Registration Data Set items improves 
reproducibility and reliability of findings.  In order to further strengthen on accessibility, 
functionality, operational efficiency and transparency, the following reforms are being 
undertaken: 
 
a) Introduction of multilingual interface, mobile friendly platform,  
b) Mandatory registration tied to funding/publication,  
c) Awareness campaigns for public, researchers & institutions,  
d) Integration of CTRI, Ethics Registration (NAITIK portal) and DCGI portal using API 
Link 
 
4.9.12 Further, DHR Bioethics Unit works closely with WHO and its global partners to 
advance ethical governance, shape policy, harmonise frameworks, and support Member 
States on emerging ethical issues. Bioethics is a WHO Collaborating Centre for 
Strengthening Ethics in Biomedical and Health Research. Head, ICMR Bioethics Unit is 
currently serving as Chair of the Global Network of WHO Collaborating Centres in 
Bioethics, reflecting global recognition of India’s leadership in research ethics and its 
growing influence in international ethical standards and collaboration. ICMR is also an 
executive committee member of the Council for International Organisations of Medical 
Sciences (CIOMS) and contributes to reviewing international guidelines 
 
4.9.13 ICMR Ethical Guidelines provide comprehensive direction for conducting biomedical 
and health research in India. The ICMR National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and 
Health Research Involving Human Participants, 2017 have legal status under the New Drugs 
and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019, and mandate that all biomedical and health research be 
conducted in accordance with these guidelines. 
 
4.9.14 On the announced in the Budget 2026-27, about the establishing of over 1000 
accredited India Clinical Trial Site Network nationwide to boost medical research and 
innovation linked to ICMR priorities, it has n informed that the focus of Biopharma SHAKTI 
is on strengthening a large-scale clinical research ecosystem in the country, by developing 
1000 being utilised by the Indian Pharma industry. More than 200 sites spread across the 
country are conducting clinical trials funded by ICMR through its various schemes. These 
clinical trial regulatory-compliant clinical trial sites to conduct ethical, high-quality, 
scientifically robust, and efficient clinical trials. This will be enabled by skilled human 
resources, expanding clinical research infrastructure including digital platforms and a robust 
governance framework.  
 
4.9.15  Furthermore, to boost medical research and innovation aligned with health research 
priorities, ICMR proposes to leverage its prior experience and strength for creating and 
strengthening 1000 clinical trial sites, by adopting a ‘Hub and Spoke model’ to meet the 
needs of the Indian Pharma Industry. To develop a nationwide network of 1000 clinical trial 
sites, the Government and private hospitals, medical colleges, research institutions, various 

91 
 
networks and consortia, which are actively involved in conducting clinical trials, either 
investigator-initiated or industry-led will be mapped. The existing clinical trial sites will be 
assessed and upgraded, and new potential clinical trial sites will be developed, in a phased 
manner to achieve the goal over the period of 5 years. These sites will be diverse in their 
geographical location to conduct both hospital-based and community-based clinical trials in 
Tier 2, 3 cities and rural areas. Public-private partnership will also be actively encouraged in 
the proposed initiative of strengthening the clinical research ecosystem in the country.   
 
4.9.16 The Committee appreciates the Budget announcement 2026-27 regarding 1000 
clinical trial sites under BioPharma SHAKTI Mission with an outlay Rs 10,000 crores 
over five years indented to mark  a strategic shift towards strengthening India’s 
biopharma ecosystem. The Committee has given to understand that creation of a 
national network of 1000 clinical trial sites is one of the components of Biopharma 
SHAKTI which will be led by the ICMR. The Committee firmly believes Biopharma 
SHAKTI Mission, a core strategic intervention aimed at strengthening India’s 
biopharmaceutical ecosystem will definitely serve as an essential pillar required to 
meet the growing demands of the Indian pharma industry and to position India as a 
competitive global hub for biopharma innovation. The Committee in this regard, 
recommends ICMR to leverage its prior experience and strength by creating and 
strengthening 1000 clinical trial sites, and adopting a ‘Hub and Spoke model’ to meet 
the needs of the Indian Pharma Industry.  
4.9.17 The Committee reckons that to regulate clinical trials, DHR registers Ethics 
Committees (EC) to review Biomedical and Health Research which also involves human 
participants through the NAITIK portal. Further, the Committee also acknowledges 
the reforms undertaken by DHR to facilitate public access to necessary trial 
information, like introduction of multilingual interface, mobile friendly platforms, 
mandatory registration tied to funding/publication, awareness campaigns for public, 
researchers & institutions, etc. In this regard, the Committee holds the view that 
regulatory reforms and ease of doing research, while maintaining ethical standards, 
needs to be encouraged. Maintaining ethical standards itself is a challenge viz. hurdles 
include uneven Ethics Committees quality, delays, and vulnerability in multicentric 
trials, etc. Hence, the Committee recommends further strengthening of the role of DHR 
as a regulatory entity through frequent trainings for Ethics Committees members and 
participants, introduction of digital tools for monitoring and timely review of 
guidelines. ICMR should ensure that participation in clinical trials is based on genuine 
informed consent and all measures to ensure this shall be taken by DHR. 
 
4.10  Contemporary and Critical Areas of Research in India 
 
4.10.1 When the Committee enquired about the measures taken by ICMR to translate its 
expanding NCD research portfolio into public health interventions, viz. including its research 
outcomes with national initiatives on National Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS), etc. DHR furnished the 
following domain wise details: - 
 

92 
 
a) Oncology 
(i) ICMR, in collaboration with Tata Memorial Centre-ACTREC, developed a powder 
for oral suspension (PFOS) of 6-mercaptopurine (PREVALL), which helps in 
accurate dosing for children undergoing treatment for Acute Lymphoblastic 
Leukaemia (ALL).  
 
(ii) ICMR’s CARE-Clinical Pharmacology initiative focuses on therapeutic 
monitoring of anti-cancer drugs like sunitinib and docetaxel, which demonstrates 
that drug monitoring improves patients' quality of life (QOL) and reduces 
treatment costs.  
 
(iii) ICMR’s pilot project on screening and early detection of cervical, breast, and oral 
cancers in Cachar, Assam demonstrated the effectiveness of frontline health 
workers, such as ASHAs, in promoting home-based screening.  
 
(iv) Incidental Gall Bladder Cancer study provided information on prevalence and 
factors associated with IGBC and other premalignant conditions (chronic 
cholecystitis, hyperplasia, metaplasia, dysplasia, carcinoma in situ) so that an 
algorithm can be developed for early detection of GBC in India.  
 
(v) The pattern of care and survival studies (POCSS) provided information on 
improved care strategies and early detection measures. 
(vi) ICMR conducted multicentric studies on breast cancer that demonstrated that 
pesticide exposure, benign breast diseases, family history of breast cancers, family 
history of other cancers, age at menopause, and physical activity are considered 
important risk factors.  
 
(vii) ICMR evaluated the efficacy of multiple point-of-care systems for detection of oral 
potentially malignant disorders (OPMDs) and to develop a prognostic model 
combining clinical/ auto-fluorescence images, saliva markers, cytology, histology, 
and multi-omics data for relapse/recurrence.  
 
(viii) With a multi-centric approach, ICMR standardised the method of detection and 
criteria for positivity of Epstein B Virus (EBV).  
 
(ix) Additionally, for women’s cancers specifically, the “CONFRONT CANCER” 
project is empowering frontline workers in Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, and Meghalaya 
through educational resources and cluster Randomised Controlled Trials (cRCT) to 
prevent and manage malignancies.  
 
b) Cardiovascular Diseases 
 
(i) The Centre for Advanced Research (CAR) for cardiovascular disease (St. John’s, 
Bengaluru) has developed a synergistic, low-cost Intervention Package (IP) for 
CVD burden reduction. A key translation measure is the “task shifting” model, 
where Non-Physician Health Workers (NPHWs) are trained to deliver protocol-
based care.  

93 
 
 
(ii) India Hypertension Control Initiative (IHCI) in private sector: ICMR initiated 
IHCI in the private sector with the goal to generate evidence for the government, 
and other stakeholders to inform a targeted approach for effectively engaging the 
private sector for hypertension screening, diagnosis, management, and control.  
 
(iii) ICMR – STEMI ACT: The aim is to examine whether the creation of a network of 
hub (medical college) and spokes (secondary public health facilities - district 
hospitals and community health centres) in a district can improve thrombolytic 
rates in ST elevated myocardial infarction (STEMI) patients through a physician 
based tele-ECG-guided thrombolytic therapy model.  
 
c) Diabetes 
 
(i) ICMR’ Young Diabetes Registry is the largest national registry for youth onset 
diabetes in the world providing data on details of hospitalisation, prevalence of 
complications and co-morbidities at registration and stratified by diabetes type, 
treatment pattern and mortality.  
 
(ii) ICMR’s India Diabetes Study (INDIAB) has been completed across 37 States and 
Union Territories and provides the first comprehensive national and state-wise 
assessment of metabolic non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in India, covering both 
urban and rural populations.  
 
(iii) ICMR also validated the Indian Diabetes Risk Score (IDRS) as a cost-effective, 
population-level screening tool for identifying individuals at risk of diabetes and pre-
diabetes, strengthening its utility for large-scale public health programmes.  
 
(iv) Under CARE Young Diabetes, the PATHWAY trial improved transition from 
paediatric to adult care among adolescents with T1DM in India.  
 
(v) Under the CARE FIG trial, it was identified that provision of appropriate lifestyle 
interventions after childbirth to women with gestational diabetes improved the 
glycaemic status and or their weight.  
 
(vi) The study on comparison of seroprevalence of SARS-CoV2 among people with and 
without diabetes and/or hypertension among existing cardiovascular community 
cohort in Delhi provided useful information on the co-occurrence and interaction of 
COVID-19 and NCDs.  
 
d) Mental Health 
 
(i) ICMR’s multistate implementation research study on integration of screening and 
management of mental and substance use disorders with other non-communicable 
diseases (ICMR-MINDS). 
 

94 
 
(ii) In response to persistent gaps in community-based mental health care and limited 
skills among Community Health Officers (CHOs), a standardised, efficient, and 
actionable mental health management workflow and management cards have been 
developed for CHOs at the primary care level.  
 
(iii) The National Suicide Prevention Strategy (NSPS) of India aims to reduce suicide 
mortality through surveillance, integration of prevention services, and mental well-
being curricula in schools, while strengthening leadership, community resilience, and 
evidence-based research.  
(iv) ICMR Centre for Advanced Research on Digital Interventions for Mental Health Care 
has been established at NIMHANS, fostering research on digital mental health 
solutions. 
(v) ICMR Centre for Advanced Research on Addictive Behaviours (CAR-AB) is being 
established at AIIMS Delhi, with a focus initiative for delivering evidence-based 
interventions targeting excessive and problematic use of technology and associated 
stress, depression, anxiety, and addiction.  
 
(vi) ICMR Centre for Advanced Research on Neuromodulation, has been established at 
AIIMS New Delhi. The centre has validated the safety and efficacy of high-frequency 
repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) for patients with somatic 
symptom disorders and schizophrenia.  
 
e) Obesity  
 
(i) The ongoing SAMPADA study is generating the latest nationally representative data 
on the prevalence of overweight and obesity across different age groups in India, 
providing critical inputs for policy and programme planning. 
(ii) ICMR has undertaken systematic evidence collation based on high-quality systematic 
reviews published over the last decade to identify packages of community-level 
interventions that are effective for the prevention and management of obesity. 
(iii) In parallel, a national-level brainstorming with experts across the country has been 
scheduled to contextualize global and national evidence and support translation of 
research findings into public health interventions aligned with national NCD 
programmes. 
 
f) Stroke 
 
ICMR established a population-based stroke registry at Dibrugarh and 
observed that stroke incidence rate was 160 /100000 population in this region. An 
unusually higher rates of haemorrhagic stroke (65-70%) were observed in the stroke 
patients in this population. In view of this, ICMR with support from the Govt. of 
Assam, had initiated a research project to establish a clinical stroke care pathway for 
management of acute stroke cases at Dibrugarh and Tezpur. MSU (Mobile Stroke 
Unit) can play a crucial role at the sub-district (block or CHC) level, especially in 
rural and hard-to-reach areas as acute stroke is a time sensitive emergency and is a 
leading cause of death.  
 

95 
 
g) Geriatrics 
ICMR is building national capacity for healthy ageing through cohorts, task forces 
and international collaborations focused on dementia prevention and elder care. 
(i) SMRUTHI (cmRCT) cohort: 3,000 at‑risk elders via MRHRUs in Tripura, 
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan; multimodal dementia‑prevention 
bundle (early detection, locally appropriate nutrition, yoga, cognitive & physical 
activity) with materials in 4 languages; rural and tribal representation. 
 
(ii) Task forces & studies: pan‑India assessment of psychological & economic 
burden of dementia caregiving (Kolkata, Delhi, Bengaluru, Jodhpur, Dibrugarh); 
evaluation of Ayushman Bharat HWCs on out‑of‑pocket spending in Rajasthan, 
Karnataka, Tripura, Puducherry. 
h) Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) 
ICMR’s CKD program integrates discovery, population surveillance and service 
innovations, with emphasis on CKDu hotspots. 
(i) Discovery & diagnostics: CAR at SGPGIMS Lucknow with two patents on urinary 
exosome miRNA biomarkers for early CKD and diabetic nephropathy differentiation. 
 
(ii) Burden & care: multicentric urban CKD study (2018) across 7 cities, n=15,372 → 
9.4% prevalence (city range 4.9–17.2%); medication‑therapy‑management study 
improved knowledge 42→73.5 and adherence/clinical outcomes. 
 
(iii) Genomics & precision care (ongoing): FSGS genetic panel standardization; 
multi‑institution Kidney Genetics Service for adolescent/adult monogenic disease; 
miRNA longitudinal markers; Alport syndrome whole‑exome and transcriptomics 
with genotype–phenotype correlation. 
 
(iv) CKDu hotspots & environment: HEAL‑CKDu (AP) linked heat exposure to impaired 
kidney function; studies on environmental toxins (metals, pesticides, water) in Central 
India; Udupi: validated CKDu risk questionnaire and ongoing prevalence & 
multimodal intervention study. 
ICMR has informed that the rapid shift towards urbanization, sedentary lifestyles, and 
unhealthy dietary habits has led to a significant rise in risk factors for CKD and liver 
diseases. Both diabetes and hypertension are leading causes of CKD, particularly through 
mechanisms like diabetic nephropathy and hypertensive nephrosclerosis. Environmental 
factors, including contaminated water and exposure to heavy metals, pesticides, and 
pollutants, have become significant contributors to CKD. The ICMR HEAL-CKDu project in 
Andhra Pradesh highlighted how occupational heat exposure, particularly in industries like 
agriculture, brick kilns, and construction, increases the risk of kidney damage, especially in 
areas with poor water quality. Additionally, studies on Chronic Kidney Disease of Unknown 
Etiology (CKDu) in areas like Uddanam and the microplastics research have shown how 
environmental toxins are linked to kidney dysfunction and disease progression. Preventive 
strategies like healthier diets, regular exercise, better control of diabetes and hypertension, 

96 
 
and addressing environmental toxins are crucial to reducing the growing burden of these 
diseases. 
 
i) Fetal anomalies 
 
ICMR has informed that under the National Health Research Priority (NHRP) on 
stillbirth, being implemented across seven states, the focus is on prevention of stillbirth 
through improving the uptake and coverage of evidence-based antenatal and intrapartum 
interventions. One of the strategies under this project is early detection of fetal anomalies by 
promoting uptake of recommended antenatal ultrasonography, particularly the second-
trimester anomaly scan, through improved utilisation of existing public health platforms. 
This includes early pregnancy registration and attendance at Pradhan Mantri Surakshit 
Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA) clinics to ensure that pregnant women receive the indicated 
ultrasonography for detection of fetal anomalies, and additional ultrasound examinations 
where clinically required. 
 
j) Hypertension 
 
ICMR has conducted a study on “Genetic Evaluation of Hypertension in the North East 
population during the period of 2015 to 2018.The goal of the study was to find association of 
the genetic makeup of vasoactive modulators of the human essential hypertension taking into 
account the level of various risk factors especially in Indian context with special emphasis on 
the Apelin (APLN), Apelin Receptor (APLNB), Guanine Nucleotide Binding Protein Subunit 
Beta -3 (GNB3) and Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase(NOS3) genes and associations 
toward predisposition to hypertension.  
k) Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) 
ICMR has played a pivotal role in advancing Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) as a national 
public health priority, directly supporting Government of India efforts under the National 
Sickle Cell Anaemia Elimination Mission. Through integrated research, diagnostics 
validation, and health-system strengthening, ICMR has generated actionable evidence to 
guide policy and programme implementation, particularly in high-prevalence tribal 
populations. With a special emphasis on tribal and underserved populations, CRMCH 
actively works in key frontier areas aligned with the objectives of the National Sickle Cell 
Anaemia Elimination Mission, thereby contributing to improved prevention, early diagnosis, 
treatment, and long-term care of affected individuals. 
l) Japanese Encephalitis (JE) and Snake bite 
ICMR published a White paper on venomous snakebite in India in 2020* which was 
acknowledged in the “National Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Snakebite 
Envenoming (NAPSE)”, launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in March 
2024, with the aim to halve snakebite-related deaths and disabilities by 2030 in India. ICMR 
has concluded a multi-centric research study to estimate incidence, mortality, morbidity, risk 
factors and economic burden due to snakebite in India. This study is being conducted in 13 
states, 31 districts, 416 Blocks across the country covering nearly 7% population as of the 
2011 census. This study is expected to provide insight on the burden of snakebite along with 
risk factors, treatment pattern and health seeking behaviour, and socioeconomic fallout. The 

97 
 
final analysis and report of this study is being compiled and may be available in the next six 
months. ICMR–DHR has done significant research and public‑health interventions have been 
undertaken in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to reduce mortality from Japanese Encephalitis 
(JE)/Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) and snakebite envenoming. To address the chronic 
JE/AES burden in eastern UP, ICMR established the ICMR–RMRC Gorakhpur, originally a 
National Institute of Virology (NIV) field unit in 2008, now a full research centre conducting 
basic, clinical and operational research, including molecular and serological diagnostics for 
JE and other AES pathogens, directly strengthening early detection and case management in 
high‑burden districts. For snakebite envenoming, ICMR–DHR has launched India’s first 
large-scale, community‑based epidemiological studies through its National Task Force, 
covering 31 districts across 13 states including high‑burden regions of UP and Bihar to 
determine incidence, mortality, treatment‑seeking behaviour, and economic burden, revealing 
substantial pre‑hospital deaths and gaps in antivenom access. These findings directly 
informed the National Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Snakebite Envenoming 
(NAP‑SE), launched by the Union Health Ministry, which aims to halve snakebite deaths by 
2030 through a One‑Health approach involving universal antivenom availability, provider 
training, community awareness, and a pilot national snakebite helpline (15400).   
4.10.2 Almost all areas of research taken up ICMR are those which can bring in 
transformative impact in accordance with the National Health Policy outcomes. The 
Committee extends all its support to the ICMR Centre for Advanced Research on 
Addictive Behaviours (CAR-AB) being established at AIIMS Delhi, with a focus 
initiative for delivering evidence-based interventions targeting excessive and 
problematic use of technology and associated stress, depression, anxiety, and 
addiction. The Committee is of the considered view that mental health is an area where 
integration of Indian Knowledge Sytsem through methodology like yoga meditation can 
bring in lot of positive changes in behaviour science. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that both DHR/ICMR and Ministry of Ayush adopt steps to develop a 
treatment protocol wherein safe integration of traditional/ alternative treatment along 
with allopathic treatment can be effectively used in the area of mental health. 
4.10.3 The Committee recommends that ICMR should undertake a study to look into 
the possibility of developing indigenous Sickle Cell Anaemia from Sugarcane 
derivatives as has been developed in countries like USA/Japan.  Regarding 
hypertension, ICMR had conducted a study on “Genetic Evaluation of Hypertension in 
the North East population during the period of 2015 to 2018’, the Committee 
recommends that ICMR should also undertake a study on the impact of hypertension 
and diabetic among the people of India in the post pandemic period. Further, ICMR 
has informed that there are many studies from various groups in India on genetic 
factors related to diabetes. Study of genetics of monogenic diabetes is already in routine 
clinical practice. The Committee understands that millets help in the management of 
body weight, which is of utmost importance in diabetic patient. In this regard, the 
Committee desires that ICMR should undertake a study on the merits of the millet diet 
as part of promotion of its usage especially among children. Such studies should help 
including millet in the nutritional status of children in POSHAN Abhiyaan.   
 

98 
 
 
4.10.4 The Committee has been given to understand that ICMR has published a White 
paper on venomous snakebite in India in 2020* which was acknowledged in the 
“National Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Snakebite Envenoming 
(NAPSE)”, launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in March 2024, 
with the aim to halve snakebite-related deaths and disabilities by 2030 in India. The 
Committee in this regard recommends that ICMR should identify the specify area of 
more snake bite and undertake research on various types of snakes bites especially by 
King Cobra, Russell’s viper, Karaita, etc which are highly venomous snake species and 
adequate arrangement be made for anti-venom doses in district hospitals and rural 
block hospitals.  Anti-venom doses of specific species of snakes may be stored in 
hospitals of the area where such species of snakes are found in plenty. 
4.10.5 The Committee, taking note of the fact that ICMR–DHR has done significant 
research and public‑health interventions in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to reduce 
mortality from Japanese Encephalitis (JE)/Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES), 
however, the Committee observes that Japanese Encephalitis are much more prevalent 
in North India, ie, from Uttar Pradesh to North Bihar (from Muzafarpur to 
Gorakhpur and Gaya) and there is toll of death of children who are vulnerable to the 
disease. The Committee therefore recommends ICMR and DHR to undertake in-depth 
research in JE and desires that the government should give more grants to support the 
research projects on the subject. 
4.10.6 The Committee views that DHR should promote R&D under PPP model in 
order to extract maximum outcome for preventing the prevalence of various diseases in 
specific part of the country. The Committee desires that multinational companies or 
companies manufacturing drugs on large scale and earning high profit should be 
guided to make expenditure of certain percentage of profit on R&D with the purpose of 
reducing the cost of drugs and treatment of disease at an affordable cost on common 
diseases like JE, kidney failure, fatty liver, etc. The Committee is of the opinion that 
each regional AIIMS may be entrusted with health research on specific disease 
prevalent in that area with enhanced budgetary support to undertake R&D projects. 
The Committee notes that ICMR has informed that under the National Health 
Research Priority (NHRP) on stillbirth, being implemented across seven states, the 
focus is on prevention of stillbirth through improving the uptake and coverage of 
evidence-based antenatal and intrapartum interventions. One of the strategies under 
this project is early detection of fetal anomalies by including early pregnancy 
registration and attendance at Pradhan Mantri Surakshit MatritvaAbhiyan (PMSMA).  
The Committee in this regard recommends that the ICMR should expand the NHRP on 
stillbirth across the country instead of limiting it in just seven states. The Committee 
feels that the role of frontline workers likes Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHAs) 
and Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) is cardinal in early pregnancy registration and 
attendance at PMSMA, especially in rural/tribal areas accordingly adequate training 
should be imparted for ASHAs and ANM in this area.  
  
 

99 
 
(i) Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) 
 
4.10.7 The Committee was keen to know the strategy is in place to shift research focus and 
funding towards the rising burden of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs). In this regard 
DHR informed that India is experiencing a shift in disease patterns, with NCDs now causing 
nearly 60% of all deaths. Despite this, infectious diseases remain a significant concern. 
DHR/ICMR has responded with a dual approach that advances NCD research while 
maintaining a strong focus on infectious disease preparedness. 
 
4.10.8   ICMR coordinates the collection of data that is required to monitor the National 
Multi-sectoral Action for Prevention and Control of common NCDs. As part of this, ICMR 
has established large-scale studies and disease registries, including the national cancer 
registry. ICMR has also started fourteen National Health Research Programmes with NCDs 
as areas of focus, specifically in areas like ambulatory NCD care, mental health, cancer, 
health coverage, emergency care and development of digital technologies.As part of 
collaboration with national initiatives such as NP-NCD and Ayushman Bharat, ICMR has 
supported research that would improve prevention, early detection and management of 
NCDs. Research focus has further expanded to nutrition, lifestyle, environmental risk factors, 
and social determinants that are related to these NCDs.  
 
4.10.9 Concurrently, for communicable diseases, the National One Health Mission has been 
launched, to create a national network of existing and upcoming high-risk pathogens 
laboratories (BSL-3/4) labs across departments and keeping them functional through 
continuous R&D and use during outbreak response. Research on tuberculosis, malaria, 
emerging and re-emerging infections, and antimicrobial resistance have been advanced, and 
these areas are considered national priorities.The sub-scheme namely (i) establishing 
Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Medical Colleges/Research Institutes, undertake 
research primarily in Non- Communicable Diseases. There is a provision of Rs. 288.11 Cr 
for the sub-scheme for the 15th FC period. 
 
4.10.10 The Committee takes into account the submission of DHR that ICMR has 
adopted a dual approach that advances NCD research while maintaining a strong focus 
on infectious disease preparedness. The Committee is given to understand that while for 
communicable diseases, the National One Health Mission has been launched while 
Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Medical Colleges/Research Institutes 
undertake research primarily in Non- Communicable Diseases. Considering that India 
is experiencing a shift in disease patterns, with NCDs, causing nearly 60% of all deaths, 
the Committee recommends DHR to revisit the funding pattern and strategy by giving 
thrust to NCD research at the same time sustaining the intensity on infectious disease 
projects. The Committee recommends that preventive healthcare with focused research 
on early detection of lifestyle diseases and its affordable treatment should be 
prioritized. 
 
(ii) Anti-Microbial Resistance 
4.10.11 Over the last five years, ICMR has significantly revised national antimicrobial 
use and stewardship protocols. Major updates include the 2025 National Treatment 
Guidelines for Antimicrobial Use (Version 2.0) jointly released by ICMR–NCDC, which 

100 
 
standardized empiric antibiotic therapy and aligned national protocols with India’s updated 
AMR Action Plan (2025–2029). These updates collectively strengthened surveillance 
consistency across the ICMR- AMR Network and improved antimicrobial stewardship 
nationwide. 
4.10.12 ICMR’s stewardship drive has shifted hospitals from case to case antibiotic use to 
structured, data‑driven practice and is expanding Antimicrobial Stewardship Program 
(AMSP) beyond tertiary care to primary care with community engagement. 
● Hospital AMSP impact (20 tertiary hospitals): monthly point‑prevalence audits 
now in all 20 (from 3); 19/20 formed multidisciplinary AMS teams and conducted 
capacity‑building; 20/20 created antibiograms; 18/20 developed antibiotic policies; 
formulary restrictions rose 2→12 hospitals; prescription audit & feedback 6→16. 
● Tiered AMSP expansion: ICMR‑NIRBI’s tier‑specific AMSP framework aligned 
to NAP‑AMR 2.0 (by 2030); pilot hub‑and‑spoke AMSP at 6 rural primary‑care 
hospitals (WB) linked to district medical colleges. 
● Awareness & advocacy: WAAW (Nov 2025) webinar & AMR surveillance 
network report; UNEP–ICMR‑NIRBI report “Priorities for the Environmental 
Dimensions of AMR in India” released 24 Nov 2025; pilot IEC to improve 
antibiotic literacy; sustained advocacy through national conferences (e.g., Hopecon 
2025, IPHA). 
4.10.13 According to DHR, ICMR contributes significantly to the core objectives of the 
NAP-AMR 2.0 (2025–2029). This is channelled through specific research and surveillance 
initiatives. DHR/ICMR operates a national AMR surveillance network, which includes 
around thirty laboratories and hospitals. This network is crucial for continuously monitoring 
and mapping resistance patterns in key pathogens found in clinical settings, providing the 
evidence base for policy interventions. The plan mandates the expansion of genomic 
surveillance, a key research initiative to detect emergent resistance genes early. This 
scientific approach helps healthcare facilities respond to new threats effectively.  
 
4.10.14 Further, DHR is also involved in expanding surveillance capabilities to 
include targeted monitoring of antibiotic residues and resistant microorganisms in 
environmental samples, such as hospital wastewater, thereby integrating environmental data 
into human health research. Anchored by Centre for Cellular and Molecular Platforms(C-
CAMP) and chaired by the Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser (OPSA), with DHR 
involvement, the innovation hub serves as the innovation arm of the NAP 2.0. It fosters 
collaborations among national and international stakeholders to develop new technologies 
and solutions for AMR mitigation. Recognising the interconnectedness of human, animal, 
and environmental health, the DHR collaborates with other key ministries and departments, 
including agriculture, environment, and animal husbandry, to ensure research findings across 
sectors are integrated into a cohesive national response. Research data generated by DHR 
initiatives will inform the development of evidence-based strategies, ensuring that 
interventions are tailored to the specific context of antibiotic-resistant strains.  
 
4.10.15 Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) identified as a major future threat is already 
impinging treatment protocols. DHR through ICMR operates an AMR Surveillance 
Network and contributes evidence on key resistant strains of pathogens found in 

101 
 
clinical settings. Also, the National Action Plan (NAP)-AMR 2.0 (2025-2029) emphasizes 
One Health surveillance and thereby integrates environmental data into human health 
research. In this backdrop, the Committee recommends that DHR/ICMR should 
establish AMR-specific hubs and promote community One health training, focusing 
inter alia on animal-human interface. The Committee also holds the opinion that the 
Department should also launch a national risk mapping app for zoonoses and integrate 
its findings into antimicrobial stewardship and protocols nationwide. 
 
4.10.16 Further, the Committee is given to understand that the use of 
technology/products like BIOFIRE are reported as a major step towards the 
antimicrobial fight. Patients who earlier had to remain in the ICU for around 10 days, 
with the help of BIOFIRE, can now receive antibiotic sensitivity reports within just 2 to 
4 hours, leading to faster and more targeted treatment. This has substantially reduced 
the overall cost and improved clinical effectiveness following its introduction. However, 
the Committee is told that the technology/products like BIOFIRE are currently 
imported and are expensive per se. Accordingly, the Committee recommends DHR to 
look into the possibility of developing such technology/products indigenously so that it 
can be made further cost effective and accessible more commonly and to smaller 
healthcare setups also as part of affordable health care inititiatives. 
 
(iii) HPV Vaccine 
 
4.10.17  The Committee desired to know the primary objectives & scope of the study titled 
"Antibody Response following One Dose of Cervavac® as compared to One Dose of 
Gardasil Vaccine in Healthy Girls Aged 9-14 Years: A Non-inferiority, Multicentre, Double-
blind, Randomized Controlled Trial" under ICMR.  
 
4.10.18  Replying to the queries of the Committee, DHR submitted that the primary objective 
of the study was to determine whether the antibody response elicited by one dose of 
Cervavac® (study product) is non-inferior to one dose of Gardasil® (comparator) against 
HPV types 16 and 18 among healthy girls in the age group of 9-14 years, 24 months post-
vaccination. Scope of the study are generation of evidence to aid in adoption of WHO’s 
single dose HPV vaccination strategy as a public health initiative by India and having an 
understating about the utilisation of a Make-In-India vaccine for the same adolescent age 
group.  
 
4.10.19 DHR added that Gardasil® was selected as the reference vaccine because it is a 
vaccine with robust clinical trial and real-world data, including evidence supporting 
immunogenicity following reduced-dose schedules. The vaccine is one of those 
recommended by WHO-Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) for one dose schedule 
for girls aged 9-14 years, and thus has a well-established immunogenicity, safety and 
extensive global clinical use. Finally, both Gardasil® and Cervavac® contain virus-like 
particles targeting HPV genotypes 16 and 18, enabling a scientifically valid comparison of 
antibody responses based on similar antigenic composition and mechanism of action. 
Therefore, it was an appropriate reference for a non-inferiority design and allows rigorous 
assessment of whether a single dose of Cervavac® elicits a non-inferior antibody response in 
healthy girls aged 9–14 years. 

102 
 
 
4.10.20  Further, the Committee asked about how the results of this trial could potentially 
impact India’s national HPV vaccination program, especially regarding the use of the 
indigenous vaccine Cervavac®. Besides this, the cost and availability of Cervavac® 
(developed by Serum Institute of India) compare with Gardasil®, possibility of positive non-
inferiority results accelerating its inclusion in public health programs, etc were also areas of 
interest to the Committee. DHR submitted in this regard that the National Technical 
Advisory Group on Immunisation had requested ICMR to conduct this study as data 
regarding single dose of Cervavac® was not available in the public domain. If the results are 
positive, then this indigenously developed vaccine could be deployed in public health 
programmes. 
 
4.10.21 As informed by DHR, Gardasil® is available as a single dose of prefilled syringes 
and needs to be imported. As per the submission of DHR, the current market rate of 
Gardasil® single dose pre-filled syringe is around ₹3000- ₹4000. On the other hand, 
Cervavac® a “Make in India product”, is available in single as well as multidose vials. The 
current market rate of single dose vials of Cervavac® is around ₹1400 to ₹1800 with 
additional syringe and needles cost of ₹10 to ₹15 per dose. The Committee are however not 
sure of the exactness of the price of Gardasil®single dose pre-filled syringe vaccine available 
in India as on date.  
4.10.22 Regarding the economic benefits arising from developing a home-grown single-dose 
HPV vaccine and how it could reduce the price of the HPV vaccine and accelerate its 
integration into India's Universal   Programme, DHR submitted that Home-grown single dose 
vaccines, if proven to be non-inferior, would save import costs and duties, thus rendering the 
vaccination more affordable. These lower prices would make universal public rollout 
financially possible. If the country purchases the vaccine for the Universal Immunisation 
Programme, price negotiation would ensure that the costs are much lower for larger scale 
vaccination. Single dose strategy will help achieve coverage of greater than 80% which 
would make it cost effective. Additionally, internal transport costs are reduced if the 
manufacturer could deliver the vaccines to the major vaccination sites in the country while 
maintaining a cold chain. All girls between 9 and 14 years can be vaccinated in a campaign 
mode to achieve near complete coverage in this age group.  
4.10.23  Delving deeper into the matter the Committee sought to know how single-dose HPV 
vaccine impact cancer incidence among women in India. DHR informed the Committee in 
this connection that girls who are vaccinated before their sexual debut are less likely to 
develop precancers or cervical cancer that are due to oncogenic HPV type 16/18 after 30 
years of age. Provided >80% vaccination coverage is achieved in girls between 9-14 years of 
age, the impact of this vaccination programme can be observed one and half decades after the 
vaccination, when they have grown into the age group at risk. Globally, focus is placed in the 
use of nonvalent vaccines because of the identification of cancer-causing HPV that are not 
covered with the current quadrivalent vaccine in use.  
 
4.10.24 The Committee reckons the importance of national HPV vaccination 
programme. The Committee understands that ICMR is engaged in the "Antibody 
Response following One Dose of Cervavac® as compared to One Dose of Gardasil 

103 
 
Vaccine in Healthy Girls Aged 9-14 Years: A Non-inferiority, Multicentre, Double-
blind, Randomized Controlled Trial" to determine whether the antibody response 
elicited by one dose of Cervavac® (study product) is non-inferior to one dose of 
Gardasil®. The result of the trial would to aid in adoption of WHO’s single dose HPV 
vaccination strategy as a public health initiative by India. Further, the Home-grown 
single dose vaccines, if proven to be non-inferior, would save import costs and duties, 
thus rendering the vaccination more affordable as well as effective. The Committee 
feels that to make the trial result oriented, a transparent narration of the facts related 
to the merits of the vaccination connecting it to cervical cancer prevention to build 
public trust is important. It is also pertinent to make the public aware that the impact 
of vaccination programme can be observed one and half decades after the vaccination, 
when the recipients have grown into the age group at risk. The Committee firmly 
believes that HPV vaccination is a corrective and a way forward step. The delay in the 
roll out of the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) maybe due to lack of 
information among the public. Hence, the Committee strongly recommends publishing 
of a detailed fact sheet on the ICMR/DHR website outlining the primary objectives and 
scope of HPV. The Committee is of the view that HPV vaccination if implemented with 
transparency and community involvement, the programme would emerge as a 
consequential public health achievement in protecting next generation of women from 
preventable malignancies, and thus reclaiming preponderance of prevention of cancer 
in national health policy. 
 
4.10.25 The Committee further recognises the fact that if the trial could demonstrate 
Cervavac®’s single-dose non-inferiority, it would be a "major fillip" by enabling faster 
rollout in the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP). Positive culmination of the 
trial would be an unequivocal boost to indigenous production and lower cost offers 
economic benefits like forex savings, job creation in biotech, etc. Single dosage can 
make UIP more successful as human lapses and follow up of multiple doses can be 
avoided. Accordingly, the Committee wants to render all its support to and pin its 
expectations on to the Department to act on the recommendations of the Committee.  
(iv) Oral Health 
4.10.26 Anant Muskaan, ICMR's National Health Research Priority Program, is aimed at 
promoting awareness of the importance of oral health in school children. According to DHR, 
these interventions are much more affordable than out of pocket expenditure for expensive 
oral diseases treatment in the country. 
 
4.10.27  As per the study conducted by Sharda et al., it was observed that the per capita cost 
of the School-Based Toothbrushing programme is lower than the out-of-pocket expenditure 
in real- scenarios in India. The per capita cost of the STB programme is ₹29,339 (95% CI: 
26,487-32,381) and lifetime caries experience with the programme is 2.72 teeth (95% CI: 
2.69–2.76) while the lifetime caries experience without the programme is 3.74 teeth (95% CI: 
3.69-3.78). Out of pocket expenditure studies reveal that ₹44,874 is saved per person with 
30% public treatment while ₹26,160 is saved per person with 100% public treatment. Thus, it 
has been observed that in real-world scenarios in India, the STB programme is expected to be 

104 
 
a cost-effective strategy for reducing the burden of dental caries and the associated treatment 
costs. 
 
4.10.28 According to DHR, the data collection process is still undergoing. The costing data 
will be collected at the end of one year of full-scale implementation (February 2026) and 
again at the end of two-year of full-scale implementation phase (February 2027). As per the 
data collected till date, the average estimated per-child annual running cost of the Anant 
Muskaan intervention is ₹79.96 (range: ₹53-₹105.46). This cost includes the toothbrushing 
kit, oral health education materials, and training and demonstration activities. The extension 
of the Anant Muskaan Project beyond the current seven districts will be considered upon 
successful completion of the two-year implementation phase (February 2027) and 
achievement of ≥80% coverage among primary school children. At the end of the two-year 
implementation phase, the Anant Muskaan Project is likely to be ready for national scaleup 
and will be handed over to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as the nodal agency 
for nationwide rollout.  
 
4.10.29 Anant Muskaan, ICMR's National Health Research Priority Program, is aimed 
at promoting awareness of the importance of oral health in school children. The project 
focus on primary school-based toothbrushing and oral health education to prevent 
costly oral diseases and reduce out-of-pocket expenditure. It is a cost-effective 
preventive intervention. The Committee perceives that the extension of the Anant 
Muskaan Project beyond the current seven districts would be considered upon 
successful completion of the two-year implementation phase in February 2027. The 
Committee recommends that the project be expanded nationally which would address 
the issue of oral disease burden and wants the project to be integrated with the School 
Health & Wellness Programme (SHWP), under the Ayushman Bharat. This would be 
an ideal move towards affordability over treatment. Also, the learnings gained from this 
programme can be extrapolated to other similar spheres to synthesise comparable 
benefits. 
 
(v) Food safety 
 
4.10.30 ICMR, through its 100 years of existence, has contributed significantly to nutrition 
science and policy in the country along with food safety. The following are some of them: 
 
1. Early studies on nutrient deficiency disorders: The studies on parboiled and milled 
rice helped to explain the incidence of beriberi among rice eaters in the east coast of 
Andhra region where milled rice was consumed largely and no incidence in Madras 
where parboiled rice was consumed more. 
2. Stomatitis associated with the deficiency of B group of vitamins, particularly 
riboflavin, was described for the first time in India, and a treatment with yeast and 
skimmed milk was found to be effective. 
 
3. Nutritive values of Indian foods:  The Nutritive Value of Indian Foods and Planing 
of Satisfactory Diets was published in 1937, which turned out to be a very popular 
contribution. Apart from this, the nutritive values of fruits and vegetables were also 
determined during 1960s. This publication was thoroughly revised and rewritten 

105 
 
with data obtained after updating some methods of nutrient estimation and was 
published as 'Nutritive Value of Indian Foods' in 1970s. More recently, the database 
profiling the nutritive values of Indian foods has been readied in 2017. The new 
'Indian Food Composition Tables (IFCT) 2017 is the compilation of nutritional 
information on 151 discrete food components for 528 key foods. 
 
4. Formulation of recommended dietary allowances (RDAs): The first 
recommendations on Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA) were made for the 
Indian context in 1944. Later, the RDAs were modified in the early 1960s, and then 
in the early 1970s, 1980, 1991 and last in 2010. These are the recommendations of 
how much of the nutrients should be ideally consumed by people of different age 
and physiological groups based on their activity 
 
5. Dietary guidelines for Indians: A manual with information on the key practicable 
points for diets and physical activity for Indians to ensure optimal health and 
freedom from disease was proposed for the first time in 1998. In 2011, after the 
RDAs were revised and the guidelines were redrafted, the revised version was 
released. 
 
6. Studies on protein-energy malnutrition (PEM):  The institutes research paved way 
for a new hypothesis that malnutrition among underprivileged children was due to 
energy deficiency and not solely due to protein deficiency. 
 
7. Contribution to national programmes and policies:  ICMR-NIN’s research was also 
the basis for the Government of India in the 1970s, to launch a supplementary 
feeding programme to provide 300 Kcal/day to improve the nutritional status of 
children in rural areas and in urban slums, which was operated under the Integrated 
Child Development Scheme (ICDS). 
 
8. Contribution to the National Prophylaxis Programme against nutritional blindness 
due to vitamin A deficiency: ICMR-NIN studies paved the way for a nationwide 
vitamin A prophylaxis programme with its inclusion in the Fourth Five-year plan in 
1969. Based on the recommendations of the ICMR-NIN, it became a national 
programme and is being implemented throughout India. 
 
9. Supplementation of iron and folic acid to pregnant women: ICMR-NIN 
recommended that a programme of iron folate supplementation be taken up for 
pregnant women and preschool children as a prophylactic measure. The government 
introduced the National Nutritional Anaemia Prophylaxis Programme aimed at 
pregnant women and young children in 1970. 
 
10. Operational research to strengthen nutrition programmes: The Institute carried out 
operational research studies on Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) to 
assess its impact on the nutritional status of children, including process and input 
evaluation. The study results helped in strengthening of the programme and 
subsequently, it was expanded in all the villages by universalizing ICDS services. 
 

106 
 
11. Development of Nutrition Surveillance System (NSS): In order to promote effective 
functioning of ICDS and nutritional well-being of the beneficiaries, the ICMR-NIN 
developed 'AAA' (triple A) approach covering Assessment, Analysis and Action 
involving the entire ICDS mechanism from the grassroots level to the supervisory 
level. This involved 'Assessment' of health and nutritional status on a continuous 
basis amongst vulnerable population groups, identifying area-specific determinants 
(Analysis) of nutrition problems and food insecurity and integrating various 
departments to take appropriate 'Action' in the prevention and control of 
undernutrition. 
 
12. Regular nutritional surveys: The National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) 
under ICMR-NIN carried out regular surveys in 10 to 16 States and generated a 
dynamic database on diet and nutritional status of the communities. Many surveys 
were regularly conducted among rural, tribal and urban populations. The most recent 
survey was the 'Diet and nutritional status of urban population in India and 
prevalence of obesity, hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidaemia in urban men and 
women' released in 2017 
 
13. Balamrutham: ICMR-NIN in collaboration with State governments has developed 
micronutrient-fortified (iron, folic acid, B1, B2, B12, niacin, zinc, vitamin A, 
vitamin C, calcium) take-home ration called Balamrutham for 6-36 month old 
children, which is being implemented in all districts of Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana. Earlier, the integrated State of Andhra Pradesh used to provide Modified 
Therapeutic Food (MTF) to children (aged 6-35 months) under Supplementary 
Nutrition Programme of ICDS. The ICMR-NIN conducted a study comparing the 
new ready-to-eat (RTE) formulation with the existing MTF and proved that it was a 
superior food supplement. This led to the introduction of Balamrutham, which 
reached the mothers and caregivers of over 10 lakh children in Telangana State. 
 
14. Food safety and toxicology: Studies on food toxins explored some major areas such 
as neurolathyrism, aflatoxicosis, argemone toxicity and epidemic dropsy and erucic 
acid toxicity in edible oil. Significant contributions have been made by the Institute 
in identifying the nature of the toxic factors and in providing solutions for prevention 
and control. 
 
15. Investigations on epidemic dropsy: In 1998, epidemic dropsy was reported from 
several States such as West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa (now Odisha), Madhya Pradesh, 
Haryana, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Delhi and 
Maharashtra, mainly due to consumption of food cooked in argemone oil mixed with 
mustard oil. The ICRM-ICMR-NIN carried out a study on epidemic dropsy 
prevalent in the areas of State of Madhya Pradesh and recommended to the 
government to stop the unauthorised use of adulterated oil. Selective cultivation of 
yellow mustard, strict enforcement of regulation and exemplary punishment to 
unscrupulous traders were followed as preventive measures. 
 
16. Knowledge, attitude, belief and practice (KABP) study on food safety: ICMR-NIN 
spearheaded the knowledge, attitude, belief and practice study on food safety in 
2005-06 which was conducted among households and other stakeholders such as 
doctors, regulators and teachers in 28 States of the country. 

107 
 
 
17. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs): Most recently, in 2017, the ICMR-NIN has 
generated data on the prevalence of overweight/obesity and non-communicable 
diseases (NCDs) in urban and rural areas from 16 States of India. The urban survey 
alone covered as many as 1, 71, 928 individuals from over 52,500 households of 
1097 wards of 16 States. 
 
18. Fenugreek seeds in the management of diabetes: It was found out that fenugreek 
seeds could improve the glucose tolerance and ameliorate other symptoms of 
diabetes mellitus (type 2). It was reported that the mechanism of action of fenugreek 
seeds on improving glucose tolerance in diabetes was due to improvement in glucose 
utilization at the cellular level.  
 
19. Research on edible oils: In the 1980s when there was a concern about the inadequate 
production of edible oil in India, the Government of India's policy of looking at 
promoting the use of unconventional edible oils got attention. Systematic studies on 
the nutritional quality and safety evaluations of unconventional edible oils such as 
rice bran oil were carried out at the ICMR-NIN. 
 
20. Recommended use of multiple oils: The relative role of n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (PUFAs) in regulating the plasma profile was studied, and the desirable 
ratio of these fatty acids in Indian diets was worked out. Based on these studies, it 
was advocated to blend or use a combination of oils to reap the benefits of n-3 and n-
6 fatty acid form of different oils.ICMR- ICMR-NIN recommended the use of more 
than one oil as diverse sources of oils confer the additional advantage of providing a 
variety of minor components (present in non-glyceride fraction of oils). 
 
21. Health effects of trans fats: Based on the studies of the ICMR-NIN  the Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) fixed the norms for trans fatty acid 
content of vanaspati, limiting to 10 per cent, and proposes to bring it down to five 
per cent and to two per cent or lesser than that in the next couple of years. 
 
22. Double-fortified salt (DFS): ICMR-NIN's research efforts focused on developing a 
technology for double fortification of salt with both iodine and iron to combat both 
IDD and iron deficiency anaemia (IDA) led to the development of a successful 
formula after exploring several stabilizers to ensure the stability of iodine on storage, 
no discolouration and bioavailability of both micronutrients when taken with food. 
The technology of DFS has been transferred to the industry. The ICMR-NIN also 
contributed to the preparation of the regulatory specifications for FSSAI for DFS. 
 
4.10.31 The Committee is impressed with the number of programmes/studies 
undertaken by ICMR in the country in the field of nutrition science and policy along 
with food safety. The Committee notes that majority of the studies undertaken by 
ICMR are hinged on the biomedical aspect. The Committee feels ICMR would be the 
ideal forum to initiate studies on India's diverse food ecosystem. For this, ICMR should 
include experts from agriculture (ICAR), environment (MoEFCC), and FSSAI while 
identifying the subjects of study to address real-world problems. The Committee 
strongly recommends a Multi-Disciplinary Food Safety Research Panel for this. 

108 
 
Another recommendation of the Committee is that due attention shall be given to 
changing food habits of the population across the societal strata keeping in mind 
aspects like easier access to fast food with the advent of fast food delivery at door steps 
primarily through platform-based services. At the same time, there is also an emerging 
cross section of population who is very health conscious. The Committee strongly feels 
that if the gist of findings in this field can be communicated in lay man’s language, it 
can reach the public in highly appreciated and acceptable manner. Further, considering 
the recent reports of rampant Vitamin D deficiency, especially among the urban 
population, the Committee recommends that ICMR shall consider commissioning a 
study on the deficiencies of Vitamin D and countermeasures. The Committee also 
favours a study on the impact of packaged food, including on the mechanisms that are 
in place to assess and regulate the quantity of preservatives used by commercial 
manufacturers. 
 
4.11   Treatment Procedure, Vaccine and Medical Devices Developed By ICMR 
 
4.11.1 The Committee sought to know the scientific advancement, methodology adhered to 
as per set SOP and innovations each in terms of drugs, treatment procedure, vaccine 
development over the period of last five years. According to the ICMR, it undertakes 
formulation, coordination and promotion of biomedical research including the development 
of innovative drugs, treatment procedures and vaccines through standardised processes. 
 
I: ICMR intramural and extramural investigator-initiated competitive grants 
 
4.11.2 The extramural and intramural principal investigator-initiated grants through schemes 
such as First-in-the-world challenge, Anveshan (Small) grants, Nishchayak (Intermediate) 
grants, Centres for Advanced Research, Centres of Excellence and the Follow-on grants. The 
scheme calls always mention the priority areas of research that includes on the scientifically 
and technically advanced MedTech such as cell and gene therapy, robotics, AI tools. The list 
of the priority areas are dynamic and newer areas are decided by a standardised process of 
holding brainstorming meetings with domain experts and with approval from a high-level 
committee at ICMR.The standardised procedure of proposal selection for these grants 
involves a rigorous 2-3 tiered process that involves scoring of the proposal for innovation 
(scientific advancement), methodology and impact besides the rationale and feasibility by the 
domain experts without any potential conflict of interest or bias.  
 
II: ICMR’s initiatives of MedTech MITRA, Patent Mitra and INTENT 
 
4.11.3 Besides these competitive grants, MedTech MITRA, an ICMR-CDSCO initiative with 
guidance from Niti Aayog, supports MedTech innovators of drugs, vaccines and medical 
devices to support them with an end-to-end development. These portals are accessible to 
every innovator 24X7 and each applicant innovator is invited for a hybrid-mode interaction. 
The multiple knowledge-partner panel (Includes senior officials from Atal Innovation 
Mission, IIT experts, Clinicians, Department of Health Research, Department for Promotion 
of Industry and Internal Trade, Atomic Energy Regulation Board, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Department of MSME) interacts with innovators one-on-one to facilitate 
incubation, proof of concept generation, patent filing and maintenance and technology 
transfer by ICMR’s Biomedical Innovations PATENT MITRA, regulatory strategy, 

109 
 
prototype development, Pre-clinical and clinical development, Field feasibility studies, 
Health technology Assessment and scale-up for government procurement/ exports. ICMR’s 
Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (INTENT) with its 85 clinical trial sites across 
the country and Centre for Advanced research facilitate the regulation compliant clinical 
investigation of medical innovations. There are high-level Technical Advisory Groups for 
MedTech MITRA, PATENT MITRA and INTENT initiatives for selecting the innovators for 
undertaking the regulation compliant development. 
 
III: ICMR’s National Health Priority Projects (NHRP) 
 
4.11.4 ICMR works in close collaboration with various Ministries and Government 
Departments for research and development in priority health conditions of national 
importance and more than 30 such National Health Priority Projects are ongoing across 
multiple districts in India. ICMR invites innovators, academic institutions, researchers, start-
ups, and industry for their expression of interest to collaborate in the development and 
evaluation of MedTech Innovations of national health priority. 
 
IV: Vaccine R&D-  
 
4.11.5 Covid Vaccine:  ICMR developed India’s first RT-PCR testing protocol in January 
2020 and issued national testing guidelines. ICMR Jointly developed Covaxin India’s first 
indigenous COVID vaccine. ICMR provided preclinical support and strain characterization. 
ICMR also provided clinical trial site coordination and gave Immunogenicity assessment 
support. 
 
Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD) Vaccine- ICMR is actively working towards the 
development of an improved vaccine against KFD in collaboration with Indian 
Immunologicals Limited (IIL), Hyderabad. The GLP-grade vaccine material has already been 
developed, and the necessary regulatory permissions have been obtained from the drug 
regulator. The clinical trial phase is about to commence.  
 
Zika Virus: ICMR is coordinating the Phase I trial for Zika virus vaccine with Indian 
Immunologicals Limited (IIL), Hyderabad as the manufacturing partner. This trial is 
expected to enrol participants in 2026. 
Influenza virus:  ICMR is working with MynvaxPvt. Ltd. to support the development 
of an indigenously developed adjuvanted recombinant Influenza vaccine. This will support 
the efforts for pandemic preparedness. This Phase I/ II trial is expected to enrol participants 
in 2026 
Avian Influenza Vaccine- ICMR had invited expressions of interest (EoIs) from 
vaccine manufacturers for the development of candidate vaccines against the highly 
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 virus. Proposals from three Industry partners were 
selected for collaborations with ICMR. The names of the industries and proposed vaccine 
platforms are listed below. 
 
 
 

110 
 
1 Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd., Pune- Live attenuated influenza vaccine 
2 Ribbonate Technologies (Premas Biotech), Gurugram-Virus-like Particles based 
vaccine 
3. Gennova Biopharmaceuticals, Pune-mRNA-based vaccine. 
 
V.  Medical Devices 
 
4.11.6 On the process involved in registration of medical devices and the steps taken to make 
the process user friendly, ICMR submitted that it has no regulatory role in the approval of 
medical devices. MedTech MITRA, an ICMR-CDSCO initiative with guidance from Niti 
Aayog, supports MedTech innovators including those of medical devices to support them 
with an end-to-end development. ICMR’s Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network 
(INTENT) and Centre for Advanced research facilitate regulation of compliant clinical 
investigation of medical devices. Further, ICMR facilitates the clinical validation of such 
devices already approved by Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) and Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO)by independently assessing claims related to the 
image quality of X-ray outputs. This includes evaluating the image quality and diagnostic 
adequacy of chest X-rays, benchmarking them against standard digital X-ray systems through 
blinded review by qualified radiologists, and generating evidence to support their effective 
programmatic deployment. 
4.11.7 ICMR, in collaboration with Institute of Plasma Research (IPR), has developed and 
validated an indigenous AI-based tool (DeepCXR) for automated interpretation of chest X-
rays. This tool classifies images as normal or abnormal and can be used with chest X-rays 
generated from both fixed digital X-ray systems and handheld X-ray devices to improve the 
TB screening under the National TB Elimination Programme. On the AI enabled X-Ray 
device for Tuberculosis Screening has been assembled by including Chinese components, 
ICMR stated that it has procured Mine2IN handheld X-ray devices through the Government 
e-Marketplace (GeM) under the Class I “Make in India” category. However, certain 
components such as the X-ray tube (a part of the X-ray source) and the detector, which are 
integral to the handheld X-ray system were imported, as per details provided by the supplier 
(Lipomic India Pvt. Ltd.).  
4.11.8 On the information regarding details of vaccines at various stages of 
development/approval by ICMR, the Committee feels that the information is scattered 
across press releases and annual reports, leading to difficulty in keeping track. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends a dedicated page on the ICMR official 
website, clearly indicating the vaccine name, target disease, development stage, and 
expected timeline for each stage. 
 
4.11.9 The Committee understands that ICMR has no regulatory role in the approval of 
medical devices. MedTech MITRA, an ICMR-CDSCO initiative with guidance from 
Niti Aayog, supports MedTech innovators including those of medical devices. Further, 
ICMR’s Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (INTENT) and Centre for 
Advanced research facilitate regulation compliant of medical devices. Also, ICMR 
facilitates the clinical validation of such devices already approved by Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board (AERB) and Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO), resulting in regulatory overlap creating an uneven protocol for 

111 
 
development of medical devices. The Committee observes that the current medical 
device registration process involves multiple organizations and ICMR has no role after 
AERB approval. Hence, the Committee strongly recommends a more simplified, single-
window system which would reduce timelines and improve transparency. 
 
4.11.10 The Committee observes that ICMR, in collaboration with Institute of Plasma 
Research (IPR), has developed and validated an indigenous AI-based tool (DeepCXR) 
for automated interpretation of chest X-rays. The Committee recommends that ICMR 
make such indigenous technology available throughout the country free of cost which 
would be a step towards accessible and affordable healthcare. Even while making 
progress towards developing indigenous technology, the Committee opines that our 
country still relies heavily on imported medical technologies and equipment such as 
MRI, CT scans, PET-CT, and LINAC systems, which are procured from international 
companies like Philips and Siemens. ICMR has acquiesces that certain component such 
as the X-ray tube (a part of the X-ray source) and the detector, which are integral to the 
handheld X-ray system developed by them were imported substantiates this fact. If the 
core component like, X-ray tube, HV tank, etc is being imported ICMR should refrain 
from claiming it as their own technology. The better way for ICMR would be to engage 
itself in depth research for indigenous production, design, and development of medical 
devices. The medical devices developed viz the portable x-ray should be completely 
indigenous including X-ray tube, HV tank. Medical innovation and products should not 
be an assembly of components to be cited as ‘Made in India’. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that ICMR should set up a benchmark for ‘Made in India’ 
initiatives and derive a protocol wherein ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ is encompassed on a 
true scale. In case ICMR has to go for compilation of medical devices, the protocol 
should be clearly highlighted on the dashboard. Having said that the Committee also 
recommends that ICMR should make maximum efforts to develop some mechanism to 
manufacture these machines in our medical device parks with 100 % percentage of 
indigenous value addition which is essential for regaining public trust in the field of AI. 
 
4.12 ICMR and Young Researchers 
 
4.12.1 ICMR has developed Impact of Research and Innovation Scale (ICMR-IRIS), which 
provides a standardized framework for multidimensional impact assessment. This approach 
converts diverse research outputs into a single metric termed Publication-Equivalent (PE). 
Impact is measured across indicators including peer-reviewed publications, highly cited 
research, contributions to clinical or public health guidelines, granted patents, development 
and commercialization of health technologies and evaluation studies supporting regulatory 
approval or procurement. Aggregated PE scores are further normalized as PE per year, per 
unit of funding, and per scientist-year to enable benchmarking.  
 
4.12.2 This framework ensures comprehensive evaluation of scientific, translational, 
technological, and policy outcomes of publicly funded research. Improving research 
indicators in the country requires sustained investment in skilled human resources and 
enhanced participation of young researchers. Under the HRD Scheme, the DHR places 
special focus on the youth pursuing undergraduate/postgraduate medicine and Ph.D. 

112 
 
programmes, as well as young faculty and women scientists with career breaks to build a 
strong pipeline of biomedical researchers comparable to global standards. 
 
4.12.3 To promote health research in the country, particularly among the youth, DHR has 
undertaken the following initiatives: 
 
(i) Targeted Support for Young Researchers: The HRD Scheme is primarily designed 
to benefit early-career biomedical researchers across medical colleges and research 
institutions, enabling them to develop research skills and scientific thinking at an 
early stage. 
(ii) Fellowships and International Exposure: DHR provides overseas fellowships and 
travel grant support to young scientists and researchers for short-term training 
abroad and participation in international conferences. This exposure helps them 
gain insights into cutting-edge global research practices. 
(iii) Encouraging Research Culture Among Students: By focusing on undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and doctoral students, the Scheme aims to inculcate scientific 
curiosity, promote hands-on research experience, and motivate youth to pursue 
long-term careers in biomedical research. 
4.12.4 Also, the new ICMR–AcSIR PhD Programme is expected to strengthen India’s 
clinical research ecosystem and foster indigenous innovation in medical devices and 
therapeutics by integrating clinicians into structured PhD training alongside biomedical and 
public health researchers. Following the ICMR–AcSIR MoU, all 27 ICMR Institutes and the 
Headquarters became affiliated academic centres, enabling 376 ICMR scientists to be 
recognised as faculty and nearly 298 medical scientists and biomedical students enrolled in 
PhD programmes, with an additional fifty clinical scientists from 11 ICMR CCoEs under the 
DHR–Young Faculty Scheme joined the programme. This initiative will build a cadre of 
clinician-scientists, enhance translational research capacity, and support technology 
development, contributing to self-reliance in health innovation. 
 
4.12.5 Further, ICMR is addressing gaps in structured mentorship by introducing formal 
coursework in research methodology, biostatistics, and publication ethics through ICMR-NIE 
(Chennai) and ICMR-NIMR (New Delhi) as part of the AcSIR PhD curriculum, with 
centralised annual examinations ensuring uniform standards. Additionally, protocol 
development workshops and related training programmes are being conducted to improve 
study design, ethical conduct, and scientific rigor, thereby shifting the academic culture from 
quantity-based outputs to quality-driven research. 
 
4.12.6 The Committee notes with appreciation the measures adopted by ICMR to 
promote health research among the youth of the country. Targeted support for Young 
Researchers for early-career biomedical researchers across medical colleges and 
research institutions, Fellowships & International Exposure to support young scientists 
and researchers for short-term training abroad and participation in international 
conferences; and Encouraging Research Culture Among Students focusing on 
undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral students are three initiatives the Committee 
has been appraised of. Further, the Committee notes that under the HRD Scheme, the 

113 
 
DHR places special focus on the youth pursuing undergraduate/postgraduate medicine 
and Ph.D. programmes, as well as young faculty and women scientists with career 
breaks to build a strong pipeline of biomedical researchers comparable to global 
standards. A new ICMR–AcSIR PhD Programme has been launched to strengthen 
India’s clinical research ecosystem and foster indigenous innovation in medical devices 
and therapeutics. Efforts are also on to address gaps in structured mentorship.  
 
4.12.7 To attract and engage the new generation to research is a critical initiative to 
ensure a continuum in Health Research. The Committee feels that it is important to 
promote students and researchers at all levels - from popularising bio sciences at higher 
secondary levels to handholding young individual and well as institutional researchers. 
Mentoring, especially at higher levels, is a key factor in producing skilled researchers 
and has to be given high priority and for this, making mentoring appealing cannot be 
ignored. The Committee wants DHR to devise appropriate initiatives to invite senior 
researchers and clinicians from both public as well as private spheres to mentoring and 
aim at forming a national mentorship grid. Targeted scholarships and small grants for 
researchers could be considered to earmark funds for the facilitation programme. The 
Committee also recommends internships at ICMR Institutes for students and young 
researchers can offer an opportunity to them to be part of real projects, while the 
Institutes also benefit.  
 
 4.12.8 The Committee also hold the firm view that assessment of outcomes based on the 
Publication-Equivalent(PE)Metric, allowing beyond short-term training opportunities 
abroad supported by fellowships, targeted outreach campaigns for underserved regions 
and institutions alongwith seed funding for medical colleges in underserved areas as 
well as effective feedback loop for review of the promotion programmes can be of 
immense help in this direction. 
 
4.13 World Trends in Health Research and ICMR 
 
4.13.1 The Committee wanted to know about the latest health research trends around the 
world and the role of DHR/ICMR in these areas of research. The DHR responded as under:  
 
Latest Global Health Research Trends 
 
1. AI-Driven Health Innovation: Artificial intelligence and machine learning are 
now central to epidemic surveillance, diagnostics, drug discovery, and 
personalized medicine. AI algorithms increasingly power real-time outbreak 
detection, predictive models, and health systems planning.  
2. Digital Health and Health Data Integration: Telemedicine, wearable sensors, 
digital health records, and secure interoperable data platforms are transforming 
care delivery, improving chronic disease monitoring and enabling decentralized 
clinical research models.  
3. Pandemic Preparedness and Early Warning Systems: Strengthened global 
surveillance and predictive models aim to detect novel pathogens early and 
accelerate countermeasure development.  

114 
 
4. Climate Change and Health Interactions: The health impact of climate change 
(vector-borne diseases, air pollution effects, disaster response) is a growing 
priority across research agendas.  
5. Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR): Research is firmly prioritizing AMR, studying 
stewardship programs, alternative therapies, and global collaboration to slow 
resistance trends. 
Role of DHR/ICMR 
1. AI and Digital Health: Indian Council of Medical Research is validating AI-
based tools for TB chest X-ray interpretation, diabetic retinopathy screening, and 
digital pathology, while strengthening national registries and structured datasets to 
enable predictive analytics and precision medicine applications. 
2. Digital Health and Health Data Integration: For data integration &. genomic 
surveillance, during COVID-19, ICMR supported integrated laboratory reporting 
systems and contributed to genomic surveillance platforms in collaboration with 
INSACOG, strengthening real-time outbreak analytics. 
3. Pandemic Preparedness and One Health: ICMR expanded laboratory 
networks, led national serosurveys, and strengthened genomic sequencing during 
COVID-19, and continues to support zoonotic disease research and AMR 
surveillance under a One Health framework. 
4. Disease Surveillance and Public Health Research: Through national cancer 
registries, NCD risk factor surveys, the India TB Research Consortium, and 
infectious disease surveillance networks, ICMR generates policy-relevant 
epidemiological evidence that directly informs national health programmes. 
5. Anti-Microbial Resistance: ICMR established the AMRSN in 2013, linking 
tertiary care hospitals across India to generate standardized, quality-assured data 
on resistance patterns in priority pathogens. The network produces periodic 
national AMR reports that inform India’s National Action Plan on AMR and 
hospital antibiotic policies. 
4.13.2 Further, the Committee sought to know about the major on-going research projects 
DHR is engaged with major international entities like WHO or private sector partners for 
collaborative research. The Department submitted that it has international collaborations in 
different exposure programs, contributing in organization of scientific events like Science, 
Technology and Innovation Conclave, International Science Festival tours of DHR scientists 
for advanced trainings like Leading Innovations at Imperial College in UK etc. A joint 
collaboration with the leading Health Science/Research Institute of the world, viz., National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) UK is also under process for capacity 
building of Centre for evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in 
India (HTAIn) attached office of DHR. In addition, DHR/ICMR have signed MoUs with 16 
foreign Organisations/Countries between 2021 and 2025.. Over the last five years, the ICMR 
institutes have demonstrated extensive collaborative research activity in the national and 
international levels. These include various collaborative projects including Regional 
Research Platform under PM-ABHIM scheme. Nationally, the institutes have coordinated on 
601 projects nationally and 70 projects internationally that resulted in 561 publications, and 
45 products. Commitments have been made for 79 projects nationally and 21 projects 

115 
 
internationally. The CD, NCD and RCN divisions have collectively collaborated on 100 
projects nationally and two projects internationally that resulted in 60 publications. 
4.13.3 Major ongoing research projects that are implemented under formal international 
cooperation agreements in priority areas of public health and biomedical research. 
These include collaborative research under research projects are in various areas such 
as under MoU with Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschafte.V. (DFG), Germany (areas: 
Toxicology, Neglected tropical diseases & Rare diseases); LoI with INSERM, France (areas: 
Diabetes & Metabolic disorders, Bioethics with focus on Ethics & regulatory issues of Gene 
editing techniques, Rare diseases); Implementing Arrangement with National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, USA (areas: 
diabetes research); MoU with Department of Biotechnology and International AIDS Vaccine 
Initiative, USA (areas: HIV, COVID-19, Tuberculosis and other emerging and infectious and 
neglected diseases); LoA with Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, USA (areas: 
Communicable diseases – Enteric and diarrheal diseases; Vector-borne diseases; Neglected 
tropical diseases; Pneumonia; Tuberculosis; Polio; HIV; Family Planning; Maternal, 
Newborn, and Child Health and Nutrition Research; Disease modeling; Artificial Intelligence 
and other advanced data analytics concerning health research; Telemedicine for rural/remote 
health improvement); MoI with Forte, Sweden (areas: Ageing and Health); MoU with Global 
Alliance for Chronic Diseases (areas: Control of diabetes and obesity; characterization, 
quantification of risk factors (tobacco and environmental pollution), chronic obstructive 
airways disease, cancer, cardiovascular disease and other disorders; and implementation 
research); MoU with African Union (areas: health research collaboration, HIV/AIDS, 
Tuberculosis, Cancer, Emerging and re-emerging infections, Vector control, Health 
Systems); MoU with Global Antibiotic Research and Development Partnership Foundation, 
Switzerland (areas: Anti-Microbial Resistance); LoI with Swiss National Science 
Foundation, Switzerland (areas: One Health); MoU with Drugs for Neglected Diseases 
initiative, Switzerland (areas: neglected diseases, communicable diseases and infectious 
diseases outbreaks); MoU with University of Oxford, United Kingdom (areas: infectious 
diseases commonly affecting socially marginalized groups and emerging health); LoI with 
National Institute for Health and Care Research, UK (areas: High-performance, affordable 
and cost-effective point of care diagnostics, including for AMR stewardship; Combination 
interventions for the prevention and treatment of cardiometabolic diseases including 
hypertension and diabetes); MoU with Department of Medical Services Thailand (areas: 
pharmacogenomics, vaccines, drug resistance diagnostic test, internet of things and artificial 
intelligence, emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases, genomic and precision 
medicine); MoU with Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, Norway (areas: 
vaccines against priority pathogens; Capacity strengthening of health personnel and 
researchers; epidemiological studies; Development of standards, assays and diagnostics; 
Development of an epidemiology data-driven prioritization process); LoI with Colombia 
(areas: build capacity and develop sustained cooperation for research areas of mutual interest 
that are of public health). 
4.13.4 The Committee takes into cognisance the latest trends in health research across 
the globe, as submitted by DHR, and how DHR and ICMR are pitching in with their 
initiatives in these cutting-edge areas. It is observed that ICMR is validating AI-based 

116 
 
tools for TB chest X-ray interpretation, diabetic retinopathy screening, and digital 
pathology, the Committee recommends that ICMR must make such indigenous 
technology available throughout the country which would ensure certainly a step 
towards accessible and affordable healthcare. The Committee also notes the major on-
going research projects DHR is engaged with international entities like WHO or private 
sector partners for collaborative research. In this regard, the Committee is pleased to 
note these ongoing research projects that are implemented under formal international 
cooperation agreements in priority areas of public health and biomedical research. 
4.13.5 The Committee feels that one of the areas DHR should prioritise is building 
capacity in AI ethics and related guidelines. International best practices may be 
factored in while doing this. One of the possible ultimate outcomes of this would be 
garnering trust of the world in our health innovations. Further, the Committee also 
favours climate-health research initiatives in collaboration with global partners on One 
Health, zoonosis, etc. Such steps would help us to be better prepared for outbreaks and 
position DHR as a torchbearer of resilient health research.  
 
4.13.6 Another aspect the Committee wants to highlight is the importance to involve 
and encourage getting young health researchers to foray into these frontier fields 
through fellowships and other appropriate supporting mechanisms. It also appears to 
the Committee that cultivating efficient public-private partnerships by incentivising the 
industry for pandemic preparedness technologies, such as co-developing affordable 
diagnostics and vaccines would be a prudent idea to equip the nation with the ability to 
deploy rapid countermeasures.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

117 
 
Chapter V 
Way Forward For DHR 
 
5.1 Strategic Plan of DHR (2024–29) 
 
5.1.1 DHR has formulated a comprehensive Strategic Plan 2024–29 aligned with the 
national vision of Viksit Bharat @2047. The strategic goals for the next 5–10 years for 
advancing health research in the country are outlined as follows: 
 
1. Promotion of Indigenous, Affordable, and Globally Competitive Health 
Technologies DHR aims to significantly enhance India’s capability in developing frontier 
health technologies through the following initiatives: 
 
(i) ‘First in the World’ Challenge: Funding support for 100 high-risk, high-reward 
research ideas to encourage disruptive innovations. 
(ii) Frontier Technologies: Advancing work in areas such as cell and gene therapy, 
synthetic organs, therapeutic vaccines, advanced robotics, and other emerging 
medical technologies. 
(iii) Section-8 Company (MIDAC): Establishment of the Medical Innovation 
Development and Assessment Corporation (MIDAC) to facilitate industry 
partnerships, development of clinical trial batches, technology transfer, and 
validation processes. 
(iv) Med-Tech Mitra: Providing end-to-end support to start-ups and MSMEs for 
medical device innovation and development. 
(v) Centres of Excellence (CoEs) at IITs: Strengthening research and innovation 
ecosystems through dedicated CoEs in premier technical institutes. 
 
2. Accelerated Solutions for Difficult and Resistant Health Challenges:- 
 
To address critical public health problems, DHR proposes: 
 
1. Increased grant allocations for priority areas such as anaemia, antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR), non-communicable diseases (NCDs), child development and 
malnutrition, and the health impacts of climate change. 
2. Promotion of Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) registered in the Clinical 
Trial Registry of India (CTRI). 
3. Development of implementation models to address complex health challenges 
more effectively. 
4. National Health Research Policy (NHRP): Formulation of a comprehensive 
policy to strengthen India's health research ecosystem. 
5. Transformation and modernization of existing ICMR institutes. 
6. Establishment of dedicated Institutes for Bacterial Infections and Child Health. 
 
3. Advancing Digital Health Research and Infrastructure 
 
DHR proposes to harness digital innovations through: 
 

118 
 
1. Creation of a National Gold Standard Data Repository for high-quality, 
interoperable health data. 
2. Establishment of the ICMR – National Institute of Digital Health Research to 
lead research in digital health systems and advanced analytics. 
 
4. Translating Research Evidence into Actionable Public Health Interventions 
DHR aims to ensure that scientific evidence translates into improved health 
outcomes through: 
 
1. Development of 25 optimized, evidence-based intervention packages for 
priority health issues. 
2. Expansion of Health Technology Assessment (HTA) and cost-effectiveness 
studies for decision-making. 
3. Strengthening the Centre for Guidelines to produce rigorous, evidence-based 
clinical and public health guidelines. 
4. Capacity enhancement of Centres of Excellence and MRU/MRHRUs for 
implementation research. 
 
5. Strengthened Surveillance Systems and Accelerated Medical Countermeasures 
To prepare for future health emergencies and emerging pathogens, DHR 
proposes: 
1. Expansion of environmental surveillance, strengthening a national network of 
BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories, and supporting the development of vaccines, 
monoclonal antibodies, and antiviral drugs. 
2. Establishment of a National Institute of One Health (NIOH) to integrate human, 
animal, and environmental health surveillance. 
3. Upgradation of the existing Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) 
into Integrated Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (IRDLs). 
 
6. Enhancing Global Standing of Indian Medical Research 
To ensure India becomes a global leader in health research, DHR outlines: 
1. Targeting placement of five Indian institutions within the top 5% of global 
medical research rankings. 
2. Expansion of MD–PhD fellowships to increase the number of physician-
scientists. 
3. Introduction of Patent Mitra for handholding innovators in patent filing and 
intellectual property support. 
 
5.1.2 Further, the Department share the major policy decisions adopted by them in the last 
few years to expand its network of research institutions and collaborations to achieve self-
reliance in health innovations. DHR’s focus has been on expansion of research infrastructure 
during last 5 years. For this, it has sanctioned 38 MRUs, 11 MRHRUs and 15 DIAMOnDS 
centres in medical colleges and in proximity of Rural Health Centres in different states/UTs.  
 
5.1.3 During the XV Finance Commission period, a key mandate of DHR was the strategic 
expansion of the Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) network to strengthen 
national capacity for epidemic preparedness and outbreak response. The approved target was 

119 
 
to establish 42 new VRDLs across the country. To date, 44 VRDLs have been sanctioned, 
including 1 Regional VRDL, 2 State-level VRDLs, and 41 Medical College-level VRDLs. 
This expansion has significantly strengthened the nationwide laboratory network, enhancing 
India’s capabilities in disease surveillance, early outbreak detection, and pandemic 
preparedness, thereby contributing to self-reliance in health research and diagnostics. 
 
5.1.4 In alignment with the vision set forth by NITI Aayog, ICMR in collaboration with the 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), established the ‘MedTech Mitra’ 
platform. The platform is being utilised by scientists, start-ups, industry, academia and 
students for healthcare prototypes developed by them. Collaborative and focused research and 
development for pandemic preparedness has been initiated through the National One Health 
Mission for which DHR is the nodal department and National Institute of One Health has been 
functionalized under the aegis of ICMR. 
5.1.5 A new Faculty of Medical Research (FMR) has been created through AcSIR -ICMR 
collaboration. In the first year, 140 PhD students were enrolled in FMR. Medical scientists 
from ICMR have also enrolled for PhD in FMR, in addition to those from outside.ICMR- 
Research Infrastructure Sharing Ecosystem (I-RISE) Portal and policy provides a structured 
overview for utilizing the research facilities in ICMR laboratories for research and 
development purposes. These ICMR facilities, including high-tech infrastructure in Tier II 
cities, can be utilized by researchers from medical colleges, universities, other institutions, 
startups, and MSME industries. 
5.1.6 Apart from this, DHR's also updated the Committee on its vision for improving 
research equity, particularly in underserved rural and tribal areas. The major achievements and 
challenges in attaining the vision included sanctioning of 39 MRHRUs in India, typically 
located near existing state health facilities like Primary Health Centres (PHCs) or Community 
Health Centres (CHCs) to create research infrastructure at the periphery to facilitate the 
transfer of modern health technologies and research outcomes to rural populations. These units 
operate in an "operational research mode" to test the applicability and feasibility of new 
technologies and interventions in a rural context. Each MRHRU receives significant funding 
for infrastructure, equipment, and an annual grant for manpower and research activities, which 
includes recruiting staff on a contractual basis. DHR emphasises closer integration and 
coordination with programmes of the Department of Health & Family Welfare (DoH&FW) 
and other scientific departments to ensure that research findings are translated into deliverable 
products and implemented effectively within the existing public health system. 
 
5.1.7 Health Technology Assessment (HTAIn): Established under the DHR, HTAIn 
conducts studies on the cost-effectiveness, clinical effectiveness, and safety of health programs 
and technologies to support evidence-based decision-making and policy formulations, 
ensuring value gained from the health budget and promoting standardised, cost-effective 
interventions that can be scaled in underserved areas. 
 
5.1.8 DHR has planned several targeted outreach programmes to enhance participation 
from medical colleges in Tier 2/3 cities, institutions in the Northeast Region, and government 
institutions that traditionally submit fewer applications. These initiatives include: 
 

120 
 
(i) Hand holding support will be extended to applicants through the organization of 
capacity building initiatives, including grant writing workshops and training 
programmes on research methodologies. 
(ii) Webinars will be conducted on a regular basis to disseminate information on open 
calls under the HRD Scheme. During these sessions, the HRD Scheme team will 
actively engage with applicants, providing clarifications and addressing queries 
related to the schemes and the application process. This will be facilitated through 
one to one interactions within the webinar platform, ensuring that applicants receive 
direct guidance and support. 
(iii) The communication channels of the ICMR, including ICMR radio and institutional 
networks, are being actively leveraged to disseminate information about the HRD 
Scheme.  
(iv) As a continuous activity, a dedicated session on the provisions and opportunities 
available under DHR schemes is being incorporated into all DHR supported 
workshops conducted in the Northeast region. 
(v) The existing networks of MRUs, MRHRUs, and VRDLs will be utilised for outreach 
and awareness generation for disseminating information, mobilizing applications, and 
fostering engagement with medical colleges and research institutions across the 
country. 
5.1.9 DHR also enumerate its role in India's goal of achieving Universal Health Coverage 
(UHC) through research-driven policies. At the core of DHR’s contribution is its oversight of 
the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country’s apex biomedical research 
body. Through ICMR’s nationwide network of institutes and field units, evidence is 
generated on communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases, maternal and child health, 
rare diseases, and emerging infections. This research directly informs national health 
programmes, clinical protocols, vaccination strategies, and disease control initiatives. By 
aligning scientific priorities with India’s disease burden, DHR ensures that public health 
policy is grounded in indigenous evidence. 
I. Cost Effectiveness of Medical Technologies through Health Technology 
Assessment 
A defining contribution of DHR to UHC lies in institutionalizing priority setting 
through Health Technology Assessment in India. By generating cost-effectiveness and 
budget impact analyses, HTA informs decisions on which technologies, drugs, and 
procedures should be financed through publicly funded schemes such as Ayushman Bharat - 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana. HTAIn provided cost evidence for 1573 Health benefit 
packages and supported revision and rationalization of 857 Health Benefit Packages under 
the AB-PMJAY. HTA also recommended that the cost of these packages may be utilized by 
CGHS and other insurance companies. This ensures that limited public resources are directed 
toward interventions that deliver maximum health gains and financial risk protection. The 
development of standardized HTA methods and the creation of Regional Resource Centres 
have further strengthened transparent and evidence-based decision-making at both national 
and state levels. 
Taken together, DHR’s role in India’s UHC agenda is not that of a service delivery 
agency, but of an enabler and steward of evidence. By generating robust scientific data, 

121 
 
strengthening infrastructure and human capital, standardizing care, and institutionalizing 
economic evaluation, DHR ensures that the expansion of health coverage in India is not only 
broader but also smarter, more equitable, and financially sustainable. 
II. Strengthening Public Health Research Infrastructure 
Beyond knowledge generation, DHR invests in strengthening research infrastructure 
within Government Medical Colleges and public institutions. The establishment of advanced 
diagnostic laboratories, genomics facilities, biorepositories, and clinical research units 
improves access to quality diagnostics and supports translational research. These investments 
enhance the public sector’s ability to respond to emerging health challenges while improving 
service delivery capacity. Through Human Resource Development (HRD) Scheme, DHR 
builds indigenous capacity in biomedical research, clinical trials, epidemiology, and health 
systems research, ensuring sustained availability of technical expertise required for evidence-
informed governance of UHC. 
III. Development of Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines 
DHR also strengthens the quality dimension of UHC through evidence-based 
guidelines developed in collaboration with experts across the country. These guidelines aim 
to reduce unwarranted variation in care, promote rational drug use, and support uniform 
standards across public facilities. Standardization is essential in a large and diverse health 
system, particularly when financial protection schemes depend on clearly defined packages 
of care. 
As part of understating the hurdles by DHR in attaining its visions, the Committee  
sought to know the main challenges faced by the DHR in terms of infrastructure, human 
resources, and inter-departmental coordination. The Department responded that in case of 
MRHRUs, there is a delay by the State Government in allotment of land for the purpose of 
construction of MRHRU building. There are challenges involved in hiring requisite 
manpower at remote locations in rural/tribal areas. Delays in opening of TSA accounts for 
small research grants and relative lack of specialized agencies in India for construction of 
high biosafety labs are some major challenges faced during PM-ABHIM scheme 
implementation.  
 
5.1.10 On the recommendations/ suggestions of DHR to bridge the shortage of researchers in 
the country and encourage more students towards studying core science, thereby promoting 
more scientific minds, DHR replied as below:- 
 
5.1.11 There is a critical need to bridge the gap between biomedical research and clinical 
practice to enable effective integration of research insights into patient care. Strengthening 
this linkage is essential for advancing biomedical research, fostering collaboration between 
clinicians and researchers, and driving innovation in healthcare. In this direction, DHR has 
started Medical PhD program focusing on developing clinician-scientists through structured 
mentoring, training in research methodology, and exposure to advanced research techniques, 
ensuring participants can continue as active researchers and secure competitive grants in the 
future.  
 

122 
 
 
Other suggestions include- 
(i) Strengthening R&D with the new scheme like First in the World Challenge, where 
startups are made eligible to apply and compete for research grants from ICMR.  
(ii) VAIBHAV Summit: Incentivises scientists and diaspora for "brain gain" and circular 
migration. 
(iii) Enhanced R&D Ecosystem: Investing in world-class infrastructure, labs, and 
computing facilities to match global standards. 
(iv) Improved Career Prospects: Developing clear career paths, mentorship, and 
competitive compensation packages, especially in tech and academia. 
 
5.1.12  The Department placed before the Committee the ways through which research 
indicators can be improved in the country in comparison to other developed countries, 
especially by promoting health research amongst the youth. On these lines, ICMR developed 
the Impact of Research and Innovation Scale (ICMR-IRIS), which provides a standardized 
framework for multidimensional impact assessment. This approach converts diverse research 
outputs into a single metric termed Publication-Equivalent (PE). Impact is measured across 
indicators including peer-reviewed publications, highly cited research, contributions to 
clinical or public health guidelines, granted patents, development and commercialization of 
health technologies, and evaluation studies supporting regulatory approval or procurement. 
Aggregated PE scores are further normalized as PE per year, per unit of funding, and per 
scientist-year to enable benchmarking. This framework ensures comprehensive evaluation of 
scientific, translational, technological, and policy outcomes of publicly funded research. 
 
5.1.13 Improving research indicators in the country requires sustained investment in skilled 
human resources and enhanced participation of young researchers. Under the HRD Scheme, 
the DHR places special focus on the youth pursuing medical undergraduate, postgraduate, 
and Ph.D. programmes, as well as young faculty and women scientists with career breaks to 
build a strong pipeline of biomedical researchers comparable to global standards. 
 
To promote health research in the country, particularly among the youth, DHR has 
undertaken the following initiatives: 
 
(i) Targeted Support for Young Researchers: The HRD Scheme is primarily designed 
to benefit early-career biomedical researchers across medical colleges and research 
institutions, enabling them to develop research skills and scientific thinking at an 
early stage. 
(ii) Fellowships and International Exposure: DHR provides overseas fellowships and 
travel grant support to young scientists and researchers for short-term training 
abroad and participation in international conferences. This exposure helps them 
gain insights into cutting-edge global research practices. 
(iii) Encouraging Research Culture Among Students: By focusing on undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and doctoral students, the Scheme aims to inculcate scientific 
curiosity, promote hands-on research experience, and motivate youth to pursue 
long-term careers in biomedical research. 

123 
 
5.1.14 The Committee notes that DHR has formulated a comprehensive Strategic Plan 
2024-29 aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @ 2047 under which the following 6 
focus areas have been identified – 
 
(i) Promotion of Indigenous, Affordable and Globally Competitive Health 
Technologies; 
(ii) Accelerated Solutions for Difficult and Resistant Health Challenges; 
(iii) Advancing Digital Health research and Infrastructure; 
(iv) Translating Research Evidence into actionable Public Health Interventions; 
(v) Strengthened Surveillance Systems and Accelerated Medical 
Countermeasures; and 
(vi) Enhancing Global Standing of Indian Medical Research. 
 
5.1.15 The Committee finds theses identified core areas to be potential drivers of 
progress in Health sector that are aimed at self-reliance, solutions for health problems 
of future, accelerating innovation, improving deliver and positioning India as a global 
leader. It is going to be a demanding task that warrants meticulous planning and 
execution through different vehicles. Establishment of MIDAC, Med-Tech Mitra, CoEs, 
setting up of National Gold Standard Data Repository, expansion of HTA, 
augmentation of MRUs and MRHRUs, National Institute of Digital Health Research, 
Establishment of a National Institute of One Health, formation of Integrated Research 
& Diagnostic Laboratories, introduction of Patent Mitra inter alia are defining these 
drivers. The Committee strongly recommends in this direction the formulation of a 
well-defined and updated National Health Research Policy (NHRP) as guiding factor to 
embark upon this ambitious task.  The Committee also is of the firm opinion that 
distinguishing health research as one of the National priorities is another unavoidable 
step to embellish the pursuit.  
 
5.1.16 As emphasised by DHR, it is imperative to establish closer integration and 
coordination with programmes of the Department of Health & Family Welfare 
(D/oH&FW) and other scientific departments to ensure that research findings are 
translated into deliverable products. But the prime driver of all the initiatives shall 
remain ICMR. The Committee would like to appreciate the effort to create a new 
Faculty of Medical Research (FMR) through AcSIR-ICMR collaboration, as ultimately, 
we need human minds to lead us. Another matter of high interest to the Committee is 
the role of DHR in India's goal of achieving Universal Health Coverage (UHC) through 
research-driven policies, which will be pivoted by ICMR and ably supported by 
HTAIn. 
5.1.17 The Committee has been made aware of the main hurdles in the path towards 
attainment of the Viksit Bharat Goals. As per DHR, there is a critical need to bridge the 
gap between biomedical research and clinical practice to enable effective integration of 
research insights into patient care. In this direction, DHR has started Medical PhD 
program focusing on developing clinician-scientists. The Committee notice that ICMR 
has developed the Impact of Research and Innovation Scale (ICMR-IRIS), which 
provides a standardized framework for multidimensional impact assessment. This 
approach converts diverse research outputs into a single metric termed Publication-
Equivalent (PE). The Committee also note that to promote health research in the 
country, particularly among the youth, DHR has undertaken measures like Targeted 

124 
 
Support for Young Researchers, Fellowships and International Exposure to young 
scientists, Encouraging Research Culture among Students by focusing on 
undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral students, etc. Further, the Committee is 
appreciative of the unique ‘First-in-the-World Challenge’, inspired by Chandrayan-3 
landing, making India the first country to do so. This initiative holds the promise of 
creating technologies, products, or solutions that are truly ‘first in the world.’ 
Accordingly, the Committee are extending its firm support to these endeavours and 
expects that DHR would be able to back up these initiatives with the requisite financial 
and infrastructural support. With regard to ‘First-in-the-World Challenge’, the 
Committee recommend that there should be prescribed criteria/parameter for selecting 
projects and allocating funds under the said category of research. 
5.2 Research on Traditional and Integrative Medicine Practices  
 
5.2.1 Even when the nation is turning towards AI for finding solutions in healthcare and 
research, traditional and alternative medicines hold its sacred place in the sphere of 
medicines. Accordingly, measures have to be taken to ensure that research on traditional and 
integrative medicine practices is conducted with rigorous scientific standards, allowing for 
evidence-based integration with modern medicine. DHR have taken many steps towards this 
like signing of the Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with the Ministry of AYUSH on May 
11, 2023, ICMR and the Ministry of AYUSH established various joint working groups 
consisting of scientists and heads of institutions from both sides (ICMR and CCRAS, 
Ministry of AYUSH). All major decisions and any modifications to programs are made with 
approval during meetings co-chaired by the two Secretaries. The progress of programmes, as 
well as the planning and execution of studies, are collaboratively managed in working group 
meetings overseen by the heads of ICMR divisions and the Deputy Director General (DDG) 
of the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) from the Ministry of 
AYUSH. 
 
5.2.2  Subsequently, DHR also submitted to the Committee that a collaboration has been 
made with Ministry of AYUSH and Five AYUSH-ICMR Advanced Centres for Integrative 
Health Research have been setup at four AIIMS. ICMR also has dedicated National Institute 
of Traditional Medicine (NITM) in Belagavi to advancing the research of traditional 
medicine in India. Established with the vision of integrating traditional knowledge systems 
with modern scientific approaches, ICMR-NITM has undertaken various cutting-edge 
research projects fostering innovation and promoting evidence-based practices in traditional 
medicine for the benefit of public health. The following measures are employed by ICMR to 
encourage scientific rigour in research on traditional and integrative medicine: 
 
a) Investigators and staff are well-trained and knowledgeable in Good Clinical Practices 
(GCP).  
b) Study plans are supported by a clear and appropriate rationale, with well- defined and 
clearly articulated study objectives.  
c) To account for confounders and effect modifiers related to the Traditional (Ayush) 
interventions being evaluated, the study population is selected using stringent inclusion 
and exclusion criteria.  

125 
 
d) Sample size calculations are performed using appropriate statistical methods to ensure 
that the study has sufficient power.  
e) A comparative or control group is included, utilising either standard care treatment or a 
placebo. 
f) All subjects are randomised to prevent selection and treatment bias. 
g) Whenever possible, double blinding is implemented for both patients and investigators, 
or single blinding for patients. 
h) A third treatment arm, which combines standard treatment with traditional medicine, is 
maintained for integration when necessary. 
i) For the evaluation of efficacy and safety of interventions, standard modern tools that are 
objective in nature are used as outcome parameters. 
j) Comprehensive methodological details for each study parameter are provided to support 
transparency and reproducibility in research on traditional and integrative medicine. 
k) All adverse events are meticulously recorded, including their intensity, type, and 
frequency, to ensure safety and enhance confidence in the integrity of the study. 
l) Protocols are reviewed and modified by the Protocol Development and Selection 
Committee, which comprises a team of subject experts from relevant areas. 
m) Studies are initiated only after obtaining IRB/EC approval and in strict accordance with 
applicable regulatory guidelines to ensure adherence to scientific and regulatory 
standards. 
n) Ayush products under study are of standard quality, accompanied by a certificate of 
analysis, and are prepared in a GMP-certified manufacturing facility. 
o) Investigators and staff are thoroughly trained in GCP. 
p) Sample handling and analysis are conducted in either NABL-accredited laboratories or 
according to good laboratory practice guidelines. 
q) Data recording, data capture, and record keeping are done using standard software or 
digital tools. 
r) Study sites are equipped with all necessary infrastructure and facilities to ensure the 
smooth completion of the study. 
s) A statistical plan is provided for data analysis. 
5.2.3  As part of understanding the progress of research leads of valid AYUSH remedies 
translated into tangible health products, the Committee sought from DHR the findings of two 
institutions, i.e, of National Institution of Traditional Medicines (NITM) and Tribal Health 
Research Forum (THRF). 
 
a) National Institution of Traditional Medicines (NITM) 
 
5.2.4  According to DHR, NITM, Belagavi is working on various aspects of traditional 
medicines from both codified and non-codified systems including their scientific validation. 
The Institute documented the ethnomedicinal practices and the results have been compiled 
into a Database on ethnomedicinal plants of the Western Ghats (https://nitmmedplantsdb.in/). 
Selected leads from these practices are being taken for scientific validation. Meantime, the 
institute is also working on selected Ayurvedic formulations for their safety and efficacy. The 
following are the Traditional Medicine formulations, which are under final stages of 
validation (Clinical Trials) at ICMR-NITM: 
 
(i) Herbal formulation (an ointment) for the management of diabetic foot ulcers: 
Under multicentric clinical trial 

126 
 
(ii) Herbal topical application (a Gel) for Osteoarthritis: Under multicentric clinical 
trial 
(iii) Herbal formulation (a lotion) for dermatophytes: Under multicentric clinical trial 
(v) Herbal formulation (extract tablet) for reduction of adverse events of 
chemotherapeutic agents in cancer therapy: Under multicentric clinical trial. 
 
The following are the Ayush practices being evaluated at ICMR-NITM: 
 
(i) Ayush-GMH as add-on to Vitamin E in Grade I and II Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver 
Disease (NAFLD): A Double-Blind Randomized Placebo Controlled Clinical 
Trial 
 
(ii) Triphala as an Add-on Intervention for Sustained Weight Loss in Overweight 
and Obesity: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial 
 
(iii) Integrative Therapy of Drakshavaleha with Oral Iron Folic Acid Supplements in 
Management of Mild to Moderate Iron Deficiency Anaemia in Women of 
reproductive age group: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
 
(iv) PunarnavadiMandura alone and in combination with Drakshavaleha compared 
to iron folic acid in the treatment of moderate iron deficiency anaemia among 
non- pregnant women of reproductive age group: a community-based three arm 
multicentre randomized controlled trial 
 
b) Tribal Health Research Forum (THRF)  
 
5.2.5  In August 2010, ICMR initiated the “Tribal Health Research Forum” (THRF) at 
National Institute of Research in Tribal Health (formerly Regional Medical Research Centre 
for Tribals) NIRTH, Jabalpur, which brought together different Institutes that work on and 
for tribal populations in their own regions, on a single platform, with the primary objective to 
improve the health of tribals. Under this THRF, set up by ICMR involving 15-16 Institutes / 
Centers (located in different regions of India with health research mandate) along with some 
of the major Divisions at ICMR Hqrs. as partners, in order to facilitate the work to be carried 
out as different institutes / centers of ICMR, 10 Tribal Health Research Units (THRUs) were 
established by ICMR in two phases. 
 
Phase - I THRUs: Key Achievements / Contributions to the National Health Research 
Programmes / Policies: 
 
Through these THRUs, the Institutes / Centres were strengthened to carry out the 
research activities on the tribal health issues and have supported Govt. of India by 
generating evidences for policy changes and contributed in various ways in the 
National Health Research Programmes, as indicated below: 
 
Hemaoglobinopathies:  
 
1. Established Sickle Cell diagnostic Clinics in 27 tribal districts of MP and in a 
remote tribal district Baster in CG (NIRTH, Jabalpur in collaboration with 
State Government). 
2. Conducted regional training workshops / training of Master Trainers on 
diagnosis of SCD and management (NIRTH jointly with MOTA) - Inducted in 
19 States. More than 1.5 crore tribal school children screened. 

127 
 
3. Established facilities for newborn screening for SCD, prenatal diagnosis of β-
thalassemia syndrome, sickle cell disorders and micro mapping of G6PD 
deficiency, in Madhya Pradesh, Assam and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 
 
Malaria: 
1. Developed evidence-based malaria intervention model (Dindori) for control of 
forest and tribal malaria. The model up-scaled to make a model in malaria 
elimination through PPP mode in Mandla district of MP through MEDP 
project. 
2. Prepared “Tribal Malaria Action Plan” as a part of NHM - Contributed to 
Policy formulation for Malaria-in-Pregnancy. 
3. Evaluated bivalent malaria rapid kits (RDTs) – Inducted into National 
programme. CDSCO/DCGI approved NIRTH for QA of malaria RDTs. 
4. Monitoring therapeutic efficacy in malaria endemic tribal regions of the 
country to support the National programme. 
5. Showed a sharp decrease in Malaria incidence in Car Nicobar since the 
Tsunami (API decreased from 105 in 2005 to <1 in 2013). 
 
Tuberculosis: 
1. Several studies identified and reported very high TB prevalence (upto 3000 / 
1,00,000) among Saharias, a PVTG in India. 
2. Intervention study among the Saharia tribe demonstrated decline in 
Tuberculosis (TB) prevalence. An intensified TB control program (Research 
cum Intervention study) - Launched in collaboration with the MP State 
Government. 
3. Repeated surveys conducted showed a declining prevalence of pulmonary 
tuberculosis in Car Nicobar, which is attributed to the better socio-economic 
status and housing brought about the post-tsunami reconstruction and 
rehabilitation initiatives. 
 
Fluorosis: 
Developed Universally accepted Nutritional supplementation and safe drinking 
water-based Intervention Model for Fluorosis Prevention and Control 
developed. 
 
Lymphatic Filariasis: 
 
Made and implemented a programme for elimination of lymphatic filariasis 
from its only focus in India viz. the Nancowry of islands. The programme has 
almost achieved its objective of bringing down the mf rate <1%. 
5.2.6. According to the Committee, millions rely on traditional systems like Ayurveda, 
herbal remedies, for primary care, especially for NCDs. The WHO Global Traditional 
Medicine Strategy 2025–2034, adopted by the Seventy-eighth World Health Assembly, 
aims to ensure universal access to safe and effective traditional, complementary, and 
integrative medicine (TCIM). From the Committee’s view point, the merits of traditional 
medicines include primarily cost-effectiveness, limited hospitalizations, reducing over-
reliance on pharmaceuticals and, last but not the least, the fact that traditional practices 
represent centuries of accumulated wisdom. But a host of demerits overshadow the 
benefits. The concerns of the Committee related to Traditional and Integrative Medicine 
practices are that these practices are largely individualized, generates unreliable or 
insufficient data, research inadvertently leads to pseudoscientific claims, presence of 

128 
 
heavy metals and pesticides in herbal products, inconsistent quality, methodological 
hurdles lowering investment returns, etc. All these factors combined with lack of 
training, governance, and patient awareness can erode trust in traditional healthcare 
systems. The Committee extends all its support to the DHR initiatives with Ministry of 
AYUSH in establishing Five AYUSH-ICMR Advanced Centres for Integrative Health 
Research (AI-ACHIR) at four AIIMS. The Committee recommends that both 
DHR/ICMR and Ministry of Ayush adopt propitious steps to address the concerns 
expressed by the Committee and take pro-active steps forsafe integration oftraditional 
and alternative medicinesinto mainstream healthcare systems. 
5.3 AI in Health 
5.3.1 With the rapid integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI), digital health platforms and 
data-driven research into healthcare delivery and public health programmes, the Department 
of Health Research (DHR) considers digital health research to be a priority area requiring 
sustained and predictable financial support. AI-enabled healthcare technologies such as 
clinical decision-support systems, digital diagnostics, digital screening and surveillance tools, 
disease prediction models, population surveillance analytics and real-world evidence 
platforms are increasingly essential for improving efficiency of national health programmes 
and early disease detection and optimisation of healthcare expenditure. Accordingly, DHR 
expects that the Ministry of Finance may support a structured expansion of budgetary 
allocations specifically earmarked for digital and AI-enabled health research. 
5.3.2 DHR has already planned strengthening of national digital and translational research 
capacity through programmes such as establishment of Infectious Disease Research & 
Diagnostic Laboratories for surveillance and outbreak response, the NIRMAN network for 
indigenous medical device development and clinical evaluation, creation of a national-grade 
data centre with AI/ML and cybersecurity infrastructure across ICMR institutes through PM-
ABHIM and a National Virus Resource Facility to support vaccine, diagnostic and 
therapeutic research; accordingly, the Department seeks sustained and dedicated budgetary 
support from the Ministry of Finance to scale such digital, AI-enabled and preparedness-
oriented research initiatives. 
5.3.3 Requirements for ICMR-NIRDHDS: To attain its objectives of accelerating research 
for development and evaluation of Digital and AI based solutions in health, the institute will 
benefit from a state of the art building infrastructure with high performance/ super computing 
facilities. Currently, the institute is actively exploring options for enhanced space and 
infrastructure to expand its scientific and technical workforce, thereby enabling the uptake of 
large-scale collaborative studies in digital health research. Digital health research is an 
emerging yet rapidly evolving interdisciplinary field that demands a diverse array of 
specialized skills. To strengthen its scientific capacity and address this expanding domain, 
the institute plans to recruit approximately 20 additional scientists over the next few years. 
Currently, the institute has three Scientists on board, with two more expected to join in the 
near future. 
5.3.4 Therefore, DHR’s considered expectation from the Ministry of Finance is not merely 
incremental increases in routine funding, but a mission-mode, ring-fenced financial support 
framework for AI and digital health research covering infrastructure, validation, regulatory 
evaluation, human resource development and implementation research. Such support would 

129 
 
enable evidence-based adoption of emerging technologies, promote indigenous innovation 
and ultimately improve efficiency, accessibility and affordability of healthcare delivery in the 
country. 
5.3.5 Further, the Committee’s query DHR on its plan to integrate emerging technologies 
like AI, genomics, and big data into its research framework. In reply, DHR stated that DHR/ 
ICMR plans to integrate AI, genomics, and big data into its research framework by (i) 
strengthening dedicated institutional capacity for digital health and data science, (ii) building 
enabling platforms and standards for trustworthy data use, and (iii) accelerating translation 
through targeted funding, regulatory handholding, and structured Intellectual Property (IP) 
support. 
5.3.6 A key step is the establishment of ICMR–National Institute for Research in Digital 
Health and Data Science (ICMR-NIRDHDS), which was repurposed from the erstwhile 
National Institute for Research in Medical Statistics (NIMS) in April 2024. The institute is 
mandated with research in development, evaluation and implementation of high impact and 
affordable digital and AI based health solutions. Development of India-specific, accurate AI 
algorithms, which depend on robust, secure, and representative health data systems that 
safeguard privacy while enabling responsible innovation. To address this need, the Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has established the Health Research Data Repository, 
providing researchers with access to standardized, interoperable, and ethically governed 
health research data. Equally critical is rigorous evaluation and evidence generation to ensure 
that AI solutions demonstrate real-world effectiveness, safety, and equity. In this regard, 
ICMR’s National Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science (NIRDHDS) is 
collaborating with clinical, technical, and governmental partners to build a network for 
systematic technical, clinical, economic, and implementation evaluations of AI health 
technologies. ICMR has further strengthened the translational research ecosystem through 
initiatives such as MedTech Mitra and Patent Mitra, which support innovators from 
validation to regulatory and intellectual property guidance. 
5.3.7 For genomics and high-dimensional biomedical data, ICMR is strengthening compute 
and analytic capacity to support rapid processing of large sequencing datasets and 
downstream applications such as outbreak investigation and AI-enabled discovery. For 
example, ICMR’s NAKSHATRA high-performance computing cluster for virological 
research is intended to enable faster analysis of complex genomic and bioinformatics data 
and support more efficient outbreak response and preparedness. 
5.3.8 ICMR is pushing emerging technologies into the translational pipeline through 
structured intramural and extramural funding mechanisms, including dedicated MedTech 
development grant calls.To ensure that innovations are protected and transferred effectively, 
ICMR has also operationalized “Medical Innovations Patent Mitra,” which offers services 
such as patentability assessment, patent filing support, prosecution assistance, and facilitation 
of technology transfer to industry partners. 
5.3.9 The Committee, thereafter, wished to know about the assessment of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) penetration in diagnostics in India. DHR submitted that AI is being 
integrated into various diagnostic processes, particularly in medical imaging (radiology, 
pathology), to enhance speed, accuracy, and efficiency. Government initiatives like the 
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) and the National Health Mission are creating the 

130 
 
digital infrastructure and regulatory frameworks to support the integration of AI. ICMR has 
also released ethical guidelines for AI use in healthcare.  
 
5.3.10 As part of understanding emerging technologies, the Committee asked about the steps 
taken by DHR to enhance electronic project management system (E- PMS) to streamline 
submission and monitoring of projects under its schemes like HRD, VRDLs (Epidemic 
Labs), MRHRUs & MRUs. The Department responded by stating that under the HRD, 
VRDL, MRU, and MRHRU schemes, integrated digital platforms have been developed to 
strengthen governance, transparency, and evidence-based programme oversight. The HRD 
Scheme now supports end-to-end digital management of fellowships, training, and 
institutional capacity-building initiatives, with automated workflows for proposal 
submission, expert review, funding approvals, and comprehensive reporting and analytics to 
support policy and programme monitoring. 
 
5.3.11 The VRDL Network has been digitally enabled for centralised oversight of laboratory 
infrastructure, diagnostics capacity, manpower, research outputs, and training activities, with 
interactive dashboards supporting quality assurance and network performance monitoring. 
Similarly, the MRU and MRHRU schemes are supported through standardised KPI-based 
monitoring, institutional profiling, geospatial mapping, and structured reporting frameworks 
to track infrastructure utilisation and research outcomes. Data governance mechanisms, 
including periodic data freezing and enhanced reporting structures, ensure data integrity and 
policy-relevant analytics. These enhancements are ongoing and iterative in nature, with 
continuous upgrades planned to further strengthen functionality, interoperability, and user 
experience. 
 
5.3.12 VRDL Scheme: The e-PMS portal has been developed and operationalized to enable 
online submission and real-time monitoring of utilization certificates, progress reports, 
training and capacity-building activities, infrastructure status, manpower details, and other 
laboratory activities. The portal provides a centralized digital platform for tracking physical 
and financial progress, and fund releases to VRDLs are made based on expenditure and 
performance data captured through the system, thereby enhancing transparency, efficiency, 
and accountability. 
 
5.3.13 HRD Scheme: The steps taken to enhance electronic project management system 
(EPMS) to streamline submission and monitoring of projects under HRD scheme are as 
follows: 
Submission: 
- Integration of new components with existing databases to maintain seamless 
data flow.  
Integration of new portals into the DHR ePMS:  
(i) Short Term Studentship 
(ii) MD Thesis Support 
(iii) Post Doctoral Fellowship 
(iv) UC/SOE and report uploading functionality, enabling applicants to upload 
annual reports, UC, and SOE in the ePMS portal. 
(v) Functionality of online technical evaluation by TEC experts. 

131 
 
Monitoring: 
(i) Monitoring dashboard on various metrices of all the components of HRD 
scheme. 
(ii) Reviewed and addressed more than 1500 consisting of technical, general, 
administrative and financial queries received on the ePMS portal. 
 
The HRD Scheme Reports have been strengthened with the implementation of the 
auto-fetch master sheet data feature. This measure ensures systematic retrieval and timely 
updating of data, thereby enhancing efficiency and reducing manual intervention. 
 
5.3.14 Further, DHR submitted before the Committee the major challenges in AI and Digital 
Health Integration which are as follows:  
 
(i) Data Quality, Privacy, and Security: AI models require vast amounts of high-
quality, diverse, and representative data for training and validation.  
(ii) Regulatory and Ethical Concerns: The rapidly evolving nature of AI technology 
outpaces traditional regulatory frameworks for medical devices.  
(iii) Interoperability and Integration: A lack of standardised data protocols hinders 
effective data exchange between different systems and providers. 
(iv) Clinical Validation and Reliability: Rigorous, real-world validation through 
prospective studies and randomised controlled trials (RCTs) is needed to 
demonstrate a tool's clinical and economic utility and ensure it is safe and reliable 
for diverse populations. 
(v) Workforce Skills and Acceptance: There is a significant shortage of healthcare 
professionals with expertise in AI and data science.  
(vi) DHR, often in collaboration with the National Health Authority (NHA) and ICMR, 
is addressing these challenges through initiatives:  
(vii) Establishing Regulatory and Ethical Frameworks: DHR adheres to existing national 
digital and data protection frameworks, including the ICMR's ethical guidance for 
biomedical AI, the IT Act 2000, and the Digital Personal Data Protection Act.  
(viii) Developing an Interoperable Digital Ecosystem: Through the Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABDM), the government is building a national digital health 
infrastructure that uses a unique Ayushman Bharat Health Account (ABHA) ID for 
citizens to link and access their digital health records across various facilities. 
 
5.3.15 The Committee is seized of the importance of Artificial Intelligence in health 
research and notes that DHR has plans to integrate emerging technologies like AI, 
genomics, and big data into its research framework. AI is being integrated into various 
diagnostic processes, particularly in medical imaging (radiology, pathology), to enhance 
speed, accuracy, and efficiency. Government initiatives like the Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABDM) and the National Health Mission are creating the digital 
infrastructure and regulatory frameworks to support the integration of AI. ICMR has 
also released ethical guidelines for AI use in healthcare.  
 
5.3.16 The Committee understand that AI-enabled healthcare technologies such as 
clinical decision-support systems, digital diagnostics, digital screening and surveillance 
tools, disease prediction models, population surveillance analytics and real-world 

132 
 
evidence platforms are increasingly essential for improving efficiency of national health 
programmes and early disease detection and optimisation of healthcare expenditure. 
 
5.3.17 A few of the remarkable steps by DHR that the Committee takes note of are (i) 
creation of a national-grade data centre with AI/ML and cybersecurity infrastructure 
across ICMR institutes through PM-ABHIM, (ii) establishment of ICMR–National 
Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science (ICMR-NIRDHDS) mandated 
with research in development, evaluation and implementation of high impact and 
affordable digital and AI based health solutions and (iii) ICMR’s NAKSHATRA, high-
performance computing cluster for virological research is intended to enable faster 
analysis of complex genomic and bioinformatics data and support more efficient 
outbreak response and preparedness. The Committee is also aware of the various 
hurdles to be surmounted by DHR to safely amalgamate AI into a sensitive domain like 
health research. One of the hurdles being privacy of digital date and safe use of digital 
platforms/technologies/tools.  
 
5.3.18 The Committee notes that DHR understandably expects that the Ministry of 
Finance may support a structured expansion of budgetary allocations specifically 
earmarked for digital and AI-enabled health research. The Committee considers the 
importance of integrating AI into the field of health research and related areas and the 
humongous benefits it can bring to the vast population of our country. The Committee 
in this regard urges the Ministry of Finance to accords high priority in allocating 
adequate funds to DHR keeping into consideration proper outcome parameter that 
generally DHR hinges upon in the field of health research. The Committee would also 
like to recommend a certain amount of budget should be kept aside solely for safety and 
protecting of health data keeping into consideration the vast amount of data available 
in the health sector. 
 
 
************* 
 
  

133 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE- 
AT A GLANCE 
 
Vision and Mission of DHR 
 
1. The Committee understands that DHR has nodal/administrative role regarding 
various Rules/Regulations/Guidelines, including the Acts like Assisted Reproductive 
Technology (Regulatory) Act 2021 and Surrogacy (Regulatory) Act 2021.The 
Committee also notes that DHR has not undertaken any post-legislative impact 
assessment of the Acts/Rules/Regulations/Guidelines, as on date. But, the Department, 
taking into consideration the large no. of cases in the country, a holistic view is being 
taken for amending the Acts. The Committee lauds the view of the Department and 
recommends that necessary steps may be taken towards specific post-legislative impact 
assessment and bring in appropriate amendments to the 
Acts/Rules/Regulations/Guidelines keeping in mind the requirements of the changing 
time on account of scientific, technological  and medical advancements. 
(Para 1.2.5) 
 
Opportunities, Strength and Challenges of DHR as an organization 
2. The Committee finds that DHR considers Ad‑hoc /Project-Based Staffing to be 
one of its biggest challenges. According to the Department this results in high turnover, 
which disrupts research continuity, weakens institutional memory, and increases costs 
due to repeated recruitment and retraining. The Committee endorses the view of DHR 
that the contractual staff, either project-based or as part of Secretariat weakens 
institutional memory due to frequent change and loss of trained personnel causing  
disruption in ongoing research, besides having  higher administrative training and skill 
development overhead. It is of the considered opinion of the Committee that permanent 
work force is an asset to any organization, especially, in offices like DHR and ICMR 
where institutional memory and research continuity is a requirement for a long term 
result oriented research. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department 
shall continue its efforts to acquire permanent workforce both for DHR Secretariat as 
well as scientific research activities.  
(Para 1.3.3) 
Human Resource Management of DHR  
3. Based on the submission of the Department, the Committee feels that 
contractual (or project-based) appointments are the new norm. The Committee is not in 
agreement with such ad-hoc or contractual arrangement. The Committee reckons the 
practical point of view that for time-bound specific scheme contractual appointments 
may contain operational merits and should have cost effectiveness.  However, the 
Committee expresses concern to observe that the contractual scientists are now 
outnumbering the permanent/deputation staff. The Committee is in favour of 
permanent staff in DHR secretariat and permanent scientist for continuity in research 
activities.   
(Para 1.4.7) 
4. In the view of the Committee, a permanent scientific workforce in research 
offers significant merits for an entity like DHR. Wherein institutional knowledge, 
sustained progress in mission-oriented, complex, long-term research are of critical 
importance in general. Further, job security encourages researchers to pursue novel 

134 
 
and high-impact ideas which should curtail migration of brighter minds to abroad due 
to lack of stability and career progression. The Committee acknowledges that 
permanent positions involve upfront costs and less flexibility for the Government but in 
research, where breakthroughs often require patience and accumulated wisdom, the 
long-term benefits of sustained scientific advancement cannot be overlooked. Hence, the 
Committee recommends a sustainable approach on the issue like hybrid model of 
appointments including permanent and deputation with less dependency on contractual 
scientists. The service conditions for contractual appointees can be based on the New 
Labour Codes which may include fixed term contracts, social security network and 
performance-based conversion to permanent posting after a fixed period on the lines of 
CSIR model. 
(Para 1.4.8) 
 
5. The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by the Department to fill up the 
various post of scientist but is disappointed to perceive the reasons for the posts to 
remain vacant like difficulty in attracting eligible and qualified candidates, lack of 
interest on the part selected candidate to join, etc. Meanwhile, the Committee 
recognises the proactive approach adopted by the Department in addressing the issue 
and revisiting and reviewing the Recruitment Rules of HTAIn to include direct 
recruitment as well. Accordingly, the Committee supports and recommends the 
revision of recruitment rules of HTAIn Attached Office to include direct recruitment 
keeping in account the importance of assessment of AI technologies/tools by HTAIn. 
 
(Para 1.4.9) 
 
6.   Considering the relevance of Ethics Committee in the era of emerging AI 
technologies and digital health platforms in the public health system, the Committee 
feels that while formulating the Recruitment Rules for the post of Scientists in the 
Ethics Committee, the Department should opt for direct recruitment on the lines of 
HTAIn Attached Office. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the 
Recruitment Rules for the post of Scientists in the Ethics Committee needs to be 
formulated including direct recruitment, at the earliest,  and these posts are to be 
populated as soon as possible.The Committee also recommends that time to time 
updation of the Recruitment Rules should be a conscious effort to contemporise the 
conditions of service for development of a permanent scientific workforce in Health 
Research sector of the country. 
(Para 1.4.10) 
7. The Committee is appreciative of the working ecosystem of DHR. Reassignment 
of roles, problem description to solution orientation, centralized science to distributed 
capacity are effective management tactics. Further, the Committee finds that operation 
mechanism for these tactics like mission-mode research, patent facilitation, Health 
Technology Assessment, human capital pipeline, data as infrastructure are bringing in 
expected benefits at ground level. The Committee also notes that the Department 
operates through the concept of Management by Objectives (MBO). This the 
management approach is based on setting specific and measurable goals and, according 
to the Committee, is an effective requirement in healthcare administration. 
(Para 1.4.12) 
Health Research Challenges In India       
 
8. The Committee recognises the work done by DHR through HTAIn and MRHRU 
towards systematic collection of data and analysis of evidence thereby addressing the 

135 
 
current ‘policy to practice’ gap. Having said that, the Committee feels more can be 
done to track whether research findings are actually incorporated into 
national/state/district health policy/plans. The Committee observes the need and 
existence of programmes addressing malnutrition, infectious diseases, and maternal 
mortality point to this. Taking this into account, the Committee recommends that DHR 
should create an “Evidence-to-Action Dashboard” that maps research outputs against 
national health priorities. Further, every ministry/department involved in the 
implementation of a particular programme/scheme should submit an action-taken 
report on relevant ICMR/DHR studies within six months of its publication, with public 
disclosure and Parliamentary review. The Committee is of the considered view that 
such measures would bridge the critical translation gap and ensure that India’s robust 
health research ecosystem directly strengthens evidence-based community interventions 
and delivers measurable public health gains. The Committee is of the firm conviction 
that research must ultimately translate into affordable medicines and accessible 
therapies for citizens. 
(Para 1.5.5) 
 
9. The Committee is pleased to note the work in progress towards the development 
of India-specific AI-based solutions for strengthening the healthcare systemin the 
country. Having said that, the Committee feels that emerging technologies such as AI 
diagnostic tools and digital health platforms in India remain in their early stages due to 
issues like poor data management, algorithmic bias, ethical challenges, and limited 
internet access in semi-urban, rural, hilly and tribal areas. Alongwith these factors, the 
Committee also hold the view that callous electronic health records maintenance and 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities compromise trust and safety towards AI tools & digital 
health platforms. Accordingly, the Committee opine that there should be data driven 
healthcare planning with strict privacy safeguards. For the success of these data driven 
healthcare policy, the country also needs technology empowered scientist, doctors, 
support staff and patients consolidating Protective Research Equilibrium (PRE). 
 
(Para 1.5.14) 
 
10. As steps to make AI tools & digital health platforms more reliable the 
Committee recommends that DHR should make pre and post-market HTA mandatory 
for all AI diagnostics seeking to integrate with public health system. DHR must update 
and enforce Ethics Guidelines for Application of Artificial Intelligence in Biomedical 
Research and Healthcare, 2023 by ICMR with compulsory bias audits, diverse dataset 
requirements, and ‘Human-in-the-Loop’ features for every government funded or 
publicly integrated AI tool. Health data/record being a sensitive subject, the Committee 
recommends for more region-diseases specific studies by DHR/ICMR on health data 
bias, maintenance and usage. 
(Para 1.5.15) 
 
11. The Committee notices that inspite of Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
(ABDM), internet in rural/tribal areas is still unreliable. Another concern in rural area 
is digital literacy gaps and inadequate training for frontline workers like Accredited 
Social Health Activist (ASHAs) and Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM).  This results in 
urban-centric development and continued exclusion of millions in the rural belts from 
benefits of tools like AI-powered chest X-ray analysis or clinical decision support 
systems like eSanjeevani. To address these, the Committee recommends that DHR 
should develop offline-capable indigenous AI solutions and launch a nationwide AI 
training programme designed for last-mile integration beginning with the aspirational 
districts for frontline workers (ASHAs, ANMs) through Model Rural Health Research 
Units. 

136 
 
 
(Para 1.5.16) 
 
12. The Committee realises that AI is revolutionizing health sector as in every other 
field. However, like any technology, it comes with both advantages and challenges. In 
the opinion of the Committee, besides the considerable efforts on the part of DHR and 
its institutions, strengthening oversight and the capacity of Ethics Committees is one of 
the measures needed to ensure consistent ethical review standards of emerging Al 
technology. Foremost, the Committee recommends thorough monitoring by DHR of 
registration/ re-registration of Ethics Committees across India with the National Ethics 
Committee Registry for Biomedical and Health Research (NECRBHR) and enforce 
penalties for non-compliant institutions. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
country lacks appropriate number of accredited and functional Ethics Committees in 
comparison to the volume of regulatory and academic trials, resulting in delayed 
approvals and increased risk of ethical lapses. 
(Para 1.5.21) 
 
13. Since there is an involvement of various Ministries/Bodies like DHR, MeitY, 
ICMR, National Health Authority (NHA), Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF), etc, the Committee recommends a 
dedicated AI Surveillance & Ethics Monitoring Cell with inter-ministerial 
representation and mandated annual Action Taken Report submission to an 
Appropriate Authority for real time performance tracking and periodic ethical audits 
and to create safety benchmarks & roadmaps for AI integration for health sector as a 
whole.  
(Para 1.5.22) 
Funding pattern of DHR 
 
14. The Committee observes that since Government is spending only 0.02% of GDP 
for Health research for the last 5 years, a large proportion of existing schemes would 
naturally suffer from implementation gaps, poor last-mile delivery, and suboptimal 
progress in semi-urban, rural, hilly and tribal areas. Despite the funds being hard to 
come, DHR has always ensured best utilization of the allocated funds and the 
Committee is appreciative of the efforts of DHR. Having said that, the Committee 
believes that the shortfall in Health Research Funding is not only a budgetary issue but 
reflects weak evidence on the returns of existing schemes/programmes as well, both 
physical and financial. DHR should be able to persuade the Ministry of Finance in pre-
budget consultations, that every additional fund allocated, yields promotion of 
indigenous affordable health technologies and digital health solutions which is 
translated into practical health policies and actions, all of these ultimately translating to 
saving of public funds. Accordingly, the Committee recommends a dedicated cell in 
DHR to bring forth periodic reports on both the physical and financial aspects of public 
health spending on bio-medical research. The reports should give emphasis on the 
outcome of schemes/programmes and utility of innovations and technology emanating 
from bio medical research for practical use on the ground level.  
(Para 2.7) 
 
15. To improve the fund utilization of DHR, the Committee recommends measures 
like teaming of seasoned scientists with early-career researchers in 
programmes/schemes to bridge knowledge gaps and variant insights in the funding 
landscaping, real-time tracking of projects outcomes involved in assets creation via 
GIS-enabled portal, developing scorecards and linking the same to annual performance 
appraisals of institutes/individuals concerned, introduction of automatic forfeiture and 
reallocation of unutilised capital grants after a certain period as well as blacklisting of 

137 
 
defaulting institutes for future projects. For the Committee, the success of any research 
endeavour is inextricably linked to adequate funding. By addressing the challenges 
inherent in the funding process through these recommended methods, DHR should be 
able to strengthen their position which may catalyse the Ministry of Finance to dedicate 
more funds for the Department for the stated strategic purpose based on actual 
outcome intending to make the healthcare more accessible and affordable. 
 
(Para 2.8) 
 
16. The Committee understands that currently DHR schemes are not benefitting 
from by the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Nidhi (PMSSN). However, the 
Committee is of the firm opinion that the DHR schemes are in no way less important in 
the endeavours to attain inter- alia the targets of National Health Policy, 2017, which is 
one of the salient features of PMSSN. Hence, the Committee recommends that DHR 
should submit a formal proposal to the Ministry of Finance for ring-fencing an 
appropriate percentage of the health component of cess from PMSSN for its schemes/ 
programmes. The Committee feels that such a proposal would hold weightage since 
PMSSN is the primarily a non-lapsable reserve fund which has been conceived to cover 
broader aims like National Health Policy 2017, Emergency & Disaster preparedness 
and response during health emergencies, etc. These aims of PMSSN directly impinge 
implementation of evidence-based interventions in urban/rural/tribal areas and 
translation of research outcomes into policy and practice. 
(Para 2.10) 
 
 17. The Committee considers the submission of the Department that as far as 
research programmes/schemes are concerned, even though institutions are generally 
located in Tier I, II and III cities, the population coverage of research activities and 
field components includes both rural and underserved populations. Also, the 
submission made by the Department of 60% and 40% fund allocation to MRUs and 
MRHRUs respectively, under Development of Infrastructure for Health Research 
during the 15th Finance Commission Period suggests appropriately earmarked funding 
pattern for both urban and rural belts. Still the Committee feels that lack of proper 
monitoring mechanism when research is conducted in rural areas leads to 
infrastructure and human resource gaps at the time of its implementation. To address 
this, DHR can launch a real-time portal linked to all MRHRUs and Ayushman Bharat 
Health & Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) and accessible to the Centre and States. 
Moreover, to bring in more transparency in fund allocation, the Committee 
recommends mapping of funding patterns and to make available in public domain, 
institute-wise, State-wise, and rural/urban break-up data of sanctioned funds. Further, 
an independent annual equity audit by CAG should be institutionalised, with findings 
presented to the Parliament. 
(Para 2.13) 
 
18. The Committee is of the considered view that when research funding remains 
concentrated in urban-based institutions and research centres it may result in health 
challenges innate to rural and tribal areas such as vector-borne diseases, malnutrition, 
maternal mortality and sickle cell anaemia, not getting its needed share of funding. 
More research institutions in the tribal and aspirational districts will ensure the area 
specific research gets needed attention and no region is left behind in healthcare 
preparedness. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DHR should notify a 
policy mandating that at least 40% of all extramural research grants be awarded to 
projects led by or implemented in rural/tribal institutions. These projects can also be 
partnered by State Medical Colleges and Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs).  

138 
 
(Para 2.14) 
 
19. As perceived by the Committee, another downside for rural and tribal areas is 
that their medical colleges and research units lack trained manpower, equipment, and 
administrative support, making them less competitive for DHR grants thereby 
reinforcing the urban funding dominance. In this regard, the Committee recommends 
that DHR should provide extra weightage in grant evaluation for proposals from these 
institutions and special incentives like hardship allowance, fast-track promotion for 
scientists opting for rural postings to aggressively handhold them. 
(Para 2.15) 
 
Projected Demands and Actual Allocations of DHR 
 
20. Based on the figures of Projected Demand, BE, RE and Actual Expenditure 
pertaining to DHR for the financial years, 2024-25, 2025-26 and 2026-27, the 
Committee observes that the gap between the funds projected by DHR and the budget 
allocated by the Ministry of Finance has narrowed from Rs 1069.34 crore in 2024-25 to 
Rs. 702.67 during 2026-27. The Committee views such trend as a positive move and 
hopes that the funds get translated into measurable outcomes like affordable treatment, 
strong disease surveillance and world class research infrastructure. The Committee also 
observes that the utilisation of funds by Department which remained below par owing 
to various emergent and unprecedented constraints initially, has picked up in the post-
pandemic period.  
(Para 2.2.6) 
 
21. The Committee observes that the enhanced BE for 2026-27 of Rs 4,821.21 crore 
(increase of 42.2 % over the Actuals of 2024-25 and 23% over RE of 2025-26) is 
overwhelmingly research-driven (Rs. 850 crore to ICMR, including Rs. 475 crore 
extramural, Rs 150 crore Intramural and Rs. 200 crore GIA-Capital funds), with 
targeted scaling of new initiatives, MedTechMitra, First-in-the-World, Centre for 
Advanced Research (CAR), National Health Research Priority Projects (NHRP), 
NIRMAN, National Virus Resource Facility (NVRF), etc.) and HRD fellowships. The 
Committee expects DHR to devise proactive steps to efficiently utilise the increased 
funding received for the ensuing year. Ensuring the assessment of capacity to utilise 
including institutional infrastructure, financial compliance, project progress roadmap, 
etc, this should be ensured before funds are released. Such measures would be 
especially pivotal in case of new Schemes like MedTechMitra, Patent Mitra, etc. The 
key concerns areas of utilisation leading to under absorption of resources that needs to 
be identified and sorted out. The Committee also strongly favours and recommends the 
creation of an institutional mechanism to monitor progress of GIA and PM-ABHIM 
projects, which have consistently witnessed project delays in the past. Realtime 
Outcome Dashboards would be a great tool for the purpose of monitoring the schemes. 
This step may be in addition to the time proven, periodic utilisation review mechanisms 
that may be in place for expected results. A dedicated monitoring mechanism would 
help to convert the ₹200+ crore GIA-Capital spike into tangible assets within the 
financial year, avoiding RE-stage surrenders and supporting long-term research 
capacity. 
(Para 2.2.7) 
 
22 The Committee further observes that to make optimal utilisation of the funds 
allocated, the Department may explore channelising money from schemes making 
sluggish progress, despite best efforts, to schemes making better headway. The 
Committee recommends such move can be made when required with the due 
consultation and approval of the Ministry of Finance, wherever required. 

139 
 
(Para 2.2.8) 
 
23. The Committee takes into account the submission of DHR about the proposed 
new research infrastructure activities under PM-ABHIM Scheme for the 16th Finance 
Commission period viz. NIRMAN, NVRF, National Grade Data Centre and Disaster 
Recovery Infrastructure and establishment of Infectious disease Research & Diagnostic 
Labs. All are critical initiatives that can act as stepping stones in the nation’s progress 
towards self-reliance in the health sector in combating its challenges.  
(Para 2.2.9) 
 
24. With respect to the matter of capital investment in health research, the 
Committee reckon from the submission of DHR that while DHR is primarily a policy, 
coordination and funding entity and do not maintain independent laboratory 
infrastructure. Physical research infrastructure is undertaken through ICMR and 
national health research missions which reflect the bulk of capital formation. PM-
ABHIM also involves significant infrastructure developments. Hence, the present 
budgetary pattern reflects a division of responsibilities between DHR and ICMR on 
these lines. The Committee makes the observation that DHR and ICMR shoulder a very 
significant component of national advancement that would contribute towards the 
Viksit Bharat vision of the Government and should take all measures to bring out the 
expected outcomes. 
(Para 2.2.14) 
 
15th Finance Commission period vs 16th Finance Commission in respect of DHR. 
25. The Committee notes that DHR, apart from its existing schemes/programmes, 
has inter alia submitted proposed new schemes, like, Integrating Evidence-based 
Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme⁠ and Policy and Strategic 
Alliance for Nurturing Medical Innovations and Translational Research Acceleration 
(SANMITRA) for the 16th Finance Commission period (2026-27 to 2030-31). The 
financial statistics of 15th Finance Commission period in respect of Department of 
Health Research shows that all through the period, the Department has never been 
allocated their Projected Demand. The Committee’s inference on the aspect is that the 
components of the schemes are getting compromised. The Committee, therefore, would 
expect that the Department is more realistic in their physical & financial proposals for 
the 16th Finance Commission period. The Committee recommends that the Department, 
on their part should adopt broad measures like concentrating on high-impact areas and 
aligning them with the national priorities, linking resources to measurable components, 
resorting to modern public financial management, turning to performance-linked 
incentives to retain skilled scientist/researches, etc. Thereby, the Department must 
enhance the performance of their schemes/programmes and be more assertive of their 
financial requirement. 
(Para 2.3.6) 
 
A Comparative study of research budget of DHR with other major research 
Ministries/Organizations. 
 
26.  The Committee takes into account DHR's budgetary allocations for research 
activities vis-a-vis other key ministries and departments involved in research, such as 
the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT), Department of Space (DoS), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), Ministry of 
Education and Ministry of AYUSH in the Union Budget 2026-27, is the lowest to DHR. 
Comparison of the similarly structured Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and 

140 
 
Ministry of Education is more thought provoking, as both cater to infrastructural 
development as well as research. Even, Ministry of Education is spending 9% of its 
total allocation for research activities while Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
shares only 4.8% with DHR. Having said that, the Committee observes that out of the 
total Government of India R&D outlay (all scientific ministries combined) for the FY 
2026–27 at ₹63,381 crore, DHR is allocated to the tune of Rs. 4,821.21 crore which is 
approximately 7.6%. When compared to 2017-18, the BE for the DHR/ICMR has more 
than tripled in 2026-27. However, the allocation over the years has been chequered. 
Whereas the growth in BE for CSIR/DSIR for the corresponding period has been 1.5 
times but their increase has been linear. 
(Para 2.4.11) 
 
27. Overall, the Committee feels that the DHR's share of budgetary allocations for 
research activities can be considered only as modest compared to other key ministries 
and departments involved in the field. Funding for the sake of enhanced budget 
allocation is not proper without relevant outcome. To improve/enhance its total 
allocation DHR has adopted many policy directions like recognition of health research 
as a strategic national priority comparable to sectors such as space, atomic energy and 
industrial research,  strengthening of allocation mechanism through outcome-linked 
budgeting, institutionalisation of enhanced inter-ministerial convergence, 
conceptualisation of a dedicated capital funding window for national health research 
infrastructure complemented by public-private partnerships, viewing of schemes like 
HTAIn as a prerequisite for efficient rollout of AB-PMJAY, National Health Mission, 
and national health programmes and not as a discretionary research scheme, etc. Also, 
DHR/ICMR should consider raising its own resources by tying up with major private 
players in the industry. The Committee is of the considered view that these policy 
directions of DHR can accelerate the pace of activities in the field of medical research in 
the country that would ultimately lead to global standard of healthcare. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that DHR should strive for Medical Innovations 
Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC) for steering translational research 
partnerships and technology development and equity for ICMR.  
(Para 2.4.12) 
 
Secretariat 
 
28. The Committee takes cognizance of the reasons submitted by the Department on 
the increase of its allocation under the Head- Secretariat under various stages of 
allocation during 2025-26 and BE 2026-27. During the previous FY, DHR had funds 
under the Head kept aside for filling up vacant posts in the Department and acquiring 
an office premise of its own. The Department clarified that very little progress has been 
made on both the issues. The Committee has recommended for the filling up of the 
vacant posts and acquiring office premise of its own for the Department during the 
examination Demands for Grants, 2025-26, as well. It is discouraging to notice that the 
one of the premier Departments in a field as vital as Health Research of the nation is 
deprived of two basic infrastructural requirements, i.e., physical infrastructure and 
human resources. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department puts 
forth a better plea based on practical solutions to rectify its HR issues and get itself a 
permanent official premise and avoid recurring expenditure on rent. 
(Para 2.5.6) 
 
Health Technology Assessment (HTA)  
 
29. The Committee takes into account the explanation furnished by the Department 
regarding reflection of HTA under two different heads in their Demand. HTA began as 

141 
 
a pilot programme in April 2017 for evaluation of appropriateness and cost 
effectiveness of available and new health technologies in the country and was later 
approved as an Attached Office of DHR in 2023. A separate budget line was given in 
2024. Now, given its distinctive mandate and requirement of sufficient technical and 
financial support, concept note of a separate scheme ‘Integrating Evidence-based 
Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme⁠ and Policy’ has been 
submitted to Department of Expenditure. With a proposed outlay of Rs. 379 Cr (2026-
27 to 2030-31), the scheme will be implemented by HTA Attached office. The 
Committee is in agreement with DHR and perceives HTA as a very important aspect of 
curating an effective ecosystem for ensuring quality and cost effectiveness of medical 
technology available the country through evidence-based mechanisms and recommends 
that DHR should effectively pursue approvals for the new scheme from the Ministry of 
Finance during the 16th FC Cycle. The Committee hopes that the accounting matter of 
reflecting HTA under two heads in the Demand No 47 of DHR will also be taken care of 
as HTA is now removed from the HRD scheme and the new scheme, namely,  
Integrating Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in 
Programme⁠ and Policyto the implemented by the Attached Office is approved.   
(Para 2.6.3) 
 
30. The Committee observes that as of February 2026, no new separate HTA 
Scheme has been publicly notified. As on date, the new HTA Scheme titled ‘Integrating 
Evidence-based Guidelines and Health Technology Assessment in Programme and 
Policy’ – 2026-27 to 2030-31 is awaiting final approval of Department of Expenditure. 
Whereas the old scheme HTAIn is continuing only as a sub-scheme under the umbrella 
Human Resource & Capacity Development programme of the 15thFinance Commission 
cycle. In this scenario, the Committee is apprehensive that this change over and absence 
of a dedicated, adequately funded HTA scheme risks funding gaps, stalled HTA studies, 
etc. The Committee, over the years, has repeatedly recommended for time-bound 
planning and better coordination while seeking approval to avoid administrative delays. 
In tune with this, keeping in mind the relevance of having HTA, the Committee 
recommends that the Department should approach the Department of Expenditure to 
expedite its approval and finalise a standalone National Health Technology Assessment 
Scheme considering the growing need for evidence-based prioritisation under national 
programmes like, Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY, AB-HWCs, etc. 
(Para 2.6.11) 
 
31. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Department should revisit the 
proposed outlay of Rs. 379 Cr, if a standalone National HTA scheme is to be considered 
in place of a mere expansion of the existing HTAIn sub-scheme for 2026–31. Taking 
into consideration the trend of allocation, the Committee notices that the Department 
hardly gets its Projected Demand for a scheme because even for the FY 2026-27, the 
proposed demand of Rs. 56.63 Cr was downsized to Rs. 25.00 Cr. Percentage of 
Variation of BE 2026-27 as compared to Projected Demand was 55.85%. The 
Committee, therefore recommends the Department to be more realistic and reasonable 
while making projections in consonance with requirement and in convincing the 
Department of Expenditure of their fund requirement with due justification. 
(Para 2.6.12) 
 
32. The Committee appreciates that the targets set under Health Technology 
Assessment for the FY 2025-26 have exceeded the mark except for the fact that no of 
policy briefs have been utilized by user agencies. The Annual Report -2025-26 of DHR 
shows that HTAIn has completed 136 studies. But the need of the hour is also that these 
studies are consumed by user agencies in the form of guidelines, uptake of technology in 
program and for procurement of devices/kits/technologies. Only then India’s goal of 

142 
 
Atmanirbhar Bharat in health technology can be achieved taking the nation towards 
efficient, equitable and sustainable healthcare. To ensure that the new HTA scheme 
provides affordability, access and cost saving and  maximum value for every rupee, the 
Committee, therefore, recommends mandatory provisions of i) time-bound integration 
of every HTA recommendation into appropriate national health programmes and 
essential medicine/device lists within 6 months, (ii) periodic capacity-building for 
officials and procurement officers (iii)  introduction of a performance-linked funding 
mechanism tied to number of HTA studies translated into policy within 12 months. 
According to the Committee, scientific evaluation of drugs, devices and treatment 
protocols should be the guide for health policy decisions to ensure optimal utilization of 
public resources. 
(Para 2.6.13) 
 
33. The Committee desires that more Research Hubs & Centres be established 
under the new HTA Scheme, particularly in unserved /underserved regions such as 
Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, the North-Eastern Region (NER) and in the Islands. 
These States/UTs have region-specific health challenges like, high-altitude diseases, 
tribal health issues, difficult terrain, which are poorly represented in current HTA 
studies. At present, HTAIn operates with only 8 Regional Hubs and 20 Resource 
Centres, the majority concentrated in southern states. Now, the proposal is to establish 
another 50 centres/hubs.The Committee observes that establishment of physical hubs is 
just an initial step. Without appropriate infrastructure and trained manpower, 
evidence generation for underserved areas is not possible. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that each proposed new centres/hubs should have a core team of HTA 
professionals including epidemiologists, health economists, and clinicians. Also, these 
remote hubs will need sustained annual recurring expenditure for manpower, training, 
data systems, etc. Hence, the Committee strongly recommends that these facts are 
appropriately taken care of in the new schema of HTA. 
(Para 2.6.14) 
 
Overview of Budget Allocation for DHR Schemes 
 
 
34. The Committee, as part of the examination of Demands of Grants 2026-27, has 
appraised the Committee on the importance of the schemes of DHR and the fast 
progress of the schemes. The Committee feels that the meagre increase in the allocation 
for the schemes, apart from ICMR, is not enough considering the projects lined up 
under these schemes by the Department. Further, while analysing the progress of the 
schemes under DHR, the Committee notes that certain schemes have been merged like 
Development of Tools/support to Prevent Outbreaks of Epidemics have been merged 
with VRDLs scheme and for other schemes like MRUs & MRHRUs draft EFC Notes 
seeking extension of the scheme for 16th FC period is awaiting approvals. According to 
DHR, the Department have re-sent higher amounts based on requirement of work of 
the schemes would be considered after the EFCs are done for the DHR schemes. 
Considering all these the Committee wants the DHR to fervently pursue the approval 
for their schemes and secure adequate funding so as to realise all the original objectives 
of the schemes to the best extent possible. 
(Para 3.1.3) 
 
Establishment of Network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics and National 
Calamities- Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) 
 
35. The Committee has been given to understand that the 22.3% increase of BE 
2026-2027 at ₹70.00 crore over 2025-2026 BE of the scheme has been earmarked taking 

143 
 
into consideration that the scheme of “Development of Tools / Support to Prevent 
Outbreaks & Epidemics,” is proposed to be discontinued from the 16thExpenditure 
Finance Cycle and its core components are to be integrated into the VRDL Scheme. 
Also, certain numbers of VRDLs are to be upgraded to IRDLs by including new 
components such as enhanced surveillance activities, support to IRDLs, NABL 
accreditation and External Quality Assessment (EQA), and contingency support for 
outbreak management. The funding pattern of the scheme suggests that the allocation 
over the past three years have been stagnant, but the utilization has been 100%. There 
has been a moderate increase of BE 2026-2027 at ₹70.00 crore against the projected 
demand of ₹180.00 crore thereby the percentage of variation of BE 2026-27 as 
compared to projected demand is 61.11 %. The Committee is of the opinion that it is 
disappointing, especially considering the significance of the scheme and some vital 
components are being merged with the scheme. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that with added responsibilities and structure of the scheme, the 
Department should make efforts to secure appropriate fund allocation under the 16th 
Finance Commission (2026-31) emphasizing the importance of investment in virology 
labs, genome surveillance and diagnostics to strengthen preparedness against future 
epidemics. 
(Para 3.2.8) 
 
36. The Committee, further, observes the fact that capital expenditure is ‘nil’ under 
the scheme because capex is proposed and released under the Scheme only when new 
VRDLs are sanctioned. During the 15th Finance Commission period, VRDLs that have 
completed five years of recurring support under the DHR Scheme and for the 16th 
Finance Commission period, it is proposed in the Expenditure Finance Committee that 
the recurring expenditure of IRDLs established under PM-ABHIM will be supported 
through the VRDL Scheme to ensure continuity and optimal utilization of the national 
laboratory network. Accordingly, DHR apprised the Committee that no proposals are 
there in the pipeline for new labs under the scheme. The Committee observes that the 
map of VRDL labs shows gaps in the geographical spread of State level and regional 
level labs. India is a country with more than a billion population, extreme topographic 
and climatic diversity accompanied by rising zoonotic and climate-amplified threats 
like, Nipah, Dengue surges, Avian influenza, etc which require that the gaps of regional 
and State level labs across the country should be abridged. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that VRDLs should be upgraded to IRDLs and these factors may be given 
due consideration and even upgradation across the country should be undertaken. 
(Para 3.2.9) 
 
37. The Committee takes note of the achievements of VRDL scheme like Integrating 
of VRDLN portal with Integrated Health Information Platform (IHIP) which has 
enhanced the public health surveillance and the launching of the Quarterly VRDL 
Bulletin at the National VRDL Conclave 2025 has provided a transparent platform for 
real-time data on viral infection trends. The Committee is of the view that the viral data 
base of VRDLs must serve as systematic sentinel surveillance platform in India for 
early detection of emerging/ re-emerging infectious diseases in the ensuing year, 
keeping into consideration the veiled threat of high risk pathogens viz., MPoX, Nipah, 
Zika, CCHF, Avian influenza etc.The Committee observes that such steps would ensure 
early-warning and containment of outbreaks. 
(Para 3.2.10) 
 
Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research 
 
38. The Committee is pleased to note that the Development of Infrastructure for 
Promotion of Health Research is one umbrella scheme which has been granted the 

144 
 
Projected Demand for the FY 2026-27 of Rs 171.35 crore as BE 2026-27. Even though 
the BE 2026-27 of Rs 171.35 crore is lesser but the RE 2025-26, it is still a good start. In 
the opinion of the Committee, accurate assessment of gaps in financial resource with 
justified projections is the reason for the Department securing the Projected Demands. 
Hence, it feels that the Department has earned the Projected Demands for the scheme 
as the utilization over the years has been close to 100%. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Department to continue with the judicious utilisation of enhanced 
funds and build confidence in its capacity to deploy and absorb resources effectively for 
nationwide research infrastructure. 
(Para 3.3.6) 
 
39. The Committee, further observes a thrust towards the funding of MRUs at Rs 
100.27 crores in comparison to that of MRHRUs at Rs 71.08 crores for the FY 2026-
27.The Committee over the time emphasised on adequate attention towards both rural 
health research and multi-disciplinary research in medical colleges. But, when more 
thrust is being given to MRUs, it by default leads to rural areas being left out as these 
areas lack in government medical colleges compared to urban areas. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends more or at least equal thrust for both areas and to ensure apt 
push is given under MRUs to government medical colleges in rural areas. This would be 
in alignment with National Health Policy goals for more research in underserved areas. 
(Para 3.3.7) 
 
40. The Committee, keeping in mind the increasing life span of the Indian 
population, has highlighted the arising need for attention towards the problems related 
to ageing and geriatrics. In this regard, it is curious to know about the 
recommendations of the Performance Evaluation Committee (PEC) constituted vide 
order dated 19th December, 2022 by DHR on the establishment of a new institute- 
National Institute of Ageing and Healthy Longevity. National Centre for Ageing, 
AIIMS, is one of the government institutions which are currently dedicated for the 
cause. The Committee wants to be appraised on the progress made on this 
recommendation of the PEC. The Committee recommends that proactive steps shall be 
taken for the establishment of the National Institute of Ageing and Healthy Longevity 
with approved traditional and integrative medical practices. Also, DHR should 
collaborate with AIIMS to create protocol of treatment to address the problems related 
to ageing and geriatrics. That is so because AIIMS has elaborate infrastructure and 
treatment experience for ageing and geriatrics. 
(Para 3.3.8) 
Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) 
 
41.  The Committee notes that the MRU scheme has achieved the annual targets 
throughout the 15th Financial Commission period. The projected demand of Rs 100.27 
crores for the FY 2026-27 has been allocated with one of the targets being establishment 
of new MRUs. In this regard, the Committee observes that MRUs should be more 
evenly distributed across the country. The Committee finds from the map submitted by 
DHR on MRUs across India that there are gaps in areas like western and central India. 
The Committee recommends that the Department should consider these areas for the 
establishment of new MRUs. Further, as a significant portion of funds are allocated to 
extramural projects and MRUs, proper and timely feedback on their utilization and 
outcomes are to be ensured through a well-defined Utilization Report System. 
(Para 3.3.14) 
 
42.  One of the ways to improve the performance of MRUs according to a Third-
Party Evaluation is going beyond uniform allocations and shifting to 

145 
 
performance/requirement-based funding in deserving cases. The Committee feels that 
the contention may contain merit but, in its opinion, to ensure even ground, the varying 
constraints under which different beneficiary institutions operate has to be 
appropriately factored in while deciding upon the parameters to assess the 
performance. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department create a 
dedicated MRU monitoring cell under DHR with real-time tracking for both physical 
and financial progress for evaluating performance/requirement-based funding beyond 
uniform allocations. 
(Para 3.3.15) 
 
Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) 
43.  The Committee has been given to understand that increase in cost of 
construction of MRHRUs buildings under Civil Work is one of the components under 
the MRHRUs scheme for which allocation of Rs 71.08 crores for the FY 2026-27 has 
been made. Further, the Committee observes that as per report of a Third-Party 
Evaluation on the performance of MRHRUs, one of the areas of concern is ensuring 
continued functionality and optimal utilization of infrastructure, financial support for 
civil repairs/maintenance of equipment in MRHRUs. The Committee observes that the 
ICMR responsible institution is assigned a MRHRU project to coordinate with the State 
Government concerned and that institution oversees civil works and infrastructure 
development, procurement and installation of equipment, etc, of the project. In this 
regard, the Committee recommends that the ICMR be responsible to undertake a 
comprehensive annual audit of the MRHRUs project assigned to them, including actual 
expenditure versus sanctioned grants and submit the same to be made part of DHR’s 
annual report. 
(Para 3.3.21) 
 
44.  Another area of concern is the human resource structure for MRHRUs. The 
prerequisite of MRHRUs are adequate staff strength with posts including clinicians, 
epidemiologists, bio-statisticians, technicians, etc., as lack of human resources would 
directly affect research outputs of MRHRUs. The Committee has been recommending 
hardship allowance and fast-track promotion for rural postings to attract more human 
resource. The Committee is reiterating its earlier recommendation for hardship 
allowance, fast-track promotion and other appropriate measures for rural postings. 
Adequate human resource is essential to strengthen research institutions in tribal and 
aspirational districts. This would ensure balanced regional growth and take care that 
will no region left behind in healthcare preparedness. 
(Para3.3.22) 
 
Human Resource Development (HRD) for Health Research 
 
45. The Committee observes that DHR along with ICMR has done much in the post 
pandemic era under the Human Resource Development Scheme for Health Research to 
encourage health research among mid - career Scientists, medical students, etc. The 
hand-holding to applicants through grant writing workshops and webinars on a regular 
basis is quite appreciable. Further, the communication channels of ICMR, including 
ICMR radio and institutional networks have actively leveraged to disseminate 
information about the HRD Scheme among the researchers. The Committee, however, 
wants to be apprised about the parameters associated with First in the World Challenge 
scheme in R&D. 
(Para 3.5.10) 
 

146 
 
46. The Committee notes that the Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework 
document of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, shows Outputs 2026-27 for the 
number of fellowships awarded as 3100 and the number of fellowships awarded for 
women scientist as 30 under the scheme for the FY 2026-27. The difference in the 
number of fellowships awarded for women scientists against the total fellowships 
awarded is disappointing. The Committee recommends that special provisions for 
women, young NRI/PIO/OCI scientists/researchers and also scientists/researchers from 
underrepresented regions like the North-East and the Islands should be given more 
thrust. Further, DHR can also look into the possibility of collaboration with reputed 
private entities for co-funding fellowships, workshops, grants, etc, to reduce 
dependency on government budgets. Capacity building is another area where support 
of private entities can be factored in. The Committee also supports and recommends the 
steps taken towards reviewing the medical education curriculum to incorporate 
research training aspects among the future clinicians. 
(Para 3.5.11) 
Grants-in-aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Coordination for Promotion 
& Guidance on Health Research (GIA) 
 
47. The Committee reckons that the Grant-in-aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral 
Convergence for Health Research has been reviewed and revised by the Department 
and is hopeful that it will lead towards effective implementation of the Scheme. As per 
the revision funding for joint initiatives is given thrust. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends following collaborative research areas that need to be prioritised:- 
(i) Environmental and Occupational Health Impacts on Public Health in 
coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 
 
(ii) One Health Approaches for Zoonotic and Infectious Diseases in partnership 
with the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying &MoEFCC. 
 
(iii) Nutrition, Maternal, and Child Health Interventions in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development & Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare. 
 
(iv) Geriatric care in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare's NCD programs, Department of Science and Technology. 
 
(v) Tribal and Rural Health Research with Focus on Traditional Medicine in 
collaboration with the Ministry of AYUSH & Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
(Para 3.5.16) 
 
48.  In Committee’s considered opinion such inter domain studies would address 
neglected areas like workplace hazards, effects of pollution, prevention, and control of 
zoonoses, congenital malformations, herbal remedies, etc, therefore, DHR should chalk 
out Action Plan based on the suggested recommendation. 
(Para 3.5.17) 
 
DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services and Research 
(DIAMOnDSR). 
 
49. The Committee takes cognisance of the work being undertaken by DHR/ICMR 
through the DIAMOnDSR scheme. According to the Department, the DIAMOnDS 
scheme focuses have been on lung and breast cancers. The Committee recommends that 
due focus maybe directed to other types of cancers as well as biomarkers.  

147 
 
(Para 3.5.25) 
 
50. On the Uniform Cancer Treatment Protocol, the Committee acquiesce with the 
submission of ICMR, being the field experts, that it does not recommend “uniform 
cancer treatment protocol”. Having said that the Committee observes that the 
treatment procedures and cost involved in a particular type of cancer in the country 
have wide gaps between a government institution and a private institution. While the 
Committee acknowledges that DHR does not have any say in the cost involved in 
treatment procedures, the Committee recommends the ICMR’s National Cancer 
Registry Programme (NCRP) along with the D/o H&FW should undertake a study to 
identify a way to address the issue of wide gaps in treatment procedures for a particular 
type of cancer between a government institution and a private institution. The 
Committee, however, is of the considered view that as a beginning, DHR should 
formulate treatment protocol for common cancers like oral, cervical and breast cancers 
and come up with a broad based for its treatment procedures and guidelines. Like the 
submission of ICMR, since National Institute of Cancer Prevention & research 
(NICPR)‑ICMR updates are directly linked to national clinical guidelines, the 
Committee perceives such a study would help to lessen the gaps. 
 
(Para 3.5.26) 
 
51. Regarding anti-cancer vaccine, the Committee has been impressed upon that 
efforts and scientific progress is being made in this field globally. The availability of 
personalized mRNA-based vaccines for specific cancers and its clinical use depends on 
the completion of ongoing trials and subsequent regulatory framework. The only anti-
cancer vaccination as of now available, both globally as well as in India, is the HPV 
vaccine. The Committee hopes that India, through ICMR, enters this field as the rising 
incidence of cancer among the population, especially among the youth, in recent times is 
alarmingly high. Accordingly, the Committee recommends ICMR should make efforts 
to make itself a part of on-going anti- cancer vaccination research projects globally in 
coordination with international entities like WHO and come forward for regulatory 
approval for clinical use. 
(Para 3.5.27) 
 
Prime Minister's Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) -Bio-
Security 
 
52. The Committee takes into account the submission of the Department that the 
fund allocated under the PM ABIM scheme for 2025–26 of ₹350.49 crore and ₹351.06 
crore 2026-27 is broadly unchanged as the scheme is presently in a consolidation and 
transition phase. The objectives under the 15th FC plan period have largely been 
completed. The Committee also notes the submission of the DHR that regarding the 
adequacy of the fund of ₹351.06 crore of 2026–27 being is sufficient for sustaining 
ongoing projects and initiating incremental platform strengthening. Funding will be 
reviewed at RE stage in line with the pace of platform roll-out and readiness of 
implementing entities. The Committee, keeping into consideration the interdisciplinary 
and cross-sectoral nature of One Health and bio-security, full-scale national 
platforming and rapid expansion may require additional, phased investments and 
convergence with allied sectoral programs, recommends that DHR should persuade the 
Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as per  needs at RE stage.  
(Para 3.6.15) 
53.  Having acknowledged the statements of the Department, the Committee wants to 
point out that last year the Department had to review and revise timeline for each of the 
pending projects. The reasons being the delay in identification of specialised BSL-3/4 

148 
 
agencies, revisions in drawings due to consultant recommendations, budget escalation 
arising from GST increase and electrical scope changes, change of land use approvals 
are some of them. The Committee feels that these technical/administrative delays will 
eventually culminate in budget escalation. In this regard, the Committee had 
recommended to streamline tendering/procurement and to fix responsibilities by 
imposing penalties. In view of the unchanged situation prevailing, the Committee wants 
to reiterate the same recommendation. Further, the Committee recommends the use of 
digital platforms for tendering/procurement, use Al technology for real-time 
surveillance of constructions of BSL -3/4 labs, VRDLs, etc. 
(Para 3.6.16) 
54. While appreciating the number of BSL-3 spread around the country as on date, 
the Committee feels that there are still areas which are underrepresented. Hence, the 
Committee recommends more BSL 3 labs in the scenario of rising zoonotic risks, 
climate-induced diseases, etc. The Committee also notes that there is only one BSL-4 lab 
in the country, in Dibrugarh. The Committee recommends that the Department should 
make efforts to construct at least three more BSL-4 labs in the 16th Plan period 
especially keeping in mind that the M/o H&FW has sought for Rs. 69,458.44 crores for 
2026-31for PM-ABHIM Scheme. 
(Para 3.6.17) 
National One Health Mission 
 
55. The Committee observes that National One Health Mission has the involvement 
of around 13 Departments, and more may be added to the list in the future, also, the 
mandate of the Mission pans the whole of India. The Committee is of the firm belief that 
DHR, ably guided by the Principal Scientific Advisor to Government of India, is well 
endowed to be the nodal department for leading the mission to success. Nevertheless, the 
Committee recommends for measures like digitized procurement, expansion of 
VRDLs/IRDLs, unified platforms for real-time data accessible to all, domain specific 
research hubs, local community involvement at grassroot levels, etc., to avoid 
coordination delays and ensuring inter ministerial integration.  
(Para 3.7.5) 
 
North-Eastern Areas 
 
56. The Committee acknowledges the work done by the Department under its 
various schemes in NER, especially setting up of VRDLs (Viral Research & Diagnostic 
Labs), activities under the HRD scheme, etc. Regarding the fund requirement, the 
Committee notes the submission of DHR that while the allocation to NER is 
proportionate to the prescribed formula, in case of additional requirements based on 
project proposals, research priorities, or State‑specific demands, the Department is 
open to consider enhanced fund support beyond the mandatory allocation, subject to 
availability of funds and due procedure. 
(Para 3.8.8) 
57. The Committee is aware that NER is prone to vector-borne disease burden due 
to its humid climate, dense forests and border proximity to high-risk areas. Considering 
this, the Committee recommends that ICMR should initiate investigator-initiated 
research projects on vector-borne disease which can yield tailored vaccines, diagnostics, 
and prevention strategies, reducing mortality rates in NER. This would be a step 
toward the national campaign of Malaria Elimination Program.  
(Para 3.8.9) 
58. Another field in NER where DHR along with Ministry of AYUSH should invest 
is the cataloguing and testing of medicinal plants involving local universities and tribal 

149 
 
communities. Such activities would be a boost to Traditional and Integrative Medicine 
practices. Research hubs for AI-driven telemedicine, mobile health apps, and remote 
diagnostics for chronic diseases are another area which can benefit the NER 
considering its terrain. NER is highly vulnerable to climate change, with frequent 
disasters exposing the people living there to conditions like malnutrition, hypertension, 
etc. Studies co-relating climate events and health outcomes, including mental health and 
nutritional security should be considered to understand and help people who are 
repeatedly exposed to natural disasters. Accordingly, the Committee recommends these 
initiatives from the part of DHR/ ICMR for NER.   
(Para 3.8.10) 
 
Funding; Extramural vs Intramural 
 
59. The Committee understands that over recent past, ICMR has shifted focus on 
two core areas – from descriptive to developmental research and gravitating towards 
extramural research instead of intramural. Such change in approach is appreciated and 
is viewed as a measure towards future readiness/preparedness to combat health 
challenges. The Committee is of the considered opinion that ICMR should continue 
funding more developmental and extramural projects so that larger numbers of 
research entities are encouraged to participate in the nation’s progress in health 
research.   
(Para 4.6) 
 
Budgetary allocation of ICMR 
 
60. The Committee notes the fact that out of the total allocation of DHR for the FY 
2026-27 of Rs. 4,821 crores, an amount of Rs. 4,000 crores is the share of ICMR. 
Further, it is also understood that amount does not include any fund from revenue or 
from any other source from within the ICMR but it is the budgetary allocation from the 
Government to ICMR. The submission of the Secretary, DHR that drew the attention 
of the Committee was that the ICMR pensions are not paid out of the salaries Head, but 
out of the Grants-in-Aid General which is basically the amount of money reflected to be 
spent on research i.e. research projects and research institutions. The Committee finds 
that the objective of Grants-in-Aid Scheme is to provide fund for research projects. 
While Grants-in-Aid General Head cover funding for other items alongwith research 
project. The Committee seeks the Department to submit a clarification in the matter.  
(Para 4.7.5) 
 
61. The Committee is appreciative about the effective utilisation of funds by ICMR. 
Over the years ICMR has always made efforts for maximum utilization of allocated 
funds. This year the allocation is a remarkable hike from previous years, which is an 
addition of Rs 850.00 Cr. Even though the projected demand for 2026-27 by ICMR was 
Rs. 4550crores, it got an allocation of Rs 4000 crores. Considering that ICMR has 
demanded for more funds, the Committee reckons that it has more projects planned for 
the year. Nevertheless, going by the trend of last two years, ICMR has always been 
granted higher allocation at the RE stage. Of course, such increase at RE stage is not at 
par with the projected demand. Addition at RE stage suggests optimal utilization of 
allocated funds and project efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
ICMR keep their good track record of actual utilization of allocated fund and physical 
progress of its projects against measurable outcomes. 
(Para 4.7.6) 
 
62. On the Committee’s recommendation that ICMR is to be allowed to retain the 
revenues generated by them rather than depositing all of it to the Consolidated Fund of 

150 
 
India, DHR had submitted that the revenue so generated is being appropriately 
recorded by ICMR Accounts section and shall be reflected in the Demand No 47. 
However, the Committee doesn’t find the refection of the same in the Demand No 47- 
2026-27. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendation on the issue. 
(Para 4.7.7) 
 
63. The Committee notes that Performance Evaluation Committees of ICMR are 
formed every 5 years and the last committee was constituted in 2022. Its report reflects 
0.01% of GDP as Government’s spending on Health Research in India, But, on the 
examination of Demand for Grants of DHR during 2026-27, it was informed that the 
Government spends 0.02% of GDP for Health Research vis-a vis U.S. National 
Institutes of Health receives about $47.77 billion annually (0.17% of GDP), the UK 
Medical Research Council $12.33 billion (0.36% of GDP), and Australia’s National 
Health and Medical Research Council $1.34 billion (0.07% of GDP). The percentage of 
the Government’s spending on Health Research in India has been stagnant for the last 
5 years. Nevertheless, the statistics is disappointing. The Government is doing a lot of 
things in its attempt to make India a developed country. Viskit Bharat@47, which is a 
part of this attempt, is a revolutionary thought and to achieve that the nation need a 
young population as well as a healthy population. The Committee, therefore 
recommends for higher budgetary support to DHR as percentage of GDP as 
comparable to leading Asian economies such as China, South Korea, Japan, etc. Efforts 
to be made to choke out a road map to bridge the research and investment gap by 
extracting measurable outcome from intramural and extramural project, especially in 
terms of publications, patents and clinical guidelines. The Committee further 
recommends for adequate budgetary support towards theoretic development advanced 
trails and indigenous innovations. Action plans should be chalked out for PPP based 
funding on mission mode to reduce long term dependency on expensive imported 
therapies.  
(Para 4.7.9) 
 
64. Every health scheme/program/research/study should be conceived as a step 
towards creating a healthy population who would directly/indirectly contribute to the 
GDP of the country. The Committee feels that at 0.02% of its GDP, India is at a very 
lower position compared to developed countries in the field of Health Research 
expenditure. As of now, India’s representation and contribution to the global health 
forums is not much remarkable. The Committee feels that India has no dearth of 
talents. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Department to timely fulfil their 
commitments towards the on-going projects, which would in turn help them secure 
more financial assistance from the Union Government for completing their research 
projects in time. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that ICMR should be 
allowed to retain the revenues generated by ICMR rather than depositing all of it to the 
Consolidated Fund of India as well as collaborate with prominent private players in the 
field of medical research to enhance its funds. The Committee desires that ICMR 
should strive to raise extra budgetary resources upto 25% from other sources to fulfil 
its requirements for undertaking research projects. 
(Para 4.7.10) 
 
65. Further, the Committee endorses the suggestions of the Performance Evaluation 
Committee on having a peer review and third party monitoring system integrating 
constructive feedback as well as enhancement of India’s presence, visibility and 
influence in the WHO system through active participation in global health forums. 

151 
 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends necessary steps to be taken in achieving the 
suggestions of the Performance Evaluation Committee. 
(Para 4.7.11) 
Physical outcomes of ICMR projects 
 
66. The Committee takes note of the progress made by ICMR in the previous years 
on various aspects like core research, research papers published, patents filed and 
patents granted, etc. The Committee also acknowledges that ICMR has contributed to 
addressing the health issues affecting the masses of the country. Nevertheless, the 
Committee is concerned to note that a portable X-Ray machine is being cited as being 
made under Make in India despite its important components like HV tank and X ray 
tube not being made indigenously. The Committee recommends that ICMR should set 
up a standardised guideline to classify its products under Make in India so that it forms 
a bench mark for the private Sector to imbibe and inculcate. Mere assembly of 
imported components should not form the basis for classification under Make in India. 
The Committee appreciates that ICMR has developed its own AI platform for rapid 
diagnosis of Chest and other X-rays. Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends 
that this AI should be provided free of cost to all CHCs/PHCs and Government 
Hospitals so that primary diagnosis can be made under the TB Muktbharat campaign. 
The Committee also recommends that the pricing of AI needs to be justified in a 
country like India where AI can be a game changer to provide affordable health care on 
a population scale. 
(Para 4.8.3) 
 
67. The Committee would like to recommend an impact assessment of the work 
carried out by ICMR, through a Third-Party, to establish a structured mechanism to 
monitor and regulate the outcomes and overall impact of these initiatives. In this 
regard, the Committee wishes to be appraised also on research projects, if any, of 
ICMR that had to be discontinued and the reasons therefore. 
(Para 4.8.4) 
 
Initiatives of ICMR- Medical Innovations Patent Mitra & MedTech Mitra 
 
68. The Committee recognizes the relevance of initiatives like MedTech Mitra and 
Patent Mitra. These are handholding measures for innovators for clinical evaluation, 
regulatory facilitation, execution of license agreements and uptake of new products. 
The Committee believes that the Department should make women, young and rural 
innovators primary beneficiaries in their handholding measures. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends phased funding at different levels of product readiness as 
innovators struggles to reach towards finished products/technology. There should be 
regional hubs related to these handholding initiatives to cater to local innovators which 
will also mitigate urban bias. The Department should seek to address the issue of low 
market penetration of new products/technology under these initiatives. This is mainly 
due to the mismatch between the demand and the final product. Last, but not the least, 
the Committee recommends effective capacity building programmes for nascent 
innovators about the various technical and procedural complexities involved in  market 
entry with new products/technology. According to the Committee, start-ups and 
innovators must be supported enough so India becomes a global hub for affordable 
health solutions. 
(Para 4.9.5) 
 
 
 
 

152 
 
Medical Innovations Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC) 
 
69. The Committee recalls that Medical Innovations Development Advancement 
Company (MIDAC) was presented before it as a transformative initiative of DHR last 
year during the examination of DFG of DHR. MIDAC, envisioned as a Section-8 
company under the Companies Act, 2013, aims to serve as a catalyst for translational 
research and technology development. Within five years, it intends to support the 
development of 25 regulation-compliant products, including formulations, vaccines, and 
medical devices, and 50 regulation-compliant diagnostics. However, the Committee 
finds that the much-anticipated company is still entangled in procedural matters 
connected to approvals. The Committee is of the considered view that DHR should not 
linger the formation of MIDAC, a Section-8 company under the Companies Act, 2013. 
It is apparent to the Committee that DHR has taken shelter behind the caveat of every 
procedural requirement being followed. In view of this, the Committee strongly 
recommends that DHR shall vigorously pursue the final approvals for MIDAC and 
ensure that the delay should not extend beyond a month with the Registrar of 
Companies and the Company must see the light of the day during the ensuing financial 
year. 
(Para 4.9.8) 
Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (INTENT):  
70. The Committee appreciates the Budget announcement 2026-27 regarding 1000 
clinical trial sites under BioPharma SHAKTI Mission with an outlay Rs 10,000 crores 
over five years indented to mark  a strategic shift towards strengthening India’s 
biopharma ecosystem. The Committee has given to understand that creation of a 
national network of 1000 clinical trial sites is one of the components of Biopharma 
SHAKTI which will be led by the ICMR. The Committee firmly believes Biopharma 
SHAKTI Mission, a core strategic intervention aimed at strengthening India’s 
biopharmaceutical ecosystem will definitely serve as an essential pillar required to 
meet the growing demands of the Indian pharma industry and to position India as a 
competitive global hub for biopharma innovation. The Committee in this regard, 
recommends ICMR to leverage its prior experience and strength by creating and 
strengthening 1000 clinical trial sites, and adopting a ‘Hub and Spoke model’ to meet 
the needs of the Indian Pharma Industry.  
(Para 4.9.16) 
 
71. The Committee reckons that to regulate clinical trials, DHR registers Ethics 
Committees (EC) to review Biomedical and Health Research which also involves human 
participants through the NAITIK portal. Further, the Committee also acknowledges 
the reforms undertaken by DHR to facilitate public access to necessary trial 
information, like introduction of multilingual interface, mobile friendly platforms, 
mandatory registration tied to funding/publication, awareness campaigns for public, 
researchers & institutions, etc. In this regard, the Committee holds the view that 
regulatory reforms and ease of doing research, while maintaining ethical standards, 
needs to be encouraged. Maintaining ethical standards itself is a challenge viz. hurdles 
include uneven Ethics Committees quality, delays, and vulnerability in multicentric 
trials, etc. Hence, the Committee recommends further strengthening of the role of DHR 
as a regulatory entity through frequent trainings for Ethics Committees members and 
participants, introduction of digital tools for monitoring and timely review of 
guidelines. ICMR should ensure that participation in clinical trials is based on genuine 
informed consent and all measures to ensure this shall be taken by DHR. 
(Para 4.9.17) 

153 
 
 
 
Contemporary and Critical Areas of Research in India 
72 Almost all areas of research taken up ICMR are those which can bring in 
transformative impact in accordance with the National Health Policy outcomes. The 
Committee extends all its support to the ICMR Centre for Advanced Research on 
Addictive Behaviours (CAR-AB) being established at AIIMS Delhi, with a focus 
initiative for delivering evidence-based interventions targeting excessive and 
problematic use of technology and associated stress, depression, anxiety, and 
addiction. The Committee is of the considered view that mental health is an area where 
integration of Indian Knowledge Sytsem through methodology like yoga meditation can 
bring in lot of positive changes in behaviour science. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that both DHR/ICMR and Ministry of Ayush adopt steps to develop a 
treatment protocol wherein safe integration of traditional/ alternative treatment along 
with allopathic treatment can be effectively used in the area of mental health. 
(Para 4.10.2) 
73 The Committee recommends that ICMR should undertake a study to look into the 
possibility of developing indigenous Sickle Cell Anaemia from Sugarcane derivatives as 
has been developed in countries like USA/Japan.  Regarding hypertension, ICMR had 
conducted a study on “Genetic Evaluation of Hypertension in the North East 
population during the period of 2015 to 2018’, the Committee recommends that ICMR 
should also undertake a study on the impact of hypertension and diabetic among the 
people of India in the post pandemic period. Further, ICMR has informed that there 
are many studies from various groups in India on genetic factors related to diabetes. 
Study of genetics of monogenic diabetes is already in routine clinical practice. The 
Committee understands that millets help in the management of body weight, which is of 
utmost importance in diabetic patient. In this regard, the Committee desires that ICMR 
should undertake a study on the merits of the millet diet as part of promotion of its 
usage especially among children. Such studies should help including millet in the 
nutritional status of children in POSHAN Abhiyaan.   
 (Para 4.10.3) 
74 The Committee has been given to understand that ICMR has published a White 
paper on venomous snakebite in India in 2020* which was acknowledged in the 
“National Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Snakebite Envenoming 
(NAPSE)”, launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in March 2024, 
with the aim to halve snakebite-related deaths and disabilities by 2030 in India. The 
Committee in this regard recommends that ICMR should identify the specify area of 
more snake bite and undertake research on various types of snakes bites especially by 
King Cobra, Russell’s viper, Karaita, etc which are highly venomous snake species and 
adequate arrangement be made for anti-venom doses in district hospitals and rural 
block hospitals.  Anti-venom doses of specific species of snakes may be stored in 
hospitals of the area where such species of snakes are found in plenty. 
(Para 4.10.4) 
75 The Committee, taking note of the fact that ICMR–DHR has done significant 
research and public‑health interventions in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to reduce 
mortality from Japanese Encephalitis (JE)/Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES), 
however, the Committee observes that Japanese Encephalitis are much more prevalent 
in North India, ie, from Uttar Pradesh to North Bihar (from Muzafarpur to 

154 
 
Gorakhpur and Gaya) and there is toll of death of children who are vulnerable to the 
disease. The Committee therefore recommends ICMR and DHR to undertake in-depth 
research in JE and desires that the government should give more grants to support the 
research projects on the subject. 
(Para 4.10.5) 
76 The Committee views that DHR should promote R&D under PPP model in 
order to extract maximum outcome for preventing the prevalence of various diseases in 
specific part of the country. The Committee desires that multinational companies or 
companies manufacturing drugs on large scale and earning high profit should be 
guided to make expenditure of certain percentage of profit on R&D with the purpose of 
reducing the cost of drugs and treatment of disease at an affordable cost on common 
diseases like JE, kidney failure, fatty liver, etc. The Committee is of the opinion that 
each regional AIIMS may be entrusted with health research on specific disease 
prevalent in that area with enhanced budgetary support to undertake R&D projects. 
The Committee notes that ICMR has informed that under the National Health 
Research Priority (NHRP) on stillbirth, being implemented across seven states, the 
focus is on prevention of stillbirth through improving the uptake and coverage of 
evidence-based antenatal and intrapartum interventions. One of the strategies under 
this project is early detection of fetal anomalies by including early pregnancy 
registration and attendance at Pradhan Mantri Surakshit MatritvaAbhiyan (PMSMA).  
The Committee in this regard recommends that the ICMR should expand the NHRP on 
stillbirth across the country instead of limiting it in just seven states. The Committee 
feels that the role of frontline workers likes Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHAs) 
and Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) is cardinal in early pregnancy registration and 
attendance at PMSMA, especially in rural/tribal areas accordingly adequate training 
should be imparted for ASHAs and ANM in this area.  
(Para 4.10.6) 
 
Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) 
 
77. The Committee takes into account the submission of DHR that ICMR has 
adopted a dual approach that advances NCD research while maintaining a strong focus 
on infectious disease preparedness. The Committee is given to understand that while for 
communicable diseases, the National One Health Mission has been launched while 
Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Medical Colleges/Research Institutes 
undertake research primarily in Non- Communicable Diseases. Considering that India 
is experiencing a shift in disease patterns, with NCDs, causing nearly 60% of all deaths, 
the Committee recommends DHR to revisit the funding pattern and strategy by giving 
thrust to NCD research at the same time sustaining the intensity on infectious disease 
projects. The Committee recommends that preventive healthcare with focused research 
on early detection of lifestyle diseases and its affordable treatment should be 
prioritized. 
(Para 4.10.10) 
 
Anti-Microbial Resistance 
 
78. Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) identified as a major future threat is already 
impinging treatment protocols. DHR through ICMR operates an AMR Surveillance 
Network and contributes evidence on key resistant strains of pathogens found in 
clinical settings. Also, the National Action Plan (NAP)-AMR 2.0 (2025-2029) emphasizes 
One Health surveillance and thereby integrates environmental data into human health 

155 
 
research. In this backdrop, the Committee recommends that DHR/ICMR should 
establish AMR-specific hubs and promote community One health training, focusing 
inter alia on animal-human interface. The Committee also holds the opinion that the 
Department should also launch a national risk mapping app for zoonoses and integrate 
its findings into antimicrobial stewardship and protocols nationwide. 
(Para 4.10.15) 
 
79. The Committee is given to understand that the use of technology/products like 
BIOFIRE is reported as a major step towards the antimicrobial fight. Patients who 
earlier had to remain in the ICU for around 10 days, with the help of BIOFIRE, can 
now receive antibiotic sensitivity reports within just 2 to 4 hours, leading to faster and 
more targeted treatment. This has substantially reduced the overall cost and improved 
clinical effectiveness following its introduction. However, the Committee is told that the 
technology/products like BIOFIRE are currently imported and are expensive per se. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends DHR to look into the possibility of developing 
such technology/products indigenously so that it can be made accessible more 
commonly and to smaller healthcare set ups also as part of affordable health care 
initiatives. 
(Para 4.10.16) 
 
HPV Vaccine 
 
80. The Committee reckons the importance of national HPV vaccination programme. 
The Committee understands that ICMR is engaged in the "Antibody Response 
following One Dose of Cervavac® as compared to One Dose of Gardasil Vaccine in 
Healthy Girls Aged 9-14 Years: A Non-inferiority, Multicentre, Double-blind, 
Randomized Controlled Trial" to determine whether the antibody response elicited by 
one dose of Cervavac® (study product) is non-inferior to one dose of Gardasil®. The 
result of the trial would to aid in adoption of WHO’s single dose HPV vaccination 
strategy as a public health initiative by India. Further, the Home-grown single dose 
vaccines, if proven to be non-inferior, would save import costs and duties, thus 
rendering the vaccination more affordable as well as effective. The Committee feels that 
to make the trial result oriented, a transparent narration of the facts related to the 
merits of the vaccination connecting it to cervical cancer prevention to build public 
trust is important. It is also pertinent to make the public aware that the impact of 
vaccination programme can be observed one and half decades after the vaccination, 
when the recipients have grown into the age group at risk. The Committee firmly 
believes that HPV vaccination is a corrective and a way forward step. The delay in the 
roll out of the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) maybe due to lack of 
information among the public. Hence, the Committee strongly recommends publishing 
of a detailed fact sheet on the ICMR/DHR website outlining the primary objectives and 
scope of HPV. The Committee is of the view that HPV vaccination if implemented with 
transparency and community involvement, the programme would emerge as a 
consequential public health achievement in protecting next generation of women from 
preventable malignancies, and thus reclaiming preponderance of prevention of cancer 
in national health policy. 
(Para 4.10.24) 
 
81.  The Committee further recognises the fact that if the trial could demonstrate 
Cervavac®’s single-dose non-inferiority, it would be a "major fillip" by enabling faster 
rollout in the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP). Positive culmination of the 
trial would be an unequivocal boost to indigenous production and lower cost offers 
economic benefits like forex savings, job creation in biotech, etc. Single dosage can 
make UIP more successful as human lapses and follow up of multiple doses can be 

156 
 
avoided. Accordingly, the Committee wants to render all its support to and pin its 
expectations on to the Department to act on the recommendations of the Committee.  
(Para 4.10.25) 
Oral Health 
82.  Anant Muskaan, ICMR's National Health Research Priority Program, is aimed at 
promoting awareness of the importance of oral health in school children. The project 
focus on primary school-based tooth brushing and oral health education to prevent 
costly oral diseases and reduce out-of-pocket expenditure. It is a cost-effective 
preventive intervention. The Committee perceives that the extension of the Anant 
Muskaan Project beyond the current seven districts would be considered upon 
successful completion of the two-year implementation phase in February 2027. The 
Committee recommends that the project be expanded nationally which would address 
the issue of oral disease burden and recommends the project to be integrated with the 
School Health & Wellness Programme (SHWP), under the Ayushman Bharat. This 
would be an ideal move towards affordability over treatment.  
(Para 4.10.29) 
 
Food safety 
 
83. The Committee is impressed with the number of programmes/studies undertaken by 
ICMR in the country in the field of nutrition science and policy along with food safety. 
The Committee notes that majority of the studies undertaken by ICMR are hinged on 
the biomedical aspect. The Committee feels ICMR would be the ideal forum to initiate 
studies on India's diverse food ecosystem. For this, ICMR should include experts from 
agriculture (ICAR), environment (MoEFCC), and FSSAI while identifying the subjects 
of study to address real-world problems. The Committee strongly recommends a Multi-
Disciplinary Food Safety Research Panel for this. Another recommendation of the 
Committee is that due attention shall be given to changing food habits of the population 
across the societal strata keeping in mind aspects like easier access to fast food with the 
advent of fast food delivery at door steps primarily through platform-based services. At 
the same time, there is also an emerging cross section of population who is very health 
conscious. The Committee strongly feels that if the gist of findings in this field can be 
communicated in lay man’s language, it can reach the public in highly appreciated and 
acceptable manner. Further, considering the recent reports of rampant Vitamin D 
deficiency, especially among the urban population, the Committee recommends that 
ICMR shall consider commissioning a study on the deficiencies of Vitamin D and 
countermeasures. The Committee also favours a study on the impact of packaged food, 
including on the mechanisms that are in place to assess and regulate the quantity of 
preservatives used by commercial manufacturers. 
(Para 4.10.31) 
 
Treatment Procedure, Vaccine and Medical Devices Developed By ICMR 
 
84. On the information regarding details of vaccines at various stages of 
development/approval by ICMR, the Committee feels that the information is scattered 
across press releases and annual reports, leading to difficulty in keeping track. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends a dedicated page on the ICMR official 
website, clearly indicating the vaccine name, target disease, development stage, and 
expected timeline for each stage. 
(Para 4.11.8) 
 
85.  The Committee understands that ICMR has no regulatory role in the approval of 
medical devices. MedTech MITRA, an ICMR-CDSCO initiative with guidance from 

157 
 
Niti Aayog, supports MedTech innovators including those of medical devices. Further, 
ICMR’s Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (INTENT) and Centre for 
Advanced research facilitate regulation compliant of medical devices. Also, ICMR 
facilitates the clinical validation of such devices already approved by Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board (AERB) and Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO), resulting in regulatory overlap creating an uneven protocol for 
development of medical devices. The Committee observes that the current medical 
device registration process involves multiple organizations and ICMR has no role after 
AERB approval. Hence, the Committee strongly recommends a more simplified, single-
window system which would reduce timelines and improve transparency. 
 
(Para 4.11.9) 
 
86 The Committee observes that ICMR, in collaboration with Institute of Plasma 
Research (IPR), has developed and validated an indigenous AI-based tool (DeepCXR) 
for automated interpretation of chest X-rays.The Committee recommends that ICMR 
make such indigenous technology available throughout the country free of cost which 
would be a step towards accessible and affordable healthcare. Even while making 
progress towards developing indigenous technology, the Committee opines that our 
country still relies heavily on imported medical technologies and equipment such as 
MRI, CT scans, PET-CT, and LINAC systems, which are procured from international 
companies like Philips and Siemens. ICMR has acquiesces that certain component such 
as the X-ray tube (a part of the X-ray source) and the detector, which are integral to the 
handheld X-ray system developed by them were imported substantiates this fact. If the 
core component like, X-ray tube, HV tank, etc is being imported ICMR should refrain 
from claiming it as their own technology. The better way for ICMR would be to engage 
itself in depth research for indigenous production, design, and development of medical 
devices. The medical devices developed viz the portable x-ray should be completely 
indigenous including X-ray tube, HV tank. Medical innovation and products should not 
be an assembly of components to be cited as ‘Made in India’. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that ICMR should set up a benchmark for ‘Made in India’ 
initiatives and derive a protocol wherein ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ is encompassed on a 
true scale. In case ICMR has to go for compilation of medical devices, the protocol 
should be clearly highlighted on the dashboard. Having said that the Committee also 
recommends that ICMR should make maximum efforts to develop some mechanism to 
manufacture these machines in our medical device parks with 100 % percentage of 
indigenous value addition which is essential for regaining public trust in the field of AI. 
 
 (Para 4.11.10) 
ICMR and Young Researchers 
 
87. The Committee notes with appreciation the measures adopted by ICMR to 
promote health research among the youth of the country like targeted support for 
Young Researchers for early-career biomedical researchers across medical colleges and 
research institutions, Fellowships & International Exposure to support young scientists 
and researchers for short-term training abroad and participation in international 
conferences. The Committee has been appraised that ICMR’s Encouraging Research 
Culture Among Students focusing on undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral 
students are three initiatives the Committee has been appraised of. The Committee 
observes that under the HRD Scheme, the DHR places special focus on the youth 
pursuing undergraduate/postgraduate medicine and Ph.D. programmes, as well as 
young faculty and women scientists with career breaks to build a strong pipeline of 
biomedical researchers comparable to global standards. The Committee appreciates 
that a new ICMR–AcSIR PhD Programme has been launched to strengthen India’s 

158 
 
clinical research ecosystem and foster indigenous innovation in medical devices and 
therapeutics. Efforts are also on to address gaps in structured mentorship. The 
Committee recommends that in its action taken note should furnish the details of 
outcome of efforts made so far by ICMR. 
(Para 4.12.6) 
 
88. To attract and engage the new generation to research is a critical initiative to 
ensure a continuum in Health Research. The Committee feels that it is important to 
promote students and researchers at all levels - from popularising bio sciences at higher 
secondary levels to handholding young individual and well as institutional researchers. 
Mentoring, especially at higher levels, is a key factor in producing skilled researchers 
and has to be given high priority by ICMR. The Committee wants DHR to devise 
appropriate initiatives to invite senior researchers and clinicians from both public as 
well as private spheres to mentoring and aim at forming a national mentorship grid. 
Targeted scholarships and small grants for researchers could be considered to earmark 
funds for the facilitation programme. The Committee also recommends internships at 
ICMR Institutes for students and young researchers can offer an opportunity to them 
to be part of real projects, while the Institutes also benefit.  
(Para 4.12.7) 
 
 89. The Committee also holds the firm view that assessment of outcomes based on 
the Publication-Equivalent(PE)Metric, allowing beyond short-term training 
opportunities abroad supported by fellowships, targeted outreach campaigns for 
underserved regions and institutions alongwith seed funding for medical colleges in 
underserved areas as well as effective feedback loop for review of the promotion 
programmes can be of immense help in this direction. 
(Para 4.12.8) 
World Trends in Health Research and ICMR 
90. The Committee takes into cognisance the latest trends in health research across 
the globe, as submitted by DHR, and how DHR and ICMR are pitching in with their 
initiatives in these cutting-edge areas. It is observed that ICMR is validating AI-based 
tools for TB chest X-ray interpretation, diabetic retinopathy screening, and digital 
pathology, the Committee recommends that ICMR must make such indigenous 
technology available throughout the country which would ensure certainly a step 
towards accessible and affordable healthcare. The Committee also notes the major on-
going research projects DHR is engaged with international entities like WHO or private 
sector partners for collaborative research. In this regard, the Committee is pleased to 
note these ongoing research projects that are implemented under formal international 
cooperation agreements in priority areas of public health and biomedical research. 
 (Para 4.13.4) 
91. The Committee feels that one of the areas DHR should prioritise is building 
capacity in AI ethics and related guidelines. International best practices may be 
factored in while doing this. One of the possible ultimate outcomes of this would be 
garnering trust of the world in our health innovations. Further, the Committee also 
favours climate-health research initiatives in collaboration with global partners on One 
Health, zoonosis, etc. Such steps would help us to be better prepared for outbreaks and 
position DHR as a torchbearer of resilient health research.  
(Para 4.13.5) 
 
92. The Committee appreciates the importance to involve and encourage to get 
young health researchers to foray into global trends of frontier fields through 

159 
 
fellowships and other appropriate supporting mechanisms. The Committee believes 
that cultivating efficient public-private partnerships by incentivising the industry for 
pandemic preparedness technologies, such as co-developing affordable diagnostics and 
vaccines would be a prudent idea to equip the nation with the ability to deploy rapid 
countermeasures.  
(Para 4.13.6) 
Strategic Plan of DHR (2024–29) 
 
93. The Committee notes that DHR has formulated a comprehensive Strategic Plan 
2024-29 aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @ 2047 under which the following 6 
focus areas have been identified – 
 
(vi) Promotion of Indigenous, Affordable and Globally Competitive Health 
Technologies; 
(vii) Accelerated Solutions for Difficult and Resistant Health Challenges; 
(viii) Advancing Digital Health research and Infrastructure; 
(ix) Translating Research Evidence into actionable Public Health Interventions; 
(v) Strengthened Surveillance Systems and Accelerated Medical 
Countermeasures; and 
(vi) Enhancing Global Standing of Indian Medical Research. 
(Para 5.1.14) 
 
94. The Committee finds theses identified core areas to be potential drivers of 
progress in Health sector that are aimed at self-reliance, solutions for health problems 
of future, accelerating innovation, improving deliver and positioning India as a global 
leader. It is going to be a herculean task that warrants meticulous planning and 
execution through different vehicles. Establishment of MIDAC, Med-Tech Mitra, CoEs, 
setting up of National Gold Standard Data Repository, expansion of HTA, 
augmentation of MRUs and MRHRUs, National Institute of Digital Health Research, 
Establishment of a National Institute of One Health, formation of Integrated Research 
& Diagnostic Laboratories, introduction of Patent Mitra inter alia are defining these 
drivers. The Committee strongly recommends in this direction the formulation of a 
well-defined and updated National Health Research Policy (NHRP) as guiding factor to 
embark upon this ambitious task.  The Committee also is of the firm opinion that 
distinguishing health research as one of the National priorities is another unavoidable 
step to embellish the pursuit.  
(Para 5.1.15) 
 
95. As emphasised by DHR, it is imperative to establish closer integration and 
coordination with programmes of the Department of Health & Family Welfare 
(DoH&FW) and other scientific departments to ensure that research findings are 
translated into deliverable products. Nevertheless, the prime driver of all the initiatives 
shall remain ICMR. The Committee would like to appreciate the effort to create a new 
Faculty of Medical Research (FMR) through AcSIR-ICMR collaboration. Another 
matter of high interest to the Committee is the role of DHR in India's goal of achieving 
Universal Health Coverage (UHC) through research-driven policies, which will be 
pivoted by ICMR and supported by HTAIn. 
(Para 5.1.16) 
96. The Committee has been made aware of the main hurdles in the path towards 
attainment of the Viksit Bharat Goals. As per DHR, there is a critical need to bridge the 
gap between biomedical research and clinical practice to enable effective integration of 
research insights into patient care. In this direction, DHR has started Medical PhD 
program focusing on developing clinician-scientists. The Committee notice that ICMR 

160 
 
has developed the Impact of Research and Innovation Scale (ICMR-IRIS), which 
provides a standardized framework for multidimensional impact assessment. This 
approach converts diverse research outputs into a single metric termed Publication-
Equivalent (PE). The Committee also note that to promote health research in the 
country, particularly among the youth, DHR has undertaken measures like Targeted 
Support for Young Researchers, Fellowships and International Exposure to young 
scientists, Encouraging Research Culture among Students by focusing on 
undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral students, etc. Further, the Committee is 
appreciative of the unique ‘First-in-the-World Challenge’, inspired by Chandrayan-3 
landing, making India the first country to do so. This initiative holds the promise of 
creating technologies, products, or solutions that are truly ‘first in the world.’ 
Accordingly, the Committee are extending its firm support to these endeavours and 
expects that DHR would be able to back up these initiatives with the requisite financial 
and infrastructural support. With regard to ‘First-in-the-World Challenge’, the 
Committee recommend that there should be prescribed criteria/parameter for selecting 
projects and allocating funds under the said category of research. 
 (Para 5.1.17) 
Research on Traditional and Integrative Medicine Practices  
97.  The Committee believes that millions rely on traditional systems like Ayurveda, 
herbal remedies, for primary care, especially for NCDs. The WHO Global Traditional 
Medicine Strategy 2025–2034, adopted by the Seventy-eighth World Health Assembly, 
aims to ensure universal access to safe and effective traditional, complementary, and 
integrative medicine (TCIM). The Committee finds the merits of traditional medicines 
include primarily cost-effectiveness, limited hospitalizations, reducing over-reliance on 
pharmaceuticals and the fact that traditional practices represent centuries of 
accumulated wisdom. However, a host of demerits overshadow the benefits. The 
concerns of the Committee related to Traditional and Integrative Medicine practices are 
that these practices are largely individualized, generates unreliable or insufficient data, 
research inadvertently leads to pseudoscientific claims, presence of heavy metals and 
pesticides in herbal products, inconsistent quality, methodological hurdles lowering 
investment returns, etc. All these factors combined with lack of training, governance, 
and patient awareness can erode trust in traditional healthcare systems. The Committee 
appreciates DHR initiative with Ministry of AYUSH in establishing Five AYUSH-ICMR 
Advanced Centres for Integrative Health Research (AI-ACHIR) at four AIIMS. The 
Committee recommends that both DHR and Ministry of Ayush adopt propitious steps to 
address the concerns expressed by the Committee and take pro-active steps for safe 
integration of traditional and alternative medicines into mainstream healthcare systems. 
(Para 5.2.6.) 
AI in Health 
98. The Committee is seized of the importance of Artificial Intelligence in health 
research and notes that DHR has plans to integrate emerging technologies like AI, 
genomics, and big data into its research framework. AI is being integrated into various 
diagnostic processes, particularly in medical imaging (radiology, pathology), to enhance 
speed, accuracy, and efficiency. Government initiatives like the Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABDM) and the National Health Mission are creating the digital 
infrastructure and regulatory frameworks to support the integration of AI. ICMR has 
also released ethical guidelines for AI use in healthcare.  
(Para 5.3.15) 

161 
 
 
99. The Committee understand that AI-enabled healthcare technologies such as 
clinical decision-support systems, digital diagnostics, digital screening and surveillance 
tools, disease prediction models, population surveillance analytics and real-world 
evidence platforms are increasingly essential for improving efficiency of national health 
programmes and early disease detection and optimisation of healthcare expenditure. 
(Para 5.3.16) 
 
100. The Committee takes note of the remarkable steps by DHR that of are (i) 
creation of a national-grade data centre with AI/ML and cybersecurity infrastructure 
across ICMR institutes through PM-ABHIM, (ii) establishment of ICMR–National 
Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science (ICMR-NIRDHDS) mandated 
with research in development, evaluation and implementation of high impact and 
affordable digital and AI based health solutions and (iii) ICMR’s NAKSHATRA, high-
performance computing cluster for virological research is intended to enable faster 
analysis of complex genomic and bioinformatics data and support more efficient 
outbreak response and preparedness. The Committee recommends DHR to choke out 
strategy to safely amalgamate AI into a sensitive domain like health research and to 
overcome the hurdles of privacy of digital date and safe use of digital 
platforms/technologies/tools.  
(Para 5.3.17) 
 
101. The Committee notes that DHR understandably expects that the Ministry of 
Finance may support a structured expansion of budgetary allocations specifically 
earmarked for digital and AI-enabled health research. The Committee considers the 
importance of integrating AI into the field of health research and related areas and the 
humongous benefits it can bring to the vast population of our country. The Committee 
in this regard urges the Ministry of Finance to accords high priority in allocating 
adequate funds to DHR keeping into consideration proper outcome parameter that 
generally DHR hinges upon in the field of health research. The Committee would also 
like to recommend a certain amount of budget should be kept aside solely for safety and 
protecting of health data keeping into consideration the vast amount of data available 
in the health sector. 
 (Para 5.3.18) 
 
 
************* 
 
 
 