PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundredth One Report on Demands for
Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 5) of the
Ministry of AYUSH
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)
105
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the One Hundredth One Report on Demands for
Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 5) of the
Ministry of AYUSH
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20th December, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ ( iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-36
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee............................. 2-7
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government's replies..................................... 8-17
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee........................ 18-35
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited............................................................... 36
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS  —   A T A G LANCE................................................. 37-40
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 41-44
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 45-57

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Ashok Siddharth
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
8. Dr. C. P . Thakur
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
13. Dr. (Ms.) Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
14. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
15. Dr. K. Kamaraj
16. Shri Arjun Lal Meena
17. Shri Anoop Mishra
18. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
19. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey
20. Shri Chirag Paswan
21. Shri C. R. Patil
22. Shri M.K. Raghavan
23. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
24. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde

(ii)
25. Shri Gyan Singh
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
28. Shrimati Rita Tarai
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manohar Utawal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby present
this One Hundred Fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Committee's One Hundredth One Report on Demands for Grants (Demand
No.6) of the Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2017-18.
2. The One Hundredth One Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th
March, 2017. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from
the Ministry of AYUSH were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 12th December,
2017.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 12th
December, 2017.
N
EW D ELHI; PROF. RAM GOPAL YADA V
12th December, 2017 Chairman,
Agrahayana 21, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AIIA : All India Institute of Ayurveda
AIIMS : All India Institute of Medical Sciences
ASCI : Advertising Standards Council of India
ASU&H : A yurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy
AYUSH : A yurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
AIAY&N : All India Institute of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy
CARIDD : Central A yurvedic Research Institute for Drug Development
CARIHD : Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Hepatobiliary Disorders
CARINMSD : Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Neuromuscular and
Musculoskeletal Disorders
CCRAS : Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
CCRH : Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy
CCRUM : Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine
CCRYN : Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy
CRIYN : Central Research Institute for Yoga and Naturopathy
CDSCO : Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
CBSE : Central Board of Secondary Education
CET : Common Entrance Test
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
EMR : Extra Mural Research
GAMA : Grievances Against Misleading Advertisements
HSCC : Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
ICFRE : Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education
IIEST, Kolkata : Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology. Kolkata
IIT, Mumbai : Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
IPR : Intellectual Property Right
ICPO : Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology
(iv)

JIPMER : Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and
Research
MDNIY : Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
NMPB : National Medicinal Plants Boards
NIA : National Institute of Ayurveda
NIH : National Institute of Homoeopathy
NIMHANS - : National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences
NIUM : National Institute of Unani Medicine
NEIAH : North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
NIMP : National Institute of Medicinal Plants
NPCC : National Projects Construction Corporation
NISR : National Institute of Sowa Rigpa
NEET : National Eligibility cum Entrance Test
NPGET : National Post-Graduate EntranceTest
NEIFM : North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine
NIN : National Institute of Nutrition
OPD : Out Patient Department
PSUs : Public Sector Undertakings
PMC : Project Management Committee
RET : Rare, Enlargement and Treatment
RARIUD : Regional Ayurveda Research Institute for Urinary Disorders
RRIUM : Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine
RRC : Regional Research Centre
RRI (H) : Regional Institute of Homoeopathy
RARI : Regional Ayurvedic Research Institute
SAAP : State Annual Action Plans
SMPB : State Medicinal Plants Board
SCSP : Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan
(v)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred One Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 5)
of the Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2017-18.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 100th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.3, 2.17, 4.9, 5.6, 6.6, 9.5, 10.8
Total - 7
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies: 2.12, 3.5, 3.9, 3.16, 5.9, 5.11, 5.13, 6.4, 6.5, 7.4,
8.4, 10.3, 10.10, 10.12, 10.16
Total - 15
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.4, 2.5, 2.8, 2.13, 3.7, 3.11, 3.12, 3.15, 4.6,
5.5, 6.3, 6.9, 6.11, 8.6, 10.5, 10.14
Total - 16
Chapter-IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:
Total - Nil
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observations
1.1 The Committee is constrained to note that out of the total outlay of 
` 10044.00 crores for the
Ministry for the 12th Five Year Plan, the Ministry got only ` 5186.00 crore at the BE stage. This was,
further, reduced to ` 3814.72 crores at the RE stage. Out of this, the Ministry has been able to utilize
only ` 3247.35 crores. The Committee observes the disappointing trend of utilization for the entire Five
Year Plan. The Committee in its earlier Reports on Demands for Grants has reiterated the need for the
realistic assessment of the requirement of funds and corresponding utilization of those funds. There has
been recurrent and persistent under utilization of the funds allocated at the stage of BE as well as RE
in all the five years of the 12th plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends that lessons need to be
learnt so that funds are not kept idly parked, year after year but are gainfully utilized for other fund-
starved programs / schemes. (Para 2.3)
Action Taken
1.2 The Ministry recognizes the need to fully utilize the allocated resources and in fact the steps taken
by it over the years has seen a significant improvement in this regard as per the trend of Budget allocation
vis-a-vis expenditure for the five years of the 12th Five Year Plan shown below:
(` in crore)
Y ear B E RE AE % Utilization
w.r.t. RE
2012-13 990.00 670.00 580.00 86.57
2013-14 1069.00 750.00 553.50 73.80
2014-15 1069.00 466.78 463.13 99.22
2015-16 1008.00 900.00 888.86 98.76
2016-17 1050.00 1027.94 1014.88 98.73
Total 5186.00 3814.72 3500.37 91.80
1.3 From the above, it can be seen that the overall utilization of funds is 91.80% of RE during the five
years of 12th Plan. It is also worth mentioning that the utilization is about 98% to 99% of RE allocation
during the period from 2014-15 to 2016-17, due to various measures taken.
2

3
PENDING UCS
Recommendation/Observations
1.4 The Committee time and again has been impressing upon the Ministry the imperative need for
speedy liquidation of pending UCs. Though some progress has been made, there is still a large number
of pending UCs and it seems that the efforts made by the Ministry to liquidate them are not enough.
The Committee, therefore, believes that a pro-active and aggressive approach is required on the part of
the Ministry for liquidation of pending UCs. The Committee is of the firm view that in this era of
e-governance and with IT resources currently available, submission of UCs should be possible almost on
"Push of a button". The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should chalk out an action
plan for online submission of UCs and also take up the matter of pendency of UCs with States which
have a large number of pending UCs like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar , Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand etc. so that all pending UCs are settled within a period of six months.
(Para 2.17)
Action Taken
1.5 Presently, following remedial Action taken have been taken by the Ministry of AYUSH to reduce the
pendency of Utilization of Certificates (UCs) in respect of erstwhile Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
Development of AYUSH Hospitals & Dispensaries and National AYUSH Mission (NAM) :
(a) Various review meeting had been conducted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH)
regarding pendency of Utilization Certificates. During the meeting of State AYUSH / Health
Ministers the issue was flagged at the level of Hon'ble MoS.
(b) The Ministry of AYUSH had nominated Nodal Officers for each State / UT to monitor the
status of pending UCs.
(c) Time to time letters have also been issued to States / UTs Government from Secretary
(AYUSH) & Joint Secretary regarding liquidation of Utilization Certificates.
(d) Regional Meeting has also been conducted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH)
regarding various issues including liquidation of pending Utilization Certificates.
1.6 However, the recommendation of the committee including on line submission of UCs by the states
has been noted. Further, the States having large pending UCs are being specifically addressed for early
liquidation of pending UCs.
1.7 In addition, in respect of the erstwhile Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Drugs Quality Control,
States have been requested repeatedly for submission of pending UCs or refund the unspent grants. As
a result only 68 UCs worth `15.50 crore are left to be settled mainly from 6 states each having pendency
of UCs of more than ` 1 crore. In order to further ensure liquidation of UCs within a period of six
months as recommended by the Department related Parliamentary Committee; the matter has been taken
up with the concerned State Authorities for expediting submission of UCs & associated documents online
or through email.

4
IV. NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION (NAM)
Recommendation/Observations
1.8 The Committee is dismayed to note that National AYUSH Mission being one of the most important
schemes of the Ministry, would be facing shortfall of funds in Financial Year 2017-18. Similar was the
case last year i.e 2016-17 when the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH had submitted that NAM would be
affected due to shortfall in allocation. NAM envisages better access to AYUSH services through increase
in number of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries, ensuring availability of ASU&H drugs and trained
manpower , upgradation of AYUSH educational institutions for improvement in quality of AYUSH education,
increase in number of Pharmacies, setting up Drug Laboratories in States and sustained availability of
herbal raw drugs by promoting medicinal plants. Keeping in view the vital objectives of NAM, it is
imperative that adequate funds are allocated for this scheme. The Committee also is of the view that
the objectives of NAM signal a significant improvement in the quality of AYUSH healthcare services,
expanding its outreach and making available AYUSH healthcare facilities to the people. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should approach Ministry of Finance for additional
funds with proper justifications for enhanced allocation of funds at RE stage. (Para 4.9)
Action Taken
1.9 During 2017-18, an amount of ` 440.00 Crore has been allocated in BE. As per the recommendation
of committee Ministry of Finance will be approached for enhancement of allocation at RE stage.
V . NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendation/Observations
1.10 The Committee takes note of the major findings of the study of the Indian Council of Forestry
Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun entailing the total commercial demand of herbal raw drugs,
exports of such drugs, consumption by domestic herbal industry as well as rural households. The
Committee believes that our country has a vast bio-diversity of medicinal plants which can be put to
great use by the Indian systems of medicine if there is proper system in place for its production,
procurement and marketing. The Committee would also like the Ministry to establish effective forward
and backward linkages to protect, sustain and encourage production of medicinal plants in a sustainable
and non-exploitative manner so that there is no distortion between demand and supply. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
1.11 National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) is coordinating the Medicinal Plants Component under
National AYUSH Mission (NAM) Scheme of Ministry of AYUSH for identified species of medicinal plants
including Rare, Endangered & Threatened (RET) species with the backward linkage of establishment of
nursery/seed block and forward linkages of post-harvest management like creation of infrastructure
(drying shed, storage godown), primary processing, marketing infrastructure (collection centre and retail
outlet) and uniform distribution of produce with optimum price fixation to enable good remuneration for
farmers/cultivators/collectors.

5
VI. STATUS OF PROGRESS OF SCHEMES IN NORTH EASTERN STATES
Recommendation/Observations
1.12 The Committee has been given to understand that 
` 143.00 crore has been allocated for schemes
of NER for 2017-18. Keeping in view the trend of utilization of funds for schemes of NER in
2016-17, the Committee wonders whether the Ministry would be able to gainfully utilize the allocated
funds. Given the prioritized focus on the area, the Committee is of the view that all out efforts need
to be made by the Ministry to utilize the funds in a time bound manner so that the desired health
outcomes for this region are achieved. Further, attention should also be given to development of required
infrastructure for the Institutes providing healthcare services through OPD. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
1.13 The Committee may note that as per details given in reply to Para No. 6.5 that against a budgetary
allocation for 2016-17 of `105 crore for NER which was reduced to `103.00 crore at RE stage, the
actual expenditure was `102.93 crore which amounts to an almost full utilization of the available
budgetary allocations. During 2017-18, an allocation of `143.00 crore has been made. For judicious and
optimal utilization of these funds, the scheme-wise distribution is as follows:
(` in crore)
Sl. No.  Name of the Scheme Allocation
1 National Medicinal Plant Board 10.00
2 North Eastern Institute of A yurveda Homoeopathy, Shillong 10.00
3 North Eastern Institute of AYUSH/Folk Medicine, Passighat 10.00
4 Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 10.00
5 Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 15.00
6 Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy 2.00
7 Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 9.00
8 Information, Education and Communication 3.00
9 National AYUSH Mission (NAM) 74.00
Total 143.00
1.14 This has already been an appreciable movement of expenditure which is `17.35 crore as on
31.05.2017. Ministry would make all attempts to fully utilize the funds allotted for NER during
2017-18.
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (AIIA), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observations
1.15 The Committee is not happy to see the snail's pace of work relating to operationlization of AIIA.
The delay in various aspects relating to operationlization of AIIA is due to delay in handing over the

6
complete building by HSCC to AIIA, delay in completion of work by M/S ITI Ltd. on IT infrastructure,
and delay in engaging the manpower through outsourced C&D categories. The Committee is of the view
that such inefficiencies are indicative of the fact that the monitoring was lax. Despite the recommendations
of the Committee in its previous report regarding putting in place a monitoring mechanism for tracking
the progress of work, the Committee finds that the AIIA is yet not complete in all respects. The
Committee, strongly recommends that all out efforts may be made for the completion of the works of
AIIA to ensure full operationalization of the Institute within three months from the presentation of this
Report. Efforts may also be made to fill up faculty as well as non-faculty posts which are crucial for
the smooth functioning of the Institute. (Para 9.5)
Action Taken
1.16 All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi is making all out efforts to make the Institute fully
operational shortly. The Institute is taking up the matter with M/s HSCC (I) Ltd. (agency constructed
AIIA building) to hand over the complete building to AIIA so that the services/activities could be started
at all floors of the Hospital and Academic Blocks. The work related to IT infrastructure is in full swing.
The institute is also putting pressure on M/s ITI to complete the entire work of IT infrastructure at the
earliest possible time. For the smooth functioning of the Institute, for filling up of the remaining faculty
and non-faculty posts for which the Institute has already re-advertised. Besides this, the Institute is very
actively in process of engaging other supporting staff related to administration, hospital and finance
through outsourced agency. To get the quick response, the Institute is preparing a road map on monitoring
mechanism for tracking the progress of work of the institute from all corners by taking weekly meetings
with the concerned agencies and higher level staff so that the Institute may be made fully operational
at the earliest possible.
X. RESEARCH COUNCILS
Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH)
Recommendation/Observations
1.17 The Committee observes that Homoeopathy is more popular in India than anywhere else in the
world. The Committee is, however, of the view that in order to improve the efficacy of Homoeopathy,
there is an imperative need for interdisciplinary research that focuses on correlating Homoeopathic
concepts of health and treatment with bio-medical concepts. The Committee would therefore like the
CCRH to start interdisciplinary research for exploring the scientific basis of homoeopathy concepts of
health and treatment. (Para 10.8)
Action Taken
1.18 The observations of the committee that Homoeopathy is very popular in India and many other parts
of world is very true and there is a need to undertake interdisciplinary research to enrich the scientific
base of Homoeopathy. Considering this, Council has initiated collaborative research programme to
systematically undertake interdisciplinary research projects since 2005. In this program, proposals are
invited from interested Scientists/ Institutes of repute and provided with all the technical and financial
support in a transparent manner. In fact a special committee for interdisciplinary research having eminent

7
scientists from IIT Mumbai, IIEST Kolkata, Bose institute, ICMR, AIIMS, New Delhi and many other
institutions has been constituted to give an adequate push to this research.
1.19 Studies are undertaken keeping in view the two objectives: to enrich the scientific base of homoeopathy
and to improve its application in clinical practice, development of new drugs for emerging health
challenges. Studies are aimed to understand the biological effect of homoeopathic medicines; animal
experimentation to assess anti-viral properties; physiochemical studies; standardization and optimization
of the process of drug manufacturing and to know the presence of nanoparticles in these medicines. The
focus is to elucidate the the nature of Homoeopathic medicines in physiochemical dimensions so that
standardization can be done and the theories/ concepts of homoeopathy can remain intact while applying
the modern approach to the studies. Till date Council has collaborated with various reputed institutes like
Bose Institute (Kolkata), Central Drug Research Institute (Lucknow), Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate
Medical Education and Research (JIPMER, Pondicherry), All India Institute of Medical Sciences (New
Delhi), University of Madras (Chennai), Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (Hyderabad), Panjab
University, Indian Institute of Technology (Delhi)etc. and has had 30 National and 03 International
collaborations. 33 projects have been concluded in this field and 15 are ongoing.
1.20 So far th rough these collaborations we are able to understand preventive effect of Belladonna on
Japanese Encephalitis, molecular level understanding of anti-diabetic effect of few homoeopathic
preparations, inhibitory effect of potentised medicines in kidney stone formation, mechanism of apoptotic
effect of medicines in Cancer cells by certain drugs, Lycopodium in improving the memory function,
presence of nanoparticles in Homoeopathic potencies, understanding the physicochemical nature of
Homoeopathic medicines etc.
1.21 Presently, studies for development of medicines for prevention/ treatment of Dengue, Chickungunya,
Rota virus, Acute encephalitis syndrome, Malaria, etc. are being undertaken. Studies to understand the
immune modulation in human by the homoeopathic medicines is also in progress. More studies on other
priority areas are under consideration beside this state of art of laboratories are being established at
Kolkata, and Mumbai for nurturing scientists to undertake studies in this nascent field. Ph.D. program
and fellowship scheme has been introduced this year to give impetus to interdisciplinary research.

8
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
Recommendation/Observations
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1 The Committee is concerned about the trend of under-utilization of funds due to non-filling up of
posts, pending UCs and non-receipt of sufficient and viable number of proposals for schemes. The
Committee is of the view that non-filling of posts and pending UCs are routine challenges which could
have been tackled had the Ministry pursued them in a sustained manner. The Committee would, therefore,
recommend to the Ministry to adopt an aggressive approach to fill up the vacant posts so that funds are
put to productive use. As regards not receiving viable proposals under the schemes of Development of
Common Facilities for AYUSH Industry Clusters and AYUSH and Public Health, the Committee is of
the considered view that concerted efforts are required to be taken to popularize the scheme and its salient
features so as to generate awareness amongst the concerned stakeholders who would then submit viable
proposals. The Committee, therefore, recommends that appropriate steps be taken to speed up the process
of implementation of these schemes and arrest this trend and take up the issue of underutilization of
funds with the concerned agencies. (Para (2.12)
Action taken
National Institutes
2.2 During the year 2015-16, the reasons for under utilization of funds were due to non-filling up of
posts approved by the Department of Expenditure, starting of various services required for making the
hospital of the Institute fully functional. Recently, Ministry of AYUSH has also approved 178 posts of
para medical/administrative staff etc. to be hired through outsourcing basis to make the Institute fully
functional.
CoE Scheme
2.3 Three UCs amounting to `169.09 lakh have been accepted and liquidated. Other pending UCs are
in process of acceptance. In order to popularize the scheme amongst the concerned stakeholders, the
scheme guidelines were revised w.e.f. 30.05.2016. Further, a slight change in guidelines was done w.e.f.
28.02.2017.
AYUSH Industry Cluster
2.4 No UC is pending. This scheme has been discontinued from April, 2017.
III. REGULA TION AND QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA, UNANI AND
HOMOEOPATHIC (ASU&H) DRUGS
Recommendation/Observations
2.5 The Committee observes that as per the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1946, and Rules made thereunder,
the quality control and regulation of AYUSH remedies primarily fall in the domain of State / UT
8

9
Governments. However, the State Drug Regulatory Framework is very weak and State Drug Licensing
Authorities are ill-equipped to handle the task of regulation of AYUSH remedies. During 2016, the
Ministry has given ` 1.86 crore as grant-in-aid to the States for strengthening their quality enforcement
mechanism. The Committee observes that a large part of the population uses AYUSH remedies as
treatment of their choice. The Committee is therefore, of the opinion that the limit of financial assistance
to States needs to be increased significantly. (Para 3.5)
Action taken
2.6 In the 12th Five Year Plan, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Drugs Quality Control has been
merged into the National AYUSH Mission (NAM) through which 28 States have been supported in
accordance their State Action Plans for the following purposes–
(i) Strengthening of ASU&H Pharmacies of State Government/Co-operatives/Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs).
(ii) Strengthening/establishment of State Drug Testing Laboratories.
(iii) Strengthening of ASU&H Drug Control Framework.
(iv) Engagement of technical manpower in State Drug Testing Laboratories
(v) Documentation, publication and dissemination of quality control materials.
(vi) Support for quality testing of drugs.
2.7 For continuation of National AYUSH Mission, external evaluation of National AYUSH Mission
components including Drugs Quality Control is on the anvil. Recommendation of the PSC has been noted
and during the appraisal and analysis process of the NAM implementation, appropriate enhancement of
funding pattern and schematic guidelines may also be considered.
Recommendation/Observations
2.8 The Committee observes that there are only 29 Drug Laboratories and 46 Pharmacies available in
the public sector in the States for testing and manufacturing of ASU&H drugs. 6 States did not have
any manufacturing unit. The Committee is of the view that given the huge size and needs of AYUSH
sector, there is a need to increase the number of Drug testing Laboratories and Pharmacies in the country.
There should be more than one Drug Testing Laboratories in big States and at least one each in smaller
States. Similarly, there should be many more ASU&H manufacturing units in the country. Special
attention needs to be given to the 6 States which do not have a single manufacturing unit.
(Para 3.9)
Action Taken
2.9 Normally grants are being released as per State Annual Action Plans (SAAP) under National AYUSH
Mission. Six states namely Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep
did not submit proposal to seek grant-in-aid as per scheme guidelines for all the components of Drugs
Quality Control. There is no binding in the NAM scheme for not supporting more than one Pharmacy
or Drugs Testing Laboratory in a state. It is prerogative of the States to set up ASU&H drugs manufacturing

10
units and laboratories and apply for grants for these projects. Recommendation of the Hon'ble PSC in
this regard will be placed for consideration of Mission Directorate of National AYUSH Mission and also
conveyed to the respective states.
Observations/Recommendation
2.10 The Committee welcomes the signing of MoU with the Advertising Standards Council of India for
suo moto monitoring of misleading advertisements and hopes that defaulters would be brought to book
and appropriate action taken against them. The Committee would like to be apprised of the efficacy of
the new monitoring mechanism. (Para 3.16)
Action Taken
2.11 On 20th January, 2017 Ministry of AYUSH signed an MoU with Advertising Standards Council of
India (ASCI) to undertake comprehensive monitoring of misleading advertisements pertaining to AYUSH
medicines, treatments and related services in print & TV media. It is informed that ASCI referred 263
complaints of allegedly AYUSH products related advertisements since January, 2015. Such complaints of
381 advertisements are also registered online till 16th March, 2017 in the Grievances Against Misleading
Advertisements (GAMA) portal maintained by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution.
ASCI after examination of the complaints and instances of misleading advertisements or exaggerated
claims forward the same to the respective State Regulators for legal action and also inform the Ministry
of AYUSH. This mechanism has helped to encourage self regulation of advertisements and ASCI reported
that many advertisers on being pointed out for their inappropriate advertisements have either withdrawn
the advertisement or rectified the advertisement contents.
2.12 The Mini stry has also written more than 200 letters to the States. Efforts are being done to have
State-wise nodal officers and do this work electronically as well, to reduce time.
V . NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendation/Observations
2.13 The Committee takes note of 588 pending UCs amounting to 
` 81.21 crore with respect to Central
Sector Schemes of NMPB. For the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of NMPB, 28 UCs are pending amounting
` 42.45 crore. These UCs are pending from the year 2001-2002 to 2009-10. The Committee is of the view
that pending UCs need to be liquidated as they block the further release of funds which in turn disrupts
the whole chain of production of medicinal plants, its procurement and use of such plants to develop
medicines for the benefit of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that concerted efforts
should be made for liquidation of pending UCs and the issue needs to be taken up with the concerned
State Governments at the highest level. (Para 5.9)
Action Taken
2.14 The State-wise Nodal officers appointed by NMPB have been directed to liaison the respective State
Authorities (at the high level) to take-up the matter of liquidation of pending UCs on urgent basis.

11
Recommendation/Observations
2.15 The Committee observes that the Expenditure Finance Committee had agreed in principle to increase
the sanctioned strength in 2014 and the proposal for creation of 65 new posts was under process. Further,
out of 16 sanctioned posts, only 10 posts were filled up while 5 posts were being managed either on loan
or contractual basis. The Committee believes that the temporary and ad-hoc measures of filling posts
on loan or contractual basis is not a healthy trend though a stop gap arrangement. The Committee notes
the small strength of manpower of the NMPB and feels that this certainly needs to be increased so that
the important mandate of the Board is not jeopardised due to this. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the creation of 65 new posts be finalized within a period of three months from the presentation of
this Report. (Para 5.11)
Action Taken
2.16 The finalization of proposal for creation of 65 number of new posts is under active process and
will be complied at the earliest
Recommendation/Observations
2.17 It is worrisome to note that the SMPBs are weak and dysfunctional bodies which are not suitable
to carry out the mandate envisaged by the NMPBs. Despite grants from NMPB to the SMPBs, the
SMPBs still suffer from staff shortage, and only 8 States SMPBs were functioning with a CEO. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the State / UT Governments the imperative
need to strengthen and turn them into robust structures that the SMPBs need to. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should interact with other States still not having full-fledged body and
encourage them to carry out necessary reforms to have full-fledged SMPBS. (Para 5.13)
Action Taken
2.18 In order to strengthen the SMPBs, DO letters from CEO, NMPB to Principal Secretaries/Secretaries/
Commissioners of the concerned states have been sent for appointing a regular CEO and necessary staff
support along with other infrastructure facilities. Annual review meeting and periodic meetings with State
Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPBs) are also being organized to activate the functioning of SMPBs'.
VI. STATUS OF PROGRESS OF SCHEMES IN NORTH EASTERN STATES
Recommendation/Observations
2.19 The Ministry has also furnished details about the funds released during 2016-17 under various
schemes of NE alongwith actual expenditure:
(` in crore)
Name of the Scheme B E AE (Up to 31.01.2017)
National Medicinal Plant Board 10.00 3.70
North Eastern Institute of Ay urveda & 9.00 3.50
Homoeopathy, Shillong

12
Name of the Scheme B E AE (Up to 31.01.2017)
North Eastern Institute of A YUSH/Folk 6 .00 4.50
Medicine, Passighat
Central Council for Research in A yurvedic Sciences 9.00 1.50
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 15.00 0.00
Central Council for Research in Y oga & Naturopathy 2.00 1.00
Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 8 .00 3.92
Centre of Excellence 1.00 0.00
Information, Education and Communication 3.00 0.00
National AYUSH Mission 42.00 39.71
TOTAL 105.00 57.83
2.2 The Committee observes underutilization of funds from the table above entailing the status of
budgetary allocation and the actual for the year 2016-17 upto 31/01/17 with respect to various schemes
of NER. Out of the total allocation of ` 105.00 crore for schemes in NER in 2016-17, only ` 57.83
crore has been utilized. It suggests that only around 50 % of the funds allocated for the schemes of NE
region have been utilized leaving around 50% to be expended in the last two months of Financial Year
2016-17. Gross underutilization of funds has been witnessed for the schemes like National Medicinal
Plant Board, Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences and Central Council for Research in
Homoeopathy and nil utilization for schemes like Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine,
Center of Excellence and Information, Education and Communications. The Committee believes that
these instances of gross under-utilization could have been minimized had budgetary controls like sound
internal audit mechanism and periodic monitoring of the trend of expenditure had been exercised. The
Committee recommends that the exact reasons for the under-utilization of the budgeted funds may be
found out and corrective action taken accordingly. (Para 6.4 & 6.5)
Action Taken
2.21 The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE), Final Estimates (FE) and Actual Expenditure
during the year 2016-17 in respect of NER is as follows:
(` in crore)
Name of the Scheme                                            2016-17
B E RE FE Actuals
12 3 4 5
National Medicinal Plants Board 10.00 6 .00 6.00 6.00
North Eastern Institute of AYUSH/ 6.00 7.45 7.45 7.45
Folk Medicine, Passighat

13
12 3 4 5
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & 9.00 7.55 7.55 7.55
Homoeopathy, Shillong
Central Council for Research in 9.00 9.00 4.00 4.00
Ayurvedic Sciences
Central Council for Research in Unani 15.00 13.00 6.24 6.24
Medicine
Central Council for Research in Yoga & 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00
Naturopathy
Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 8.00 7.00 4.18 4.18
Centre of Excellence 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
Information, Education and Communication 3.00 3.00 0.95 0.88
National AYUSH Mission 42.00 47.00 64.63 64.63
TOTAL 105.00 103.00 103.00 102.93
2.22 From the above, it can be seen that the actual expenditure is about 98.0% of BE and 99.9% of RE
2016-17. Thus, there is no under utilization of funds.
VII. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (NIA)
Recommendation/Observations
2.23 The Committee is constrained to note several vacant posts in NIA. Out of 287 sanctioned posts,
125 are lying vacant. Several faculty posts are also vacant as they have been re-notified due to
amendments in Recruitment Rules. The Committee would like to remind the Ministry that it had been
recommending to expedite the process of recruitment for the last two years in its Reports. The Committee
would like to point out that vacant posts would affect the quality of treatment, research and teaching
in the Institute. Concerted efforts must be made to fill up the vacant posts without any further delay.
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards filling the vacant posts.
(Para 7.4)
Action Taken
2.24 Progress made to fill up vacant Teaching Posts: The Institute has a total sanctioned strength of 95
Teaching Posts in different categories (Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor and Lecturer)
out of which 59 are filled and 36 are lying vacant. Out of 36 vacancies, 27 vacancies have already been
notified on All India basis and the last date was 14.03.2017. Scrutiny of the applications received is being
done. A Screening Test will be conducted to shortlist the candidates to the required number for Interview
after which Selection Committees will meet to interview and select the candidates to all these 27 posts
together. It is expected that these posts will be filled up in 2-3 months time. The remaining 9 vacant

14
Teaching posts includes 1 post of Professor and 7 posts of Associate Professor which are to be filled
by Promotion for which no incumbent teachers with the required length of service or category (like SC
or ST) are available who can be considered for promotion to these posts. Efforts will be made to fill
up such posts by way of deputation/ contractual appointments. In any way, all efforts will be made to
fill up almost all the posts very soon. 1 posts of Lecturer fell vacant only in February and this will be
notified soon for Direct Recruitment.
2.25 Non-Teaching Posts: The Institute is in the process of filling up of around 50 posts of Group-B/
C on regular basis by direct recruitment very soon. Notification of these vacancies will be published very
shortly. The Institute has already deployed sufficient number of persons by out-sourcing against a
number of Group-C and MTS posts and various works are managed smoothly and without affecting
quality of work relalting to Academic, Hospital Services, Pharmacy, Offices etc.
VIII. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, KOLKATA
Recommendation/Observations
2.26 The Committee observes that utilization trend for NIH for 2015-16 and 2016-17 has not been
satisfactory. Reasons given for under-utilization of funds by the Ministry are unspent balances of
previous years and vacant posts. The Committee is of the firm view that the under-utilization of funds
is not a healthy trend. It indicates that financial norms are not being followed and this adversely impacts
the accomplishment of targets. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry should make liable the
autonomous bodies under it to adhere to financial norms and act responsibly while utilizing funds so that
unspent balances are not left at the end of the financial year. Further, the Committee has been reiterating
in successive reports on the issue of filling up of vacant posts. Vacant posts do not only mean unspent
balances but also defeat the objectives of the Institute to promote and develop Homoeopathy. The
Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised of the updated status of filling up of the vacant post at NIH.
(Para 8.4)
Action Taken
2.27 The budget allocation and utilization of funds for the year 2015-16 and 2016-17 is as follows:
(` in crore)
 2015-16       2016-17
BE RE AE BE RE AE
Plan 34.00 32.00 26.00 34.00 31.67 31.67
Non-Plan 2.00 2.50 2.50 3.50 3.50 3.50
2.28 From the above, It can be seen that the actual Plan expenditure for the year 2015-16 and
2016-17 is 81.25% and 100% of RE and Non-Plan is 100% in both the years.
2.29 The vacancies in respect of teaching posts of the Institute have been published in January, 2017
and subsequently in February, 2017 so that these can been filled.

15
X. RESEARCH COUNCILS
Recommendation/Observations
2.30 While examining the financial performance of the five Research Councils during 2016-17, Committee
notes that there is significant absence of correlation between BE, RE and Actual Expenditure of CCRAS,
CCRUM and CCRH. The BE of ` 86.00 crore of CCRAS was reduced to ` 75.00 crore at RE stage but
the amount spent as on 31/01/2017 is only ` 56.00 crore. Similarly, the BE of ` 66.00 crore and ` 65.00
crore in respect of CCRUM and CCRH was reduced to ` 64.00 crore and ` 55.50 crore respectively at
the RE stage and the amount expended as on 3/01/2017 is ` 51.00 crore in respect of CCRUM and
` 55.50 crore in respect of CCRH. Since only two months are left and not more than 33% can be spent
during the last quarter of the financial year , savings are certain to occur under these heads. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should impress upon the Research Councils to
exercise due diligence in their budget formulation so that there are no instances of blocking of scarce
resources deployable elsewhere. (Para 10.3)
Action Taken
2.31 The budget allocation and actual expenditure of the Councils for the year 2016-17 is as given below:
(` in crore)
Name of the Council B E RE FE A E
Council for Research in 86.00 75.00 70.00 70.00
Ayurvedic Sciences
Council for Research in Unani 66.00 64.00 57.24 57.24
Medicine
Council for Research in Yoga & 27.00 24.00 24.00 24.00
Naturopathy
Council for Research in Homoeopathy 65.00 55.50 53.18 53.18
Council for Research in Siddha 13.00 10.17 8.42 8.42
2.32 It is submitted that the scare resources have been judiciously utilized to ensure full and complete
usage as allocated in the Final Estimates (FE) and the balance amount deployed to meet urgent requirements
in other sectors.
2.33 It may be mentioned that the total requirement of funds at the RE stage was `1359.25 crore to meet
urgent requirement in respect of the newly approved Institutions. But the Ministry of Finance allocated
`1027.94 crore against BE of `1050.00 crore which in fact amounted to reducing the available budgetary
allocation. To meet the urgent requirement of the new Institutions, funds were transferred from other
schemes including the Councils and hence the FE figures were much lesser than the RE figures in
respect of some of the Councils.

16
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM)
Recommendation/Observations
2.34 The Committee notes that CCRUM has filed only 5 patents during the 12th Five Year Plan which
is indicative of the poor research output. The Committee desires the Ministry to strive to substantially
increase the number of patent filings. (Para 10.10)
Action Taken
2.35 CCRUM has filed provisional patent for five drugs through National Research Development Corporation
during 2015-16. Earlier the Council has been awarded patents for eight drugs during 2010-12. As per
new guidelines of IPR in respect of Ayurveda and Unani drugs any drug or their any ingredients whose
references are available in the classical books cannot be granted for patent. Because of this hurdle, a
number of provisional patent drugs filled by the Council prior to 2012 were denied patent rights. The
guidelines for IPR need to be reviewed. Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy
Recommendation/Observations
2.36 The Committee desires to be apprised of the targetted outcomes of the three Resea Projects of
CCRYN which are to be started in 2017-18. (Para 10.12)
Action Taken
Targeted outcome/Objectives Name of the Collaborating Status
of the scheme Organization
• To conduct total 15 National Institute of Mental Memorandum of Understanding
Research projects in Health & Neurosciences (MoU) has been signed and the
5 years of collaboration. (NIMHANS), Hosur Road, scheme has been initiated.
• To publish minimum 5 Bangalore-560 029,
research papers in a Karnataka.
reputed Journal in a Defence Institute of Memorandum of Understanding
span of 5 years. Physiology & Allied (MoU) has been signed and the
Sciences (DIPAS), scheme has been initiated.
Lucknow Road, Timarpur,
Delhi-110054.
King George's Medical Awaiting for signing of
University Shah Mina Road, Memorandum of Understanding
Chowk, Lucknow, Uttar (MoU)
Pradesh 226003.
Accreditation through National Accreditation Board for Hospital and Healthcare providers (NABH)
Recommendation/Observations
2.37 The Committee feels that accreditation through National Accreditation Board for Hospital and
Health care providers (NABH) is a much needed and much-awaited step in increasing the credibility of

17
Research Councils. Now that CCRAS has identified its institutions for accreditation and working towards
it, the Committee would like the Research Councils of Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, Siddha and Unani to
accelerate the process of accreditation of the institutions under them. An early action in this regard would
help promote AYUSH drugs and therapies. (Para 10.16)
Action Taken
CCRAS
2.38 The process for GAP analysis of five identified CCRAS Institutes namely RARIUD, Jammu; RARISD,
Vijayawada; CARIDD, Kolkata; CARINMSD, Cheruthuruthy and CARIHD, Bhubaneswar has been initiated
for obtaining NABH accreditation.
CCRUM
2.39 The Council has initiated process for accreditation of hospitals attached to six centres viz., Central
Research Institute of Unani Medicine (CRIUM), Hyderabad & Lucknow, Regional Research Institute of
Unani Medicine (RRIUMs), Chennai, Bhadrak, Patna and Srinagar. Requirements for accreditation have
been identified and caps are being filled.
CCRH
2.40 The 1st edition of the standards for National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare
Providers (NABH) accreditation of Homoeopathy Hospitals were existing since 2009. However, the need
was felt to revise these standards. Accordingly, NABH involved the CCRH wherein Council actively
contributed to revised publication of 2nd edition of the standards and guidelines for NABH accreditation
of Homoeopathy Hospitals.
2.41 Also as per the directions of Ministry of AYUSH, the institutes and units under the Council are to
be NABH accredited for which the following initiatives have been undertaken:
• The Council has provided training and orientation for NABH standards to institute's scientists
working in different centers having IPD facility on 2nd -4th Sep.2016 and 9th -11th Dec. 2016
at Delhi and Kottayam respectively.
• The proposals for achieving NABH accreditation are being developed at CRI (H), Noida; CRI
(H), Kottayam and RRI (H), Gudivada. The documentation work consisting of preparation of
manuals has also been initiated. The gaps between the requirements and existing infrastructure
have been identified and the Council is working towards it so that the application for Accreditation
to NABH may be submitted at the earliest.

18
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGET ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observations
3.1 The Committee's attention has also been drawn to the achievement of physical targets by the
Ministry during the 12th Plan period. By and large, the Ministry has tried to accomplish the target set
during the 12th Five Year Plan. Ministry's achievements with respect to schemes / institutions like
Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, New Delhi, National Institute of Siddha, NIUM, Bangalore, MDNIY,
New Delhi, Ayurvedic Mobile Health care Programme under SCSP , Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of
Indian Medicine, Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Laboratory and National AYUSH Mission (NAM) are
praiseworthy. However, there have been important schemes where targets have not been met. Details of
these schemes are as follows:
Name of Scheme Target for 12 Five Y ear Plan Achievements
All India Institute To recruit staff, Registration of
of Ayurveda AIIA under Society Act, 1860,
Procurement of medical equipments
and ancillary services and furniture.
All India Institute of Yoga Establishment of the Institute Land has been identified.
All India Institute of Establishment of the Institute Cabinet approval awaited
Homoeopathy
All India Institute of Establishment of the Institute Agreement between Project
Unani Medicine Management Consultant (PMC) and
Ministry of AYUSH signed.
National Institute of Introduction of new subject in PG Not yet materialized.
Homoeopathy, Kolkata course in Psychiatry, Introduction
of Diploma/Degree course in
Homoeopathy Pharmacy
North Eastern Institute Starting of Panchakarma Assistant Under process
of Ayurveda and one year course. Starting of
Homoeopathy, Shillong construction of phase - II of the
following:-
UG hostel for boys (G+3 floor) DPR for phase II submitted by
UG hostel for girls (G+3 floor) the consulting agency and
Senior resident hostel (G+3 floor) approval from Ministry is awaited.
Type III quarter (G+3 floor) Type
18

19
Name of Scheme    Target for 12 Five Year Plan        Achievements
IV quarter (G+3 floor) Director's
bungalow(G+3 floor) Guest house
cum commercial complex (G+3
floor)
North Eastern Institute of Creation of posts Created posts were advertised on
Folk Medicine, Pasighat deputation basis but no suitable
candidate was found.
National Institute of Identification of location Drawing Matter of setting up of NIMP
Medicinal Plants up of DPR Institution of work under consideration of the
Ministry of AYUSH.
National Institute of To establish institute Standing Finance Committee
Sowa-Rigpa Memo circulated for comments.
Central Council for Establishment of CRI of Yoga and CRIYN, Jhajjar, and CRIYN,
Research in Yoga and Naturopathy Nagamangala, Karnataka have been
Naturopathy upgraded to Post Graudate Institute
of Yoga and Naturopathy Education
and Research and construction of
building for setting up of these PG
institutes are in full swing. CRIYN,
Bhubaneshwar construction assigned
to CPWD but some resistance from
local people; steps are being taken
to resolve the issues.
Extra Mural Research Publication of 84 Research Project Research project papers published
papers to encourage research on in reported journals.
classical texts and investigate
fundamental principles of AYUSH
system.
Pharmacovigilance initiative New Scheme yet to be approved.
for ASU drugs
Central Drug Controller
for AYUSH
3.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that physical targets set for the 12th Five Year Plan with
respect to the schemes listed above have not been achieved. This is mainly due to incomplete work in
projects due to procedural delays leading to delay in construction activities. This obviously leads to time
and cost overruns in the long run. Time lines for completion of these procedural processes must be set

20
and efforts need to be made to adhere to them for timely completion of projects. Other reasons for non-
accomplishment of targets with respect to schemes were non-filling up of vacancies and incomplete
research projects and publication of research papers. Two schemes of Pharmacovigilance Initiative for
ASU drugs and Central Drug Controller for AYUSH are yet to be approved. With no dearth of funds,
the Ministry could have easily achieved the set targets had it done proper planning and implementation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to be more vigilant about the physical as well as
financial targets set so that they are achieved within the specified time period. A proper mechanism for
monitoring at various levels and addressing pending issues pertaining to conceptualization can be
devised for timely completion of projects, starting off new schemes etc. (Para 2.4 & 2.5)
Action taken
3.3 The status on achievements of various physical targets set for 12th Plan is detailed below:
(i) In Extra Mural Research, a target of publication of 84 Research Project papers was fixed for
12th Five Year Plan and we have managed to publish around 70 Research Papers in 12th Five
Year Plan. The target could not be achieved because of the guideline under the scheme which
stipulated that the publication may be done only after completion of project. Recently, the
policy regarding publication has been revised under EMR Scheme to encourage the Principal
Investigators to publish their research work at any stage of their project so that the productivity
of EMR projects can be enhanced.
(ii) Director, North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine, Pasighat has re-advertised the posts for
filling up the posts at the earliest and for creation of other posts, the matter has been taken
up with IFD for sending a proposal to the Ministry of Finance.
(iii) All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi has filled up most of the sanctioned posts through
direct/deputation basis required for faculty, hospital and administration. The process to re-
advertise for filling up of some of these vacant posts is in process.
(iv) The All India Institute of Yoga will now be set up as an All India Institute of Ayurveda, Yoga
and Naturopathy (AIAY&N) at Goa as an extension of the existing All India Institute of
Ayurveda, New Delhi and the National Institute of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy at Panchkula
will be set up as an extension of the existing National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.
(v) Similarly, the nomenclature of the All India Institute of Unani Medicine and All India Institute
of Homoeopathy have been changed as National Institute of Unani Medicine and National
Institute of Homoeopathy. These Institutes are being established as extension of the existing
National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore and National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata.
(vi) As regards introduction of new subject in PG course in Psychiatry Introduction of Diploma/
Degree course in Homoeopathy Pharmacy by NIH, Kolkata, it is stated that due to non-availability
of Teaching Faculties and also non-availability of separate Psychiatry unit as per the Clinical
Establishment Act, the PG course on the subject could not be introduced. Similarly, introduction
of Diploma/Degree Course in Homoeopathy Pharmacy is awaiting finalization of draft course
curriculum of the subject.

21
(vii) The proposal for starting a one year Panchakarma Therapist Course as submitted by Director,
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong is under examination
and certain clarification has been sought from NEIAH for taking further action in the matter.
The Ministry has approved the Phase-II work of NEIAH, Shillong at a cost of `57 crore to
create various infrastructural facilities. PMC has been selected and the contract has been
awarded.
(viii) EFC meeting held on 6th March, 2017 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary &
Secretary (Expenditure) to consider the proposal for Establishment of National Institute of
Sowa Rigpa (NISR) at Leh (Jammu & Kashmir) has recommended the proposal and further
action in the matter is being taken accordingly.
(ix) The 'Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy
Medicines' was included in the budget head of Department/Ministry of AYUSH in the 12th
Plan. The scheme could not be implemented for want of regulatory structure and centralized
coordination system for carrying out pharmacovigilance activities in a systematic manner.
Accordingly, certain notional amount of funds were kept in the annual plan BEs.
(x) Now twelve posts of Drug Controllers and Inspectors have been created in the Ministry to
oversee the enforcement of legal provisions for regulation, quality control and safety surveillance
of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy medicines. Consequently, a vertical AYUSH
structure is being set up under the aegis of Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO) and recruitment rules are in approval process for the central AYUSH regulatory
posts to make appointment of regular officers. Meanwhile, All India Institute of Ayurveda,
New Delhi has started functioning and is likely to be fully operationalized in 2017-18. This
institute like All India Institute of Medical Sciences will act as National Pharmacovigilance
Coordination Centre for ASU&H drugs and later on similar All India Institutes of Unani
Medicine and Homoeopathy may be considered to act as separate national coordination centres
for the pharmacovigilance activities of Unani and Homoeopathy drugs respectively. With these
developments and possibilities in mind, it is envisaged in 2017-18 to initiate the recruitment
process for AYUSH Drugs Controllers & Inspectors after approval of recruitment rules and
implement the pharmacovigilance initiative after taking necessary approvals and provisioning
of funds at BE and RE stages. Due care will be taken to conceptualize the scheme with
tangible targets, outcomes and monitoring mechanism for smooth implementation of the projects
and adherence to timelines in terms of physical and financial achievements.
(xi) The matter of setting up of National Institute of Medicinal Plants (NIMP), was being pursued
by the Ministry of AYUSH with the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir, for setting up
of NIMP in Bhaderwah area of Jammu & Kashmir since year 2014-15. However, based on
the report of Central Team's visit to the identified sites during 27th - 29th July 2015, the
Bhaderwah area of Jammu & Kashmir has not been found suitable for setting up of NIMP
by this Ministry and in the meantime in April 2016 a Writ Petition on the matter has also been
filed in the Hon'ble High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and the Hon'ble Court in an Interim Order

22
had directed to maintain a status-quo on the matter and now the matter of setting up of NIMP
is sub-judiced. The counter reply on behalf of the NMPB, Ministry of AYUSH has already been
filed and the status of the case is still pending.
(xii) In respect of CCRUM the following steps have been taken:
• The Council has achieved the targets for infrastructural development. During the 12th
Plan construction of the building for Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine (CRIUM),
Lucknow and Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine (RRIUM), Patna was
completed.
• There was a proposal for construction of the building for Regional Research Centre
(RRC), Silchar during the 12th Plan. This proposal was cleared by the Competent
Authority only on 29th March, 2017. Approval for an estimated cost of `47.88 crore has
been made to the Council for construction of the building. A token amount of `4.88 crore
has been released to NPCC on 31st March, 2017. The time schedule for completion of
the construction is 24 months from the date of award to the concerned firm.
• During 12th Plan, a total of 56 vacancies were filled up.
• Physical Achievements
The Council has achieved the targets of Physical achievements for 12th Plan as detailed below:
Physical Target and Achievements during 12th Plan
Targets for 12th      Achievements             Remarks
Plan (Units)
1           2                3
Commencement of Projects Commenced :62 Four collaborative projects have been
Research Projects: 67 approved by the SFC in the last quarter
of 2016-17. Approved amount is to be
released and work initiated during
2017-18. One IMR project could not be
taken
Completion of Research Projects completed : 36 Reports are being compiled and
Projects: 36 sequentially published.
Filing of Patent Provisional patent filed: Provisional patents are under
Application: 09 5 drugs examination. Research data on other four
patents is under compilation.
Commercialisation of Patent/ 16 (7 patent and 9 non Drugs commercialised till June, 2014
Non Patent drugs: 01 patent drugs)

23
1           2                3
Publication of Research papers 125 (Clinical-21, Drugs-25, There papers have been published in
in peer reviewed journals: 30 Survey-38 and Literar-41) the peer reviewed journals.
Validation of Classical Drugs/ Studies completed: 28 Data on the completed studies is under
Therapies: 94 drugs compilation for publication in the form
Studies in progress: 48 of technical reports.
drugs
New studies recently
started: 18 drugs
(xiii) In respect of CCRH the following steps have been taken:
• Council has been able to achieve more than 90% of physical targets set for the 12th FYP
in most of the research projects (details are enclosed as Annexure I). The variation in
the number of studies proposed to be concluded and actual is due to procedural delay
in getting approval in initiation of the studies.
• Regarding construction related work, Council has undertaken construction activities at
Agartala which has been completed in time bound manner. Construction was initiated at
Mumbai and land have been procured for own building from state government at Jaipur,
Lucknow and Siliguri. The vertical expansion have been initiated at RRI, Gudivada and
completed at CRI, Kottayam and RRI (H), Kolkata. The virology laboratory is made
functional at RRI (H), Kolkata and construction work for Drug Standardization laboratory
at CRI (H), Noida is in progress. The delay in construction of building at Imphal is due
to that an NGO at Imphal has filed a case in the National Green Tribunal and obtained
stay for the construction activities on the land in the campus of Regional Institute of
Medical Sciences, Imphal.
• Council has filled most of the vacancies.
• Council has also utilized the grant fully received by it during the 12th plan period.
• Council is conducting onsite monitoring as well as through periodic conference and video
calls for evaluation of the research work and is also reviewed by the special committees
and scientific advisory committee of CCRH, periodically.
Further Recommendation
3.4 The Committee is not convinced by the achievements listed out by the Ministry with respect
to physical targets of the 12th Plan. The problem in guidelines regarding publication of Research
project paper, re-advertisement of posts, changing the nomenclature of All India Institute of
Unani Medicine, All India Institute of Homoeopathy, delay in finalization of draft curriculum,
non-availability of teaching faculties, non-availability of separate psychiatry unit in NIH, Kolkata

24
etc. are routine issues. They could have been resolved with a streamlined monitoring mechanism
for early and timely intervention of the Ministry and necessary remedial measures taken. The
Committee also takes serious note of the fact that the Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance
of Ayurveda Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy medicines could not be implemented for want of
regulatory structure and centralized coordination system for carrying out pharmacovigilance
activities in a systematic manner. It is quite intriguing that a vertical AYUSH structure under
the aegis of the CDSCO with no specific time-frame as such is still in the process of being set
up. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to put in place a robust monitoring
mechanism with respect to the procedural issues for a better monitoring of the progress of
projects/schemes. The Committee would also like the Ministry to timely implement the scheme
of pharmacoviligance of AYUSH medicines and setting up of a vertical AYUSH structure for
quality control of AYUSH drugs and proper coordination among various AYUSH centres.
Recommendation/Observations
3.5 The Committee observes that there is a shortfall of 
` 1050.13 crores against the projected demand
of AYUSH ` 2478.78 crore Ministry of for the financial year 2017-18. The Committee is of the view
that AYUSH has huge potential for effective presentation and therapy that is also safe and cost effective
and hence that the Ministry should not face any fund crunch. Keeping in view the fact that peoples' out-
of-pocket expenditure on health amounts to 64% of the total Health Expenditure (source: National Health
Accounts 2013-14), it would be befitting to allocate a substantially higher proportion of the Health
Budget for the Ministry of AYUSH. AYUSH has huge potential for effective prevention and therapy that
is also safe and cost effective. Inadequate allocation for AYUSH is, in the opinion of the Committee,
the main reason for not achieving the objectives of AYUSH. The Committee simultaneously observes that
it is imperative that in order to obtain the best possible health outcomes, allocation of resources is
prioritized across competing ends and the available resources deployed in a more efficient manner. The
Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to prioritize the schemes and utilize funds accordingly and
move the Ministry of Finance for more funds at RE 2017-18 stage based on the efficient and productive
utilization of BE 2017-18 allocation. (Para 2.8)
Action taken
3.6 The Ministry has already approached the Ministry of Finance for additional funds to the tune of
`367.76 crore particularly for eight new and upcoming Institutions. The Ministry of Finance have
informed that the proposal for additionality would be considered at RE stage based on the pace of
expenditure over last six months, pending UCs, unspent balance and the absorption capacity of the
Ministry.
Further Recommendation
3.7 The Committee points out that two of the fundamental issues that hamper allocation of
more funds to the Ministry are pending UCs and lack of absorption capacity. It would like to be
updated about the corrective measures taken by the Ministry to address these concerns. The
Committee also desires to be apprised of the quantum of additional funds, if any, allocated at
RE stage and utilization figures thereof.

25
Recommendation/Observations
3.8 The Committee would also like to express concern about the schemes where there have been nil
allocation at the RE stage. Schemes like National Institute of Medicinal Plants, National Institute of
Sowa Rigpa, Indian Institute of AYUSH Pharmaceutical Sciences, Central Council for Research in Sowa
Rigpa, Pharmacovigilance initiative for ASU drugs and Central Drug Controller for AYUSH indicate
such a trend. SFC approval for the scheme-Pharmacovigilance initiative for ASU Drugs is still awaited.
Similar is the case with Central Drug Controller for AYUSH as Recruitment Rules for 12 regulatory posts
were yet not approved and required officers yet not to be recruited. Further, Central Council for Research
in Sowa Rigpa, National Institute of Sowa Rigpa, National Institute of Medicinal Plants, Indian Institute
of AYUSH Pharmaceutical Sciences have not taken off as envisaged by the Ministry for the past three
to four years. The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendations of proper assessment
and planning for launching any new scheme before seeking allocations. All necessary approvals/
clearances need to be obtained before hand so that there is no inordinate delay in implementation of
schemes. (Para 2.13)
Action Taken
3.9 The steps taken to operationalise various schemes and their status is elaborated below:
(i) National Institute of Sowa Rigpa - EFC meeting held on 6th March, 2017 under the
Chairmanship of Finance Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) to consider the proposal for
Establishment of National Institute of Sowa Rigpa (NISR) at Leh (Jammu and Kashmir) has
recommended the proposal and further action in the matter is being taken accordingly.
(ii) Central Drug Controller -  Secretary (AYUSH) has taken review meetings with the Senior
Officers of the Department of Health and Family Welfare to expedite setting up Central vertical
structure of AYUSH drugs regulation under CDSCO. This matter is being followed up in
accordance with the decision of 5th March, 2015 meeting taken by Health and Family Welfare
Minister to create AYUSH vertical in CDSCO on the directive from Prime Minister's Office.
(iii) Pharmacovigilance of ASU Drug -  The 'Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance of
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Medicines' being part of AYUSH Budget will be
taken up for implementation from 2017-18 as the required infrastructural resources would be
available for coordination, planning and regulatory actions related to safety monitoring of
medicines under pharmacovigilance system. Details of the intended actions by the Ministry for
Central Drugs Controller and Pharmacovigilance Initiative are provided in the reply to para 2.5
of the PSC's report.
(iv) National Institute of Medicinal Plants -  The matter of setting up of National Institute of
Medicinal Plants (NIMP), was being pursued by the Ministry of AYUSH with the State
Government of Jammu and Kashmir, for setting up of NIMP in Bhaderwah area of Jammu
and Kashmir since year 2014-15. However, based on the report of Central Team's visit to the
identified sites during 27th - 29th July 2015, the Bhaderwah area of Jammu and Kashmir has
not been found suitable for setting up of NIMP by this Ministry and in the meantime in April

26
2016 a Writ Petition on the matter has also been filed in the Hon'ble High Court of Jammu
and Kashmir and the Hon'ble Court in an Interim Order had directed to maintain a status-quo
on the matter and now the matter of setting up of NIMP is sub-judiced.
3.10 The counter reply on behalf of the NMPB, Ministry of AYUSH has already been filed and the status
of the case is still pending.
Further Recommendation
3.11 The Committee in its previous Reports on Demands for Grants have been exhorting the
Ministry to quickly sort out the lingering issues concerning the regulatory framework of AYUSH
drugs. The Ministry has not been able to set up a central vertical structure of AYUSH drugs
regulation under CDSCO uptill now, despite the fact that the National Health Policy 2017 recognizes
the need to establish a robust and effective quality assurance mechanism for AYUSH drugs. The
feedback that Secretary (AYUSH) had taken review meeting is hardly convincing. The fact
remains that the current arrangement is not producing the intended results. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that an empowered committee may be set up to monitor the progress of
the new regulatory structure of AYUSH drugs which may submit periodical progress reports to
the Ministry.
III. REGULA TION AND QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA, UNANI AND
HOMOEOPATHIC (ASU&H) DRUGS
Recommendation/Observations
3.12 The Committee finds that a large number of samples of ASU&H drugs have failed the testing
procedure in 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. Even in the year 2016-17, out of 330 samples which were
tested, 36 samples have failed. Interestingly 35 samples were Homoeopathic drugs and only 1 ASU drug.
The Committee would like to point out that the Ministry has not informed about the action taken with
respect to the defaulters as done in previous years. The Committee feels that testing of samples and
consequent action thereupon is one of the most important components of quality control of ASU&H
drugs. The Committee is of the firm view that in case of samples failing the testing process, strict action
needs to be taken. However, merely issuing show cause notices, suspending/cancelling licenses would not
help as the defaulters may start with a new and different license. The Committee believes that in order
to ensure proper and effective regulation of ASU&H drugs, the defaulters must be prosecuted for trying
to play with the lives of people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that stringent measures should
be in place against the erring manufacturers so as to dissuade them from trying to pass just any
formulation as ASU&H drugs. (Para 3.7)
Action taken
3.13 The Committee is informed that as per Section 33 E, 33 EE, 33 EEA in Chapter-IV A of the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 respectively are already in place to deal with misbranded, adulterated and
spurious ASU drugs. The State Licensing Authorities are empowered to prohibit the manufacture and sale
of ASU drugs under section 33EEC of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. Ministry of AYUSH has

27
written letters to State Government from time to time to check the quality of ASU drugs in accordance
to the provisions under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 1945. Nevertheless, the observations
and recommendations of Hon'ble PSC have been noted and appropriate directions tangible with the legal
provisions may be issued to the State Authorities to take effective actions against erring manufacturers.
Further Recommendation
3.14 The Committee is aware of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules
made thereunder regarding dealing with misbranded, adulterated and spurious ASU drugs and
also about powers of State Licensing Authorities in this regard. Despite these provisions,
misbranded, adulterated and spurious ASU&H drugs have remained a festering problem and the
safety, efficacy and quality of AYUSH drugs have not been assured. The Committee would like
the Ministry to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 in an appropriate manner so that
defaulters are brought to book and strict action taken against them. The Committee is of the
firm view that suitable amendments alone can help in controlling/monitoring the sale of
misbranded, adulterated and spurious ASU drugs.
Recommendation/Observations
3.15 The Committee is dismayed to note that even after two years since the decision of the creation of
a vertical structure in CDSCO was taken, no real progress has been made so far. Only 12 regulatory posts
have been notified. Recruitment rules for these posts were still in the process of finalization. The
Committee would like to point out that even through CDSCO is under the Department of Health and
Family Welfare of which the Ministry of AYUSH was once a part of, things are not moving at a swift
pace towards finalization of the vertical structure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
may take up this issue with the Department of Health and Family Welfare on a priority basis and also
fix a timeline for creation of this vertical structure. The Committee would like to emphasize the fact that
regulation and quality control of ASU&H drugs is one of the most important areas in the Ministry and
if the ASU&H drugs market is regulated efficiently, it will go a long way in building credibility of these
drugs and strengthen the process of mainstreaming of AYUSH. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation made in its 95th Report that all inter-ministerial issues may be ironed out within a
designated timeline and the vertical structure created at the earliest. (Para 3.11)
Action Taken
3.16 In order to ensure that the inter-ministerial issues are sorted out amicably, a meeting was held on
8th February, 2017 under the chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH) with the Addl. Secretary (Health and
FW) and DCG (I) to discuss and review inter alia issues of AYUSH vertical establishment in CDSCO.
Minutes of the meeting have been circulated and a specific letter written to Department of Health and
Family Welfare on 29th March, 2017 with the approval of MoS (AYUSH) for taking necessary action
in respect of issuing a formal communication/notification about the AYUSH vertical structure, work
allocation of the designated Technical officers of the Ministry of AYUSH for discharge of their duties
and for sending statutory issues/documents of AYUSH drugs to the DCG (I) and registration of AYUSH
Ethical Committees. Ministry of AYUSH has already taken up the task of framing recruitment rules in

28
consultation with DoPT, UPSC and Law Ministry before the recruitment process is initiated for the
twelve (12) regulatory posts including seven (07) posts of Inspectors and five (05) posts of Assistant
Drug Controllers and Deputy Drug Controllers.
Further Recommendation
3.17 The Committee has already recommended with respect to this issue in para 3.11.
Recommendation/Observation
3.18 The Committee also takes into cognizance the fact that the Central Sector Scheme for developing
Pharmacovigilance system for ASU&H drugs was still being conceptualized. The Committee urges upon
the Ministry to immediately iron out all pending issues concerning pharmacovigilance system for AYUSH
so that the scheme is implemented as early as possible and all necessary approvals sought and other
procedural formalities completed. (Para 3.12)
Action Taken
3.19 It is envisaged to seek the approval for implementing the Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance
of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Medicines in 2017-18, for which necessary allocation has
been made under the respective budget head and Memorandum is being prepared for interdepartmental
appraisal followed by approval of the competent authority. Plan of Action has been worked out and
National Coordination Centre to implement the scheme identified.
Further Recommendation
3.20 The Central Sector Scheme for developing Pharmacovigilance system for ASU&H drugs was
envisaged in the 12th Plan but the scheme could not be implemented even after conclusion of
the 12th Plan period. The Committee is of the view that this inordinate delay in implementation
of the project reflects lack of efficiency and inadequate follow-up by the administrative machinery
in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Ministry to constantly
monitor and follow up on the implementation of this important project concerning pharmacovigilance
of AYUSH drugs so that the issue of time-lag in utilization of allocated funds and implementation
of this Project is promptly addressed.
Recommendation/Observation
3.21 The Committee observes that in the past the oft-repeated contention of the Ministry has been that
due to the ineffectiveness of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954,
it has not been possible to take stringent action against the misleading and exaggerated claims of
efficacy of the AYUSH remedies and that certain amendments were needed to be carried out in the said
Act. The Department of Health and Family Welfare which had constituted a Task Force for suggesting
amendments to the aforesaid Act, has been requested to expedite consolidation of the amendment provisions
recommended by the Task Force. But the latest submissions of the Ministry indicate that the amendment
to the Drugs and Magic Remedies Act is far from being materialized. The Committee would like the
Ministry to indicate the time-frame within which the amendment of the Magic Remedies Act would be
enacted. (Para 3.15)

29
Action Taken
3.22 The Department of Health and Family Welfare is responsible to take up the revision or amendment
of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954. However, it is understood
that a view has been taken on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers to include the regulatory
provisions for advertisements of drugs in the new legislation being framed for Drugs and Cosmetics.
Ministry of AYUSH separately took up the amendment of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 to insert
regulatory provisions for Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs related advertisements, on which final view
is to be taken on the basis of comments/suggestions/objections received from the stakeholders and to
consider whether or not or in what manner the intended rules be notified.
Further Recommendation
3.23 The Committee is constrained to note the snail's pace of progress made in amending the
Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954. Taking into account the
fact that the lack of stringent regulatory provisions has allowed unscrupulous elements to dupe
innocent people by making tall claims about providing cure to cancer, liver cirrhosis, kidney
failure and other chronic diseases without scientific evidence, the Committee in its 75th Report
concerning Ministry of AYUSH (the then Department of AYUSH) presented to Parliament on 9th
December , 2013 had recommended that urgent measures be taken to amend the said Act. Almost
four years have passed since then, but the amendment could not be finalized. The Committee,
therefore, deprecates the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in whose legislative domain the
amendment to the said Act falls, for its inertia and indifference in the matter and would like
the Ministry of AYUSH to convey this Committee's displeasure to the former. The Committee
would also recommend that the necessary amendments be carried out expeditiously within a
specified time-frame and the outcome intimated to the Committee.
IV . NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION (NAM)
3.24 The Committee is aware that the overall standard of AYUSH education in the country continues to
be extremely poor. The Committee feels that the mandatory requirement of accreditation of teaching
hospitals and surprise inspection teams are efforts in the right direction. Further, in order to promote
AYUSH education, effective curricula reforms will also need to be carried out. The Committee also
recommends that practitioners of Allopathy should be sensitized to the strengths of AYUSH system and
to the cross system referrals between healthcare providers of all systems of medicine so that ignorance
about AYUSH is dispelled and AYUSH is integrated in the health delivery system. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should prepare a framework for fostering collaborative and interdisciplinary
AYUSH research of contemporary relevance. Further, NEET and NPGET test for UG and PG students
to regulate the entry of qualified students into these institutions is a much awaited step. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry that these measures may be implemented at the earliest for visible
improvement in the quality of AYUSH education. (Para 4.6)

30
Action Taken
National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) for admission in Under-Graduate course of ASU&H
colleges:
3.25 In order to bring meritorious students to the ASU&H systems of medicine in the country, a decision
was taken that the entrance exam being conducted by the private association may be stopped and all
admissions in Under-Graduate course of ASU&H colleges shall be made only through National Eligibility
cum Entrance Test (NEET) to be conducted by the CBSE from the Academic Year 2017-18. This matter
was taken up with CBSE and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
3.26 Meanwhile, the Ministry has received representations from certain State Governments expressing
their inability to admit students into AYUSH-UG courses for the Academic Year 2017-18 as CBSE has
not included the AYUSH-UG courses in its notification. In this regard, the Ministry has also received
representations about allowing the management/NRI quota as it is being permitted for MBBS/BDS seats.
The matter was examined by the Ministry and after considering the representations made by the State
Governments, following has been decided and conveyed to the State Governments on 26.04.2017:
(i) Since, it is important to ensure that meritorious students/candidates come to AYUSH streams
of medicine, it would be advisable to the State/UT Government to adopt the merit list of NEET
for admission in AYUSH-UG courses for the Academic Year 2017-18 as per the existing
reservation policies of the concerned State Government in tune with CBSE notification of
NEET for modern medicine.
(ii) However, if due to some difficulties the State/UT Governments are unable to adopt NEET
merit list for AYUSH-UG admission for A.Y 2017-18, then such State/UT Government may
admit students in all the AYUSH Colleges/Institutions (Public and Private) through Common
Entrance Test (CET) of the concerned State Government as per the existing Rules and Policies
of the concerned State/UT/Institute/University as done in the previous year (2016-17.
(iii) Admission in AYUSH-UG Courses shall be compulsorily through NEET merit list from the A.Y .
2018-19.
Further Recommendation
3.27 The Committee appreciates the Ministry for introducing National Eligibility cum Entrance
Test (NEET) for bringing meritorious students to the AYUSH systems of medicine in the country.
The Committee would, however, like to reiterate that the Ministry must make efforts to integrate
traditional as well as modern system of medicine and education so that an integrated approach
can be taken in health delivery system. The Committee would also like to highlight the need for
curricula reforms in order to promote quality AYUSH education and recommends to the Ministry
to take necessary action in this regard.
V . NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendation/Observation
3.28 It is a matter of serious concern that despite India being home to 7% of the world's bio-diversity
which makes it one of the 17 mega bio-diversity rich countries in the world, the market for medicinal

31
plants is not well developed in India and the country has lagged behind in maintaining the passport data
regarding place, time and phytochemical properties of medicinal plants, which are the three basic
parameters of quality assurance. Since the greatest challenge to widespread acceptance of AYUSH is
faced in quality assurance which largely depends on the source of raw materials, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry take necessary initiative to build a database that traces the source of raw materials.
(Para 5.5)
Action Taken
3.29 National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) is coordinating the Medicinal Plants Component under
National AYUSH Mission (NAM) Scheme of Ministry of AYUSH for identified species of medicinal plants.
Under this, the nursery raising of medicinal plants is also included. State Missions of each State are
advised to take necessary initiative so that the farmers maintain passport data for medicinal plants.
Further Recommendation
3.30 The Committee is of the view that merely advising the State Missions to take the initiative
to maintain passport database of medicinal plants is not enough. The Committee would, therefore,
recommend to the Ministry to play a pro-active role in this regard and incentivize the State
Governments to start maintaining a database of medicinal plants.
VI. STATUS OF PROGRESS OF SCHEMES IN NORTH EASTERN STATES
Recommendation/Observation
3.31 The Committee notes that all the three regional institutes, namely Ayurveda Regional Research
Institute for Gastro-intestinal Disorders, Guwahati, Regional Ayurveda Research Institute, Gangtok and
Regional Ayurveda Research Institute, Itanagar are mandated to carry out clinical research. The Committee
would like to know whether the knowledge generated through the clinical research carried out at these
Institutes have produced tangible health outcomes and facilitated in finding solutions to health issues
specific to the North East region. (Para 6.3)
Action Taken
3.32 Validation of Ayurvedic classical medicine is one of the major mandate of Clinical research of
Council which is extended through Intra Mural Research scheme.
In Twelfth Plan:
• Validation of 13 Classical Ayurvedic formulations in 3 diseases/conditions viz. Osteoarthritis,
Rheumatoid Arthritis, Diabetes Mellitus etc. through 5 clinical research projects were completed
in Research Ayurveda Regional Institute for Gastro-Intestinal Disorders, Guwahati. 2 projects
on Iron Deficiency Anaemia and Agnimandya are to be initiated in the institute. Besides this,
Health Care services through OPD and other outreach activities such as Tribal Health Care
Research, Swasthya Rakshan Programme, Ayurveda Mobile Health Care Programme under
SCSP, Ayurvedic Health Centre under NE Plan etc. are also provided.

32
• Due to constraints of requisite infrastructure and manpower, the clinical research projects
could not be undertaken in the initial phase of 12th Plan in Regional Ayurveda Research
Institute, Gangtok and Regional Ayurveda Research Institute, Itanagar. However, Health Care
services through OPD and other outreach activities were provided in these institutes. At
present, Clinical research projects on Rheumatoid Arthritis and Essential Hypertension for
validation of Classical Ayurvedic formulations are in progress at RARI, Gangtok and RARI,
Itanagar respectively. Besides this 3 projects on Amlapitta, Aruchi and Grahani at RARI
Gangtok and one project on Agnimandya at RARI, Itanagar are to be initiated. Health Care
services through OPD and other outreach activities such as Tribal Health Care Research,
Swasthya Rakshan Programme, Ayurveda Mobile Health Care Programme under SCSP , Ayurvedic
Health Centre under NE Plan etc. are also continued in the institutes. The details are annexed
at Annexure-II.
Further Recommendation
3.33 The Committee is disdained to note that work on various research projects were hampered
at RARI, Gangtok and RARI, Itanagar due to infrastructural constraints which should have been
taken care of in the first instance before the starting of these Institutes.The Committee also
notes that the reply of the Ministry is bereft of the specific information asked for by the
Committee as to whether the knowledge generated through the research carried out at these
Research Institutes have facilitated solutions to the health issues specific to the North Eastern
region. The Committee further desires to know the time-lag in translating research outcomes
at these Institutes into tangible health products.
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong
Recommendation/Observation
3.34 The Committee taking into note the financial and physical achievement of the Institute finds that
though allocation for NEIAH was reduced to 
` 7.55 cores at the RE stage, even the reduced amount has
not been fully utilized. The Committee views with concern the non-filling up of vacant posts. The
Committee also notes that out of 112 posts at NEIAH, 61 posts are still lying vacant which is certain
to impair the functioning of NEIAH. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute should take
up the issue of filling up of vacant posts on a priority basis so that the facilities being offered by the
Institute and the courses run by it do not face manpower constraints. (Para 6.9)
Action Taken
3.35 The allocation of budget at RE stage for the year 2016-17 to NEIAH was `7.55 crore and the said
allocation has been fully utilized. Phase-I of the project has been completed and taken over by the
Institute in October, 2016 and the hospital and colleges are running full-fledged. Admission into 1st year
UG courses of BAMS and BHMS completed and classes have already commenced w.e.f. 30.11.2016.
The first terminal examination of both the courses have been ongoing w.e.f. 1st April, 2017.
3.36 Out of total 112 (including four earlier sanctioned posts) posts for which advertisement was
published during November, 2015, a total of 36 posts have been filled up on regular basis and 20 posts

33
were filled up on contractual basis. Written test for 28 posts has already been conducted and interview
is pending. An advertisement for walk-in-interview for the remaining 28 posts has been published several
times firstly in September, 2016, secondly in January, 2017 and the latest in March, 2017 in the
newspapers and the official web-site of the Institute. All out measures are being taken to fill up the vacant
posts on priority basis but for the reason of non-availability of suitable candidates.
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the final outcome in filling up vacant posts
at NEIAH.
North Eastern of Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Passighat
Recommendation/Observation
3.38 The Committee notes that though the NEIFM, Passighat has been inaugurated, but due to non
filling up of various posts, the Institute is not operational. The Committee recommends that all out
efforts should be made for filling up of vacant posts at the earliest. (Para 6.11)
Action Taken
3.39 NEIFM, Pasighat has not yet been formally inaugurated. As regards vacant posts, it is stated that:-
(i) 13 posts were advertised and the recruitment is in process.
(ii) 18 vacant posts were Advertised and due to non-receipt of adequate applications, the posts
are being re-advertised.
(iii) Another 62 posts on contract were sanctioned earlier out of which 33 posts have been filled
on contract/casual basis. Balance vacancies have been filled through outsourcing.
Further Recommendation
3.40 The Committee desires to know as to by when NEIFM is targeted to be made functional and
whether there is any time and cost overruns involved in making the Institute operational. The
Committee would also like to highlight the fact that without adequate manpower, the very
purpose of setting up of this Institute would be defeated and it would take a very long time for
the NEIFM, Passighat to become operational. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a pro-
active approach needs to be adopted by the Ministry to fill up the vacant posts so that NEIFM
becomes operational as early as possible.
VIII. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, KOLKATA
Recommendation/Observation
3.41 The Committee is constrained to observe that the expansion of the existing 100 bedded to 250
bedded hospital is still in progress and yet not completed. The expansion of the Hospital was initially
supposed to be completed in 2010-11 and after revision, the deadline was extended till May, 2015. The
Committee would like to highlight that more than two years have passed after extension and the

34
expansion project is still not complete. The Committee is of the view that this pace of work reflects the
lackadaisical attitude of the concerned agency. It also speaks volumes about inefficient and non-serious
efforts to complete the project. The Committee would also like to stress upon the fact that not only the
project is being delayed year after year, it is also leading to cost escalation. Further, it seems that the
Ministry has not taken the recommendations of the Committee's in its previous report seriously. Given
the past track record of the pace of work and empty assurances, the Committee strongly recommends that
the expansion of the hospital should be completed in all respects without any further delay.
(Para 8.6)
Action Taken
3.42 The observation of the Committee have been noted and all out efforts have been made to make the
new hospital expansion building functional immediately on completion of internal electrical (AC) works
by CPWD.
Further Recommendation
3.43 The Committee finds the reply of the Ministry with respect to expansion of the existing 100
bedded to 250 bedded hospital very vague and evasive as the present status of the work done in
this regard has not been furnished by the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that the
completion of work of internal electrical connections by CPWD would not take much time and
hopes that all other expansion related works are complete in all respects so that 250 bedded
hospital become operational at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised if there
has been any cost escalation due to delay in the expansion work.
X. RESEARCH COUNCILS
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
Recommendation/Observation
3.44 The Committee observes that trans-disciplinary and collaborative research strategies that correlate
AYUSH concepts with bio-medical research would need to be adopted and validation and standardization
of classical AYUSH formulations through clinical trials would need to be carried. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should prepare a framework for giving AYUSH research a paradigm shift
so that robust standards and safety and efficacy data of Ayurvedic drugs and therapies could be
developed. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken
3.45 CCRAS
• The study on AYUSH QOL-2C for increasing quality of life in lung cancer and breast cancer
and the study on AYUSH Manas for Mental retardation has been concluded and data analysis
has been completed. Preparation of technical Report/Monographs is under process after which
the same will be made available in the health care system.
• The study on 11 Clinical Research Projects pertaining to validation of Ayurvedic drugs/therapies
in 9 disease conditions will be completed in 2017-18. After the completion of study the data
will be analyzed.

35
3.46 CCRUM
The Collaborative studies are being conducted by the CCRUM with reputed medical institutions such
as All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi; Jamia Hamdard; Jamia Millia Islamia;
Amity University, New Delhi and National Institute of Research on Tuberculosis (ICMR), Chennai;
Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology ICPO (ICMR), Noida and National Institute of Nutrition
NIN (ICMR), Hyderabad. In these collaborative studies efficacy and safety of Unani treatments are being
validated in well-planned randomized controlled trials. The diseases on which collaborative studies are
being conducted include Vitiligo, Obesity, Cervical Erosion, Dengue, Pulmonary Tuberculosis, Infective
hepatitis and Diabetes mellitus etc.
Further Recommendation
3.47 The Committee finds that study on AYUSH QOL-2C has been concluded by CCRAS and
eleven clinical research projects pertaining to Ayush drugs/therapies in nine disease conditions
will be completed in 2017-18. Similarly, 33 projects of CCRH in collaboration with institutes like
Bose Institute, Kolkata, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, JIPMER, Pondicherry, AIIMS,
New Delhi, Madras University, Chennai, IIT, Delhi have also been completed and 15 projects are
on-going. The Committee hopes that the studies completed are translated into tangible AYUSH
drugs which are scientifically validated and reaches the common man as early as possible. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the probable time-frame regarding such drugs made
available in our health care system.
Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS)
Recommendation/Observation
3.48 The Committee would like to be apprised of the research outcomes of the 20 on-going research
projects of CCRS. (Para 10.14)
Action Taken
3.49 The outcome of the twenty ongoing Research Projects of CCRS is as per Annexure-III.
Further Recommendation
3.50 The Committee would like to observe that no amount of pure research will be able to solve
India's health problems unless it leads to application of the knowledge generated through research
projects in the healthcare delivery system. From a perusal of Annexure III, it is not clear as to
how many outcomes of research projects of CCRS have led to development/introduction of new
health products or technologies into the healthcare system. The Committee, therefore, desires
to be apprised of the measurable health products/processes and innovative technologies introduced
into health programmes of the country as a result of the research projects undertaken by CCRS
during the last five years. The Committee also recommends that a time-frame for completion
of research projects need to be finalised and preparatory exercises like procurement of equipment
and recruitment of staff need to be completed expeditiously so that the real work is set in motion
without any delay.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
36

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGET ALLOCATION
The Committee is not convinced by the achievements listed out by the Ministry with respect
to physical targets of the 12th Plan. The problem in guidelines regarding publication of Research
project paper, re-advertisement of posts, changing the nomenclature of All India Institute of
Unani Medicine, All India Institute of Homeopathy, delay in finalization of draft curriculum, non-
availability of teaching faculties, non-availability of separate psychiatry unit in NIH, Kolkata etc.
are routine issues. They could have been resolved with a streamlined monitoring mechanism for
early and timely intervention of the Ministry and necessary remedial measures taken. The
Committee also takes serious note of the fact that the Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance
of Ayurveda Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy medicines could not be implemented for want of
regulatory structure and centralized coordination system for carrying out pharmacovigilance
activities in a systematic manner. It is quite intriguing that a vertical AYUSH structure under
the aegis of the CDSCO with no specific time-frame as such is still in the process of being set
up. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to put in place a robust monitoring
mechanism with respect to the procedural issues for a better monitoring of the progress of
projects/schemes. The Committee would also like the Ministry to timely implement the scheme
of pharmacoviligance of AYUSH medicines and setting up of a vertical AYUSH structure for
quality control of AYUSH drugs and proper coordination among various AYUSH centres.
(Para 3.4)
The Committee points out that two of the fundamental issues that hamper allocation of
more funds to the Ministry are pending UCs and lack of absorption capacity. It would like to be
updated about the corrective measures taken by the Ministry to address these concerns. The
Committee also desires to be apprised of the quantum of additional funds, if any, allocated at
RE stage and utilization figures thereof. (Para 3.7)
The Committee in its previous Reports on Demands for Grants have been exhorting the
Ministry to quickly sort out the lingering issues concerning the regulatory framework of AYUSH
drugs. The Ministry has not been able to set up a central vertical structure of AYUSH drugs
regulation under CDSCO uptill now, despite the fact that the National Health Policy 2017 recognizes
the need to establish a robust and effective quality assurance mechanism for AYUSH drugs. The
feedback that Secretary (AYUSH) had taken review meeting is hardly convincing. The fact
remains that the current arrangement is not producing the intended results. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that an empowered committee may be set up to monitor the progress of
the new regulatory structure of AYUSH drugs which may submit periodical progress reports to
the Ministry. (Para 3.11)
III. REGULA TION AND QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA, UNANI AND
HOMOEOPATHIC (ASU&H) DRUGS
The Committee is aware of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules
made thereunder regarding dealing with misbranded, adulterated and spurious ASU drugs and
37

38
also about powers of State Licensing Authorities in this regard. Despite these provisions,
misbranded, adulterated and spurious ASU&H drugs have remained a festering problem and the
safety, efficacy and quality of AYUSH drugs have not been assured. The Committee would like
the Ministry to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 in an appropriate manner so that
defaulters are brought to book and strict action taken against them. The Committee is of the
firm view that suitable amendments alone can help in controlling/monitoring the sale of
misbranded, adulterated and spurious ASU drugs. (Para 3.14)
The Committee has already recommended with respect to this issue in para 3.11.
(para 3.17)
The Central Sector Scheme for developing Pharmacovigilance system for ASU&H drugs was
envisaged in the 12th Plan but the scheme could not be implemented even after conclusion of
the 12th Plan period. The Committee is of the view that this inordinate delay in implementation
of the project reflects lack of efficiency and inadequate follow-up by the administrative machinery
in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Ministry to constantly
monitor and follow up on the implementation of this important project concerning pharmacovigilance
of AYUSH drugs so that the issue of time-lag in utilization of allocated funds and implementation
of this Project is promptly addressed. (Para 3.20)
The Committee is constrained to note the snail's pace of progress made in amending the
Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954. Taking into account the
fact that the lack of stringent regulatory provisions has allowed unscrupulous elements to dupe
innocent people by making tall claims about providing cure to cancer, liver cirrhosis, kidney
failure and other chronic diseases without scientific evidence, the Committee in its 75th Report
concerning Ministry of AYUSH (the then Department of AYUSH) presented to Parliament on 9th
December, 2013 had recommended that urgent measures be taken to amend the said Act. Almost
four years have passed since then, but the amendment could not be finalized. The Committee,
therefore, deprecates the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in whose legislative domain the
amendment to the said Act falls, for its inertia and indifference in the matter and would like
the Ministry of AYUSH to convey this Committee's displeasure to the former. The Committee
would also recommend that the necessary amendments be carried out expeditiously within a
specified time-frame and the outcome intimated to the Committee. (Para 3.23)
IV. NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION (NAM)
The Committee appreciates the Ministry for introducing National Eligibility cum Entrance
Test (NEET) for bringing meritorious students to the AYUSH systems of medicine in the country.
The Committee would, however, like to reiterate that the Ministry must make efforts to integrate
traditional as well as modern system of medicine and education so that an integrated approach
can be taken in health delivery system. The Committee would also like to highlight the need for
curricula reforms in order to promote quality AYUSH education and recommends to the Ministry
to take necessary action in this regard. (Para 3.27)

39
V . NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
The Committee is of the view that merely advising the State Missions to take the initiative
to maintain passport database of medicinal plants is not enough. The Committee would, therefore,
recommend to the Ministry to play a pro-active role in this regard and incentivize the State
Governments to start maintaining a database of medicinal plants. (Para 3.30)
VI. STATUS OF PROGRESS OF SCHEMES IN NORTH EASTERN STATES
The Committee is disdained to note that work on various research projects were hampered
at RARI, Gangtok and RARI, Itanagar due to infrastructural constraints which should have been
taken care of in the first instance before the starting of these Institutes. The Committee also
notes that the reply of the Ministry is bereft of the specific information asked for by the
Committee as to whether the knowledge generated through the research carried out at these
Research Institutes have facilitated solutions to the health issues specific to the North Eastern
region. The Committee further desires to know the time-lag in translating research outcomes
at these Institutes into tangible health products. (Para 3.33)
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the final outcome in filling up vacant posts
at NEIAH. (Para 3.37)
North Eastern of Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Passighat
The Committee desires to know as to by when NEIFM is targeted to be made functional and
whether there is any time and cost overruns involved in making the Institute operational. The
Committee would also like to highlight the fact that without adequate manpower, the very
purpose of setting up of this Institute would be defeated and it would take a very long time for
the NEIFM, Passighat to become operational. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a pro-
active approach needs to be adopted by the Ministry to fill up the vacant posts so that NEIFM
becomes operational as early as possible. (Para 3.40)
VIII. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, KOLKATA
The Committee finds the reply of the Ministry with respect to expansion of the existing 100
bedded to 250 bedded hospital very vague and evasive as the present status of the work done in
this regard has not been furnished by the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that the
completion of work of internal electrical connections by CPWD would not take much time and
hopes that all other expansion related works are complete in all respects so that 250 bedded
hospital become operational at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised if there
has been any cost escalation due to delay in the expansion work. (Para 3.43)
X. RESEARCH COUNCILS
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
The Committee finds that study on AYUSH QOL-2C has been concluded by CCRAS and
eleven clinical research projects pertaining to Ayush drugs/therapies in nine disease conditions

40
will be completed in 2017-18. Similarly, 33 projects of CCRH in collaboration with institutes like
Bose Institute, Kolkata, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, JIPMER, Pondicherry, AIIMS,
New Delhi, Madras University, Chennai, IIT, Delhi have also been completed and 15 projects are
on-going. The Committee hopes that the studies completed are translated into tangible AYUSH
drugs which are scientifically validated and reaches the common man as early as possible. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the probable time-frame regarding such drugs made
available in our health care system. (Para 3.47)
Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS)
The Committee would like to observe that no amount of pure research will be able to solve
India's health problems unless it leads to application of the knowledge generated through research
projects in the healthcare delivery system. From a perusal of Annexure III, it is not clear as to
how many outcomes of research projects of CCRS have led to development/introduction of new
health products or technologies into the healthcare system. The Committee, therefore, desires
to be apprised of the measurable health products/processes and innovative technologies introduced
into health programmes of the country as a result of the research projects undertaken by CCRS
during the last five years. The Committee also recommends that a time-frame for completion
of research projects need to be finalised and preparatory exercises like procurement of equipment
and recruitment of staff need to be completed expeditiously so that the real work is set in motion
without any delay. (Para 3.50)

41
MINUTES

II*
SECOND MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12th December, 2017 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shri Ashok Siddharth
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
6. Dr. C. P . Thakur
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
9. Shri M. K. Raghavan
10. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
11. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
12. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. R. K. Vats, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
*Minutes of first meeting relate to other matters.
43

44
3. Dr. Jagdish Prasad, Director General of Health Services (DGHS)
4. Dr. G. N. Singh, DCGI
5. Dr. V . G. Somani Joint, Drugs Controller of India
6. Dr. S. Eswara Reddy, Joint Drugs Controller of India
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Members that the meeting has been convened to : (i)
consider and adopt the draft ***, *** and 105th Action Taken Report*** pertaining to ***, *** &
Ministry of AYUSH ***; and (ii) ***
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft ***, *** and 105th Action Taken Report*
pertaining to ***, *** & Ministry of AYUSH ***. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the said
Report*. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Jairam Ramesh, M.P (Rajya
Sabha) and in their absence Dr. Vikas Mahatme, M.P (Rajya Sabha) to present the Report* in Rajya Sabha
and Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P (Lok Sabha) and in his absence Shri M. K. Raghavan, M.P (Lok Sabha)
to lay the Reports in Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2017.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4.47 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

45
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN HOMOEOPATHY
(Physical targets and Achievements during 12th Plan)
Sl. Name of the Scheme/ Target for 12th Achievements made upto
No. Main Activities Plan (Units) 31st March, 2017
12 3 4
I. Intramural Research
(i) Clinical Research
New studies to be initiated 35 32
Studies to be concluded 18 17
(ii) Drug Development
(a) Drug Standardization 40 drugs 35 drugs
Laying down standards for
monograph preparation
(b) No. of drugs to be proved 25 drugs 21 drugs
(c) Clinical verification 23 drugs Initiated 23 drugs completed
on 16 new drugs Ongoing on 16 new drugs
II. Fundamental/collaborative research
New studies to be initiated 27 studies 28 studies
Studies to be concluded 21 studies 13 studies
III. Validation of drug therapies 40 drugs Validation of 40 drugs
initiated on 05 disease
conditions
IV. Documentation and publication
No. of research articles published in 100 articles 95
national and International peer reviewed
journals
Books/Monographs/Journal 45 44
V. Reach out programmes 03 03
(i) Homoeopathy for Healthy child (HHC) 06 districts in Ongoing
(with effect from Feb., 2015) 10 blocks
47

48
12 3 4
(ii) Integration of homoeopathy in national 02 districts in Ongoing
program for prevention and control of 02 states
non-communicable diseases (NPCDCS)
(with effect from Dec., 2015)
(iii) Swasthya Rakshan Program (SRP) 55 villages/colony Ongoing
(with effect from April, 2015)
(iv) Health care activities in SC 95 health camps 5500 people screened for
predominant area under SCSP conducted health status
plan (with effect from Oct., 2016)
VI. CME/Workshops/Seminars/Health No fixed target • CME/Seminar/Workshop: 70
melas • Health Melas: 140 meals
VII. Infrastructure strengthening of No fixed target (i) Construction completed at
Central Research Institutes (H) & Agartala
Regional Research Institutes (H) (ii) Construction of boundary
wall at Imphal completed
(iii) Construction initiated at
Mumbai Procurement of land
for own building from State
Government : 03 (Jaipur,
Lucknow, Siliguri)
(iv) Vertical expansion initiated at
RRI, Gudivada and completed
at CRI, Kottayam.
(v) RRI (H) Kolkata- Laboratory
is equipped with advanced
instrumentation and is made
functional.
(vi) CRIH Noida- Construction
work in progress, for DS
Lab.  Equipment purchased
process completed. Partition
work is completed for
Microbiology Lab.

49
ANNEXURE-II
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES
Brief on activities/Achievements of 3 CCRAS North East Institutes
Sl. Name of Institute Activities Achievement
No.
12 3 4
1. Research Ayurveda Clinical Research focusing on I. Intra Mural Clinical Research
Regional Institute Skin disorders, GIT disorders Projects
for Gastro-intestinal Medico-Ethno-Botanical Survey. • Completed
Disorders, Guwahati Other Activities: - Clinical evaluation of Punarnava
• Health care services through Guggulu. Dashmoola Ghrita and
Out-Patient Department Kottamachukadi   Taila  in  the
(OPD) management of Osteoarthritis -
• Special Clinics for Geriatric Research   paper  published  in
Health Care. JRAS.
• Outreach Activities such as - Clinical evaluation of Simhanaada
Tribal Health Care Research, Guggulu and Brihata Saindhavadi
Swasthya Rakshan Programme, T aila   in  the  management  of
Ayurveda Mobile Health Care Rheumatoid Arthritis
Programme under SCSP, - Clinical   Evaluation   of  Nisha
Ayurvedic Health Centre Amalaki  and Chandraprabha Vati
under NE Plan etc. in  the  management of  Type-II
Diabetes   mellitus  (Madhumeha)
- Clinical evaluation of Vatari Guggulu,
Hingvashtaka Churna and Brihat
Saindhavadya Taila in the
management of Rheumatoid Arthritis
- Clinical evaluation of Yogaraja
Guggulu, GandharvahastaTaila and
Dhanwantara Taila in the
management of Osteoarthritis
• To be initiated
- Clinical evaluation of Manduravataka
in the management of Iron
Deficiency Anemia.
- Clinical evaluation of Pippaladyasava
in the management of Agnimandya
49

50
12 3 4
II. Health Care Services
• No. of Patients Benefited in last year
- 26395
III. Survey of Medicinal Plant
IV .  2 IMR projects on Medicinal Plant
Research are in progress.
2. Regional Ayurveda Clinical research on lifestyle I. Intra Mural Clinical Research
Research Institute, related and Non-communicable Projects
Gangtok disorders focusing on Gout •  Ongoing
Other Activities: - Clinical evaluation of Punarnava
• Health care services through Guggulu   and  Rasna  Saptaka
Out Patient Department (OPD) Kashaya in the management of
• Special Clinics for Geriatric Rheumatoid Arthritis (Amavata)
Health Care •  To be initiated
• Outreach Activities such as - Clinical evaluation of Avipattikara
Tribal Health Care Research, Churna in  the  management  of
Swasthyarakshan Programme, Amlapitta (Hyperacidity/Non ulcer
Ayurveda Mobile Health Care dyspepsia)
Programme under SCSP, - Clinical evalua tion of Sanjivanivati
Ayurvedic Health Centre and Lashunadi Vati in the
under NE Plan etc. management of Aruchi
- Clinical evaluation of Jirakadyarishta
and Mustakarishta in the
management of Grahani
(Malabsorption syndrome)
II. Health Care Services
•  No. of Patients Benefited in last
  year - 16502
3. Regional Ayurveda Clinical research on lifestyle I. Intra Mural Clinical Research
Research Institute, related and Non-communicable Projects
Itanagar disorders focusing on • Ongoing
Hypertension. - Clinical evaluation of Rudraksa
Medico-Ethno-Botanical Survey Churna in the management of
Other Activities Essential Hypertension (Uccha
• Health care services through Raktachapa)
Out Patient Department (OPD) • To be initiated
• Special Clinics for Geriatric - Clinical evaluation of Sanjivanivati
Health Care and    Lashunadi   Vati   in  the

51
12 3 4
• Demonstrative Medicinal management of Agnimandya
Plants Garden II.  Health Care Services
• Outreach Activities such as • No. of Patients Benefited in last
Swasthyarakshan Programme, year - 15412
Ayurvedic Health Centre under
NE Plan etc. III. Survey of Medicinal Plant

52
ANNEXURE-III
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN SIDDHA
Sl. Name of the Progress/Status Outcome of the Research
No. Project
12 3 4
52
1. Multi-centric
Clinical Trial of a
Classical Siddha
Formulation
Rasagandhi
Mezhugu in
Karuppai Nar
thasai Kattigal
(Fibroid Uterus)
• Approved by the IHEC of SRRI,
Trivandrum, SCRU, Palayamkottai,
SRRI, Puducherry, SCRI, Chennai.
• Preparation of trial drug is entrusted
to IMPCOPS and it is in progress.
• Purchase of three Ultrasonogram
(USG) is in Progress.
Determination of safety and
efficacy of RGM in Karuppai
Nar thasai Kattigal (Fibroid
Uterus)
2. RCT of Two
Siddha Drugs in
the Management
of Urolithiasis
(Kalladaippu) -
Phase 2
• IHEC approval accorded
• SRF recruited
• Trial drug procured
• Purchase of one USG device is in
progress.
Determination of 2 Siddha
drugs in the management of
Urolithiasis (Kalladaippu)
3. Development of
Siddha Treatment
Guidelines for
Selected Non-
Communicable
Diseases.
Project completed. Development of Siddha
Treatment Guidelines
4. Assessment of
awareness and usage
of Siddha medicine
among the patients
reporting to selected
Siddha OPDs in
Puducherry and
Karaikkal
Study completed. Statistical analysis is in
progress.
Data will help in capitalizing on
the strengths of Siddha
medicine and to overcome the
lacunas by more effective
awareness measures
5. Digitization and
Compilation of
Herbarium and
I. Herbarium:
Medicinal, aromatic, economically important
species collected from Tamil Nadu State -
• Digitalization of the
Herbarium for the
development of Centralized

53
Folklore Claims at
Survey of Medicinal
Plants Unit-Siddha,
Palayamkottai.
1825
Mounted herbarium sheets cleaned,
reprocessed and housed in the locker -
7485 Nos.
Unmounted herbarium sheets (duplicated)
-350 Nos.
Mounted herbarium sheets digitized - 1
part -3381 collections
Mounted herbarium sheets photographed
-6136 Nos.
Herbarium images edited - 1041 Nos.
Digitization of mounted herbarium sheets-
updated - 20 Nos.
Herbarium sheets added - 158 Nos.
Herbarium images uploaded to database -
750 Nos.
II. Museum:
Raw Drugs reprocessed and displayed -
700 Nos.
Repository of Digital
Medicinal Plants Herbarium
for effective preservation,
by using versatile
techniques and thus
provides easy accessibility
for the student community
and the public.
• Publication of descriptive
catalogue of original and
digital herbarium sheets in
print form will be available
to public/researchers.
6. Anti-hyperlipidemic
activity of D5
Chooranam
Project initiated.
7. A Siddha polyherbal
formulation
(Nilappanai
Chooranam) in the
management of
Oliaosnermia
(Vindhanu
Standardization of Nilappanai chooranam
is in progress pertaining to chemistry
aspects. With CPCSEA approval/
formalities, the pharmacology aspects with
regard to the project are in progress
Standardisation of the
polyherbal formulation before
initiation of the clinical trial
8. Vernacular Name
Encyclopaedia of
Siddha Drugs
mentioned in Siddha
• Initially ninety plants were identified
from the Gunapadam Mooligai book.
• Out of ninety plants, vernacular names
of thirty plants have been discussed
12 3 4
Publication of V ernacular Name
Encyclopaedia

54
Materia Medica
(Gunapadam)
(VERNAES)
and meaning of the terms derived.
Searched various Tamil Lexicon
books, dictionaries and ancient Tamil
literature books.
• Vernacular name derivation of 30
more plants is in progress.
9. Database of Siddha
preparations for
certain diseases
mentioned in the
enlisted books of
Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940
As per the prescribed format, hard
copies and soft copies were prepared
for the diseases like Iraippu Noi,
Peenisam, Gunmam, Kalladaippu, Manjal
Noi, Peruvayiru, Keelvaayu, Veluppu
Noi, Mathumegam, Athisaram, Vellai Noi,
Moola Noi, Perumbaadu, V enpadai,
Pavuthiram, Pal Noikal, Putru Noi,
Vippuruthi, Karappaan and Maladu from
22 books enlisted under Drugs and
Cosmetics Act.
Standard database - referral text
for physicians, researchers and
academicians.
10. Medico Ethno
Botanical Study of
Palamalai — Salem
District.
Number of Tours: 09
Number of Specimens collected: 491
Number of Folklore claims collected: 58
Number of Museum specimens
collected: 49
Number of Saplings collected: 18
Number of Herbarium sheets preserved
andmounted: 338
• Documentation of floral
diversity and its ethno
practices of the forest tribes.
• Enlightens with the added
area of hitherto unexplored/
non documented floral wealth
of Palamalai and the folk
claims of the forest dwellers
11. Isolation of chemical
markers from
selected plants used in
Reproductive and
Child Health
• Procurement of HPLC initiated.
• Re-tender for procurement of High
Pressure Liquid Chromatography (1
No.) was advertised on 28.02.2017.
The technical bid was opened on
01.03.2017 and price bid was opened
on 04.03.2017.
• Recruitment of SRFs completed on
17.03.2017.
To isolate chemical markers
from eighteen plants used in
RCH. These markers will be
quantified in Siddha formulations
used in RCH treatment.
12. Qualitative and
Quantitative Analysis
of Chembu (copper)
• Procurement of equipment (ICP-
OES) initiated.
• Tender has been finalized.
• The content of Chembu (Cu)
present in the selected drugs
would be quantified.
12 3 4

55
in Chembu
containing plants' - A
Scientific validation
of Siddha claim
• Project staff recruited. • The analytical technique
would be extended to heavy
metals and other inorganic
elements.
13 Analysis of inorganic
composition of
selected plants used
in Siddha system
• Procurement of equipment
(Microwave and XRD) initiated.
• Project staff recruited.
If the composition of the ash/
inorganic matters were known,
the same could be prepared
using synthetic pharm products
for preparing the Siddha
formulations similar to other
metals/minerals. Study on the
exact composition of these
ashes will be helpful to the entire
Siddha community. Biodiversity
is conserved
14 Pre-clinical safety
and efficacy of nuna
kadugu (internal
medicine) and nuna
thailam (external
medicine) in venpadai
Preparation of the trial drug was completed
and given for standardization.
Determination of safety and
efficacy of the Siddha
formulations in Venpadai
(Vitiligo)
15 Status of labeling,
drug information and
branding in marketed
anti-diabetic Siddha
formulations: Cross-
sectional study:
Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
2016
Project staff recruited. Work in progress. The study may generate base-
line information on compliance
to existing regulations on labels
and existing scenario with
repect to package inserts. The
study may help in formulating
strategies to develop
comprehensive guidelines for
pharmaceutical companies.
16. Siddha Encyclopaedia
& Android
Application for
Research Community
and Health care
institutions (T.V .
Sambasivam Pillai
Medical Dictionary)
Project staff recruited. Work in progress. Creation and installable CD–
ROM and thereby converting
TV Sambasivampillai dictionary.
Developing a copy righted
Android Mobile application of
"Siddha Encyclopaedia (TCS
medical Dictionary)"
12 3 4

56
17. Qualitative and
Quantitative Analysis
of Lead in 'Lead
containing Plants' - A
Scientific validation of
Siddha claim
• Preliminary data collection is in
progress.
• Recruitment of project staff is in
progress.
The content of Lead present in
the selected drugs would be
quantified.
18. Untargetted approach
to the geochemical
characterization of
Hypothecated Muppu
(Marine sediments
collected from Bay of
Bengal at
Rameswaram and
white powdery salts
collected from
Kovanur
• Procurement of the equipment (UV-
Spectrometer) initiated.
• Recruitment of RA and JRF
completed.
• An integrative workflow to
establish chemical
composition of the marine
sediments and white
powdery salt.
• Qualitative methodologies
would be available to detect
the trace elements present in
the inorganic sediments and
salts.
19. Metabolomic profiling
and Identification of
Principal Components
from herbals used in
Siddha System for
Cognitive disorders
using multivariate
statistical analysis
Purchase of the equipment (LC-MS/MS)
initiated.
• An integrative workflow to
establish molecular
fingerprinting, quantitative
analysis and principle
component identification of
natural products through
statistical analysis.
• "Comprehensive Mass
Spectral Atlas of secondary
metabolites" would be
generated.
• The outcome of this
systematic scientific study
would be published in peer
reviewed journals, which
strengthens the veracity of
Siddha Medicine system in
the current modern scientific
society.
12 3 4

57
• Strengthening the
infrastucture of SCRI
and enlightment
of Intellectual
knowledge in the
concerned field.
20. A Statistical Approach
to construct a
classifier to distinguish
patients as per their
body constitution
based on Siddha
principles of Udaliyal
Yet to be presented before IHEC for
approval.
To measure the correlation
between Udaliyal and disease
outcome.
12 3 4