Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Fifty-seventh Report on Demands 
for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department 
of Aids Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
 
 
REPORT NO. 
62


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

33
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Fifty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Aids
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. Acronyms .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—26
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—10
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 1 1—18
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 19—25
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 26
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 27—28
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—32

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby
present this Sixty- second Report of the Committee on Action T aken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s 57
th Report on Demands for Grants
2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for the year 2012-13.
2. The Fifty-s eventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26 th and
25th April, 2012 respectively. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Report, received from the Department of AIDS Control were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 8 th February, 2013 .
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the
8th February, 2013.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
8th February , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 8, 1934 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

(iv)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AEP – Adolescence Education Programme
AIDS – Acquired Immuno-Deficiency Syndrome
ART – Antiretroviral therapy
AR V – Anti-retro-viral
BCSU – Blood Component Separation Units
CBO – Community-Based Organisation
CD4 – Cluster of Differentiation 4
CHC – Community Health Centre
CSC – Care and Support Centres
CPFMS – Computerized Project Financial Management System
DCI – Dental Council of India
DCGI – Drugs Controller General of India
DAC – Department of AIDS Control
DLBB – District Level Blood Banks
DPR – Detailed Project Report
DRTB – Drug Resistant TB
DST – Drug Sensitivity Testing
EFC/CCEA – Expenditure Finance Committee/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
EPP – Estimation Projection Package
EOI – Expression of Interest
GFA TM – Global Fund of AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
GMP – Good Manufacturing Practice
HBV – Hepatitis B Virus
HCV – Hepatitis C Virus
HIV/TB – Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Tuberculosis
HRG – High Risk Group
ICDS – Integrated Child Development Service
ICPS – Integrated Child Protection Scheme
ICF – Intensified TB Case Finding

ICTC – Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre
JAT – Joint Appraisal Team
LFU – Lost to Follow–up cases
LWS – Link Worker Scheme
MARP – Most at Risk Population
NACO – National AIDS Control Organisation
NACP – National AIDS Control Programme
NARI – National AIDS Research Institute
NBTA – National Blood Transfusion Authority
NGO – Non-Government Organisation
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
NTWG – National Technical Working Group
OI – Opportunistic Infections
PFC – Power Financial Corporation
PHTN054 – Pulmonary Hyper Tension 054
PLHIV – People Living with HIV
PLOS – Public Library of Sciences
PMC – Project Management Consultant
PPTCT – Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission
RCE – Revised Cost Estimate
RFP – Request for Proposal
RGSEAG – Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls
RNTCP – Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme
RTI – Reproductive Tract Infection
SACS – S tate AIDS Control Society
SBTA – State Blood Transfusion Authority
SBTC – State Blood Transfusion Council
SOE – Statement of Expenditure
STI – Sexually Transmitted Infection
TB – Tuberculosis
TM – Transfusion Medicine
TRG – Technical Resource Group
WHO – World Health Organisation
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 49)
of the Department of AIDS Control for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 1.8, 4.3, 5.4, 6.4, 6.5, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.7, 10.3,
11.3, 11.6, 11.8, 12.2, 13.3, Total–15 (Chapter I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 1.1, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 2.6, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14,
3.2, 7.3(a), 7.3(b), 8.6, Total–12 (Chapter II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.10, 5.3, 5.7, 7.2, 9.2, 9.4, 14.4 Total–7
(Chapter III)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Nil, Total–Nil (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
I. INTRODUCTION
CARE, SUPPORT AND TREATMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 In Bihar, where HIV and visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) interact and co-infection is a
problem, the Committee recommends as a first step-in areas that are endemic for Kala-azar –
Department of AIDS control should consider actively screening people living with HIV for this life-
threatening disease. Co-infected patients should then be given antiretrovirals as soon as possible
after starting anti-kala-azar therapy. (Para 1.8)
Action Taken
Visceral Leishmaniasis (kala – azar) is one of the disease which is endemic in the State of
Bihar. Kala-azar among HIV positive patients requires regular screening as it is regarded as one of
the Opportunistic Infections(OI) in endemic areas. Thus, at the time of pre-ART registration and
thereafter, all PLHIV are screened for such OIs and then referred to the diagnostic facilities
available under National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme for confirmatory diagnosis of
kala-azar. All PLHIV with co-infection of kala-azar are regarded as “WHO Clinical Stage – IV” as
per the existing case definition and are provided ART as soon as possible after starting anti kala-
azar therapy irrespective of CD4 count.
IV SETTING UP OF NEW BLOOD COMPONENT SEPARATION UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
1.2 The Committee appreciates that the targets set by the Department under NACP-III for
setting up of BCSUs have been achieved more or less. The Committee would, however, like to be
updated regularly of the targets set and success achieved by these units. (Para 4.2)
Action Taken
In the beginning of NACP III there was a target of setting up new BCSUs in 80 tertiary
care hospitals in addition to continuing support for 82 BCSUs which already existed.
As of date (June 2012), all of the proposed 80 centers are licensed.
The targets have been achieved with efforts of close follow up by the programme for
obtaining site allocation by the state, equipment installation, allocation of funds as per pattern of
assistance, follow up with the office of DCG(I) for central license at all stages.
2

3
NACP 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13 T otal
III
Target T* A* T A T A T A T A T A
80 0 0 40 19 40 28 12 26 7 4 3 3 80
(*T denotes Target and A denotes achievement)
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee notes that not only quantity but also quality matters. Blood transfusion is
life-saving treatment in many situations. But transfusions can also be a quick and easy route for
the transmission of infectious agents such as HIV , HBV , HCV , and malaria. NACO has been
entrusted the task of setting up and expanding blood banks across the country. Several studies
reviewing the current scenario in transfusion medicine (TM) in India indicate an urgent need for
restructuring the blood transfusion services with extreme variations in management and quality.
These studies note that compliance with quality assurance and GMP is not ensured. A large number
of blood banks are unlicensed. The Committee feels that since quality of blood banks is regulated
under the Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, under schedule ‘F’, Department of AIDS Control and the
DCGI should jointly come up with a plan to urgently address the issue of quality of blood banks
in the private and public sector. (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
NACO is focusing on quality management systems in Blood Banks in the country. Quality
management modules were prepared at NACO with the assistance of a group of experts in
Transfusion Medicine and Quality. These quality management modules are to be used in Blood
banks at the state level. So far 12 workshops covering 28 states for Quality Management have been
completed by NACO.
Efforts are also being made to monitor the blood banks and core committees have been
constituted in all states comprising Blood Bank experts and representative of the Drug Controller
at the state level, to monitor all blood banks.
Department of AIDS Control and the DCGI will also make a joint plan to execute the above
in a smooth manner.
Blood Transfusion service in the respective state is implemented by State level
functionaries. DCG (I) at the centre and its counterparts in the state are responsible for the
regulation and licensing of Blood Banks. Department of AIDS Control (DAC) is making all efforts
by working with the states and providing funds for augmenting voluntary blood donation and
ensuring provision of safe and quality blood in the country by reducing HIV transmission through
blood to < 0.5%.
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS
Recommendation/Observation
1.4 The Committee also recommends to the Department to take special cognizance of the
underserved districts of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand. The Committee further
recommends that the Department should keep assessing the requirements of Blood Banks based on
the actual needs in various States due to migration and other factors. (Para 5.4)

4
Action Taken
NACO is taking special cognizance of the underserved areas including districts of
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand. NACO regularly assesses these states as per their
requirement for blood as per the population.
In Uttarakhand, support for a district level blood bank by NACO has been approved during
2012-13for the newly created district of Ranikhet. 21 newly created Blood Component separation
units of Uttar Pradesh are being given financial support of annual recurring grant in the financial
year 2012-13. In Jharkhand, NACO is taking initiatives for licensing of the three blood banks at
Saraikela, Chatra and Koderma.
VI. INTEGRATED COUNSELING AND TESTING CENTERS (ICTCS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee is at a loss to understand the rationale on the basis of which the
Department, in the first place fixes the target and fails to achieve the same year after year. A plain
reading of the target set vis-à-vis the achievement shows that the Department is not following its
own yardstick of fixing of target each year on the basis of achievement of the previous year,
which shows poor foresight of planning by the Department. The Committee, therefore, enjoins
upon the Department to seriously set realistic and achievable targets. Once targets are fixed, all
efforts should be made to achieve them. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken
As per the targets set under NACP III, the Department, through year wise scale up, had
to reach an end-line annual target of 22 million per year by the end of NACP III i.e. 2011-12. This
is inclusive of the target of counselling and testing of 75 lakh pregnant women.
To achieve this, the Department scaled up HIV counselling and testing facilities from 4567
in 2007-08 to 10,515 in 2011-12. Programme coverage has increased from 7.8 million in 2007-08
to 19.4 million in the year 2011-12.
During the year 2011-12 (April 2011 to March 2012) the Department has achieved the target
of counselling and testing 19.4 million attendees including 85.6 lakh pregnant women. Thus overall
achievement is 88% and the achievement of coverage of pregnant women is 113% as against the
target set for the last year of NACP III.
Recommendation/Observation
1.6 Testing of pregnant women raises several ethical questions. The Committee feels these
ethical issues have to be addressed at the time of rolling out routine testing of pregnant women
under NRHM. Testing with counseling is key. Support services for domestic violence and
discrimination within the family and community are also crucial. Treatment needs of women who
test positive should also be the top priority. Absence of these components will have an adverse
impact on the uptake of ante-natal services if they are identified with routine HIV testing of
pregnant women. The Committee feels that a detailed study on the testing of women who, are
pregnant – their treatment and the discrimination they face, – must be immediately undertaken and
should be used to shape a more sensitive and humane testing programme for pregnant women.
(Para 6.5)
Action Taken
Under the routine counseling and testing services for pregnant women provided under

5
NACP, all pregnant women are offered counseling and testing for HIV . These Pregnant women have
the right to “opt-out” under the existing strategy . Counseling is provided to all pregnant women
before and after HIV test. Any HIV positive pregnant women detected by the ICTCs is offered
PPTCT services and linked to Care Support and Treatment services.
The recommendations of the Committee for conducting a detailed study on testing of
women who are pregnant – their treatment and discrimination they face, will be taken up by the
Department.
VIII. ANTIRETROVIRAL TREATMENT (ART) CENTERS
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee notes that stockouts of ART medicines were reported throughout 2011 in
many states including UP, Bihar, Maharashtra, Manipur etc. The Committee fails to understand as
to how performance of RITES has been called satisfactory in such circumstances. The Committee
recommends that the Department take a more serious note of such lapses and have closer
monitoring mechanism in place since such gaps in supply only add to drug resistance apart from
the obvious inconvenience. (Para 8.3)
1.8 The Committee has noted that throughout 2011, there have been regular incidents of HIV
drug (first, Second and pediatric doses) in different States, which has been reported by different
PLHIV networks. The Committee feels that this is a serious issue since stock outs mean drug
interruptions which can lead to increased public health risks of HIV drug resistance. The
Committee recommends that an investigation and report be undertaken to list the numbers of
stock outs and to document the reasons for the stock outs. NACO should also outline to this
Committee what measures have been planned to prevent and to deal with incidents of stock outs.
The role of the PLHIV Networks should be to continue this good work of monitoring HIV
treatment at ART Centres and reporting problems like stock outs of NACO. PLHIV networks
should be further encouraged to continue reporting such incidents. Stock outs are related to
inefficiencies such as poor planning, incorrect projections of local requirements, poor distribution
and supply at treatment facilities, expiry of medicines as the stock that was received earlier is
not distributed first. The Committee recommends that NACO immediately reform the
pharmaceutical supply management system for HIV medicines as it is an important element in
treatment programmes. (Para 8.4)
Action Taken
As per the information captured in the Computerised Management Information System
(CMIS) under the programme, during 2011, 32 sites had shown stock-out of ARV drugs, most of
them only for few days. On detailed analysis, it was found that the stock out of ARV drugs for
more than a week was found only in 4 ART centres in two States of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The
corrective measures were initiated immediately by relocation from other ART centres with surplus
stocks.
Subsequently, in order to prevent such situation of stock-out of ARV drugs in future, NACO
has decentralised the allocation of ARV drugs through SACS instead of directly sending to ART
centres, so that State level monitoring of stocks is ensured.
Now each State AIDS Control Society has a designated official at the level of Joint Director
to ensure distribution and supply chain management of various ARV drugs in their respective States.
Further, NACO now has a dedicated Logistic Coordinator at the central level, which looks after
stock position and supply management of various ARV drugs in each State/UT.

6
A drug estimation committee has been constituted consisting of eminent medical specialists,
having expertise in the field for proper forecasting of ARV drugs, to ensure adequate quantity of
ARV drugs are indented for procurement.
In the State Grievance Redressal Committee meetings, which is constituted in every state,
the PLHIV network also participates as a member of the Committee. This Committee meets from
time to time and the feedback provided by the PLHIV networks is immediately acted upon by
initiating corrective measures including the issue of stock-out of ARV drugs at the ART centres.
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee feels that the slow rate of scale up of ART treatment over the last decade
has forced patients into the private sector where inappropriate HIV drug regimens are often
prescribed, leading to a long term public health problem of drug resistance. Many economic and
bureaucratic barriers have been noted in the eligibility criteria for enrolling in the programme for
those needing alternative first line or second line HIV drugs. As a result, patient groups have had
to approach the Supreme Court. These barriers must be addressed and must not be created for
patients who will need third line HIV medicines. Currently the proportion of HIV patients who have
failed to the second-line treatment is probably very small. The programme must start planning for
ART Centres of Excellence to take in these few patients. This will control drug resistance. Cost
alone should not be the only criteria. Failure to procure the third line drugs will have future public
health complications as PLHIVs could develop a very resistance HIV which could prove costly.
Planning and treating third line in a few patients will build capacity and experience of public health
facilities classified as centres of excellence by Department of AIDS Control. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
It is submitted that ART was started in 2004 with 8 ART centres, which have been rapidly
scaled up to existing 355 centres (March 2012) against a target of setting up of 250 such ART
centres by 2012.
As per the information available with Deptt. of AIDS Control, only 35,000 patients are on
ART in private sector against around 5,42,000 patients in the public sector in the country.
As per the need of the programme, the second line ART was rolled out in two Centres of
Excellence (COE) in 2008 and was extended to 10 COEs and 18 ART Plus centres to expand this
service across the country. In addition, 7 COEs for Paediatric HIV Care are also providing the
services of second line ART.
The criteria for enrolling patients on second line were stringent as options for drugs in
management of HIV/AIDS were limited. This has helped in continuance of first line therapy to a
large number of patients who were failing due to factors other than drug resistance and actually
did not require the second line regimen. This has also provided a broader base of ARV drugs for
such patients who might require the same in future. The same approach was explained to Hon’ble
Supreme Court and as per directions, the criteria for inclusion of patients on treatment failure was
relaxed. Even after relaxation, the number of patients on second line ART is 4208 (as on March
2012) in all the designated centres.
All the COEs and ART Plus centres are well equipped to manage all types of patients on
HIV/AIDS care. As the HIV virus is constantly mutated, the Drug Resistance is not only related
to Treatment Adherence alone. As and when required and recommended by the Technical Resource
Group on ART, the programme will look into use of newer drugs for subsequent therapy (third line
ARV regimen) in public interest and with public health approach.

7
National AIDS Control Programme lays great emphasis on issues related to proper
counselling of patients to ensure complete adherence to treatment, so that patient do not develop
resistance early and continue the first line regimen as long as possible. The second line treatment
is also provided under NACP. The overall Drug Resistance in the country is very low and as of
now, there is no major public health threat of large number of PLHIV developing resistance to the
virus.
Recommendation/Observation
1.10 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has not treated the matter of
phasing out Stavudine with the urgency and seriousness it deserves. The Committee feels that the
inordinate delay on the part of the Department in this regard is a sad commentary on the working
of the Department and calls for introspection. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should start phasing out of Stavudine in a time bound manner. The Committee desires
to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard. (Para 8.7)
Action Taken
The World Health Organisation (WHO) has released the guidelines for Antiretroviral Therapy
(ART) for HIV infection in adults and adolescents (2010 revision). The guidelines mainly describe
the newer strategies with regard to the starting of treatment and the drugs needed to be used at
the time to starting.The WHO also recommended country adaptation of these guidelines based on
the context of each country’s HIV epidemic, the strengths and weakness of health systems, and
the availability of financial, human and other essential resources.
WHO recommends phasing out of ARV drug Stavudine from ART regimen. Two meetings
of the Technical Resource Group on ART were held in Aug’ 10 and Dec’11to discuss this issue.
Subsequently, it was decided that Stavudine would be phased out from the national ART programme
for both existing and new patients. This phase out will be done once the drugs from the
procurement cycle of 2012-13 are in place. Thus, during 2012, phase out will start by not using
any Stavudine based regimen for new patients and later on the old patients will be shifted to non-
Stavudine based regimen in a phased manner.
X. ADOLESCENCE EDUCATION PROGRAMME (AEP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.11 The committee is impressed that with consistent efforts of the Department, the programme
is running in most of the States. The Committee feels that the Department should vigorously take
up with the States where the programme is still under suspension, the reasons for the delay in
implementation of the programme and resolve their apprehensions in this regard without any further
delay, in view of the fact that HIV/AIDS is a hydra headed monster which usually attacks the
vulnerable adolescent population due to lack of awareness of the devastating effects the diseases
could have on them. The states, that have suspended, should also reconsider their decision.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken
Adolescence Education Programme (AEP) is promoted by State AIDS Control Societies of
NACO in collaboration with the Departments of Education in secondary and senior secondary
schools to build up life skills of adolescents to cope with the physical and psychological changes
associated with growing up and to enable them to protect themselves from HIV/AIDS/STI. After

8
it was suspended in eight States (Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh), due to a serious follow up and revision of the toolkit
(Educational Material) in 2008, by NACO, the programme was resumed as part of school health
programme under NRHM or through NGOs in the States of Kerala, Gujarat and Rajasthan. Serious
efforts are on for resumption of the programme in the other five States (Chhattisgarh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Uttar Pradesh) where it continues to be suspended.
NACO is continuing its efforts through the State AIDS Control Societies (SACS), in States
where the Adolescence Education Programme, is still under suspension (Chhattisgarh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh). The SACS in these States are once again being
asked to discuss this issue with the State education departments to look into ways of implementing
the Adolescence Education Programme.
XI. NEW STRATEGIES
Recommendation/Observation
(i) Setting up of District AIDS Prevention and Control Unit (DAPCU)
1.12 The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Department to train the staff
posted in different DAPCUs throughout the country. However, it feels that keeping in view the
severity of the disease, there is a pressing need to provide training to more staff in order to ensure
more focus on the preventive aspect of the disease control programme. The Committee emphasizes
that the Department should not only strive to achieve the target fixed but depending on the
requirement and situation may also enhance both financial and physical targets . (Para 11.3)
Action Taken
NACO will ensure refresher training to existing staff and induction training to newly
recruited staff.
Recommendation/Observation
(ii) Scheme of link workers in rural areas of Category A & B Districts
1.13 It may be recalled that in its previous report on the Demands for Grants 2010-11, the
Committee has recommended to increase the reach of the scheme to cover all the states in the
country. However, as per information received from the Department in the context of Demands for
Grants 2012-13, the Department has covered only 209 districts. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its earlier recommendations that the Department needs to assess the scheme so as to
cover the remaining districts and closely monitor the schemes as the success of this scheme is
crucial for achieving the goal of halting and reversing the epidemic of AIDS. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken
Since inception, the link worker scheme (LWS) has been funded completely by donor
agencies (including GFATM) for implementation in 209 districts across 20 States. Since the
partnership with various Donor Partners have ended on 31st March, 2012, LWS is proposed to be
implemented in 163 Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) supported ‘A and
B’ category and highly vulnerable districts across 18 States from Apr 2012 onwards.
The selection of Districts have been done based on the epidemiological scenario, and the
absence of other specified schemes for addressing the issues related to high risk groups, vulnerable
population and people living with HIV/AIDS. Through these parameters, the Scheme has been able

9
to cover the high prevalent and highly vulnerable Districts of the country where the rural
intervention is most needed.
(iii) Preferred private provider scheme for management of sexual infections among the
high risk groups (HRG)
1.14 The Committee notes that the efforts made by the preferred private providers are successful
in bringing about decline of Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI) prevalence among high risk
group from 11.8% to 8.4% in the first three quarters of 2011-12. However, the Committee feels
that there is a need to speed up management under this scheme as the figure of 8.4% is still on
the higher side and much more efforts need to be undertaken on this front. The Committee would
like to be regularly apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee also feels that these
private providers should be trained in the rational prescription of antibiotics as this will address
drug resistance issues in the long run. (Para 11.8)
Action Taken
The matter is noted for compliance. Preferred providers are trained on standardized STI/
RTI treatment. To address emergence of drug resistance the providers are provided with pre
specified colour coded drug kits to treat common STI syndromes apart from training them on
rational usage of antibiotics. The preferred private provider approach is planned to be continued in
NACP-IV . In order to reduce STI prevalence amongst HRG, there would be due emphasis on
ensuring access of the essential STI service package to all HRGs through flexibility in the modality
of service delivery to them.
To further reduce STI prevalence of 8.4% among HRG, it has been planned to scale up STI
service delivery points to HRG through referral linkages with urban health centres for urban living
HRGs. To enhance STI service to rural based HRG , the staffs at PHC, CHC are trained in
Syndromic management of STI and HRG are referred to seek services. The HRG are mobilized for
seeking services through rural based Link Workers.
XII. NA TIONAL PAEDIATRIC INITIATIVE
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Department of AIDS Control in
conjunction with the Ministry of Women and Child Development to start the scheme namely
“National Scheme on Children affected by HIV and AIDS”, would like to be apprised about the
number of children targeted under the said scheme and the financial and physical targets set under
the Programme during the Twelfth Plan. (Para 12.2)
Action Taken
During NACP III, a “Pilot Scheme on Children Affected by HIV and AIDS” was
started in 10 districts, with support from UNICEF. The scheme aimed at enabling children living
with and affected by HIV to gain access to a minimum package of services that would address
their overall developmental needs. The package of services for CABA included Psychosocial
counseling (11,106 children), food security interventions (25,493 children), linkages with social
protection schemes (18,823 children), nutritional assessments and growth monitoring (25,493
children), linkage with formal and non – formal education (3332 children), HIV testing (21,198
children), pre ART screening (6,193 children), OI prophylaxis and treatment referrals (2190
children) etc.

10
Under NACP IV , it is proposed to set up Care and Support Centers (CSCs) which will also
address the various needs of Children affected by HIV/AIDS. The Care and support centers shall act
as the focal point from which the required services to Children affected by HIV/AIDS will be ensured
through advocacy and linkages .One important deliverable of the CSC is ensuring linkage & referral
to care and Support services essential for PLHIVs including “Children affected by HIV/AIDS” so that
a positive health and living are ensured. Targets are under finalization for T welfth plan period.
HIV/AIDS related aspects have already been integrated into the following schemes/acts of
the Women and Child Development Ministry:
1. Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme
2. Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2000 (Amended 2006)
3. Rules under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2000 (Amended
2006)
4. Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS)
5. Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls – RGSEAG (SABLA)
6. National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
7. Policy Framework for Children and AIDS, 2007
8. National Plan of Action for Children, 2005
XIII. INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC)
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The Committee is constrained to note that the Department could not utilize allocated fund
during 2011-12 and as a result thereof it has not been able to do full justice to the programme.
The Committee, impress upon the Department to ensure that funds allocated during the current
year be fully utilized as dissemination of knowledge for creating awareness about the disease is a
sin-qua-non for eliminating it. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken
NACO implements integrated and comprehensive campaigns to promote HIV/AIDS awareness
using multi-media approach. Regular campaigns are conducted at national and state level using mass
media, mid-media, outdoor, interpersonal communication, and innovative media vehicles like digital
cinema, panels in metro trains, digital screens, internet, and mobile phones among others.
Mass-media campaigns through electronic media (TV , radio, internet) and print media focus
on thematic areas which include condom promotion, V oluntary Blood Donation, prevention and
treatment of sexually transmitted infections, HIV counseling and testing, prevention from parent to
child transmission of HIV , youth and HIV , and stigma and discrimination. But due to certain
unforeseen delays in financial clearances certain campaigns could not take off last year.
The Department of AIDS Control had prepared a calendar of activities for the awareness
campaigns that it would hold during the year 2012-13. It is moving ahead to achieve all the targets
this year. Noting the concern expressed by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health &
Family Welfare, the Department of AIDS Control would take every measure to ensure that the
funds allocated during the current year are fully utilized for creation of knowledge and awareness
on HIV/AIDS.

11
11
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
I. INTRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 Prima facie , a look at the communicable and non-communicable disease burden profile of
the country suggests there could be more pressing issues which could have been the prioritized
over HIV/AIDS, and yet the Ministry in its wisdom went on to create a separate Department for
it. While the committee understands that HIV/AIDS is a genuine health problem which requires
timely addressal, it fails to understand the reason why the Ministry went on to create a dedicated
Department to take care of the issue. The Committee also appreciates the fact that while resource
constraint is a reality given our circumstances, it, at the same time mandates more prudence while
allocating national priorities. During evidence, the Committee queried the Department to justify this
act, and to the Committee’s dismay no satisfactory answer was provided. Further, a post-evidence
written query was made and the Department forwarded the same to the Ministry to be replied.
Answer to this is still awaited till the compilation of this Report. The Committee takes serious view
of this delay on part of the Ministry as time crunch at the time of DFGs is to be anticipated as
is prompt response.The Committee recommends that the response be communicated to them in
detail at the time of the presentation of the ATN within the stipulated three months from the date
of presentation of this Report in the Parliament. (Para 1.1)
Action Taken
India is a low prevalence country but has the third largest population of HIV infected people
in the world. Even a small percentage increase in prevalence will result in a large number of HIV
infection on account of population size. Though a series of measures, including the organizational
framework at the governmental level i.e. the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) were in
place, the magnitude of the problem warranted a more focused attention.
2. AIDS related issues were handled by the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
However, the overall ambit of that Department was very large. Therefore, in the then existing set
up, a more focused attention and a multi-dimensional approach was not possible. Moreover, the
gravity of the problem also needed to be gauged by the fact that it affects the population in the
most productive age groups. Similarly, there was a need for coordinated action for a high focused
cutting edge research in this area.
3. In the above context, it was felt necessary to create a separate Department of AIDS Control
to be located within the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare by amending the Government of
India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. This was done to create the necessary space to take
up a whole range of programmes to effectively tackle the problem and provide viable solutions. The
Department was to be oriented exclusively for building an all encompassing response to contain the
spread of this menace by reaching out to the diverse population, dissemination of accurate,
complete and timely information about HIV/AIDS, promotion of measures that are effective for
protection against its spread and provision of free treatment for all those who need it.

12
4. To sum up, Department of AIDS Control was created to provide a sharper focus to
government initiatives in effectively tackling the threat posed by HIV/AIDS in the country. Further,
it was felt that the gravity and magnitude of the problem could be better assessed by a dedicated
Department for the purpose which would spearhead as well as coordinate programmes dealing with
AIDS related issues.
PREVENTION
Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee recommends that treatment should be recognized as a cornerstone of
prevention activities explicitly by Department of AIDS Control. Outcomes of recent scientific
studies show that if an HIV-positive person adheres to an effective antiretroviral therapy regimen,
the risk of transmitting the virus to their uninfected sexual partner can be reduced by 96%. Studies
suggest that antiretroviral therapy reduces the sexual transmission of HIV in generalized epidemics,
especially among sero-discordant couples. There is also growing evidence of the impact of ART
on community-level HIV transmission, both, in generalized and concentrated epidemics including
among injecting drug users. Most importantly the availability of Treatment for Prevention will not
only empower people to get tested for HIV , but also to disclose their HIV status, but significantly
contribute to reducing the stigma and discrimination surrounding HIV . Therefore, it is crucial for
Department of AIDS Control to recognize and use antiretroviral drugs as a prevention tool to
control the epidemic in India. The Committee feels that to capitalize on the scientific evidence,
continued investment in ART treatment is necessary in the coming five years to prevent new
infections. (Para 1.5)
Action Taken
Department of AIDS Control has taken note of a recent scientific study indicating that
treatment with ARV drugs reduces the risk of transmitting the virus to other un-infected sex
partners by 96%. This PHTN 054 study is a multi centric/multi country study conducted at two
sites in India located at NARI, Pune and YRG Care, Chennai. The data from these two sites has
not yet been analysed with specific reference to India. However, the overall preliminary analysis
on this variable at NARI, Pune site, will be done only after the completion of study.
The major concern on this study is that the sites in all other countries are ‘generalised
epidemic’ sites except in India where the epidemic is ‘concentrated epidemic’. The results as
outcome of this study will only be restricted to discordant couples.
The issue of making available treatment for prevention to empower people to get tested for
HIV , which is stated as contributing factor to reduce the stigma and discrimination, was discussed
in the last meeting of the Technical Resource Group (TRG) on ART held in December 2011. The
TRG was of the opinion that the issue of side-effects and emergence of resistance among these
people will be a major deterrent to providing anti-retroviral drugs as prevention tool in our country,
presently. Further, as the high risk populations in the context of HIV are largely divided into two
parts. One, most at risk populations (MARP’s) who are not infected and the other, who are HIV
infected. In the first group ART as prophylactic treatment is currently ruled out in the programme
while for others the ART will be given to those who have CD4 count as < 350.
As a part of planning of NACP – IV, it has been well recognised that providing Care,
Support and Treatment services to PLHIV will be an important component of the programme
during the next five years. Although, Lost to Follow Up (LFU) is presently within acceptable limits,
more efforts will be made to further bring it down during NACP IV.

13
CARE, SUPPORT AND TREATMENT
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The committee recommends that all persons living with HIV should be offered and
counseled to test for Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C by Department of AIDS Control. As a next step,
clear guidelines, resources and training for the testing of Hepatitis in ICTCs and management of
the Hepatitis co-infection should be provided to ART centers. Costs of Hepatitis drugs alone should
not be a factor to refuse treatment of this co-infection that can cause liver cirrhosis. Efforts to
boost local production of Hepatitis drugs and variety of measures such as bulk Procurement and
health safeguards in the Patent law should be used to reduce prices. (Para 1.6)
Action Taken
The diagnosis and management of Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C to people attending the
hospitals is the mandate of the general health system, as these facilities are to be provided in the
existing health care delivery system.
Thus, Department of AIDS Control may not be asked to duplicate efforts to provide such
facilities in the set up of National AIDS Control Programme. Moreover, a large number of NACO
facilities are located in the same institutions belonging to larger health system like Facility Integrated
Counselling & Testing Centres and ART centres etc.. Whenever a PLHIV attending ART centre is
diagnosed to be co-infected with Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C, he/she is referred to the general health
system for confirmatory diagnosis and management of these diseases.
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 The Committee clearly recommends that Department of AIDS Control strengthen TB
infection control in ART centers to prevent transmission of TB among people living with HIV. The
Committee also clearly recommends that with new tests that can detect DR-TB in less than two
hours, it’s a perfect time for Department of AIDS Control to take immediate action to boost
diagnosis of DR TB in people living with HIV . At ART Centres implementation of intensified TB
case finding (active TB screening) has been abjectly neglected despite clear WHO
recommendations. HIV+ patients often arrive in health facilities in very bad condition and even die
before their DR TB treatment can be diagnosed and appropriate treatment can be started. The
Committee feels that Intensified case finding with access to culture/DST testing can increase
access to early treatment of DR TB for people living with HIV in the public programme with
appropriate drug regimens. Usually people living with HIV have already been treated in the private
sector with inappropriate TB drug regimens. The Committee notes that recent studies in scientific
journals like PLoS have documented that the proliferation of TB formulations in the private market
coupled with the casual over-the-counter sale of antibiotics, of which some are used for DR TB
treatment, is fuelling the development of drug resistance, which is also affecting people living with
HIV . There is an urgent need for Department of AIDS Control to work with RNTCP and the
DCGI’s office for regulatory control of sale and administration of TB Drugs in the private sector
in order to address the growing incidence of severe forms of DR-TB in India. (Para 1.7)
Action Taken
The Department of AIDS Control is providing support to all ART centres for ensuring
infection control measures to be adopted in these facilities including measures to ensure prevention
of transmission of TB among PLHIV . This is regarded as an integral part of HIV-TB activities at
the ART centres.

14
The Intensified TB Case Finding (ICF) activities are being implemented in all Integrated
Counselling and Testing Centres (ICTCs) and ART centres across the country. The diagnosis of TB
among HIV infected people, who attend the ART centres, is done by referring them to designated
TB Diagnostic facilities in the same institution, where the ART centre is located. As the testing
facilities for diagnosis of TB already exists in the same institute, the Deptt. of AIDS Control is not
duplicating the efforts in this regard.
The diagnosis of Drug Resistant TB (DR TB) by newer technologies is the mandate of
Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP) being implemented by Central TB Division in
Department of Health. In this regard, there is a Joint National Technical Working Group (NTWG)
for coordination of HIV & TB activities. This group explores and directs both programmes to
initiate such activities in improving the management of HIV/TB co-infection. Similar State level
Committees exist at state level to ensure the proper coordination between the two programmes so
that the activities both at TB clinic and ART centres (HIV/AIDS clinic) are well coordinated for
the benefit of patients with HIV/TB co-infection.
As regards regulatory control of sale and administration of TB drugs in the private sector,
in order to address the growing incidence of severe forms of Drug Resistant TB cases in the
country, it is conveyed that this is the mandate of Drugs Control Authority i.e. Drugs Controller
General (India) and RNTCP. However, this will be taken up by the Department in the next meeting
of NTWG.
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee note with serious concern the continuance of this trend of underutilization
of the budgeted funds and feels that the Department seriously needs to put in place a rigorous
monitoring mechanism for ensuring financial discipline and optimal utilization of the budgeted
amount. (Para 2.6)
Action Taken
The Department is making continuous efforts to ensure optimal utilization of available funds.
As a result of these efforts there has been a significant increase in utilization of budgeted funds
from year to year during the Eleventh Plan. The following bar-chart shows the utilization vis-à-
vis allocation in last 5 years.


15
It may be seen from the above graph that the utilization of budgeted funds in the Financial
Year 2011-12 has been highest ever in the history of the programme. The Department will continue
its efforts to ensure that there is optimal utilization of funds in the current financial year. This will
be ensured through constant monitoring of financial performance of states and timely completion
of planned activities like central procurement.
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 The Committee would, however, like to point out that the efforts need to be sustained till
the elimination of all the problems areas being faced by different States. The Committee is
constrained to observe that there was downward revision of funds at the RE stage during 2011-12.
The Committee does not find merit in the justification putforth by the Department that the broad
cut resulted in the downward revision of funds. In the Committee’s opinion, opening balance of
Rs. 206.32 crore at the beginning of 2011-12 seems to be the main reason for reduction of
allocated funds during the year. The Committee would like to point out that various components
under NACP deserve to be pursued vigorously and any cut in funds for the same would severely
hamper the ongoing fight against the deadly disease. (Para 2.12)
Action Taken
Concern of the Committee is noted. The Department will make vigorous efforts to ensure
that the programme does not suffer due to shortage of funds caused by cuts in allocation.
Several steps have been taken to improve utilization of funds by states and reduce
outstanding balances with them. The quantum of cash and advances outstanding with SACS has
shown improvement in the last year. These reductions of outstanding balances have been achieved
despite steady growth in releases of funds to states.
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee would like to know the measures the Department has taken to ensure that
this decline in GFATM funds does not further affect the expansion and improvement of the
treatment programme for HIV . This is particularly important as the Department of AIDS Control’s
TRG on ART has recommended earlier treatment with better drugs that will keep patients alive
longer and reduce new infections. This is in line with the latest studies that show that people under
treatment not only benefit as individuals, but they are also less likely to transmit the virus to others-
in effect, protecting the community. (Para 2.13)
Action Taken
There has been a decline in donor support to HIV/AIDS programmes across the globe.
This has impacted the Global Fund as well. However, Global Fund has invited applications from
India for extension of current funding agreements for integrated counseling/testing and treatment
components. The Department has submitted applications to the Global Fund for grants amounting
to USD 103 million for the testing component and USD 187 million for the treatment component
of the programme. These will ensure continued external aid for these components until 2015.
Global Fund approval of these requests is awaited. The Department is hopeful of finalizing
continued Global Fund support for these components. However, it is also recognized that the
quantum of Global Fund support under consideration would be inadequate to meet the
requirements of the country in the T welfth Plan period. Therefore, under the Twelfth Plan
proposal, the Government proposes that any shortfall in Global Fund support be met from
Domestic Budgetary Support.

16
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 Taking into view the above comments, the Committee is perturbed to note that the Twelfth
Plan outlay of the Department is yet to be approved and conveyed to them by the Planning
Commission. Pending formal approval of the Twelfth plan the Department is also carrying on with
their existing activities. Furthermore, the Department is also not in a position to initiate the process
of seeking formal EFC/CCEA approval of schemes in the Twelfth Plan in the absence of approval
of Sectoral and Plan allocation. The Committee is of the strong view that the process of approvals
and clearances need to be streamlined with a view to cut delays in decision-making. It, therefore,
recommends to the Government to hasten the approval of Twelfth Plan related approvals so that
the Department is able to complete all the other formalities incidental to planning process and start
implementation of its schemes in right earnest without any further loss of time. (Para 2.14)
Action Taken
The Committee’s concern is noted. It is reiterated that the Department will take timely
action as envisaged under Ministry of Finance guidelines for transition of on-going schemes from
Eleventh Plan to Twelfth Plan. It may also be noted that the planning for NACP-IV in the Twelfth
Plan is at an extremely advanced stage and tentative targets have been drawn up. Implementation
in the current Financial Year is aimed towards achieving the draft Twelfth Plan targets. The
Department will make all efforts to ensure that the implementation of the programme in the Twelfth
Plan does not suffer.
III. ROLE OF NGOs
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has not been able to recover the
unspent balances available with the discontinued NGOs. There appears to be some slackness on the
part of the Department and other implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends
imposing severe penalties on the NGOs which indulged in fraud or financial embezzlement. If need
be, the Department should sound the law enforcement agencies of the concerned States to proceed
with action against such NGOs as fraud or financial embezzlement comes within the domain of
penal offences requiring expertise and wherewithal of law enforcement agencies. (Para 3.2)
Action Taken
State AIDS Control Societies are responsible for contracting NGOs/CBOs for
implementation of targeted intervention projects through a transparent process of expression of
interest followed by Technical Appraisal Committee doing a desk review and Joint Appraisal
Committee (JAT) doing a field verification of the capacity of NGO before the contracting is
approved by the Governing Body headed by Secretary/Principal Secretary of the State. The
performance of the NGO is monitored and the poor performing NGOs/CBOs are terminated based
on the assessment or independent evaluation process. The first instalments of funds are released
as an advance and the monthly Statement of expenditure (SOEs) are monitored by Computerized
Fund Management System (CPFMS). Before the next instalment is released, the previous SOEs is
settled. This process helps in lowering the outstanding amounts with the NGOs.
State AIDS Control Societies (SACS) have already initiated the above steps to keep a tab
on the expenditure of NGOs and thereby decrease the outstanding amounts with the NGOs without
compromising the field implementation. After the statutory audits, SACS recover the unspent
balance amount from NGOs/CBOs and those NGOs not complying with necessary legal actions are

17
taken by involving the district collector or Commissioner. Out of the total outstanding from NGOs
amounting to Rs. 352.7 lakhs in 27 States, an amount of Rs. 221.5 lakhs has been recovered which
is 63 per cent. NGOs in 14 States have a balance of Rs. 131.08 lakhs still to be recovered. District
administration has been requested to expedite the recovery process. Legal actions have also been
initiated against the NGOs who have not responded to the notice. Legal actions have been initiated
for NGOs in 8 States.
VII. PERSONS TO BE COUNSELLED AND TESTED AT ICTCS (TARGET OF 220 LAKH
PER YEAR)
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The Committee finds that these are fleeting statements based on assumptions. Street
children for example are sexually active at a very young age. New studies also establish that
assumptions that young people below 15 years are not sexually active are not accurate.
Interventions for young people are necessary to address the risk of STDs, HIV and Hepatitis and
the Committee recommends that the Department make appropriate provision for capturing this risk
group. Another scenario was presented before the officials during oral evidence-a long-haul truck
driver/migrant labour (the two highest risk – groups) contracting infection from a sex-worker and
passing it on to his wife back in the village-chances of the wife thus getting infected and becoming
pregnant and being captured as a new case? The Committee for want of a satisfactory answer
recommends that the Department take a very serious view of this critical gap in data generation
as it feels that given the poor accessibility to health care in rural areas the chances of such cases
being captured in data collection would be truly grim. The Committee feels that citing international
norms and a one-size-fits-all kind of approach is neither adequate nor acceptable while capturing
data in a truly diverse country like India. The Department must come up with more innovative
solutions after consulting the various stakeholders so that a more realistic picture is available for
dealing with the HIV menace. The examples quoted are only illustrative and not exhaustive. The
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard. (Para 7.3) (a)
Action Taken
The mathematical models of Estimation Projection Package (EPP)/Spectrum used for HIV
Estimation are developed by WHO/UNAIDS Global Reference Group and are adopted in all
countries across the world. The models are developed based on the best available evidence globally
that inform the assumptions in estimating infections in different age groups. Based on the review
of the available evidence on infections among children below 15 years age, the model works on
the assumption that all the HIV infections in children are resulting from Mother to Child
Transmission. Adequate and valid evidence is not available currently that establishes other routes
of transmission among children. Efforts will be made to generate the required information to inform
assumptions in modeling pertaining to the transmission of HIV among children.
In order to capture the effect of migration on HIV transmission in rural areas, sentinel
sites under HIV Sentinel Surveillance are being set up at primary health centres in rural areas in
heavy out-migration districts. This ensures that the pregnant women from these villages are
captured in the data collection efforts to monitor the HIV epidemic. However, poor utilization of
public health settings in rural areas is still a limitation to HIV Sentinel Surveillance activities.
Besides surveillance, special in-depth studies are also being conducted to study the dynamics of
HIV transmission due to migration and these studies also inform the programme about the ways
to control it.

18
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee observes that HIV , Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C share common modes of
transmission. The Committee recommends that the technical feasibility of ICTC centres expansion
to test and counsel for hepatitis in a p hased manner should be undertaken immediately. This is
important as many experts feel that there is a significant but under recognized hepatitis-associated
disease burden in this country. Despite that India does not have a Hepatitis disease registry, or
information on the diseases burden. For example, a Professor & Head of Gastroenterology at
AIIMS, has stated that studies reported from various parts of India estimate that about 20 million
Indians are Hepatitis B carriers and about 8 to 10 million may have silent Hepatitis C virus
infection. These individuals do not know that they have these infections and not only are at risk
of transmitting this disease but also cannot access early treatment preventing late stage liver
cirrhosis and liver cancer. (Para 7.3 (b))
Action Taken
The diagnosis and management of Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C to people attending the
hospitals is the mandate of the general health system, as these facilities are provided in the existing
health care delivery system. Thus, Department of AIDS Control may not duplicate efforts to
provide such facilities in the set up of National AIDS Control Programme as such facilities are in
the large number of cases, located in the same institution. Whenever a PLHIV attends an ART
centre and is found to be co-infected with Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C, he/she is referred to the
general health system for confirmatory diagnosis and management of Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C.
VIII. ANTIRETROVIRAL TREATMENT (ART) CENTRES
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 The Committee feels that it would be in the fitness of things to upgrade the link centres
to ART centres in order to increase the number of patients who can avail treatment as well as
procure drugs near their residence which would go a long way in decreasing the staggering figures
of patients who cannot avail treatment due to inaccessibility of the existing ART centres in the
country. (Para 8.6)
Action Taken
As has been pointed out by the Committee in para 8.5, it is understood that HIV virus is
prone to drug resistance. As ART is a specialised treatment, scale up of facilities to provide ART
is done with caution. NACP stresses proper counselling of patients to ensure complete adherence
to treatment, to prevent drug resistance. As per scheme of Link ART Centres, these centres are
upgraded to ART centres once they have a critical mass of patients for treatment at the centre.
They require adequate infrastructure and other facilities to undertake this specialised care in the
interest of the patients.

19
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee notes that with focused intervention of NACO, there is a considerable
decline in unspent balances available with the societies. The Committee would, however, like to
point out that availability of unspent balances with some SACS like Andhra Pradesh SACS (17.59
crore), Karnataka SACS (Rs. 21.09 crore), Madhya Pradesh SACS (Rs. 15.02 crore) and Tamil
Nadu SACS (Rs. 14.68 crore) is still quite high. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to introduce stricter monitoring mechanism and financial discipline so that funds do not
get accumulated and remain unutilized. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to
ensure fixing of responsibility to ensure proper accountability in utilization of funds. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.2 Recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. It is always the endeavor of
the Department to keep balances with the SACS to the minimum. With respect to unspent balance
available with Andhra Pradesh SACS, Karnataka SACS, Madhya Pradesh SACS and Tamil Nadu
SACS, it is submitted that other than Madhya Pradesh the other three states exhibit high prevalence
of HIV/AIDS and have a high concentration of programme activities. Their annual budgets are
correspondingly large. The final availability of unspent balances at the end of the financial year
2011-12 for these SACS are Andhra Pradesh (Rs.7.24crore), Karnataka (Rs.14.83 crore), Madhya
Pradesh (Rs.16.09 crore) and Tamil Nadu (Rs.6.14 crore). While all efforts are made to ensure that
SACS do not have idle unspent balances, it must also be appreciated that there is a necessity to
have funds available with SACS at all times as working capital to meet program expenditure and
avoid any hiccup in programme implementation due to a fund flow problem.
Continuous monitoring has ensured that though opening cash balance as on 1.4.2011 was
Rs. 206.32 crore, closing balance as on 31.3.2012 was Rs. 145.37 crore which represents a
significant improvement.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Committee is concerned that a balance of Rs.147.37 crore remaining as unspent
balance is still a very substantial amount and warrants constant efforts on the part of the
Government to wipe out the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to devise innovative ways to reduce the balance to the minimum and ensure
financial prudence and propriety.
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS
Recommendation/Observation
3.2 The Committee notes that against the target of setting up of 39 Blood banks during the
19

20
Eleventh Plan, only 25 Blood Banks could be set up. When enquired about the reasons for
non-completion of 14 blood banks, the Department has stated that this was on account of various
factors like non-completion of infrastructure, in-adequate man-power, lack of equipments and non-
acquisition of license etc. But the Committee feels that the reasons illustrated by the Department
are frivolous. It appears that the Department has not made sincere efforts to achieve the physical
targets. The Committee desires that the Department should make concerted efforts to complete the
processes as mentioned above by the December, 2012, so that the time line set by NACP-III is
adhered to . (Para 5.3)
Action Taken
3.5 As identified in NACP III the Blood Safety component of DAC was committed to facilitate
setting up of District Level Blood Banks at the District Hospitals in 39 newly created districts of
which 25 have been established. The 39 districts with no blood bank were identified in the States
of Bihar, U.P, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, Mizoram, and Uttarakhand.
As per the norms the State needs to provide land, infrastructure, equipments and manpower
before support of laboratory technician, some equipment support and consumables are provided
under this scheme.
At present 25 DLBBs have been set up. Of the remaining 14 cases, in 6 districts
construction of the building for blood banks is complete and steps are being taken to meet the
requirements for a license.
In 8 other districts, blood bank buildings are under construction. Instructions have been
issued by NACO to the respective SACS to set up a Blood Storage Centre in these districts till
the new blood banks become operational.
In the States where infrastructure has still not been provided the target cannot be attained
till December 2012. However in the remaining sites where basic infrastructure is available all efforts
will be made to have the blood banks functional.
Further Recommendation
3.6 The Committee is dismayed to observe the snail’s pace of progress for setting up the
remaining 14 District Level Blood Banks (DLBBs), out of 39 DLBBs under Phase-III of
NACO. Factual position as given by the Department clearly indicates that majority of the
State Governments have failed to fulfill their commitments of providing infrastructure. The
Committee is of the firm opinion that the difficulties as pointed out by the Department are
not insurmountable and can be taken care of if the matter is pursued vigorously with the
State Governments concerned at the highest level. The Committee, therefore, would like to
impress upon the Department to play a proactive role by taking up the matter with the
concerned State Governments, if need be, at the highest level, and inform the Committee
of the efforts made in this regard and the outcome thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
3.7 The Committee is surprised that in spite of the Committee’s recommendation made in its
42
nd Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11), the Department has moved at a snail’s pace which
is evident from the fact that it has managed only to get the land allotted in November 2011 for
the four metro blood banks. The Committee is dismayed by the callousness on the part of the
Department to disregard its recommendation to have a targeted approach in making the four metro
blood banks functional at the earliest. The Committee expresses its displeasure at this sorry state

21
of affairs and recommends that the Secretary of the Department should take personal interest to
ensure completion of the four Metro Blood Banks at the earliest. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
3.8 • The Proposal for Setting up of Metro Blood Banks was one of the approved activities
under NACP- Phase III.
• As building and manpower were not part of the proposal, a revised proposal was
submitted to EFC and then to Cabinet for approval.
• Under the scheme, it is envisaged to get the requisite land free of cost by respective
State Governments. However, being all the 4 sites in metro-cities, it was difficult to get
requisite piece of land of this size, that too, in vicinity of medical college hospital.
• The land transfer has been done for sites at Kolkata, Mumbai & Chennai. While for
Delhi site, the same is still pending.
• The DPR 2 for the sites at Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata was approved by the Steering
Committee on 20.12.2011.
• Revised EFC Memo was circulated on 29.2.2012 and has since been redrafted in view
of revised format issued by Ministry of Finance and due to time and cost overrun a
Standing Committee report has to be enclosed with the Revised Cost Estimate.
• Since the examination of the Department by this august Committee, a Standing
Committee on Time & Cost Overrun, chaired by Secretary, DAC has been constituted.
This committee had two meetings and has submitted its findings on 7.6.2012. The
minutes of the same are under circulation. They will be annexed with the draft RCE for
circulation shortly.
• All efforts are being made by the Department to accelerate the establishment and
functioning of these Metro Blood Banks which will be initiated after all approvals are
obtained.
Further Recommendation
3.5 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Project concerning setting up of
the Metro Blood Banks has been plagued by delays due to faulty planning which is evident
from the fact that building and manpower were not part of the original proposal which
necessitated submission of a revised proposal first to EFC and then to Cabinet and thus
resulted in time and cost overruns. More than two and a half years have passed since the
Committee made recommendations in this regard in its 42nd Report presented to
Parliament on the 28th April, 2010, but the execution of the project still remains a far cry.
The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to review the strategies adopted so
far in the implementation of the Project and incorporate necessary modifications in the
same with a view to expedite the project at the earliest.
VII. PERSONS TO BE COUNSELED AND TESTED AT ICTCs (TARGETS OF 220 LAKH
PER YEAR)
Recommendation/Observation
3.10 As per information submitted by the Department, it has set an overall target of 220 lakh

22
people per year (including pregnant women) to be counselled and tested in ICTCs at the end of
NACP III i.e. March, 2012. However, a plain reading of the figures furnished by the Department
reveals that the Department has not been able to achieve its scaled down targets. Further, as per
information furnished by the Department, total approved number of posts of counsellors in ICTCs
is 4992 whereas the actual strength is 4774. Similarly the sanctioned strength of the post of lab
technicians in ICTCs is 4702 whereas the actual strength is 4352. The Committee expresses
displeasure that the Department has not been able to fulfill even its scaled down targets. However,
the Committee supports any endeavour by means of which the Department would be able to
achieve the targets fixed by it. If need be, it would support the Department to seek additional funds
from the Finance Ministry/Planning Commission so as to augment the manpower as well as number
of stand-alone ICTCs with the rider that the Department makes serious efforts to achieve its yearly
targets. (Para 7.2)
Action Taken
3.11 The Department has made efforts to scale up counseling and testing services by
collaborating with NRHM to establish Facility Integrated Counseling and Testing Centres. Workload
of ICTC is continuously reviewed to ensure optimal utilization of available human resource.
The vacancies among counselors and laboratory technicians has been a constant challenge
for the Department due to
(i) inability of some States like Odisha to fill up the vacancies due to court cases and
other administrative issues
(ii) attrition of staff at field level
(iii) overall shortage of qualified laboratory technicians in the States
To address this challenge, wherever there is a vacancy, the department ensured continuity
of counseling and testing services by training the general health system laboratory technician and
utilizing their services.
Further Recommendation
3.12 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee
feels that if the court cases had been pursued vigorously, pronouncement of verdicts could
have been expedited. As regards resolving administrative issues and dealing with attrition
of staff at field level, the Committee is of the firm view that these issues could have been
easily taken care of by streamlining the decision-making process and offering adequate
incentives. The Committee, therefore, would like the Department to show vision in dealing
with such issues and advise the State Governments accordingly, instead of devoting its
energies to quick-fix solutions.
IX. NEW INITIATIVES
(i) SETTING UP OF NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION AUTHORITY (NBTA)
Recommendation/Observation
3.13 The Committee expresses its dismay over the fact that the Department of Expenditure has
not sent its comments so far. Though the original timeline for starting NBTA was April, 2010, there
is still no ray of hope of its being set up in near future. The Committee condemns such
procrastinating attitude of the government. The Committee impress upon the Department that in
order to ensure setting up of a National Blood Transfusion Authority, it is imperative that immediate

23
steps should be taken to remove the legal infirmities raised by the Ministry of Finance along with
seeking replies from respective Departments without further delay in view of the fact that the
scheme which was to take wings in the Eleventh Plan is yet to take off. (Para 9.2)
Action Taken
Status Note on Establishment of National Blood Transfusion Authority (NBTA)
3.14 • The Proposal for Setting up of NBTA was one of the approved activities under NACP-
Phase III.
• A vision document on NBTA was prepared in 2008 which was reviewed during a
meeting of experts.
• The proposed budget allocation for NBTA was 39.55 crores for 2 years under NACPIII.
• A draft Cabinet note was prepared and sent to various departments such as Dept. of
Expenditure and Economic Affairs, under Ministry of Finance, Dept of Health and
Planning Commission for comments in September 2009
The Ministry of Finance has not supported the proposal and the detailed observations are
as given below:
1. The intent of NBTA and SBTAs, as clarified in the responses of the revised proposal
is facilitation of the regularity functions of the DCI. These functions can be done
through the existing set up of NBTC and SBTCs which were set up for the purpose.
If necessary, these existing entities could be further strengthened.
2. It has been indicated that State Governments spend Rs. 700 Crore on blood banks
annually and the intent is that these funds would be provided to NBTA to enable it
manage these blood banks through the respective SBTAs. Prima facie, it is not clear
why the State Governments would provide these funds to NBTA without a specific legal
provision, or whether alternate/additional central funding is being conceived here. It is
difficult to support the present formulation without a clear understanding of the fund
requirement and its source in the present case.
3. What appears to have been proposed is taking over regulation and administration of
blood banks (including financial administration) by NBTA through SBTAs. Prima facie,
it does not appear to be feasible without a clear legal mandate in this regard.
4. The fund requirement (over 2010-12) for establishing the NBTA and SBTAs has been
reduced and it has been stated that these funds would be made available out of
NACPIII. Even as the source of funding of the new proposed entities has been clarified
there remains a requirement of appraisal of expenditure proposals at the appropriate
forum before considering their approval.
In view of the above, the matter was not pursued further.
Further Recommendation
3.16 While looking into the reasons for non-approval of the proposal, the Committee finds
that the basic premise for non-approval of the same is the legal infirmities existing in the
present scheme and the requirement of appraisal of the expenditure proposals at the
appropriate forum before considering their approval. The Committee, therefore, impresses
upon the Department to have a relook at the scheme based on Finance Ministry’s detailed
observations and try to remove the infirmities and submit the same again for reconsideration
and approval.

24
(ii) SETTING UP OF PLASMA FRACTIONATION CENTRE (PFC)
Recommendation/Observation
3.17 The Committee is disappointed by the snail’s pace to set up Plasma Fractionation Centre
which is still bogged down in bureaucratic red-tapism even though the Eleventh Five Year Plan has
come to an end. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to make all out efforts
for setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre without any further delay. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken
• The Proposal for Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre was one of the approved
activities under NACP-Phase III.
• The Centre will have the capacity to fractionate 1.5 lakh litres of plasma per annum
collected from all NACO supported blood banks in the country
• The direct benefit of implementation of this project is to ensure access of plasma
derivatives to needy patients at affordable costs. This will also reduce our dependence
on imported products saving the foreign exchange.
• As building and manpower were not part of the proposal, a supplementary proposal was
submitted for approval.
• The total outlay for the scheme is Rs. 250 crores.
Current Status
• Tamil Nadu Government has provided the land for establishing the PFC at New Avadi
Road, Anna Nagar, Chennai measuring approximately 1.5 acres.
Issues of Concern
EOI for the Project Management Consultant selection was published in May, 2010. During
July, 2009 to January, 2011 the blood safety work was placed at Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare as per decision of Hon’ble HFM which has been transferred to Department of AIDS
Control since January, 2011. In this period NACO convened national and international consultations
to arrive at the technology to be used for the PFC plant. As the proposal was prepared with costing
of 2007-08 it is likely that the estimated cost will be escalated which may require a fresh EFC
approval.
Departmental Efforts to remove bottlenecks
A meeting of the expert group was held on 4 th February, 2011 which short listed 5
companies amongst the 14 EOIs received as Project Management Consultant (PMC).
Request for Proposal (RFP) was prepared for onward communication to the selected
companies. No company was found to be suitable for the same and the whole process is being
reworked.
As the country has no expertise in the area of plasma fractionation the project has been
delayed. Further, cartelization of the technology providers in this area is causing concern in
identifying the appropriate technical resources. Further, the cost estimation will be revised as there
has been an escalation in the price since 2007-08.

25
Further Recommendation
3.19 The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which setting up of a Plasma
Fractionation Centre is still entangled in paper work. It shows the lackadaisical approach
of the Department for setting up Plasma Fractionation Centre. Though, the reply of the
Department indicates the progress made so far, the reasons for the delay are not justified.
In the opinion of the Committee, this is a case of poor planning and implementation
strategy on the part of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to revisit its strategy and set out necessary time-bound corrective measures to
achieve the target at the earliest.
XVI. HIV/AIDS Bill
Recommendation/Observation
3.20 The Committee expresses its displeasure on inordinate delay in bringing about HIV/AIDS Bill
even though six years have lapsed since it was first drafted in 2006. The reasons given by the
Department are not acceptable and frivolous and clearly indicate the manner in which it continues
to sideline this crucial law that is aimed at not only protecting the rights of people living with HIV
and marginalized population but also to protect public health. The cases of discrimination in
healthcare, education and within their families have not gone down and in fact continue to endanger
the lives of millions of HIV+, while the Department delays action. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should take urgent measures to speed up the process for
introduction of the bill as soon as possible, keeping in view the nature of the diseases. (Para 14.4)
Action Taken
3.21 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. As indicated earlier, the draft of the
Bill was recast and referred to Ministry of Law and Justice in September, 2011 and again in
December, 2011 for vetting. Thereafter, a note along with the draft of the Bill was prepared which
was circulated to various Ministries/Departments in March, 2012, for their comments. The
comments of most of the Ministries/Departments have been received which are being examined.
Comments of few are awaited. They have been reminded to expedite their comments. The
Department has been taking all measure to speed up the process for completion of various
requirements before introduction of the Bill in the Parliament.
Further Recommendation
3.22 The Committee understands that the proposed HIV/AIDS Bill requires detailed
analysis before being introduced in the Parliament. At the same time the Committee
expects that the Department could have been more proactive in taking the Bill to its logical
conclusion. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to take concrete steps
to ensure that the Bill is introduced at the earliest.

26
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
– Nil –

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee is concerned that a balance of Rs.147.37 crore remaining as unspent
balance is still a very substantial amount and warrants constant efforts on the part of the
Government to wipe out the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to devise innovative ways to reduce the balance to the minimum and ensure
financial prudence and propriety. (Para 2.10)
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS
The Committee is dismayed to observe the snail’s pace of progress for setting up the
remaining 14 District Level Blood Banks (DLBBs), out of 39 DLBBs under Phase-III of
NACO. Factual position as given by the Department clearly indicates that majority of the
State Governments have failed to fulfill their commitments of providing infrastructure. The
Committee is of the firm opinion that the difficulties as pointed out by the Department are
not insurmountable and can be taken care of if the matter is pursued vigorously with the
State Governments concerned at the highest level. The Committee, therefore, would like to
impress upon the Department to play a proactive role by taking up the matter with the
concerned State Governments, if need be, at the highest level, and inform the Committee
of the efforts made in this regard and the outcome thereof. (Para 5.3)
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Project concerning setting up of
the Metro Blood Banks has been plagued by delays due to faulty planning which is evident
from the fact that building and manpower were not part of the original proposal which
necessitated submission of a revised proposal first to EFC and then to Cabinet and thus
resulted in time and cost overruns. More than two and a half years have passed since the
Committee made recommendations in this regard in its 42nd Report presented to
Parliament on the 28th April, 2010, but the execution of the project still remains a far cry.
The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to review the strategies adopted so
far in the implementation of the Project and incorporate necessary modification in the same
with a view to expedite the project at the earliest. (Para 5.7)
VII. PERSONS TO BE COUNSELED AND TESTED AT ICTCs (TARGETS OF 220 LAKH
PER YEAR)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee
feels that if the court cases had been pursued vigorously, pronouncement of verdicts could
have been expedited. As regards resolving administrative issues and dealing with attrition
of staff at field level, the Committee is of the firm view that these issues could have been
easily taken care of by streamlining the decision-making process and offering adequate
incentives. The Committee, therefore, would like the Department to show vision in dealing
with such issues and advise the State Governments accordingly, instead of devoting its
energies to quick-fix solutions. (Para 7.2)
27

28
IX. NEW INITIATIVES
(ii) SETTING UP OF NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION AUTHORITY (NBTA)
While looking into the reasons for non-approval of the proposal, the Committee finds
that the basic premise for non-approval of the same is the legal infirmities existing in the
present scheme and the requirement of appraisal of the expenditure proposals at the
appropriate forum before considering their approval. The Committee, therefore, impresses
upon the Department to have a relook at the scheme based on Finance Ministry’s detailed
observations and try to remove the infirmities and submit the same again for
reconsideration and approval. (Para 9.2)
(iii) SETTING UP OF PLASMA FRACTION CENTRE (PFC)
The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which setting up of a Plasma
Fractionation Centre is still entangled in paper work. It shows the lackadaisical approach
of the Department for setting up Plasma Fractionation Centre. Though, the reply of the
Department indicates the progress made so far, the reasons for the delay are not justified.
In the opinion of the Committee, this is a case of poor planning and implementation
strategy on the part of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to revisit its strategy and set out necessary time-bound corrective measures to
achieve the target at the earliest. (Para 9.4)
XVI. HIV/AIDS Bill
The Committee understands that the proposed HIV/AIDS Bill requires detailed
analysis before being introduced in the Parliament. At the same time the Committee
expects that the Department could have been more proactive in taking the Bill to its logical
conclusion. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to take concrete steps
to ensure that the Bill is introduced at the earliest. (Para 14.4)

29
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Thursday, the 8 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Dr. Tarun Mandal
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
14. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
15. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
16. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them of the agenda of the
meeting viz. (i) to consider and adopt draft *, 62
nd and * Reports of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in its Reports on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of *, AIDS Control and *, respectively, of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and (ii) * * *.
31
* Relates to other matters.

32
II. Consideration and adoption of draft *, 62 nd and * Reports
3. The Committee considered and draft *, 62 nd and * Reports of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on Recommendations/observations contained in its Reports on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of *, AIDS Control and *, respectively of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports
with minor amendments.
4 . ***
5 . ***
6 . ***
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
* Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.