 
 
       
                                                                                       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
REPORT NO. 
141 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
135TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2022-23 (DEMAND 
NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH, 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
135TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2022-23 (DEMAND 
NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH, 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 (i)  
2. PREFACE 
 
(ii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
 
(iii) - (iv) 
4. REPORT 1-30 
 Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 
 
2 – 10 
 Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
 
11 – 16 
 Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
 
17 – 26 
 Chapter–IV- Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry have not been received 
 
27 - 30 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
31 – 33 
6. MINUTES 34 - 36 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agarwal     
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Vacant 
5. Vacant 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
9. Vacant 
10. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                     Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 
  
        

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Forty First Report of the Committee on Action Tak en by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 135th Report on Demands 
for Grants 2022-23 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare.  
2. The One Hundred Thirty Fifth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 24th March, 2022. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Departments on 13th July, 2022.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 50 recommendations in the 135th Report, out of which 16 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and has been categorized under Chap ter I. 
There are 13  recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry’s replies that have been categori zed under Chapter II. There are 14 recommendations/ 
observations, in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by  the 
Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and has been 
categorized under Chapter III while 7 recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry have not been received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on the  8th September, 202 2 considered the Draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
8th  September, 2022 
Bhadra, 1944  (Saka) 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary                                                                                           
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
(ii) 
  

 
 
                          ACRONYMS 
 
AYUSH 
AI 
AIIMS 
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
Artificial Intelligence 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AMR 
BE 
BMGF 
BSL 
CCMB 
CCRAS 
Antimicrobial Resistance  
Budget Estimate 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
Bio safety Level 
Centre for Cellular & Molecular Biology 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
CBNAAT Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test 
CSIR 
CNRT 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
Centre for Promotion of Nutrition Research and Training  
CoE 
DCGI 
Center of Excellence 
Drugs Controller General of India  
DBT 
DBT 
Direct Beneficiary Module  
Department of  Biotechnology  
DHR    Department of Health Research 
DIAMOnDS 
DoI 
DoPT 
DRSC 
DST 
EQA 
FY 
GCLP 
GDP 
DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services  
Declaration of Intent  
Department of Personal and Training 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Department of Science and Technology 
External Quality Assessment 
Fiscal Year 
Good Clinical Laboratory Practices 
Gross Domestic Product 
GIA Grants in Aid Scheme  
GHI Global Health Index 
HTAIn Health Technology Assessment in India  
HRD Human Resource Development 
HTA Health Technology Assessment 
ICMR 
ICRC 
ISRO 
Ig-ELISA 
IIT 
IIPH 
IDD 
IDSP 
INSACOG 
 
IRDA 
INTENT 
JRF 
KFD 
LAMP 
MAFSU 
MD 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
India Cancer Research Consortium  
Indian Space Research Organisation 
Immunoglobulin-Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay test 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Indian Institute of Public Health 
Iodine Deficiency Disorders 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Project  
Indian SARS-CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics or Indian SARS-CoV-2 
Genetics Consortium 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network 
Junior Research Fellowship  
Kyasanur Forest disease  
Loop mediated isothermal amplification  
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University 
Doctor of Medicine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

 
 
ML Machine Learning 
MoA 
MoU 
Memorandum of Agreement 
Memorandum of  Understanding 
MRHRUs Model Rural Health Research Units 
MRUs 
MSEs 
MSMEs 
NAFLD 
NACO 
NCDI 
Multidisciplinary Research Units 
Medium & Small Enterprises  
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
National AIDS Control Programme 
National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research 
NCDC National Control for Disease Control  
NER 
NIAID 
North Eastern Region 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
NIH 
NIMS 
NIN 
NITI 
National Institute of Health 
National Institute of Medical Statistics 
National Institute of Nutrition 
National Institution for Transforming India 
NITM   National Institute of Traditional Medicine, Belagavi 
NIV National Institute of Virology, Pune 
NTF 
NVBDCP 
OR 
PhD 
PMASBY 
PM-ABHIM 
QC 
QS 
RCRC 
National Task Force 
National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 
Operational Research 
Doctor of Philosophy  
Pradhan Mantri Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana 
Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
Quality Control 
Quality Assurance 
Regional Clinical Research Centers  
RE Revised Estimate 
RMRC Regional Medical Research Centre 
RRT 
RT-PCR 
Rapid Response Teams 
Real Time Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SARS-COV-2 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2  
SDG Sustainable Development Goals  
SNCM 
SRG 
STNM Hospital 
Standing National Committee on Medicines and other Health Care Products  
Start-up Research Grant  
Sir Thutob Namgyal Memorial 
STW 
STS 
Standard Treatment Workflow  
Short Term Studentship 
SFC 
S&T 
TB 
Standing Finance Committee 
Science & Technology 
Tuberculosis 
TM 
VCRC 
Traditional Medicine 
Vector Control Research Center 
VDRL 
VRDL 
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory Test 
Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories 
UCs Utilization Certificates 
UTs Union Territories 
UHC 
WHO 
Universal Health Care 
World Health Organisation 
 
 
(iv)  

1 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 35th Report on on Demands for Grants 2022-
23 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the DHR in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which hav e been accepted by the Government: 
1.3, 2.12, 2.24, 3.2, 3.4, 3.27, 3.37, 3.38, 3.44, 3.47, 4.5, 4.11, 4.15, 4.17, 4.20 and 
4.24  
       Total–16 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of  the Government's replies: 1.8, 2.11, 2.14, 2.19, 2.20, 2.26, 3.10, 3.50, 
3.52, 4.4, 4.9, 4.10 and 4.14 
         Total– 13 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 1.4, 2.15, 2.16, 2.23, 2.29, 3.6, 3.11, 
3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.26, 3.33, 3.34 and 3.41 
       Total– 14 (Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 1.11, 2.6, 2.7, 2.9, 2.27, 4.6 and 4.19 
           Total-7 (Chapter-IV) 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
1.1  Vision of the Department 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.1.1 The Committee recognizes the vision of the Department of Health Research and 
acknowledges the objectives set by the Department to achieve the set vision. However, the 
Committee is of the strong opinion that with changing times and fickle nature of the health 
emergencies, the Department needs to continuously evaluate its objectives and approach and 
recalibrate it, if the need arises. The Committee also believes that no objective can be achieved 
in its entirety if the Department functions in isolation or in association with research based 
institutes only. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to realize its vision, DHR must 
work in synergy with various departments and Ministries of the Central and State Governments 
as well as the leaders in healthcare industry in the private sector. 
(Para -1.3 of 135th Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The Department of Health Research along with ICMR is working in tandem with various 
Departments and Ministries of the Central and State Governments as well as private sector. 
ICMR has launched consortiums in the area of high priority areas like TB, Malaria and  Cancer. 
The aim is to bring together all major national players (with international collaborators) to 
address overarching scientific questions to tackle these health issues in a mission mode.  
 
1.1.3 In battle against COVID -19, ICMR worked in coherence wi th centre and state health 
departments, other S &T agencies and private partners like Bharat Biotech & Zydus Cadilla to 
bring out various solutions ranging from ramping up the testing infrastructure to developing 
diagnostic kit for national serosurveillance to developing a fully indigenous vaccine. 
 
1.1.4 ICMR-DHR-Centre of Excellences (CoE) for fostering MedTechinnovations was 
established at seven IITs viz., IIT -Bombay, IIT -Delhi, IIT -Guwahati, IIT -Hyderabad, IIT -
Kanpur, IIT-Kharagpur and IIT -Madras. These centres of excellence for Medical Device and 
Diagnostic development have been set up with an aim to develop the products/technologies in 
synergy with the requirements of the National Health Mission, Ayushman Bharat and Public 
Health Programs of the Government of India for their potential deployment. 
 
1.1.5 ICMR works in  collaboration with national pro grammes like NV BDCP, NACO etc. to 
generate new evidence to eliminate the communicable diseases like lymphatic filariasis, 
kalazar, AIDS, leprosy etc. As per the recommendation by eminent members of the committee, 
DHR-ICMR will work towards further strengthening the inter -departmental, inter sectoral 
collaborations to bring out logical solutions to health challenges of the nation. 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
1.2  Data and Projection Models 
   
 Recommendation 
 
1.2.1 The Committee recommends Department of Health Research to work with independent 
experts and statistical organizations to ensure that it has the best possible data and projection 
models to inform their thinking. 
(Para 2.12 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.2.2 ICMR has a full-fledged institute, National Institute of Medical Statistics (NIMS) that has 
contributed immensely in the area of AIDS, COVID -19 etc. The projections in the demand for 
COVID-19 realted essential supplies for the whole country were also handled under the 
leadership of ICMR-NIMS. ICMR is planning to recruit biostatiscians in mission mode and is 
also working in the capacity building programmes to create a talent pipeline of skilled 
biostatisticians. 
 
1.2.3 As suggested by committee, Department will develop a framework and identify 
independent experts from different statistical organisations to work on data and disease 
modelling. Recently, ICMR collaborated with IITs and Imperial College, Lo ndon to carry out 
modelling in the area of COVID-19. 
 
 
1.3  Ramping up testing capacity 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee agrees that India did ramp up its testing capacity exponentially since the 
pandemic began in January 2020. Yet; it's true that as c ompared to several other countries with 
high case load, India's testing numbers remained low under whelming. 
(para 2.24 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 In terms of cumulative numbers, India is second highest in COVID -19 testing in the 
world with more than 86 crore tests done till now. India made sure to optimally use its testing 
capacity as per the requirement through calibrated testing approach. As per WHO guidance a 
140 tests per million population per week were recommended. However, India’s average 
testing remained close to 900 -1000 tests per million population per week. Besides, the total 
testing numbers at the peak of 2 nd and 3rd wave were higher than many developed nations like 
USA and UK. 
 
1.4  Establishment of VRDLs 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.4.1 The Department has submitted that till date 132 VRDLs have been established across 25 
States and 5 Union Territories. These Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) 

4 
 
are established in a three -tier mode, viz., Regional, State and Medical College L evel. Regional 
level VRDLs are equipped with serology, RT-PCR, virus isolation, sequencing and fluorescence 
microscopy; State Level labs are equipped with serology, RT - PCR, fluorescence microscopy 
and sequencing, while Medical College Level are equipped w ith serology and Rt -PCR. These 
VRDLs are intended to cover the entire country for timely diagnosis/identification of viruses 
during outbreaks of epidemics, generation of data about viral diseases for facilitating quick 
deployment of adequate resources and measures to save the human lives during outbreaks. 
(Para 3.2 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 As on April 2022, a total of 136 VRDLs have been setup across the country spread over 
25 States and 5 UTs. The VRDL network is a three tiered system comprising of regio nal level, 
state level and medical college level laboratories designated as top level, middle level and 
lower level respectively. During the subsequent expansion of the VRDL network, equal 
geographic coverage of the country has been ensured.  
 
1.4.3 The VRDLs are equipped with state -of-art laboratory infrastructure, capable to diagnose 
more than 25 viruses of public health importance. Further impetus has been given to strengthen 
the VRDL network by implementing coordinated research activities on advance dia gnosis, 
robust surveillance mechanism for various virus diseases, epidemiological studies, outbreaks 
detections etc. 
 
1.4.4 Each laboratory has linkage with local health authorities and are being supplied field 
samples of any outbreak cluster with the help  IDSP and their sentinel sites. The data with 
respect to outbreak investigations and diagnosis is being uploaded on real -time basis to the 
dedicated data mining center operational at ICMR -NIE, Chennai. The interpretation/analysis of 
the data is parallel reported to the respective health authorities at Central and State level.   
 
1.5 Establishment of 3 tier VRDLs 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.5.1 The Committee observes that since Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories  (VRDLs) 
are established in a three -tier mode, viz., Regional, State and Medical College Level. VRDLs 
can be established in Sikkim and Nagaland as well at regional and state level even if there is no 
Medical College in these two States. The Committee notes that the States of Sikkim and 
Nagaland had highest fatality rate among st all the North -Eastern States.  Non-availability of 
testing facility could have been one of the reasons for high causality. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends DHR to work in associati on with the State Governments of North -Eastern Region 
and establish VRDLs in any government run research centre or any government hospital. 
(Para 3.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 As per the scheme norms, VRDLs can be establish in government medical 
colleges/research institutions/army hospitals. Due to unavailability of medical colleges in the 
State of Sikkim and Nagaland, the VRDLs could not be setup. However, DHR will explore the 
potential sites in the mentioned States.  

5 
 
 
1.5.3 Besides that, a viral diagnostic laboratory is functional at STNM Hospital, Gangtok, 
Sikkim since 2015 with financial support from ICMR. The said lab is equipped with all 
necessary infrastructures and trained human resources. The lab is catering whole Sikk im region 
efficiently. 
 
1.6  Establishment of MRHRU 
 
 Recommendation 
 
1.6.1 The Committee, therefore recommends DHR to work assiduously in establishing MRHRU 
in each state and UT of the country considering the poor state of health technology in almost 
all Indian States. The Committee also recommends the Department to approve and establish 
more such units in the rural part of country and accordingly the Department must seek 
adequate funds for the scheme at the RE stage and in subsequent years. 
(Para 3.27 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.6.2 The Department also has the target of establishing 01 MRHRU in each State and Union 
Territory. Accordingly, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for guidance and 
compliance. 
 
 1.7  Capacity Building and Skill Development 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.7.1 The Committee takes note of the efforts put by DHR for capacity building and skill 
development of the human resource. However, the Committee believes that the major problem 
now-a-days in medical research is its sub -standard quality. Poor quality medical research 
leads to almost no or little impact in clinical practice. The Committee takes note that in India, 
faculties and scientists in medical institutions, are largely engaged in teaching and clinical 
care and there is very little number of scientists interested in medical research. 
(Para 3.37 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 In order to promote quality research, the subject specific calls with well -defined research 
questions have been initiated upon brainstorming discussions with the biomedical experts. 
 
1.8  Quality of Medical Research 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.1 The Committee is of the strong view that quality of medical research can only be 
improved by inviting large no. of scientists, who can devote specific time for research f rom 
medical institutions especially in the field of diseases engulfing the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends utilizing college facilities having specific and exclusive time for 
research activities. The Committee also recommends that there shoul d be added incentives for 

6 
 
researchers for conducting high-quality and viable medical research that can be translated into 
action in treatment of life threatening diseases. 
(Para 3.38 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is no ted and will work towards implementing 
them.  
 
1.9  Basic Objective of HTAIn 
 
 Recommendation 
 
1.9.1 The Committee acknowledges the basic objective of HTAIn i.e. to analyse the health 
technologies viz. medicines, devices and health programmes  for its cost- effectiveness, clinical-
effectiveness and equity issues by means of Health Technology Assessment (HTA), and in turn 
helping in decision making for an optimal utilization of allocated health budget. The Committee 
believes that HTAIn scheme an d the scheme of establishing Model Rural Health Research 
Units (MRHRU), if operated in consonance & conjunction to each other can greatly aid in 
improving the overall health infrastructure, particularly in rural and semi -urban areas. The 
Committee, believes that adequate budgetary allocation and subsequent optimal utilization of 
allocated funds under this scheme would also help in minimizing the cost for healthcare by 
reducing the out of pocket expenditure that still remains enormous. The Committee notes th at 
out of the 17 Resource Centres of HTAIn only one such centre is in NE region and none in the 
UT of J&K and Ladakh. The Committee, therefore, recommends DHR to work towards setting 
up at least one such centre in J&K/Ladakh and one more in NE region. 
(Para 3.44 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 Resource Centre is available at Indian Institute of Public Health (IIPH), Shillong in NE 
Region. However, the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to constitute a centre in UT 
of Jammu &Kashmir and Ladakh will be consid ered and the recommendation of the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding HTAIn and MRHRU schemes working in conjunction and consonance 
with each other for improving the overall health infrastructure has been noted for compliance. 
 
1.10  Specialized Cancer Centre in NER 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.1 The Committee understands that North -Eastern states have the highest incidence of 
Cancer in India, for example Mizoram has the highest incidence of stomach cancer, Meghalaya 
has big number of esophageal cancer cases and Nagaland reports high Nasopharyngeal cancer 
cases, but due to unavailability of specialized facilities, patients often visit other cities of India 
for diagnosis and treatment. Thus, specialized cancer centre for screening, early diagnosis and 
treatment of cancer within the region needs to be  established. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends DHR to fast track setting up of oncopathology labs in NE region. 
(Para 3.47 ibid) 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.2 The DHR ICMR advanced Molecular oncopathology diagnostic services have been set 
up in Cachar Cancer I nstitute in Silchur and RIMS, Imphal. The suggestion of the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding Mizoram will also be considered as and when a proposal is received from 
Mizoram. 
 
1.11  Allocation of Fund to ICMR 
  
Recommendation 
 
1.11.1 Considering the pivotal role of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) in the field 
of bio -medical and health research in India, the Committee is deeply concerned to note the 
large gap in funding of ICMR when compared with health research institutions of countries like 
US, UK, France and China. What worries the Committee more is that the allocation of fund to 
ICMR and subsequent utilization of funds by ICMR has always been less than the projected 
demand, even in the Covid -years, where the need for adequa te funds and optimal utilization 
was call of the hour. The Committee believes that the budgetary allocation to ICMR in 2022 -
23, is grossly inadequate keeping in view the mandate of the ICMR. However, the Committee is 
also aware that the utilization trends of ICMR over the years don‟t present a justified reason 
for increase of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends ICMR to improve the absorption 
capacity of its scheme implementing agencies. The Committee recommends ICMR to provide 
more money for researc h projects, joint -research projects with national and international 
bodies, establish net work of labs for diagnosis of Communicable and Non - Communicable 
diseases, extensively fund research projects, provide trainings/ international exposure to 
researchers, develop programmes to encourage youth to take up research, scheme to develop 
inclination towards health-research in students of higher-secondary and senior secondary. 
(Para 4.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.11.2 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. Some more centers under ICMR like 
Center at Nagpur, Jabalpur, Chandigarh, Bangalore & Dibrugarh are under Construction. These 
Centers will cater the enhanced need of the Country and will also increase the absorption 
capacity of ICMR. 
 
1.12  Dual-Use Research 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends DHR -ICMR to formulate regulations and 
national policy for oversight of dual -use research - which refers to experiments that are 
conducted for peaceful purposes but can be modified or altered to cause harm. The Committee 
further recommends DHR/ICMR to conduct trainings and develop strict and exhaustive 
guidelines on bio-safety and bio-security. 
(Para 4.11 ibid) 
 
 
 

8 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.2 DHR-ICMR conducts regular training in the area of bio safety & Bio security including 
BSL-3 and GLP. ICMR/DHR has also notified a BSL -3 certification committee for regularly 
monitoring the facility design, operationalization, projects undertaken and pathog ens stored. 
Also a high level BSL -4 expert committee has been notified and is operational now. ICMR has 
also developed exhaustive guidelines on biosafety and biosecurity which have been disseminated 
to all eligible laboratories. As guided, ICMR will work towards developing a robust plan. 
 
1.13  Lack of public confidence in Healthcare 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.13.1 The Committee, however, believes that there is a general lack of public confidence in 
healthcare/pharmaceutical industry and the Committee apprehends t hat slackening public 
confidence might pose a hurdle in conducting clinical trials. The Committee recommends 
ICMR to work in cohesion with the pharmaceutical industry to regain trust of the general 
public by engaging more transparently. The ICMR should als o make more efforts to educate 
and inform patients and the society at large about the benefits of engaging in clinical research 
and allowing authentic collection of patient data. 
(Para 4.15 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.2 The Communications Unit of ICMR is working continuously to bring mass awareness 
regarding the procedure of drug/vaccine development and also tackle the vaccine hesitancy 
among the population. As  guided by the committee ICMR would develop a program to educ ate 
and inform patients and society about the benefits of engaging in clinical research. 
 
1.14  Projects taken by ICMR 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.14.1 The Committee takes note of the projects under taken by ICMR along with different 
organizations of the Ayush . The Committee is of the view that Ayurveda, Homeopathy, Siddha, 
Unani and herbal medicines have wide socio cultural acceptance with large chunk of 
population subscribing to the alternative mode of treatment, but the Committee believes that 
scientific research is needed, so that these regimens can be incorporated as standard treatment 
regimens. Research on Ayush preparations must be conducted scientifically so that it is in line 
with the modern patenting system. The Committee, therefore, recommends ICMR to  work 
towards linking various disciplines of Ayush with each other and also with modern system of 
medicine, as it may lead to a possible convergence of various disciplines for global benefit. 
(Para 4.17 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.2 ICMR through its institut e ICMR -National Institute of Traditional Medicine (ICMR -
NITM) has envisioned to influence public health outcomes by integrating Traditional Medicine 
(TM) with Modern Health System, through Research, Human Resource Development and 
 

9 
 
Outreach. ICMR -NITM is wor king on developing evidence -based, affordable, traditional 
medicine solutions for public health concerns, which may be further integrated with modern 
healthcare systems. More than 1500 TM formulations from 750 TM practitioners involving 
1200 species of pla nts has been documented.  The scientific evidences are being created 
through (i) Pharmaco -epidemiological studies on utility of TM practices (ii) Robust 
observational studies (iii) Pre-clinical evaluations through in silico, in vitro and in vivo studies 
of the selected practices (iv) Clinical evaluation of the selected preparations/ practices that 
include Model Rural Health Research Units as rural sites (v) Implementation research & 
development of policies and recommendations on models of integration. ICMR -NITM created 
a database on ethnomedicinal plants of Western Ghats (http://nitmmedplantsdb.in), successfully 
validated the TM practice for osteoarthritis, filed provisional patent on TM formulation for 
COVID-19.  ICMR -NITM aims to provide an interface of Mo dern Healthcare System and 
Traditional Healthcare System by recommending use of validated traditional medicine, training 
to create a cadre of integrative health care researchers and professionals and human resource 
development and developing policies and g uidelines. Thus, its activities are not limited to 
drug/product development but to ensure integration of already validated traditional medicine, 
skill-sets and knowledge-base to the existing healthcare system. 
 
1.15  Funding Health Research Institutions 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.15.1 Analysing the data from the 2016 evaluation the Committee observes that, there is wide 
gap in funding between health research institutions of countries like US, UK, Australia, China 
and Brazil and ICMR. The Committee further observes  that though annual output (in terms of 
paper published) of ICMR has continued to grow with respect to its 2005 output and in2014, 
ICMR produced 108% more papers than it did in 2005, however, the Committee believes that 
this won't be a just comparison with  NIH (National Institute of Health, US) as NIH is already 
working at a very high output, and given a larger base, it's rate of growth (in terms of paper 
published) cannot be as high as ICMR. The Committee further notes that just the number of 
paper published cannot be a sufficient indicator for performance, as the quality of research, its 
significance in public health and its viability are far more important factors in performance 
analysis. 
(Para 4.20 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.2 ICMR agrees with the Committ ee’s observation that numbers of publication are not 
sufficient indicator for performance. To further elaborate on ICMR’s activities and 
achievements in public health, it has contributed to the development of several diagnostic 
solutions to health challeng es including COVID -19, Nipah, TB, Haemoglonopathies, KFD, 
Chandipura Virus etc. It has also been involved in development of life - saving vaccines against 
COVID-19, Shigella, JE, KFD etc. It has developed several models of disease elimination like 
malaria in Odisha, Mandla & Punjab, Kala Azar in Vaishali, Bihar etc. As mentioned before as 
well, it is working in tandem with centre and state health departments and national programmes 
to identify gaps and provide solutions. 
 
 
 

10 
 
1.16   Regular Assessment of ICMR's Functioning 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.16.1 The Committee notes that regular assessment of ICMR's functioning is being carried 
out, as after the 2017 assessment another Committee under the chairmanship of Prof 
.(Dr.)Vinod K. Paul, Member NITI Aayog has been con stituted in 2021 for conducting the next 
evaluation/Peer review of the performance of ICMR. The Committee desires to be apprised of 
the Action Taken Note on the recommendations made by Performance Evaluation Committee 
(PEC) headed by Dr. M K Bhan which submitted its report in 2017. 
(Para 4.24 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.2 The PEC recommendations and the action taken are tabulated below: 
 
Recommendations Action Taken 
Restructuring/reorganization of 
ICMR and its institutes 
7 smaller ICMR institutes have been 
merged with the larger institutes 
Initiation of Mission-mode 
Projects  
Mission mode projects have been initiated 
in the area of TB, Malaria & other Vector-
Borne Diseases, Nutrition. 
Setting up Centre for 
Excellence in Medical Colleges 
Capacity Building Programs in Health 
Research are ongoing for  
(i) Establishing nation-wide Centres of 
Excellence, 
(ii) DST’s INSPIRE type Program for 
medical colleges, 
(iii) REMEx (Renovation and Enrichment 
of Medical Excellence) for ICMR scientists 
and 
(iv) ICMR Research Ambassador Scheme 
for motivating young faculty to take up 
health research projects 
Human Resource Development: 
New schemes for career 
development in Health 
Research 
Development of inter-
disciplinary & multi-sectoral 
linkages   
ICMR PPP Policy has been approved by 
GC. 
Enhanced efforts are made to forge inter-
disciplinary and multi- sectoral linkages 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
 
CHAPTER–II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
2.1  Path-Breaking Efforts of ICMR 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.1.1 The Committee takes note of the path -breaking efforts of ICMR in the development of 
Covid-19 vaccine Covaxin. The Committee appreciates ICMR for undertaking initiatives like 
India Hypertension Managemen t Initiative, India TB -Constortium, Mobile Stroke Unit to 
contain the spread of communicable and non -communicable diseases in the country. The 
Committee believes that ICMR can play a  major role in achieving the objectives of SDG 
(Sustainable Development Goals) 3, which is to ensure health and well -being for all, including 
a bold commitment to end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other 
communicable diseases by 2030. It also aims to achieve universal health coverage, and provide 
access to safe and effective medicines and vaccines for all. The Committee recommends ICMR 
to prepare a detailed framework consisting of proper planning, well defined SOPs, smooth 
coordination between different organisations and effective implementation, directed toward s 
realizing objectives of SDG-3. 
(Para 1.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.1.2 DHR is grateful to committee for appreciating its efforts in development of COVID 
vaccine as well other initiatives undertaken.  ICMR is supporting in attainment of SDG -3 of 
Good Health & Well-Being.  It is working towards Universal Health Care (UHC) by ensuring a 
sustainable and cost -effective model through its ongoing programmes like health technology 
assessment, standard treatment work flows and national list of essential medicines and 
diagnostics. These programmes would serve as an important tool in prioritizing national health 
spending and providing a uniform guideline to ensure quality healthcare services across the 
nation. It is also helping the SDG3 through disease burden estimation  and NCD monitoring and 
evaluation. However, the planning, implementation and monitoring aspects falls under the 
purview of DoH&FW, MoH&FW. DHR is committed to provide the requisite technical support. 
 
 
2.2  Realistic Estimation of Projected Demand 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee acknowledges that realistic estimation of "Projected Demand is far from 
exact science and there always would be a certain degree of uncertainty associated with it. 
However, the Committee believes that these projections a re based on a series of tenable 
assumptions having scope for a considerable “funnel of doubt”, which expands into the future. 
(Para 2.11ibid) 
 
 

12 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted.  
 
2.3  Allocation of Fund to ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee observes that no allocation has been done for Covid -19 to ICMR in BE 
2022-23. Also, no expenditure has been incurred under the scheme PM ABHIM for which Rs. 
140 crores were allocated in RE 2021-22. 
(Para 2.14 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.2 Allocation of Rs.323.00 crores has been made for Covid -19 during the F.Y. 2022 -23 
under PM-ABHIM and Rs 116.00 crores has been incurred under PM -ABHIM against the RE 
2021-22. 
 
2.4  Non Utilization of Funds 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.4.1 The Committee observes that reason for non utilisation of funds allocated in 2019 -20 and 
2020-21 for setting up of nationwide network of laboratories for managing epidemics has been 
mainly due to non -utilisation of funds allocated for NE region. Similarly,  the reasons given by 
DHR for under-utilisation in other heads have also remained almost the same in 2019 -20 and 
2020-21. The advocacy of same reasons for under -utilisation of funds highlights the laxity on 
the part of DHR in improving the situation. 
(para 2.19 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
2.4.2 The reasons for non -utilization of funds under NE region from 2019 -20 and 2020-21 was 
due to nationwide Covid -19 Pandemic. The routine research & Capital works suffered during 
the Covid-19 Pandemic during the F.Y. 2019 -20 & 2020-21. Further, the VRDLs are set up in 
Government Medical Colleges and Central Research Institutes and almost all the Government 
Medical Colleges in the NE Region have been covered under the Scheme. However, DHR will 
explore the potential sites to set up new VRDLs. 
 
2.4.3 The expenditure under MRU/MRHRU Schemes for NE region during the years 2019 -20, 
2020-21 and 2021-22 was as under: 
                                                                             (Crore Rs.) 
Year Revised Estimate Actual Expenditure 
MRUs 
2019-20 5.00 5.00 
2020-21 6.00 3.25 
2021-22 5.00 3.30 

13 
 
MRHRUs 
2019-20 3.00 1.59 
2020-21 2.00 1.99 
2021-22 3.00 3.00 
 
2.4.4 The savings under the MRU Scheme for 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 were mainly due to 
redeployment of resources for testing functions in the wake of COVID pandemic. The savings 
under the MRHRU Scheme for 2019 -20 were mainly due to delay in finalization of cases of 
transfer of land by the concerned State Governments. 
 
2.5  Under utilization of Funds 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.1 The Committee notes with concern that the Department has not fully utilised funds 
allocated in financial year 2020 -21 as almost Rs. 938 crores rema ined unutilised. The 
Committee observes that there was significant under -utilisation in almost all the heads and 
schemes run by the Department. 
(Para 2.20 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 Due to diversion of resources and focus towards management of COVID -19 along with 
lockdown in the country owing to COVID-19 Pandemic lead to under-utilization of funds. 
 
2.6  Under utilization of Funds 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.1 The Committee observes that more than 10% of allocated funds have remained unutilised  
till 31.01.2022 in the financial year 2021 -22. The Committee further observes gross under 
utilization of funds in projects like establishment of network of VDRLs for managing epidemics 
(34.13% non -utilisation w.r.t RE allocation); development of tools to prevent outbreaks 
(39.53% non-utilisation w.r.t RE allocation); Establishment of MRUs (47.04% non -utilisation 
w.r.t RE allocation); Establishment of MRHRUs (38.50% non -utilisation w.r.t RE allocation); 
Human Resource and Capacity Development (35.44% non -utilisation w.r.t RE allocation); 
Inter-sectoral coordination in medical, biomedical and health research (50.16% non-utilisation 
w.r.t RE allocation); Promotion & guidance on research governance issues (44.45% non -
utilisation w.r.t RE allocation). 
(Para 2.26 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
2.6.2 An amount of Rs. 75.79 Crore has been utilized against the RE of Rs. 79.20 Crore. Thus, 
95.69% amount has been utilized during the financial year 2021 -22 under the Scheme 
Establishment of Network of VRDLs for Managing Epidemics . Similarly, an amount of Rs. 
14.80 Crore has been utilized against the RE of  Rs. 15.00 Crore under the Scheme - 
Development of Tools to prevent Outbreaks which is 98.67%; Rs. 39.61 Crore has been utilized 

14 
 
against the RE of  Rs. 51.00 Crore under the Establi shment of MRUs which is 77.67%; Rs. 
18.00 Crore has been utilized against the RE of  Rs. 18.00 Crore under the Establishment of 
MRHRUs which is 100.00%; Rs. 23.76 Crore has been utilized against the RE of  Rs. 27.00 
Crore under the Human Resource and Capacit y Development which is 88.00%; Rs. 15.31 Crore 
has been utilized against the RE of  Rs. 25.00 Crore under the Inter -sectoral coordination in 
medical, biomedical and health research which is 61.24%; Rs. 20.64 Crore has been utilized 
against the RE of Rs. 22. 00 Crore under the Promotion & guidance on research governance 
issues which is 93.82%. 
 
2.6.3 The year 2021 -22 was the first year of the 15 th Finance Commission period and it took 
some time for finalization of the Scheme and issuance of the Administrative Approval and 
scheme guidelines under MRU scheme and due to less number of adequate proposals under 
HRD and GIA schemes which resulted in under-utilization of funds during 2021-22. 
 
2.7  Target of setting up VRDLs 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.1 The Committee,  notes that the Department has surpassed its target of setting up 07 
VRDLs in 2021 -22. However, the Committee has noted that despite achieving more than the 
target, the expenditure under the scheme in 2021 -22 till 31.01.2022 has been to the tune of Rs. 
52.17 crores only which is almost Rs. 22 crores less than the RE allocation for the said scheme. 
The Committee further observes that like 2021 -22, 2020- 21 was also a Covid -19 year, but in 
2020-21, DHR managed to establish 19 VRDLs. The Committee desires to k now the reason for 
the shortfall in setting up VRDLs in 2021-22. 
(Para 3.10 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 An amount of Rs. 75.79 Crore has been utilized against the RE of 79.20 Crore which is 
95.69% of RE 2021-22. A total of 12 VRDLs have been set up during t he year 2021-22 and the 
target has been surpassed. 
 
2.8  Creation of Capital Assets 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.8.1 The Committee expresses its displeasure over lower expenditure under „Creation of 
Capital Assets‟ & „Grant -in-Aid General‟ heads of ICMR. The Committee believes that 
creating assets is key to developing health infrastructure in the North -East region as is 
granting aid for research projects and capacity building of professionals/researchers and local 
human resource. The Committee, therefore, reco mmends DHR to work towards capacity 
building of local human resource in health and related sectors in a time bound manner. The 
Committee, further recommends ICMR to study, capture, evaluate and implement good 
practices of NER for improvement in overall health. 
(Para 3.50 ibid) 
 
 
 

15 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 The main reason for lower expenditure in NE region is global Covid -19 Pandemic. The 
pandemic badly affected the Capital Works as well as routine research activities in NE Region. 
 
2.9  Key areas of Concern 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.1 The Committee expresses its satisfaction to note that DHR is aware of the „Key Areas of 
Activities‟ to improve the overall health infrastructure and thus public health in the North 
Eastern Region of the country. The Committee recommen ds DHR to prepare a detailed 
roadmap to implement these measures within a definite timeframe. The Committee, also 
recommends DHR to seek higher budgetary allocation from Ministry of Finance for 
improvement of health infrastructure in the NER with the hope that the fund allocated would be 
fully utilized for the intended purpose. The Committee also recommends DHR to explore using 
drone delivery services for organ transplantation, particularly eye transplantation. 
(Para 3.52 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.2 DHR is g rateful for the satisfaction of the committee and will work towards the 
recommendation. Organ transplantation doesn’t come under the mandate of DHR , h owever, 
ICMR will provide technical guidance to concerned Department i.e. DoH&FW. 
 
2.10  Budgetary Allocation to ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.10.1 The Committee observes that the BE 2022 -23 allocation to Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR), government's premier health research organization and the agency steering 
the research response to pandemic Covid-19, is Rs. 2,198.00 crores which is a meagre increase 
from Rs 2,133.07 crore, as per the revised estimate for 2021-22. 
(Para 4.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2  Apart from the Main Grant Budget of Rs.2198 Crores, an amount of Rs.690 Crores  also 
sanctioned under PM-ABHIM Scheme during the F.Y. 2022 -23. The Covid -19 component and 
major Capital Works activities covers under PM -ABHIM Scheme. As such, ICMR has been 
allotted sufficient funds in the F.Y. 2022-23. 
 
2.11  Establishment of BSL-IV and BSL-III Labs 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.11.1 The Committee notes the establishment of 2 new BSL-IV and three new BSL-III labs. The 
Committee commends ICMR for starting a mobile BSL -III lab, recently. The Committee 
understands that the two new BSL -IV labs would co ver the East and West part of India, 

16 
 
however, the North and South India still don‟t have BSL -IV labs. The Committee believes that 
in the absence of well -equipped and high -tech labs, samples have to be transported over long 
distances to the nearest lab. this causes delay in diagnosis often leading to serious 
repercussions over result of diagnostic test. The Committee is of the strong opinion that lack of 
adequate number of BSL -3 and BSL -4 labs would greatly hinder India's chances of defeating 
viral outbre aks thereby exposing India's large population to various deadly diseases. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends ICMR to establish one BSL-IV lab in each of the four zones. 
The Committee also recommends DHR to launch more mobile laboratories as such mobile 
units could be of great help during outbreaks particularly in rural and remote areas. 
(Para 4.9 ibid) 
 
2.11.2 The Committee is also well aware of the fact that research in BSL -IV labs has its own 
share of fall outs as these facilities are built for research ers to work with the most dangerous 
pathogens. However, the Committee believes that science can enable humanity to reap the 
benefits of research if it meets ethical, considerate and smart policymaking. 
(Para 4.10 ibid) 
 
Action Taken  
 
2.11.3 Operationalization and maintenance of BSL -4 labs is highly demanding and complex. 
Besides, BSL-4 is not needed routinely for outbreak investigation. BSL -4 labs are required for 
animal experiments, growing viruses and undertaking animal challenge studies. These 
specialized research functions are undertaken in BSL -4 as the inoculums of the pathogen 
generated for these experiments is very high, thus increasing vulnerability of the laboratory 
workers to become infected. Besides, the high risk viruses stored in these labs nee d to be 
maintained with utmost caution as any leakage from these labs can lead to havoc in the country. 
Constructing too many BSL -4s is not advisable due to biological threats. The BSL -3 labs are 
more than adequate for handling high risk pathogens and unde rtaking investigation of 
pandemics/epidemics. As of now, there are 18 BSL -3 labs operational/ under construction 
within the ICMR/DHR network. Also ICMR/DHR has developed a mobile BSL-3 lab in public 
private partnership. This lab is operational and will take pandemic preparedness to next level as 
it can be driven to the outbreak site and made operational within 24-48 hours. 
 
 2.12  Challenges faced by the ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.12.1 The Committee takes note of the challenges faced by the ICMR in operationalising 
clinical trials in India during the COVID -19 pandemic and commends for its efforts to carry 
out clinical trials in the face of such difficulties. The Committee also appreciates ICMR for 
developing a pan -India clinical trial network (Indian  Clinical Trial and Education Network -
INTENT) which will provide a single, ready platform for conducting rapid but good quality 
randomized clinical trials. 
(Para 4.14 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.2 ICMR is grateful to the committee for acknowledging the chal lenges faced in 
operationalizing clinical trials. INTENT would prove to be a very beneficial ready resource for 
conducting clinical trials in the country. 

17 
 
 
CHAPTER–III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
3.1  Rapid Response Teams (RRT) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.1  The Committee recommends DHR - ICMR to establish and manage Rapid Response 
Teams (RRT)  consisting of epidemiologists, immunologists, virologists, experts of infectious 
disease, physicians and other relevant scientific and clinical staff to counter any emergency 
situations developing due to disease Outbreaks. 
(Para1.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 During COVID-19, ICMR convened National Task Force (NTF) consisting of eminent 
epidemiologists, public health experts, physicians, virologists & other clinical scientists to 
deliberate on various aspects of disease outbreak including Diagnostics, Epi demiology & 
Surveillance, Operational Research (OR) & Clinical Research.  
 
3.1.3  At present, a multidisciplinary team of epidemiologists, virologist and immunologists 
does exist in ICMR Institutes, involved in outbreak investigation. Besides, each Institute of 
ICMR has relevant linkages with clinical experts.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.4  The Committee appreciates the existence of the multi -disciplinary team consisting 
of epidemiologists, virologists and immunologists at ICMR. The Committee, however, 
intends to convey the Government that the Rapid Response Team (RRT) must be at the 
alert mode to meet any eventualities of Biological and Chemical weapons/warfare, besides 
combating the challenges posed by the outbreak of endemic or pandemic. Such oversight 
body should not only have relevant linkages with clinical operational and clinical research 
institutes but also integrated co -ordination with national decision making body viz., NITI 
Aayog, PMO and Cabinet Secretariat to ward off or keep vigil against any possible 
biological or chemical warfare so that appropriate decision is taken with out delay even of 
an hour. The Committee understands that the Government needs to incorporate the 
component of biological/chemical, deterrence in its national security strategy. 
 
3.2  Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) 
  
Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee has noted that Pradhan Mantri Ayushman  Bharat Health Infrastructure 
Mission (PM-ABHIM) which was launched in October last year has yet not seen the light of the 
day. The Committee feels that the PM ABHIM is to be implemented from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 

18 
 
i.e. for 5 years, thus non -utilization of fun ds allocated for the very first year casts serious 
doubts over the scheme achieving its intended targets. The Committee desires to know the 
reasons for the delay and hopes that the said scheme will be commenced soon. The Committee 
recommends that the Depar tment should give more impetus in implementing this scheme as it 
aims to bridge gaps in public health infrastructure, mainly in critical care facilities and 
primary care, both in rural and urban areas. 
(Para 2.15 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2  As per approval of Cabinet for the PM-ABHIM scheme is to be implemented from 2021 -
22 to 2025-26 i.e. for 5 years. RE 2021 -22 under PM-ABHIM was Rs.140 Crores against which 
amount of Rs.116 Crores incurred during the F.Y. 2021 -22 under PM-ABHIM Scheme. Further, 
Rs.690 Crores has been earmarked for the F.Y. 2022-23 under PM-ABHIM scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.2.3  The Committee endows due credence to PM -ABHIM in bridging gaps in public 
health infrastructure especially focused in critical care facilities and primary healthcare. 
The Committee, in this regard, would like to be apprised of appropriation of Rs. 140.00 
Crore during financial year 2021-22 and Rs. 690.00 crore in financial year 2022 -23 and the 
achievement of physical target against the actual expenditure during the said financial 
years.  
 
3.3  Funds for Covid-19 to ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.3.1 The Committee feels that adequate funds for Covid-19 to ICMR in BE 2022-23 should have 
been allocated. With newer variants of Covid -19 expected and questions over efficacy of 
vaccines with respect to newer variants, research work like genome analysis, efficacy studies o f 
vaccines over newer variants, efficacy of vaccines on lactating mothers etc is bound to suffer due 
to non-allocation of funds. Keeping in view the fact that Covid-19 is still not over, the Committee 
strongly recommends the Department to seek funds from M inistry of Finance under Covid -19 
head. 
(Para 2.16 ibid)  
 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 The funding for health research has continuously being increased over last few years 
including by budget allocation under PM -ABHIM. An amount of Rs.690.00 crores  has been 
allocated for the year 2022 -23 which includes Rs 323.00 crores for  Covid-19 during the F.Y. 
2022-23 under PM -ABHIM Scheme. However, as per the need and with development of 
national level mission mode research programmes, Department will seek addi tional budget 
from the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry of Finance must 
allocate DHR at least 0.1% of GDP for health research in the next five years and earmark 
at least 5% of total health budget for health research for next year, to start with, towards 
combating any future outbreak of disease and meeting health exigencies.  
 
3.4  Emergency Epidemic Preparedness and Response 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4.1 The Committee observes that in 2020 -21, out of the Rs. 1,275.00 crores released to 
ICMR, actual expenditure was only 1,236.30 crores. Similarly, in 2021-22 out of the total funds 
allocation of Rs. 526.28 crores the ICMR spent Rs. 232.72 crores only. The Co mmittee 
expresses its serious concern over partial utilisation of fund allocated under Emergency 
Epidemic Preparedness and Response. The Committee does not agree with the Department's 
version that less utilization of the allocated funds, did not affect in any way the physical 
achievements both in terms of procurement of testing kits, setting up of testing labs and 
creating the testing capacity in the country. Contrary to Department's reflection, the deadly 
second wave overwhelmed India's Covid -19 testing in frastructure. The second wave scores of 
people with symptoms of the disease could not get themselves tested, since labs were fully 
booked and test reports were significantly delayed. In many places, this delay in delivery of 
reports meant that seriously il l patients in dire need of comprehensive treatment couldn't get 
hospitalized and as a result scores of people died too. 
(Para 2.23 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.2  ICMR has prepared the budget for Covid -19 during the F.Y. 2020 –21 on the basis of 
anticipated requirement for the Covid -19 testing kits for all over India with the anticipated 
prices as on May – June 2020. However, Government has decided in September 2020 that  
States will procure the kits themselves which resulted less number of procurement by ICMR.     
The rates of kits have been also reduced too much as compared to March – April 2020 to post 
September 2020. During the second wave of infections, some labs where the case load was high, 
had an exceeded in-turnaround time (> 48 – 72 hours) in a proportion of cases due to very high 
demand for testing. 
 
3.4.3 Besides, many States and Offices (Private & Government Organizations) imposed a 
demand for testing of even healthy individuals, during inter-state travel or attending Office. This 
was not as per the National Covid -19 Guidelines of ICMR and Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare and this resulted in overwhelming of labs un-necessarily. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
3.4.4 The Committee is not in agreement with DHR’s plea of partial utilization of fund 
allocated under Emergency Epidemic Preparedness and Response. The delayed delivery of 
investigation reports & long waiting in queue of patients at hospital corridors & gates 
resulting into more than 5 lakh death during Second Wave of Pandemic Covid -19 are 
testimony to the fact of exhibiting mismanagement of Pandemic Covid-19. All Government 

20 
 
machinery reached to the point of grinding halt. The Committee understands the 
limitation of DHR over its anticipating capacity in the situation of unpredicted and 
unprecedented global health emergencies. However, the Committee recommends ICMR to 
enhance its professional pursuit and operational efficiency to meet any future health 
eventualities of this magnitude or more than this . The Committee further recommends 
ICMR to undertake project to make in -depth research/studies to predict/pre -hand 
revelation of possible outbreak of Pandemic by adopting the sewage sample test etc.  
 
3.5  Diversion of manpower and other resources 
 
Recommendation 
  
3.5.1 The Committee observes that the Department had to divert manpower and other 
resources in the Department of Health Research (DHR), ICMR and Medical Colleges for 
Covid-19 Management and ramping up the t esting labs both in 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. The 
Committee recommends that now with the experience of three waves, the Department should 
formulate a contingency plan to tackle such situation more skillfully. 
(Para 2.29 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 DHR-ICMR has r ecruited staff specifically for dealing with COVID -19 testing. The 
strength is kept according to the situation of COVID -19 in the country. The VRDL network is 
being strengthened along with addition of four NIVs in the country. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.3  The Committee recommends DHR to formulate the Contingency Plan to combat 
Covid-19 like national health emergencies viz. outbreak of ‘Monkeypox’ for timely and 
effective management of its menace. The DHR may appprise the Committee about steps 
taken in matter.  
 
3.6  Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.6.1 The Committee is pleased to note that the scheme for establishing Viral Research and 
Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) has been extended for another  five years i.e. till 2026. The 
Committee observes that out of the 132 VRDLs established across 25 States and 5 Union 
Territories in the country, only 80 VRDLs are functioning. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends DHR to facilitate for trained manpower and  work on other administrative 
procedures for swift commencement of operations in all the VRDLs. The Committee believes 
that for catering to the testing needs of a vast country like India, the spread/network of testing 
labs must be expanded. The Committee, therefore, recommends that, DHR must aim towards -
"One VRDL in each District" by 2026. The Committee hopes that increasing the spread of 
VRDLs would help in reducing the turnaround time from the present 24-48 hours. 
(para 3.6 ibid) 
 
 

21 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.6.2 As on April 2022, a total of 136 VRDLs have been setup across the country and while 
approving the expansion of the VRDL network, equal geographic coverage of the country has 
been ensured. Reporting of testing data indicates about the lab status whether fun ctional/non-
functional. As on date, 112 out of 136 VRDLs are reporting non -COVID 19 diagnoses and 
outbreak investigation data on the dedicated data mining centre at ICMR -NIE Chennai. The 
other VRDLs approved during last one and half year are in the process  of becoming fully 
functional. DHR is monitoring the same regularly.  Three consecutive trainings have been 
conducted for the VRDLs on the data reporting and technical aspects in the past four months. 
  
3.6.3 As per the present scheme norms, setting -up of V RDLs in each District may not be 
possible, since the VRDLs can be funded in government medical colleges/research 
institutions/army hospitals only. The scheme has specified yearly targets with defined budget 
outlay. However, during the COVID -19 Pandemic, l arge n umber of molecular diagnostic 
laboratories have been setup at district level, that can server the purpose.  
  
3.6.4 The DHR/ICMR is doing handholding of the VRDLs with the help of resource centers 
(NIV-Pune & NIE Chennai) by providing trainings on adv ance tools of diagnosis, 
standardization and developing S OPs for various testing procedures, enabling lab quality 
systems, sampling & transportation to further reduce the turnaround time from 24-48 hours. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.5 The Committee, notes that the DHR/ICMR is doing handholding of the VRDLs with 
the help of resource centers (NIV -Pune & NIE Chennai) by providing trainings on 
advance tools of diagnosis, standardization and developing S OPs for various testing 
procedures, enabling lab quality s ystems, sampling & transportation to further reduce 
the turnaround time from 24 -48 hours. The Committee, however, recommends DHR to 
ensure setting up of VRDLs in each district as a long term goal. The Committee is of the 
firm view that expansion of network  of testing quality labs throughout the country would 
definitely reduce the transportation time having a bearing on the turnaround time. 
 
3.7  Setting realistic targets 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.7.1 The Committee believes that targets should always be challenging  and commensurate to 
its capacity and requirements. The Committee recommends DHR to set targets keeping in mind 
the size of the country and its population so as to cover the remote and rural areas of the 
country which are devoid of quality testing infrastructure. 
(Para 3.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.2 The Department has targeted to establish 14 New VRDLs during the year 2022 -23. The 
VRDLs are approved taking into account the coverage of the Scheme and geographical 
distribution of VRDLs across the country. 
 

22 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7.3 The Committee gives impetus to the need of a network of quality testing 
infrastructure in the country to map the various health index of the whole population to 
the extent of last miles of the country. The committee, therefore,  recommends DHR to 
expand the scope of VRDL scheme to cover the remote rural and tribal areas of the 
country. The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Finance to allocate higher 
allocation to the said scheme and extend its period of time years for implementation till 
achievement of its ideal objective of setting up of one VRDL in each district. 
 
 3.8  Establishment of MRUs 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.1 The Committee has been given to understand that so far, 92 MRUs are approved in the 
country and the Department's target was to set up 6 MRUs in 2021 -22. The Committee 
observes that like in 2021 -22, the MRU scheme has been allocated Rs. 60 crores only for t he 
same target of setting up 6 MRUs in 2022 -23. The Committee recommends DHR to set higher 
targets every year and seek more allocation for the scheme to increase the spread/network of 
MRUs in the country as there are no MRU in several states and the States  like Bihar and 
Chhattisgarh don‟t have MRUs in commensurate to the population of States. 
(Para 3.19 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 Targets for setting up new MRUs in a year are decided on the basis of past trends, 
requirements and availability of funds. All t he States and Union Territories are addressed 
regularly to send proposals for setting up of MRUs in Medical Colleges.  The MRU scheme 
approved for 2021-22 to 2025-26 envisages establishing of 30 MRUs, i.e. 06 MRUs every year. 
However, against the target of  establishing 06 MRUs in 2021 -22, 11 MRUs were actually 
approved. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation to DHR to seek allocation for the 
scheme to increase the spread/network of MRUs in the country as there are no MRU in 
several states and the States like Bihar and Chhattisgarh don’t have MRUs in 
commensurate to the population of States. 
 
 
3.9  Setting up MRUs in NER 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.9.1 The Committee has observed that no MRU has been established in Sikkim, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh. Given the increasing Cancer cases in north-eastern States, 
the Committee is of the considered view that the Department must work in tandem wit h the 
respective State Governments and set up MRUs in these States at the earliest. The Committee 
believes that good clinical research infrastructure at the local level in the State can help boost 

23 
 
country's fight against Cancer and severe non - communicable diseases like Hypertensions and 
cardio-vascular diseases. 
(Para 3.20 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 MRUs in Govt. Medical colleges are established on the basis of proposals received from 
State Governments.  MRUs in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram and Nagaland 
have been established under the MRU scheme of ICMR. Now, these have been taken over by 
DHR. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.3 Keeping in view the geographical landscape of NER, the Committee recommends for 
intensive network of MRU for ens uring basic infrastructure of clinical investigation and 
research work for region specific study of Biology of Diseases. The Committee is of the 
considered view that only better research infrastructure would provide adequate facilities 
for treatment of can cer and other life threatening communicable and non -communicable 
diseases viz. Hypertension and cardio -vascular disease. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation for setting up of MRUs in Sikkim and Meghalaya.  
 
3.10  Operationalisation of MRUs 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.10.1 The Committee also observes that though 92 MRUs are approved in the country but all 
the MRUs are not functional, the Committee finds no point in just announcing and approving 
MRUs if there is not enough manpower and infrastructure at the ground level. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends Department to reduce the delay between the dates of the announcement 
of approval and the actual operationalisation of MRUs at the ground level. 
(Para 3.21ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.2 The Time lag between the initial sanction of an MRU and the subsequent 
operationalization of that MRU is generally due to the time taken in awarding contracts for 
Civil Works and procurement of equipment and the recruitment of staff.  These functions in 
State Govt. Medical Colleges are regulated by the rules/instructions of the respective State 
Governments.  Process in these activities is, however, monitored regularly through periodical 
progress reports and virtual review meetings. The recommendation of the  Parliamentary 
Committee has, however, been noted for guidance and compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.3 The Committee feels that DHR should take concrete steps for reducing the time lag 
between sanctioning of an MRU and operationalization of MRU uni t. The Committee 
does not approve the procedural delay in awarding civil works and procurement of 
equipment. The DHR, therefore, should have effective supervision and monitoring over 
the progress of the MRU projects. To avoid the delay, the Committee recom mends DHR 

24 
 
to get the technical and human resource strength sanctioned at the time of sanctioning of 
the project, itself.  
 
3.11  Objective of the MRHRU Scheme 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.11.1 The Committee notes that the objective of the MRHRU scheme is to transfer  modern 
technology for tackling the disease burden in rural India. The Committee is of the view that 
considering the havoc caused by Covid-19, particularly the second wave of Covid-19, there is a 
dire need to beef up health infrastructure in the rural India. The modern healthcare equipments 
and technologies which are generally limited to urban centres should be taken to the rural 
healthcare facilities as well. The Committee observes that despite the year -on-year increase in 
the budget of the scheme, the tar get to set up MRHRUs is decreasing from 7 in 2019 -20 to 2 in 
2021-22. For 2022 -23 also the target is to set up 2 MRHRUs only. The Committee further 
observes that there is no MRHRU in the vast state like Uttar Pradesh and also the UT of 
Ladakh. 
(Para 3.26 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.2 The targets are decided on the basis of past trends, proposals received from State 
Governments and available resources.  State Governments, ICMR, Directors of ICMR 
Institutes are regularly addressed to send their proposals. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.11.3 The Committee recommends DHR for taking pro -active steps in incentivizing the 
State Government to prepare proposal on setting up of MRHRU in rural areas. Extensive 
and equitable distribution of MRHRU would ensure the facility  of understanding Biology 
of various diseases in tribal and remote rural areas and thus ensure access to affordable 
treatment. The DHR, therefore, need to work in tandem with State Government and seek 
enhanced budgetary allocation from the Ministry of Fina nce for laying out network of 
MRHRU for ensuring availability of Modern tools, methods, equipments and technologies 
in rural healthcare system.  
 
 
3.12  Proposal for fellowship/training 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12.1 The Committee observes that over the past three years the reason for under - utilisation 
of the allocated funds has been same i.e. due to receipt of less number of proposal for 
fellowship/training. The Committee understands that unless there is adequate bud getary 
allocation followed by optimal utilization of allocated fund, the objective to create a large pool 
of trained and skilled medical researchers would not be realized. The Committee is not 
satisfied with Department repeating the same reason for less nu mber of proposals for 
fellowship/training for under-utilisation of the allocated funds. The Committee desires to know 
the concrete steps taken by DHR to increase the number of proposals for fellowship/training. 

25 
 
The Committee strongly feels that there is no  dearth of talent in our country, hence the DHR 
should work on establishing institutional mechanism to attract scientists for submitting more 
proposals for fellowship under the schemes of DHR. 
(Para 3.33 ibid) 
 
3.12.2 The Committee observes that over the past 9 years, DHR's efforts to encourage Indian 
health research personnel serving abroad and coming back to India has paid little dividends as 
in these 9 years only 10 persons have availed this offer. The Committee ther efore, recommends 
that the Department must analyse the programme and find out the reasons as to why the scheme 
has few takers. The Committee also recommends that DHR must develop a conducive 
environment and offer lucrative prospects to Indian researches se rving abroad, so that they are 
encouraged to come back to their country of birth and serve their country. 
 
(Para 3.34) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.3 Following initiatives have been taken by the DHR in order to attract scientists for 
submitting more proposals with better research quality: 
 
1. For wider publicity the scheme was advertised in the national daily newspapers 
and social media platforms. 
 
2. Monthly stipend and research grant has been enhanced. 
 
3. Evaluation of the proposals, for those projects which are weak and require 
modification, the experts committee members provide the guidance and 
opportunity to modify the proposals. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.4  The Committee considers the need for creation of poo l of trained and skilled 
medical researchers in various fields to eliminate/eradicate various diseases in the country 
through in depth study, understanding Biology of Disease and find out solution for 
eradication in a time -bound manner. The Committee, ther efore, emphasizes the need for 
establishing institutional mechanism and simplification of procedures for inviting larger 
number of proposals for fellowship under the scheme governed by DHR. 
 
 
3.13  Human Resource Development for Health Research 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.1 The Committee observes that over the years there has been gross underutilization of the 
funds allocated and like in the case of Human Resource Development for Health Research 
component, the reason for under-utilization is same for all the years. The Committee notes that 
during last three years i.e. 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22, RE allocation has significantly been 
reduced, thereby implying that DHR did not get enough viable research projects to be 
undertaken and appropriation of alloc ated fund thereon. The Committee recommends DHR to 

26 
 
make serious efforts to identify research projects which have potential for treatment of diseases 
and therefore rational utilisation of allocated funds could be made. The Committee, strongly 
suggests DHR t o promote research and encourage researchers to undertake research for the 
benefit of public health. The Committee also recommends that in view of the increasing 
biological threats, the DHR should put more emphasis on research related to biological 
weapons to ensure that in the eventuality of biological attacks, the country is safeguarded 
against any biological warfare. 
(Para 3.41 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.2 The observation of the Hon’ble  Committee is noted and efforts will be made to identify 
research projects having potential for treatment of diseases and utilization of allocated funds. 
Following initiatives have been taken by the DHR in order to attract scientists for submitting 
more proposals with better research quality: 
 
1. For wider publicity the scheme was advertised in the national daily newspapers and social 
media platforms. 
 
2. Evaluations of the proposals, for those projects which are weak and require modification, 
the experts  committee members provide the guidance and opportunity to modify the 
proposals. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that DHR should encourage and 
emphasize on research relating to surveillance over biological weapon s and chemical 
warfare which have been equally threatening as nuclear weapons. The Committee, cautions 
the Government for chalking out counter strategy to guard the country against possible 
Biological and Chemical attack and therefore, feel the need and ur gency of strengthening 
defence mechanism from the point of Biological and Chemical Weapons.  
  

27 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
4.1  Need for more skilled manpower in future 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.1.1 The Committee is contended to note that the Department is well aware of the need for 
more skilled manpower in future and bringing in more professionalism in its working for 
realizing the objectives of bio-safety and bio-security as well as to deal with diseases identified 
for elimination like TB, Malaria, Filariasis within a definite timeframe. However, the 
Committee, feels that Department should take action to fill the posts of scientific professionals 
so that crucial research work is  not delayed. The Committee recommends Department to fast -
track recruitment processes of skilled and scientific professionals. The Committee further 
recommends DHR to create a work culture and environment which attracts highly skilled 
professional shaving great scientific acumen. The Committee believes that offering lucrative 
career prospects along with a good work -life balance and liberty to carry out world class 
research would definitely attract best scientific brains to ICMR. 
(Para 1.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
4.1.2 As on date, the total sanctioned strength of regular Government employees in the 
Department is 42 out of which 06 sanctioned posts are for Scientist C, D and E. These posts are 
to be filled on Deputation (ISTC) basis. The recruitment p rocess of Scientist C, D & E (02 
posts each) is at advanced stage in consultation with Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC). 
 
4.1.3 DHR is concerned about intake of trained manpower and has been advertising and 
recruiting scientific positions in mission mode. In last 2 -3 years more than 100 scientists have 
been recruited in ICMR. Recently, scientists posts in the area of Entomology, An imal Resource 
Facility & Hemoglobinopathies Centre. Regular training is imparting in the area of Bioethics & 
Biosafety and Biosecurity. These activities will be strengthened further. 
 
 
4.2  Adequate Funds to Health Research 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee observes that for DHR, BE 2021 -22 allocation was Rs. 2663.00 crores 
which was increased to Rs. 3080.00 crores in RE 2021 -22 and the allocation for BE 2022-23 is 
Rs. 3200.65 crores only. The Committee further notes that while the increase in b udget from 
BE 2021-22 to RE 2021-22 is almost 16%, the increase from RE2021 -22 to BE 2022-23 is just 
3.92% only. The Committee further observes that while countries like UK and USA are 
allocating budget of around 2% of their GDP to health research, India w hich faces humongous 
burden of diseases which lead to poverty inducing out -of-pocket health expenditure by its 
population, allocates only 0.02% of its GDP for health research. 
(Para 2.6 ibid) 

28 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2  The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. 
 
4.3  Higher Budgetary allocation for Health Research 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.3.1 The Committee is of the view that the increase in health research budget, year on year is 
very meager and is not commensurate with the tasks DHR -ICMR are entr usted to deal with. 
Thus the allocated budget is grossly insufficient to meet the existing and future healthcare 
challenges. The Committee feels that higher budgetary allocation for health research will 
result in more research based findings which in turn would help in devising more informed 
affordable and practical plans/methodologies for diagnosis and treatment of both 
communicable and non -communicable diseases. Higher allocation for health research would 
also make the country better prepared for tackling  any future outbreaks and health exigencies. 
The Committee, in its 127 th Report on Demand for Grants had recommended Government to 
allocate 5 percent of the budget of the Department of Health & Family Welfare to DHR. The 
Committee further reiterates its recommendation to allocate 5% of the total health budget for 
health research in the next two years. The Committee also recommends that considering global 
standards with respect to investment in health research, the Government must invest at least 
0.1% of the GDP in the next five years. Here the Committee also advances its support to DHR 
for seeking higher budgetary allocation from Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 2.7 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. The matter will be pursed with 
Ministry of Finance based on requirements during the RE stage. 
 
4.4  Boosting the absorption capacity of the implementing agencies 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.4.1 The Committee is pleased to observe that the percentage of shortfall/variation as 
compared to "Projected demand" is decreasing year -on-year. Therefore, the Committee is 
hopeful that the Department will continue to improve its fiscal performance by projecti ng 
realistic estimate each year to the Ministry of Finance. However, the Committee feels that that 
on the one hand the Secretary DHR demands 5% of total health budget for health research, on 
the other hand the Department's Projected Demand is nowhere close  to 5% of total health 
budget (Rs. 83,000 crores in BE 2022 - 23). The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that DHR must work towards boosting the absorption capacity of the implementing agencies 
which are tasked with running its schemes across different regions of the country. 
 (Para 2.9 ibid) 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
4.4.2 Department is working closely with the implementing agencies by providing training and 
hand holding to improve the quality of proposals received. Along with media advertisement for 
increasing awareness about the schemes. These efforts will ensue boosting in the absorption 
capacity of the implementing agencies and recently, PM-ABHIM schemes has been approved for 
next 5 years covering new activities / centers which are going to start w ithin the ambit of this 
Scheme which will boost the absorption capacity of ICMR. 
 
4.5  Enhance funds absorption capacities 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.5.1 The Committee, over the years, has recommended higher allocation to DHR, including 
for financial year 2022-23. After observing continuous under-utilisation of allocated funds, the 
Committee is of the opinion that seeking higher allocation by the department is not justified 
until the Department and its sister organizations and scheme implementing agencies don‟t 
enhance their funds absorption capacities. The Committee, therefore, urges DHR to boost fund 
absorption capacity of the implementing agencies and all organizations associated with it. The 
Committee also recommends that higher budgetary allocation would be jus tified only if the 
Department hires more skilled, experienced and scientific staff and undertakes more research 
projects of significance having impact on health and well being of Indian population. 
(Para 2.27 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.5.2 Continuous efforts are being made by the Department to increase research work in 
VRDLs, MRUs, MRHRUs thereby enhance their absorption capacity.  So far, 136 VRDLs, 97 
MRUs and 30 MRHRUs have been established and proposals for setting up more such units are  
under process.  Due to diversion of resources and staff for COVID -19 duties to augment the 
COVID testing capacity of the country lead to under utilization of funds. With the COVID 
pandemic on decline, research activities of are expected to increase, resul ting in more 
absorption capacity. The implementing agencies are also being pursued constantly by holding 
review meetings and workshops to expedite the utilization of funds. 
 
4.5.3 Taking into account the pandemic situation, some more centers of ICMR like O ne Health 
Center Nagpur, NIV Units at Chandigarh, Bangalore, Jabalpur & Dibrugarh are under 
construction. These Centers will cater the enhanced need of the Country and will also increase 
the absorption capacity of ICMR. 
 
 
4.6  Allocation as per originally conceived plan 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.6.1 The Committee believes that appropriate expenditure as per originally conceived plan by 
ICMR-DHR would make a good case for seeking higher budgetary allocation at the RE stage 
and BE 2023 -24 as it is well established t hat only through the in -depth health research, the 

30 
 
country can be saved from the life-threatening non-communicable and communicable diseases. 
 
(Para 4.6 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.6.2 Guidance of Committee is noted. Also, at the time of RE 2022 -23, an analysis  of last six 
months expenditure figures will be done and based on actual expenditure incurred, RE 2022 -23 
& BE 2023-24 will be demanded. 
 
4.7  Performance evaluation of ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7.1 The Committee notes that the external evaluation and analysis conducted by Thomson 
Reuters for ICMR wherein ICMR was compared to similar organizations of US, UK, Australia, 
China and Brazil was done six years ago. Considering that since then the world has seen 3 
waves of Covid-19 pandemic, the Committee believes that now is an opportune time for another 
similar external evaluation. The Committee recommends ICMR to conduct such an evaluation 
wherein ICMR is compared to other competitors on parameters like, trends in budgetary 
allocation and utilization, compar ison between public and private investment, utilization 
avenues and research work under taken, health research infrastructure and its development, 
numbers of scientific professionals and clinical researchers, patents filed, number of 
fellowships and grant for research and future outlook. 
(Para 4.19 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.2 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
 
  

31 
 
RECOMEMNDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
 
RAPID RESPONSE TEAMS (RRT) 
 
The Committee appreciates the existence of the multi -disciplinary team consisting 
of epidemiologists, virologists and immunologists at ICMR. The Committee, however, 
intends to convey the Government that the Rapid Response Team (RRT) must be at the 
alert mode to meet any eventualities of Biological and Chemical weapons/warfare, besides 
combating the challenges posed by the outbreak of endemic or pandemic. Such oversight 
body should not only have relevant linkages with clinical operational and clinical research 
institutes but also integrated co -ordination with national decision making body viz., NITI 
Aayog, PMO and Cabinet Secretariat to ward off or keep vigil against any possible 
biological or chemical warfare so that appropriate decision is taken without del ay even of 
an hour. The Committee understands that the Government needs to incorporate the 
component of biological/chemical, deterrence in its national security strategy. 
 
(Para 3.1.4) 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI AYUSHMAN BHARAT HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
MISSION (PM-ABHIM) 
 
 The Committee endows due credence to PM -ABHIM in bridging gaps in public 
health infrastructure especially focused in critical care facilities and primary healthcare. 
The Committee, in this regard, would like to be apprised of appropriation of Rs. 140.00 
Crore during financial year 2021-22 and Rs. 690.00 crore in financial year 2022 -23 and the 
achievement of physical target against the actual expenditure during the said financial 
years.  
        (Para 3.2.3)  
 
FUNDS FOR COVID-19 TO ICMR 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry of Finance must 
allocate DHR at least 0.1% of GDP for health research in the next five years and earmark 
at least 5% of total health budget for health research for next year, to start with, tow ards 
combating any future outbreak of disease and meeting health exigencies. 
 
        (Para 3.3.3)  
  
EMERGENCY EPIDEMIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE 
 
The Committee is not in agreement with DHR’s plea of partial utilization of fund 
allocated under Emergency Epidemic Preparedness and Response. The delayed delivery of 
investigation reports & long waiting in queue of patients at hospital corridors & gates 
resulting into more than 5 lakh death during Second Wave of Pandemic Covid -19 are 
testimony to the fact of exhibiting mismanagement of Pandemic Covid-19. All Government 
machinery reached to the point of grinding halt. The Committee understands the 
limitation of DHR over its anticipating capacity in the situation of unpredicted and 
unprecedented global health emergencies. However, the Committee recommends ICMR to 

32 
 
enhance its professional pursuit and operational efficiency to meet any future health 
eventualities of this magnitude or more than this. The Committee further recommends 
ICMR to undertake project to make i n-depth research/studies to predict/pre -hand 
revelation of possible outbreak of Pandemic by adopting the sewage sample test etc. 
 
       (Para 3.4.4)  
 DIVERSION OF MANPOWER AND OTHER RESOURCES 
 
The Committee recommends DHR to formulate the Contingency Plan to combat 
Covid-19 like national health emergencies viz. outbreak of ‘Monkeypox’ for timely and 
effective management of its menace. The DHR may appprise the Committee about steps 
taken in matter.  
 
       (Para 3.5.3)  
 
VIRAL RESEARCH AND DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES (VRDLS) 
 
The Committee, notes that the DHR/ICMR is doing handholding of the VRDLs 
with the help of resource centers (NIV -Pune & NIE Chennai) by providing trainings on 
advance tools of diagnosis, standardization and developing SOPs for various testing 
procedures, enabling lab quality systems, sampling & transportation to further reduce 
the turnaround time from 24 -48 hours. The Committee, however, recommends DHR to 
ensure setting up of VRDLs in each district as a long term goal. The Committee is of the 
firm view that expansion of network of testing quality labs throughout the country would 
definitely reduce the transportation time having a bearing on the turnaround time. 
 
       (Para 3.6.5)  
SETTING REALISTIC TARGETS 
 
The Committee gives impetus to the need of a network of quality testing 
infrastructure in the country to map the various health index of the whole population to 
the extent of last miles of the country. The committee, therefore, recommends DHR to 
expand the scope of VRDL scheme to cov er the remote rural and tribal areas of the 
country. The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Finance to allocate higher 
allocation to the said scheme and extend its period of time years for implementation till 
achievement of its ideal objective of setting up of one VRDL in each district. 
 
      (Para 3.7.3)  
ESTABLISHMENT OF MRUS 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation to DHR to seek allocation for the 
scheme to increase the spread/network of MRUs in the country as there are no MRU in 
several states and the States like Bihar and Chhattisgarh don’t have MRUs in 
commensurate to the population of States. 
      (Para 3.8.3)  
SETTING UP MRUS IN NER 
 
Keeping in view the geographical landscape of NER, the Committee recommends 
for intensive network of MRU for ensuring basic infrastructure of clinical investigation 

33 
 
and research work for region specific study of Biology of Diseases. The Committee is of the 
considered view that only better research infrastructure would provide adequate facilities 
for treatment of cancer and other life threatening communicable and non -communicable 
diseases viz. Hypertension and cardio -vascular disease. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation for setting up of MRUs in Sikkim and Meghalaya.  
 
        (Para 3.9.3)  
OPERATIONALISATION OF MRUS 
 
The Committee feels that DHR should take concrete steps for reducing the time 
lag between sanctioning of an MRU and operationalization of MRU unit. The Committee 
does not approve the procedural delay in awa rding civil works and procurement of 
equipment. The DHR, therefore, should have effective supervision and monitoring over 
the progress of the MRU projects. To avoid the delay, the Committee recommends DHR 
to get the technical and human resource strength sa nctioned at the time of sanctioning of 
the project, itself.  
    (Para 3.10.3)  
OBJECTIVE OF THE MRHRU SCHEME 
 
 The Committee recommends DHR for taking pro -active steps in incentivizing the 
State Government to prepare proposal on setting up of MRHRU in rur al areas. Extensive 
and equitable distribution of MRHRU would ensure the facility of understanding Biology 
of various diseases in tribal and remote rural areas and thus ensure access to affordable 
treatment. The DHR, therefore, need to work in tandem with State Government and seek 
enhanced budgetary allocation from the Ministry of Finance for laying out network of 
MRHRU for ensuring availability of Modern tools, methods, equipments and technologies 
in rural healthcare system.  
    (Para 3.11.3)  
 
PROPOSAL FOR FELLOWSHIP/TRAINING 
 
The Committee considers the need for creation of pool of trained and skilled 
medical researchers in various fields to eliminate/eradicate various diseases in the country 
through in depth study, understanding Biology of Disease and find out solution for 
eradication in a time -bound manner. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for 
establishing institutional mechanism and simplification of procedures for inviting larger 
number of proposals for fellowship under the scheme governed by DHR. 
      (Para 3.12.4)  
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT FOR HEALTH RESEARCH 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that DHR should encourage and 
emphasize on research relating to surveillance over biological weapons and chemical 
warfare which have been equally threatening as nuclear weapons. The Committee, cautions 
the Govern ment for chalking out counter strategy to guard the country against possible 
Biological and Chemical attack and therefore, feel the need and urgency of strengthening 
defence mechanism from the point of Biological and Chemical Weapons.  
 
                              (Para 3.13.3)  

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
  

35 
 
 
XVI 
 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Thursday, the 8th September, 2022 in 
Committee Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri A.D. Singh 
5. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
7. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
8. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
9. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
10. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
12. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
13. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director  
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt four draft 

36 
 
Reports namely *** (iii) Draft 141 st Report on Action Taken by  the Government 
on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 135 th Report on Demands 
for Grants 2022 -23 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare; and ***.  
3.1 ***  
3.2 ***  
3.3 Thereafter, the Committee considered draft 141st   Report of the Committee 
where the Committee made a total of 14 observations/recommendations. The 
Report was also adopted by the Committee without any further changes.  
3.4 ***  
4. ***  
5. ***  
5.1 ***   
5.2 ***  
5.3 *** 
6. ***  
6.1 ***  
6.2 ***  
6.3 ***  
7. ***   
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.52 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matter 