PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 38
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING THE THREE
VACCINE PRODUCING PSUs, NAMELY, THE
CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (CRI) KASAULI,
THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA (PII), COONOOR,
AND THE BCG VACCINE LABORATORY (BCGVL), CHENNAI

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING THE THREE
V ACCINE PRODUCING PSUs, NAMELY , THE
CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (CRI) KASAULI,
THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA (PII), COONOOR,
AND THE BCG V ACCINE LABORATORY (BCGVL), CHENNAI
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH DECEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH DECEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—12
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 13—18
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 19—24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss
LOK SABHA
11. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
12. Shri Ashok Argal
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
18. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
20. Shri N. Kristappa
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Shrimati Meena Singh
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
31. Shri Ratan Singh

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present this
Thirty-Eighth Report of the Committee on ‘Major issues concerning the three vaccine-producing
PSUs, namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII),
Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.’
2. The Committee after having done an extensive study of the ‘Functioning of the three
vaccine-producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute
of India (PII), Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai’, had presented the
Thirty-Fourth Report to the Parliament on 18th February, 2009. Thereafter, the Committee also
considered the Action Taken Note on the Report received from the Department of Health and
Family Welfare. While doing so, the Committee found that some important issues raised by the
Committee were either not explained convincingly or further clarifications were required on those.
It was, therefore, decided to present another report highlighting those major issues on which the
Committee wishes to make further emphasis and obtain the Government's response.
3. The Committee held extensive discussion with the Secretary and other officers from the
Department of Health and Family Welfare on the 26th October, 2009 to get a correct assessment
about the revival of the three vaccine producing PSUs.
4. The Draft report, prepared on the basis of the feedback received from the Department and
the discussions held with the Secretary and other officers from the Department, was considered
and adopted by the Committee on the 17th December, 2009.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th,December, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana 26, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
REPORT
I INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare had
presented its Thirty-Fourth Report on the ‘functioning of the three vaccine producing PSUs,
namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor,
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL) Chennai’ to Parliament on the 18th February, 2009. This
Report was based on an extensive study done by the Committee in the light of inputs received from
all concerned and their objective analysis. The Committee had recommended revival of the three
vaccine producing PSUs at the earliest. It took more than six months for the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare to furnish the Action Taken Note which was received in the last week of
September, 2009. A scrutiny of the Action Taken Note, instead of indicating a significant progress,
confirmed Committee’s apprehensions. Major part of the Action Taken Note seemed to display a
lack of commitment on the Ministry’s part. The Committee strongly felt that presenting an Action
Taken Report in the routine manner would serve no purpose as quite a few pertinent issues had
remained unanswered. The Committee, accordingly, interacted with the Secretary, Health and
Family Welfare at its meeting held on the 26th October, 2009. A detailed questionnaire covering all
conceivable aspects was also forwarded to the Ministry by the Committee.
1.2 The Secretary, Health and Family Welfare during her presentation gave an overall idea about
the present status of vaccine availability in the country. The Committee was given to understand
that only four vaccines-BCG, DT, TT and DPT were being produced by the three PSUs. Out of
that with the exception of BCG vaccine, 50 per cent requirement was being met from the private
sector. It was also pointed out that against the total expenditure of Rs.200 crore for Universal
Immunization Programme, contribution made by the three PSUs amounted to only Rs.90 crore,
further reduced to Rs.30 to 40 crore taking into account Government funds being spent for their
running. The Committee was, however, apprised that keeping in view its serious concerns, a three
member Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Javed Chaudhary, former Health Secretary had
been set up on the 25th September, 2009 by the Ministry. This Committee was to give a report
within three months on the reasons for suspension of manufacturing licenses of the three PSUs,
the roadmap for their revival and their future role.
1.3 Based on the analysis of the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry, deposition of the
Secretary and the response to its questionnaire, the Committee has the following observations/
recommendations on the most significant areas of concern.
II REVIV AL OF V ACCINE-PRODUCING PSUs
2.1 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the assurance given by the Ministry at many
places in Action Taken Note about the revival of the three units. The Committee, however, finds
that this assurance is subject to their becoming GMP compliant. The Committee had pointed out
that manufacturing licenses of the three units should have been suspended for a specified period.
And this period could have been utilized for removal of all the shortcomings in a time-bound
manner under the overall supervision of the Ministry. The Committee had strong reservations on
the suspension of manufacturing licenses till such time the deficiencies were rectified. The
predominant element of ambiguity in the order of the Drug Controller General of India given in his
capacity as the Central License Approving Authority on the 15th January, 2008 is borne out by the
action taken by the Ministry so far.

2
2.2 It was decided in a meeting held on the 6th February, 2008 under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Health and Family Welfare to set up a Committee which was to visit the three units for
study of infrastructure, facilities available/feasibility of conversion of existing labs into testing labs,
and utilization of existing facilities for setting up a residential training facility and having some of
the vaccines produced at the three units. An Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of DCGI
could be set up on the 11th April, 2008, which submitted its report in September, 2008. In the
meantime, the progress made in the setting up of Integrated Vaccine Complex and Medipark at
Chengalpattu, Tamil Nadu was reviewed by the Minister for Health and Family Welfare. Project
Managers had been appointed and tenders floated for detailed site survey and preparation of base
maps. After discussing the report of the Expert Committee on the 18th September, 2009, DCGI
was requested to revisit the report and address all the Terms of Reference of the Committee and
indicate recommendations against each Term of Reference very clearly along with plan of action
to be executed. On the 8th October, 2008, revised report was furnished by DCGI which was,
however, found to be another version of the earlier report. DCGI was, accordingly, advised by the
Director General Health Services on the 17th November, 2008 to revisit the report again.
Thereafter, DCGI furnished a revised report which stated that it was to be decided by the
Directorate/Ministry as a policy decision as to which vaccines were to be produced and where and
the same needed to be weighed/vetted in the light of the new facilities being planned at the
upcoming Vaccine Park at Chengalpattu. It was also stated that the Committee was not equipped
or competent to give the detailed micro-planning, financial requirements, pricing, architectural plans
of buildings/infrastructure and specific manpower utilizations/requirements. The DGHS then
furnished his comments on the revised report indicating the inadequacies in the report.
The recommendations of the Expert Committee were approved by the Minister on the
17th February, 2009 and the decision was conveyed to the Institutes on the 12th March, 2009.
Prior to this, in January, 2009, WHO advised that the new facility constructed by HSCC in CRI,
Kasauli could be renovated for production of DPT vaccine and the work was being undertaken
with the assistance of WHO. Similarly, facilities at PII, Coonoor were also reviewed by an Expert
Team. As per the latest feedback received from the Ministry, a Core Group, under the
Chairmanship of the former Health Secretary, has been set up in September, 2009 to review the
reasons for suspension of manufacturing licenses of the three units and also review the roadmap
for their revival to make them GMP compliant.
2.3 The above sequence of events since the suspension of manufacturing licenses of the
three units in January, 2008 clearly establishes the fact that their revival is not envisaged
by the Government in the near future. Rather every attempt has been made to create
hurdles so as to ensure that the process of making them GMP compliant continues for long
and manufacturing process of major vaccines of UIP at these age-old PSUs remains
suspended. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Expert Committee headed by the
Drug Controller General of India, the supreme authority for quality control of drugs in the
country has expressed its inability at arriving at a decision about the status of the three
units inspite of persistent efforts by the Ministry. The Committee wonders how the Director
General Health Services who is directly under the control of the Ministry could simply
negate the report of the Expert Committee. The Committee is not aware of the fate of the
latest Committee (Javed Chaudhary Committee) set up by the Ministry. But, the fact
remains that the time is running out for the three vaccine producing units.
2.4 What gives credence to Committee’s apprehensions is the background for setting up
the Integrated Vaccine Complex at Chengalpattu (TN) and progress made so far. On a specific
query, the Committee was informed that capability of HLL Lifecare Limited, a ‘Mini Ratna’
Public Sector Enterprise in implementing Healthcare projects, technology assimilation and
expertise in vaccine business were the criteria for entrusting the company with the project.

3
The Committee is, however, surprised to note that the only expertise of HLL Lifecare Limited
in vaccine business so far has been marketing of Hepatitis B and Typhoid vaccines from 2005,
followed by recent entry into marketing for Rabies Vaccine (Human) and sourcing agent for
Government of India for the import and supply of JE vaccines since 2006. Technology transfer
discussions with Denmark, Korea and Belgium based Institutes and positioning of a project
team are the technology assimilation credited to the company.
2.5 The Committee has also been informed that the first phase of the IVC project
focusing on formulation facilities is expected to start in January, 2010 and to be completed
in December, 2012. The second phase on bulk production units is expected to start in
September, 2010 and to be completed in December, 2012. The Committee can, therefore,
only conclude that at least for the next three years, supply of vaccines as per the
requirements of the entire country will be met mainly by the private sector. Not only this,
the quantum of manufacturing of UIP vaccines like DPT (100 million doses), TT (200 million
doses), BCG (100 million doses), Measles (100 million doses), Hepatitis B (40 million doses)
and Pentavalent combination vaccines (100 million doses) establishes the fact that the fate
of the existing PSUs is sealed.
2.6 Committee’s worst fears ar e confirmed by the assessment about the three units
given by the Ministry. According to the Ministry, what these units are going to produce is
to be determined by a vaccine policy, yet to be formulated by the Government. Secretary,
Health Research has been requested to organize a discussion with all concerned. Only
thereafter, the policy on what the three units should manufacture for ensuring vaccine
safety would be developed. It has also been pointed out that the three units, given their
heritage status have inherent capacity constraints to undergo the requisite modernization.
Consequently, their product mix can never be as dynamic as envisaged in the case of IVC.
2.7 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the conflicting signals emerging from the
Government’s side on the status of the three existing vaccine- producing PSUs. On the one
hand it is being emphasized time and again at different fora that Government is determined
for the revival of the three units and every effort is being made to ensure their becoming
GMP compliant, on the other hand it is also being categorically pointed out that their fate
is to be decided by a vaccine policy yet to be formulated and they can never equate with
the proposed ‘state of the art’ IVC project.
2.8 In the succeeding paragraphs an attempt has been made to analyse the progress made so
far in the revival of the three PSUs.
III CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI
3.1 In its Thirty-Fourth Report, the Committee had voiced serious concern on the lack of vision
and initiative on the part of the Ministry for revamping the existing structure of CRI, Kasauli, an
age-old institution functioning as a subordinate office of the Ministry. In reply to the Committee’s
observation, the Ministry in its ATN has stated that a proposal was approved in 1997-98 for
creation of new facilities for manufacturing of Triple Vaccine at CRI, Kasauli for which M/s HSCC,
Noida, a turnkey agency was selected with total allocation of Rs. 13.29 crores. However, the
infrastructure created with the help of M/s HSCC, was found to be non-compliant with the GMP
standards. Thereafter, another attempt was made for up gradation at CRI, Kasauli in 2002 with an
approved outlay of’ Rs. 85 crores. However, the Ministry has not specified details about the
progress made under this project.
3.2 The Committee had critically observed in its 34th Report that though two years had already
passed by since M/s HSCC had expressed its inability to complete the structure in December, 2006,

4
the Ministry had displayed a laidback approach on such a serious issue by not initiating any
substantive action against the agency for breach of agreement. As per the latest feedback received
from the Ministry, it had been decided to issue a notice to M/s HSCC claiming damages for
their breach of agreement, and the Central Vigilance Commission was also approached on
31st August, 2009 for tendering advice. Subsequently, the Ministry informed the Committee that the
notice has been sent to M/s HSCC on 16th November, 2009. On being asked further by the
Committee as to whether any response has been received from the Central Vigilance Commission
in the matter, the Committee was apprised that the CVO of the Ministry had informed on 3rd
November, 2009 that CVC had returned the records stating that comments/information of Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare should be forwarded to it as per its new reporting format. The CVO
of the Ministry has also advised that since the case pertained to professional impropriety rather than
financial impropriety, the administrative division should process the case for taking administrative
action against the officers as deemed fit.
3.3 The Committee observes that the reply of the Ministry regarding the action taken
against M/s HSCC, Noida for its failure to build a GMP compliant structure at CRI, Kasauli
is simply untenable. The Committee also raises serious doubts on the process of awarding
the contract to M/s HSCC, Noida. The process of awarding contract for building a GMP
complaint structure to an agency which did not have the technical competence to build such
a unit itself speaks volumes of a faulty process of selection ab initio. The Committee
observes that it seems that from 1997-98 until December, 2006 — the time when M/s HSCC,
Noida expressed its inability in completing the project, monitoring as required was not done
by the Ministry to assess the progress of work undertaken by the agency.
3.4 The Committee also finds that the action initiated by the Ministry against M/s HSCC,
Noida has been perfunctory in nature. Instead of pursuing the matter vigorously, the
Ministry has moved at a snail’s pace which is evident from the fact that action against the
company has been initiated only after the matter was reported upon by the Committee in
its 34th Report in February 2009, and thereafter also, it took the Ministry more than six
months to reach a decision regarding referring the matter to CVC for advice and almost
nine months to issue a notice to M/s HSCC. The reasons as to why the matter has remained
pending from December, 2006 till date without any substantial action being initiated against
the defaulter company simply escapes the Committee’s comprehension. The Committee also
feels that the tardy pace of action taken so far clearly indicates dilatory tactic on the part
of the Ministry. The Committee’s apprehensions in this regard get reinforced from the fact
that the records pertaining to this case, which were forwarded to the CVC on 31st August,
2009, were not furnished in the prescribed new reporting format. The Committee is simply
not ready to buy the argument that it took more than two months for the CVO of the
Ministry to come to know that the communication from the Ministry to CVC was not
forwarded as per the new reporting format. The Committee is constrained to call into
question the seriousness of the Ministry to take stringent action against those who were
responsible for this mix-up. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Departmental
Inquiry under progress may be completed within a strict time frame and action may be
initiated against those responsible without further delay. The Committee would like the
Ministry to provide a copy of the enquiry report as well as the follow-up action taken
thereon.
3.5 The Committee takes note of the fact that the revised Schedule ‘M’, the Indian version of
GMP norms of WHO was made effective for the existing units w.e.f. 30th June, 2005. Accordingly,
during the inspection made by the drug authorities in 2001 and 2004, only partial compliance to
NRA’s requirement was considered adequate. There were thus no specific recommendations by
WHO for upgradation of these units at that time. It was only during the WHO-NRA assessment

5
in August, 2007, that all the three units were found to be non-compliant with GMP norms. In
pursuance to September, 2007 directive of the Ministry, CRI, Kasauli submitted a proposal for
construction of new GMP compliant facility for manufacturing of DPT Group of vaccines at an
estimated cost of Rs.32 crores and constitution of a project Committee. The Committee has been
informed that due to suspension of the license of institutes in January, 2008 and the constitution
of an Expert Committee in April, 2008 on modalities of utilization of the institutes, the proposal
could not be processed further.
3.6 The Committee had also drawn the attention of the Ministry to a response given in answer
to Rajya Sabha Starred Question 34 on the 24th July, 2009, whereby renovation/upgradation project
of the new GMP compliant building at CRI, Kasauli was expected to be completed by June, 2010.
Feedback given by the Ministry in this regard is that the layout plan for DPT vaccine unit has been
prepared with inputs from WHO and DCG(I) and approved for Rs.15 crore. There has been no
response to the EOI issued by M/s HSCC. WHO has in the meanwhile forwarded names of three
vendors having extensive experience in setting up GMP compliant vaccine manufacturing units. The
Committee has not been made aware of any follow-up action initiated on the WHO suggestion.
Instead HLL Lifecare Ltd., has been addressed on 16th November, 2009 to furnish their proposal
for renovation of DPT facility at CRI, Kasauli.
3.7 The Committee takes serious objection to the state of affairs emerging after
submission of a project proposal by CRI. The Committee wonders about the feasibility of
the DPT unit at CRI becoming GMP compliant by June, 2010 as the process of selection of
implementing agency is still continuing. Further, the rationale of inviting HLL Lifecare Ltd.
for taking up the project by ignoring the names of experienced vendors suggested by WHO
is also not known to the Committee. The Committee views with serious concern the
involvement of HLL Lifecare Ltd., for Kasauli project when it is already set to start an
ambitious Vaccine Park at Chengalpattu (TN). The Committee, accordingly , recommends
that the approved layout plan for the DPT vaccine unit at CRI, Kasauli should be
implemented in a transparent and time-bound manner.
3.8 The Committee in its Thirty-Foutth Report had pointed out the acute shortage of personnel
especially in Group’ A’ and ‘B’ in CRI, Kasauli. As per the latest feedback received from the
Ministry, out of 50 Group A posts, 27 posts were vacant. While out of 32 Group B posts, 10
remained vacant. Replying to a specific query made by the Committee on the reasons for the post
of Director at CRI being filled up on deputation basis since 1997 and the reasons for reviewing
the Recruitment Rules for the above posts, the Ministry informed that the posts of Director and
Additional Director were CHS cadre posts and the Recruitment Rules limited the scope of filling
up of the posts from CHS cadre officers only with PG degree/diploma in Bacteriology/
Microbiology. Since no CHS cadre officers were willing to join, they were de-cadred. After de-
cadrement, the posts were filled up on deputation basis. The Ministry has also informed that the
existing recruitment rules were reviewed by a Committee constituted by DGHS under the
chairmanship of Special Director General (Public Health), with a view to widen the scope of
recruitment of non-medical personnel and non-CHS cadre officers also so as to enable selection of
proper incumbents having requisite speciality/cadre. The revised recruitment rules have been
referred to Department of Personnel and Training for its consideration on 23rd November, 2009.
The Committee was also given to understand that the requirement of manpower at the Institute in
accordance with the GMP norms and the revival plan now required to be assessed.
3.9 The Committee is not happy with the status of duly sanctioned posts at CRI
remaining vacant for so long leading to some posts getting lapsed. The fact that as many
as 27 Group ‘A’ posts and 10 Group ‘B’ Non-Gazzetted Posts are still vacant at CRI requires
the matter to be pursued vigorously and persistently. Not only this, action also needs to be

6
initiated without any delay for reassessment of requirement of manpower at CRI in
accordance with the GMP norms and the revival plan.
IV BCG V ACCINE LABORATORY, CHENNAI
4.1 The Committee had, in its Thirty-Fourthth Report, observed that as per the information
furnished by the Ministry, the inspection report of the WHO-NRA inspecting team which had
visited BCG VL, Chennai in August, 2007 had pointed out 55 major deficiencies. The Institute had,
in its Status report, informed that out of the 55 deficiencies pointed out, 45 major deficiencies had
already been rectified by it. The Committee had also been informed that as regards the remaining
10 deficiencies, corrective action had either been already initiated or justification for the existing
position had been given by the Institute. Consequent to the WHO-NRA assessment in August, 2007,
all the three units being non-compliant of GMP norms, they were advised in September, 2007 to
formulate a plan of action and put up a detailed project report. Accordingly , BCGVL  proposed
renovation/upgradation of existing facilities for production of BCG vaccine at an estimated price of
Rs.13 crores. However, it was not followed by submission of detailed proposal.
4.2 The Committee would like to point out that as per the status note of the Ministry,
a proposal for upgradation/renovation of BCGVL, Chennai was submitted to the Drug
Controller General of India on the 30th January, 2008. This was followed by a report of the
Institute submitted to the Deputy Drugs Controller, South Zone on 26th February, 2008 and
later on 20th March, 2008 to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare about the
rectification work that it had carried out in the Institute. Not only this, the Institute had
preferred appeals twice, – once on 24th January, 2008 against DCGI’s decision to suspend
its license, and again on 14th June, 2008 to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to
revoke suspension of the license. However, the ATN did not mention as to what action was
taken on the part of the Ministry to consider their case in the light of the rectifications
carried out by the Institute.
4.3 On a specific query made in this regard, the Ministry has stated that BCG Vaccine
Laboratory was inspected twice after August 2007 and it was observed that deficiencies were not
complied till January 2008. Clarifying further on the issue of the proposal for up gradation/
renovation of BCGVL, Chennai, the Ministry has stated that the office of DCG (I) has furnished
its observations/objections on the plan vide its letter dated 20th February, 2008. Attention of the
Committee has also been drawn to the fact that while the Inspection Team had observed 70
deficiencies, the compliance statement of the then Director listed out only 55 deficiencies.
4.4 The Committee would like to note here that the Ministry had furnished the
Inspection Report of the WHO-NRA team that had visited BCG VL in August 2007 along
with the status note vide its O.M. dated 24th July, 2008 to the Committee for its
consideration. The Committee would like to point out that the onus of furnishing vetted
information to a Parliamentary Committee lies with the Ministry. The Committee finds it
strange that the Ministry had not challenged the veracity of the report submitted by the
Institute while forwarding the same to it. The Ministry continued to remain silent on this
issue even in its Action Taken Note. It was only after a pointed query with regard to
rectification of 45 deficiencies out of the 55 deficiencies pointed out by the WHO-NRA
assessment team, that the Ministry has chosen to react. An attempt has been made by the
Committee to make a comparative analysis of 55-deficiency and 70-deficiency Reports. The
Committee has no hesitation in arriving at the conclusion that the so-called additional 15
deficiencies are duly reflected in the original report, the only difference being that some of
the deficiencies are in the expanded form in the later report. The Committee is also not
inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry that the action taken information was
not complete and did not indicate the manner of compliance/rectification of deficiencies.

7
4.5 The Committee takes note of the fact that as per the Expert Committee constituted
in April, 2008, the existing facilities had inherent problems for renovation and vaccines can
be manufactured only on the construction of new facilities. Feasibility of BCGVL becoming
GMP compliant has become more difficult in the light of the latest report given by the
Oversight Committee in October, 2009. Although, WHO GMP expert has been requested to
prepare the preliminary layout plan for the Institute, there is no land available for the
same. A proposal is, therefore, in the pipeline to shift the work of the Institute along with
its personnel to the upcoming Vaccine Complex at Chengalpattu. The Committee strongly
feels that a pre-conceived view about there being no possibility of BCGVL becoming GMP
compliant is very dominant. The very fact that persistent efforts made by the Institute
authorities to rectify the deficiencies pointed out in the WHO-NRA assessment report and
succeeding in removing the majority of the same with the remaining ones being the
responsibility of the Ministry have been of no avail, confirms Committee’s observations.
V PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA, COONOOR
5.1 The Committee notes that consequent to WHO-NRA assessment in August, 2007, PII,
Coonoor was advised in September, 2007 to formulate a plan of action and put up a detailed project
report. Accordingly, PII, Coonoor proposed renovation of existing facilities for TCARV and DPT
at an estimated price of Rs.34 crores and construction of new facilities for DPT vaccine at an
estimated price of Rs.120.93 crores. However, detailed proposal was not submitted by PII. This
was followed by suspension of the license of the Institute in January, 2008 and constitution of an
Expert Committee in April, 2008.
5.2 The Committee’s attention was drawn to the delay in the construction work on the new
facility for production of TCARV with GMP compliant facility at PII. On a specific query in this
regard, the Committee was informed that the lay-out plans for construction of Tissue Culture Anti
Rabies Vaccine (TCARV) facility were finalized on 20th February, 2006, after which the drawings
were prepared by HSCC (I) and submitted to the Coonoor Municipality during September, 2006,
followed by the payment of fee for land development immediately after the assessment in
October, 2006. Correspondence continued with the Coonoor Municipality during 2007 and 2008. In
November, 2008, additional set of drawings as required by the Commissioner, Coonoor Municipality
were prepared through the local engineer and submitted for approval for the construction of facility
as per the layout plan without any deviation in the height limit. The matter was taken up with the
Collector of Nilgiris District to grant approval to the construction of the manufacturing facility on
29th March, 2009 and again on 17th July, 2009. The Coonoor Municipality had forwarded the
drawings to the Assistant Director of Town Planning, Coimbatore on 10th September, 2009 for
examination and recommendations to the Hill Area Conservation Authority (HACA) for forwarding
to the Department of Town and Country planning, Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai for final
approval.
5.3 In the meantime, the Oversight Committee comprising of WHO-GMP Expert, the DCGI and
officials from the Ministry had visited the Institute on 14th and 15th of September 2009, and
finalized the projects to be taken up by the Institute i.e., Diphtheria-Pertussis Block, Tetanus Block,
Anti-sera, Animal Houses and Formulation and Filling Block including the TCARV . The conceptual
layout plans of all the proposed buildings/blocks of PII, Coonoor were explained, discussed,
modified and finalised by the Committee at its second meeting held on 21st October, 2009 at PII,
Coonoor.
5.4 The Committee notes that the current layout plan is a revision of the one submitted earlier
to the local authorities in terms of area (the total area of actual construction was 3958.00 Sq.mt.
whereas in the new plan it is 5396.00 Sq.mt) the number of floors and the total working height

8
of the building (from three floors and 17.00 meter height in the earlier plan to four floors and
15.00 meter height in the new plan). Since the area of the structure was revised in the new plan,
the plan for TCARV had to be re-submitted to the local authorities for approval. The estimated
price for the TCARV project is Rs.50 crores and the tentative price of the entire project was placed
at Rs.280 crores.
5.5 The Committee observes that till the 10th September, 2009 the issues surrounding
the commencement of the construction work at PII, Coonoor were yet to be finalized even
after three years, of the initial layout plans for the construction of TCARV facility being
finalized on the 20th February 2006. Another disturbing fact which came to the notice of
the Committee was that M/s HSCC (I), which had failed to build a GMP compliant structure
at CRI, Kasauli after spending nearly 12 crores of public money, was involved by the
Department to prepare the drawings of TCARV facility at PII, Coonoor. The Committee
fails to understand as to how the services of an agency which expressed its inability to
construct a GMP compliant structure in another Institute could be retained by the Ministry
in the case of a second unit again. The Ministry has informed that the layout plan was
originally submitted to the local body i.e. Coonoor Municipality during September, 2006. In
November, 2008 another set of drawings was submitted for approval for the construction of
the facility. Subsequently, the Oversight Committee visited the Institute in September, 2009
and the conceptual layout plans of all proposed buildings/blocks of PII were modified and
finalized by it in October, 2009. Thereafter, the revised layout plan was again resubmitted
to the local authorities for approval. The Committee is constrained to observe that a gap
of almost three and a half years between the submission of the first layout plan and the
last revised layout plan not only reflects poorly on the decision making process in the
Ministry but also shows a lack of urgency on the part of the Ministry for reasons best
known to it, in addressing this vital issue in a proactive manner. The Committee
apprehends that given the pace with which the approval of the previous plan had progressed,
a similar situation may arise for the revised plan. The Committee, therefore, suggests that
the Ministry should, henceforth, leave no stone unturned to expedite the approval of the
revised plan so that it is not inordinately delayed.
VI PROCUREMENT PRICE OF V ACCINES
6.1 The Committee had, in its Thirty-Fourth Report, commented on a very pertinent issue
regarding the procurement price of the vaccines. The Committee had observed that CRI, Kasauli,
BCG VL, Chennai and PII, Coonoor are in the public sector and therefore, vaccines were available
to the people at cheap prices, and the price of the vaccines could go up in future once their
manufacturing goes into the private hands.
6.2 In reply, the Ministry in its A TN has informed that the three PSUs were supplying vaccine
to the UIP as captive units, on no profit and no loss basis equal to their capacity without going
through the tendering process from 2006-07 onwards. After the suspension of their manufacturing
licenses for non-compliance of GMP norms, UIP vaccine procurement is being carried out from
other PSUs as well as indigenous private sectors to meet the present requirements on the basis of
competitive rates after inviting tenders.
6.3 On the issue of rising prices of vaccine the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare had, informed during the course of her deposition before the Committee that although the
private sector had quoted higher prices for the vaccines, the Government had negotiated at a
relatively fair price. On being asked to provide full details of PSUs/ private firm-wise and quantum
of vaccine supplied by them during 2007-08 and 2008-09, the Department has furnished the
requisite details. A close scrutiny of the feedback received from the Ministry as indicated below

9
confirms the Committee’s apprehension regarding the increase in prices of vaccines after the
closure of the three PSUs :
Vaccine Procurement Price
BCG
Years 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Rate (per vial of
10 doses in Rs.) 20.00 13.00 13.00 – –
Vaccine Institutes – – – 13.00 17.50 27.85 (SII)
Other Public/ 13.50
Private Sector
DPT
Years 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Rate (per vial
of 10 doses in 14.37 11.8 1 1.80 11.80 – –
Rs.) 12.15(BE), 13.00 13.00 13.50 13.40(II 23.59 (IIL and
Vaccine 12.51(HBP L, BE), 23.49
Institutes CL). 14.37(se (Shantha)
Other Public/ 15.20(SII) rum),
Private Sector 16.88(BE)
D T
Years 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Rate (per vial of
10 doses in Rs.) 7.49 8.10 9.60 9.60 –
Vaccine Institutes 7.49 7.49 9.14 12.00(IIL), –
Other Public/ 13.85
Private Sector (BE)
T T
Years 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Rate (per vial of
10 doses in Rs.) 6.10 6.20 6.20 6.20 – –
Vaccine Institutes 6.10 6.66 6.20 – 8.40 17.69(IIL, BE
Other Public/ (IIL), and SII)
Private Sector 11.85
(BE)
6.4 The Committee observes that from the year 2004-05 onwards the prices of the
four vaccines namely BCG, DPT, DT and TT remained stable untill 2007-08. However, in the
year 2008-09, and especially in 2009-10, the prices of vaccines have nearly doubled with the
price of BCG rising from Rs.13.00 per vial of 10 doses in 2007-08 to Rs.17.50 in 2008-09 and
to Rs.27.85 in 2009-10. Similarly, in the case of DPT vaccine which was earlier procured
from the other public/private sector units at the rate of Rs.13.50 per vial of 10 doses to
Rs.13.40 for the quantities procured from Indian Immunological Limited (IIL), Rs.14.37
from Serum Institute of India (SII), Pune and Rs.16.88 from Biological E. (BE) Ltd.,
Hyderabad during 2008-09. While, in 2009-10 the price per vial of 10 doses for DPT rose to

10
Rs.23.59 for supplies procured from IIL and BE, and Rs.23.49 from Shanta. Similarly, the
price of the DT vaccine rose from Rs.9.14 per vial of 10 doses in 2007-08 to Rs. 12.00 (IIL)
and Rs.13.85 (BE) for the quantities procured for the year 2008-09. For TT vaccine, the
price per vial of 10 doses was Rs.6.20 in 2007-08 which rose to Rs.8.40 (IIL) and Rs.11.85
(BE) for the quantities procured for the year 2008-09 which again shot up to Rs.17.69 for
the quantities procured from IIL, BE and SII for the year 2009-10.
6.5 The Committee observes that within two years of the closure of the three PSUs, the
competitive prices of vaccines have shot up to more than double the figures. The Committee
notes that with the rising prices of vaccines, the expenditure incurred in the
implementation of the Universal Immunization Programme in the country would surely add
to the burden of the Public Exchequer and the very objective of providing highly essential
drugs like vaccines to the targeted population at affordable prices would stand defeated.
Thus it is beyond doubt that the Ministry’s argument that the vaccines have been procured
at relatively fair prices is not factually correct. It is also evident that after the closure of
the captive units, the challenge to the private sector to provide vaccines at competitive
prices has been nullified. Hence, the prices of vaccines have been spiraling upwards. The
Committee has been given to understand that the Integrated Vaccine Complex at
Chengalpattu, Tamil Nadu would be completed by the year 2012 and until then the vaccines
required under UIP would be procured through the process of tendering as has been
continuing since the last two years. The Committee apprehends that given the present trend
of price rise, the prices of vaccine may rise manifold in the coming years which would hit
hard the general public as well as the Government Exchequer. The Committee, therefore,
observes, even at the cost of repetition, that for stabilizing the prices of vaccines, there may
be no other alternative than revoking the suspension of the manufacturing license of the
three vaccine Institutes to enable them to start production forthwith.
VII SHORTAGE OF V ACCINES
7.1 Asked to comment on the shortfall of 11.22 crore doses of UIP vaccines in the year 2008-09
and 17 crore doses in the year 2009-10 as admitted by the Ministry itself in reply to an RTI
application, the Ministry in a written reply has tried to explain away the shortage by stating that
the actual requirement of vaccines for any particular year for which procurement order is placed
during the year may be more or less than the projected requirement shown by the states as the
actual requirement depends on a number of factors such as balance reported by States/GMSDs as
on 1st April of that year, pipeline supplies of previous year etc. The Department has further stated
that no shortage is anticipated during the year 2009-10.
7.2 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the explanation given by the Ministry
about the actual requirement and the projected requirement of vaccines under UIP. The
Committee wonders as to how the Ministry could deny the information submitted by it
under RTI. Fact of the matter is that somewhere something is gravely wrong. Either the
categorical information given under RTI supplemented by the fact that requirement details
of some states were yet to be received is wrong or the subsequent clarification given by the
Ministry is misleading. Either way, position seems to be very disturbing. Besides that,
requirements projected being not judiciously made or non-utilization of available vaccines in
a year cannot be considered an ideal situation. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that necessary steps may be taken for assessment of actual requirements of vaccines by
different states followed by monitoring of their timely utilization. The Committee would also
like to point out that inspite of overall coverage of states under UIP being satisfactory, very
low coverage in some of the crucial states is a cause of serious concern. Committee’s
attention has been drawn by the below 50 per cent coverage of vaccines under UIP in Delhi

11
in 2008-09, showing a downward trend when compared with 2007-08 figures. When this is
the state of affairs in the capital city of the country, factual position in respect of other
states is likely to be different from what is shown on paper.
VIII EFFICACY OF PSU-V ACCINES VIS-A-VIS WHO NORMS
8.1 The Committee, in its Thirty-Fourth Report, had noted that until the inspections were
carried out, the Institutes had been meeting the vaccine requirement for the entire country without
reports of any adverse effects from the use of such vaccines. The Drug Controller General of
India, during his deposition before the Committee, also admitted that no such complaint against the
three vaccine producing units had been received so far. Response received from the Ministry to
a subsequent query has been that no compilation of data with respect to the complaints received
about the effectiveness of the vaccines produced by the three units during the last five years has
been maintained.
8.2 On being pointed out by the Committee that since there has not been a single complaint
about the safety of the vaccines produced by the three PSUs, why can’t the Department
immediately start their production at these PSUs, in view of the shortage of the vaccines for
Universal Immunization Programme to the tune of Rs.11.22 crore doses vis-a-vis the requirement
of Rs.75.63 crore doses in the year 2008-09 and Rs.17 crore doses in the year 2009-10 as revealed
by the Ministry in reply to an RTI application, the Secretary replied that India is a big exporter
of vaccines and exports Rs.1600 crore worth of vaccines to almost 150 countries. If the National
Regulatory Authority, who is Drug Controller General of India, adopts dual standard of imposing
certain GMP norms on private sector but having completely non-compliant public sector, he would
stand being derecognized by the World Health Organisation (WHO) which is the main agency for
getting the country’s exports to the other countries. It was for this reason that the suspension of
the manufacturing licenses of the three PSUs were not revoked.
8.3 The Committee notes that despite the Secretary’s admission before the Committee
on 26th October, 2009 that “there is no evidence to show that the vaccines produced by the
three PSUs were unsafe for the children” the Ministry has not taken any concrete steps
towards resuming production of vaccines at the three PSUs. The Committee would like to
make it abundantly clear that neither will it compromise on safe vaccines nor is it against
GMP compliance, innovations or building competencies for new technology. However, it
cannot remain a mute spectator to a situation where in the name of exports, GMP
compliance and new technology, the entire vaccine market is handed over to the private
sector and an impending shortage of vaccines is allowed to loom large over the Universal
Immunization Programme. It is in this context that the Committee is of the considered
view that revoking of the manufacturing licenses of the three PSUs should not wait for the
submission of the Javed Chowdhary Committee Report.
8.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that while the Ministry continues its
exercise towards making the three vaccines Institutes GMP compliant, it should immediately
revoke suspension of the manufacturing licenses of the PSUs to enable them to resume
production of the vaccines produced by them earlier so that the flow of adequate supply of
the vaccines at affordable prices for the UIP is maintained uninterrupted.
IX INTRODUCTION OF NEW V ACCINES
9.1 During the course of her deposition before the Committee, the Secretary, Health and Family
Welfare, pointed out that a new vaccine- Pentavalent vaccine-which can provide a child protection
from three vaccines covered under DPT vaccine and also Hepatitis B and Hemophilus Influenzae
type B (Hib) is proposed to be introduced under UIP. For that, required processes, competencies,

12
skills and infrastructure needed to be built up. The Committee notes that one of the vaccines
proposed to be produced by the Integrated Vaccine Complex is Pentavalent V accine (100 million
doses).
9.2 On a specific query regarding the effectiveness of the Pentavalent vaccine specially in the
context of Indian population, the Committee was informed that the Sub-Committee on Hib and
Pneumococcal of the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) had
recommended, in April, 2008, for introduction of the same. The reason being that there was
significant evidence of relatively high Hib disease burden in the country to warrant early
introduction of Bib vaccine into the UIP.
9.3 The Committee notes that the price of Pentavalent Vaccine is about Rs.100 per dose
whereas the price inclusive of CST/V AT @ 4% in the case of DPT vaccine is Rs.2.45 and
for Hepatitis B Rs.4.96 per dose. The Committee has also been given to understand that Hib
vaccine is available for Rs.300-400 per dose in the market. The Committee finds that now
a review is being undertaken in view of high price and concerns for relevance of
Pentavalent vaccine. The Secretary, Health Research has, accordingly, been requested to
organize a discussion with paediatricians and experts. Only, thereafter, the policy on
Pentavalent vaccine would be developed. The Committee is constrained to observe that the
decision of NTAGI for introduction of Pentavalent vaccine was not based on any scientific
assessment of its requirement in the country.
9.4 The Committee is happy to note that ultimately the Ministry has realized the
essential need for going for an objective assessment in co-ordination with all concerned
before arriving at a final decision on a vital issue relating to the health of our children,
the future of the country.

13
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II REVIV AL OF V ACCINE-PRODUCING PSUs
The above sequence of events since the suspension of manufacturing licenses of the
three units in January, 2008 clearly establishes the fact that their revival is not envisaged
by the Government in the near future. Rather every attempt has been made to create
hurdles so as to ensure that the process of making them GMP compliant continues for long
and manufacturing process of major vaccines of UIP at these age-old PSUs remains
suspended. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Expert Committee headed by the
Drug Controller General of India, the supreme authority for quality control of drugs in the
country has expressed its inability at arriving at a decision about the status of the three
units inspite of persistent efforts by the Ministry. The Committee wonders how the Director
General Health Services who is directly under the control of the Ministry could simply
negate the report of the Expert Committee. The Committee is not aware of the fate of the
latest Committee (Javed Chaudhary Committee) set up by the Ministry. But, the fact
remains that the time is running out for the three vaccine producing units. (Para 2.3)
What gives credence to Committee’s apprehensions is the background for setting up
the Integrated Vaccine Complex at Chengalpattu (TN) and progress made so far. On a
specific query, the Committee was informed that capability of HLL Lifecare Limited, a ‘Mini
Ratna’ Public Sector Enterprise in implementing Healthcare projects, technology
assimilation and expertise in vaccine business were the criteria for entrusting the company
with the project. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that the only expertise of
HLL Lifecare Limited in vaccine business so far has been marketing of Hepatitis B and
Typhoid vaccines from 2005, followed by recent entry into marketing for Rabies Vaccine
(Human) and sourcing agent for Government of India for the import and supply of JE
vaccines since 2006. Technology transfer discussions with Denmark, Korea and Belgium
based Institutes and positioning of a project team are the technology assimilation credited
to the company. (Para 2.4)
The Committee has also been informed that the first phase of the IVC project
focusing on formulation facilities is expected to start in January, 2010 and to be completed
in December, 2012. The second phase on bulk production units is expected to start in
September, 2010 and to be completed in December, 2012. The Committee can, therefore,
only conclude that at least for the next three years, supply of vaccines as per the
requirements of the entire country will be met mainly by the private sector. Not only this,
the quantum of manufacturing of VIP vaccines like DPT (100 million doses), TT ( 200
million doses), BCG (100 million doses), Measles (100 million doses), Hepatitis B (40 million
doses) and Pentavalent combination vaccines (100 million doses) establishes the fact that
the fate of the existing PSUs is sealed. (Para 2.5)
The Committee’s worst fears are confirmed by the assessment about the three units
given by the Ministry. According to the Ministry, what these units are going to produce is
to be determined by a vaccine policy, yet to be formulated by the Government. Secretary,
Health Research has been requested to organize a discussion with all concerned. Only
thereafter, the policy on what the three units should manufacture for ensuring vaccine
safety would be developed. It has also been pointed out that the three units, given their
13

14
heritage status have inherent capacity constraints to undergo the requisite modernization.
Consequently, their product mix can never be as dynamic as envisaged in the case of IVC.
(Para 2.6)
The Committee is deeply disturbed by the conflicting signals emerging from the
Government’s side on the status of the three existing vaccine- producing PSUs. On the one
hand it is being emphasized time and again at different fora that Government is determined
for the revival of the three units and every effort is being made to ensure their becoming
GMP compliant, on the other hand it is also being categorically pointed out that their fate
is to be decided by a vaccine policy yet to be formulated and they can never equate with
the proposed ‘state of the art’ IVC project. (Para 2.7)
III CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI
The Committee observes that the reply of the Ministry regarding the action taken
against M/s HSCC, Noida for its failure to build a GMP compliant structure at CRI, Kasauli
is simply untenable. The Committee also raises serious doubts on the process of awarding
the contract to M/s HSCC, Noida. The process of awarding contract for building a GMP
complaint structure to an agency which did not have the technical competence to build such
a unit itself speaks volumes of a faulty process of selection ab initio. The Committee
observes that it seems that from 1997-98 until December, 2006 — the time when M/s HSCC,
Noida expressed its inability in completing the project, monitoring as required was not done
by the Ministry to assess the progress of work undertaken by the agency. (Para 3.3)
The Committee also finds that the action initiated by the Ministry against M/s HSCC,
Noida has been perfunctory in nature. Instead of pursuing the matter vigorously, the
Ministry has moved at a snail’s pace which is evident from the fact that action against the
company has been initiated only after the matter was reported upon by the Committee in
its 34th Report in February 2009, and thereafter also, it took the Ministry more than six
months to reach a decision regarding referring the matter to CVC for advice and almost
nine months to issue a notice to M/s HSCC. The reasons as to why the matter has remained
pending from December, 2006 till date without any substantial action being initiated against
the defaulter company simply escapes the Committee’s comprehension. The Committee also
feels that the tardy pace of action taken so far clearly indicates dilatory tactic on the part
of the Ministry. The Committee’s apprehensions in this regard get reinforced from the fact
that the records pertaining to this case, which were forwarded to the CVC on 31st August,
2009, were not furnished in the prescribed new reporting format. The Committee is simply
not ready to buy the argument that it took more than two months for the CVO of the
Ministry to come to know that the communication from the Ministry to CVC was not
forwarded as per the new reporting format. The Committee is constrained to call into
question the seriousness of the Ministry to take stringent action against those who were
responsible for this mix-up. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Departmental
Inquiry under progress may be completed within a strict time frame and action may be
initiated against those responsible without further delay. The Committee would like the
Ministry to provide a copy of the enquiry report as well as the follow-up action taken
thereon. (Para 3.4)
The Committee takes serious objection to the state of affairs emerging after
submission of a project proposal by CRI. The Committee wonders about the feasibility of
the DPT unit at CRI becoming GMP compliant by June, 2010 as the process of selection of
implementing agency is still continuing. Further, the rationale of inviting HLL Lifecare Ltd.
for taking up the project by ignoring the names of experienced vendors suggested by WHO

15
is also not known to the Committee. The Committee views with serious concern the
involvement of HLL Lifecare Ltd., for Kasauli project when it is already set to start an
ambitious Vaccine Park at Chengalpattu (TN). The Committee, accordingly , recommends
that the approved layout plan for the DPT vaccine unit at CRI, Kasauli should be
implemented in a transparent and time-bound manner. (Para 3.7)
The Committee is not happy with the status of duly sanctioned posts at CRI
remaining vacant for so long leading to some posts getting lapsed. The fact that as many
as 27 Group ‘A’ posts and 10 Group ‘B’ Non-Gazzetted Posts are still vacant at CRI requires
the matter to be pursued vigorously and’ persistently. Not only this, action also needs to be
initiated without any delay for reassessment of requirement of manpower at CRI in
accordance with the GMP norms and the revival plan. (Para 3.9)
IV BCG V ACCINE LABORATORY, CHENNAI
The Committee would like to point out that as per the status note of the Ministry,
a proposal for upgradation/renovation of BCGVL, Chennai was submitted to the Drug
Controller General of India on the 30th January, 2008. This was followed by a report of the
Institute submitted to the Deputy Drugs Controller, South Zone on 26th February, 2008 and
later on 20th March, 2008 to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare about the
rectification work that it had carried out in the Institute. Not only this, the Institute had
preferred appeals twice, - once on 24th January, 2008 against DCGI’s decision to suspend
its license, and again on 14th June, 2008 to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to
revoke suspension of the license. However, the ATN did not mention as to what action was
taken on the part of the Ministry to consider their case in the light of the rectifications
carried out by the Institute. (Para 4.2)
The Committee would like to note here that the Ministry had furnished the
Inspection Report of the WHO-NRA team that had visited BCGVL in August, 2007 along
with the status note vide its O.M. dated 24th July 2008 to the Committee for its
consideration. The Committee would like to point out that the onus of furnishing vetted
information to a Parliamentary Committee lies with the Ministry. The Committee finds it
strange that the Ministry had not challenged the veracity of the report submitted by the
Institute while forwarding the same to it. The Ministry continued to remain silent on this
issue even in its Action Taken Note. It was only after a pointed query with regard to
rectification of 45 deficiencies out of the 55 deficiencies pointed out by the WHO-NRA
assessment team, that the Ministry has chosen to react. An attempt has been made by the
Committee to make a comparative analysis of 55-deficiency and 70-deficiency Reports. The
Committee has no hesitation in arriving at the conclusion that the so-called additional 15
deficiencies are duly reflected in the original report, the only difference being that some of
the deficiencies are in the expanded form in the later report. The Committee is also not
inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry that the action taken information was
not complete and did not indicate the manner of compliance/rectification of deficiencies.
(Para 4.4)
The Committee takes note of the fact that as per the Expert Committee constituted
in April, 2008, the existing facilities had inherent problems for renovation and vaccines can
be manufactured only on the construction of  new facilities. Feasibility of  BCGVL becoming
GMP compliant has become more difficult in the light of  the latest report given by the
Oversight Committee in October, 2009. Although, WHO GMP expert has been requested to
prepare the preliminary layout plan for the Institute, there is no land available for the
same. A proposal is, therefore, in the pipeline to shift the work of  the Institute along with

16
its personnel to the upcoming Vaccine Complex at Chengalpattu. The Committee strongly
feels that a pre-conceived view about there being no possibility of  BCGVL becoming GMP
compliant is very dominant. The very fact that persistent efforts made by the Institute
authorities to rectify the deficiencies pointed out in the WHO-NRA assessment report and
succeeding in removing the majority of  the same with the remaining ones being the
responsibility of  the Ministry have been of  no avail, confirms Committee’s observations.
(Para 4.5)
V PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA, COONOOR
The Committee observes that till the 10th September, 2009 the issues surrounding
the commencement of the construction work at PII, Coonoor were yet to be finalized even
after three years, of  the initial layout plans for the construction of  TCARV facility being
finalized on the 20th February 2006. Another disturbing fact which came to the notice of
the Committee was that M/s HSCC (I), which had failed to build a GMP compliant structure
at CRI, Kasauli after spending nearly 12 crores of  public money, was involved by the
Department to prepare the drawings of  TCARV facility at PII, Coonoor. The Committee
fails to understand as to how the services of  an agency which expressed its inability to
construct a GMP compliant structure in another Institute could be retained by the Ministry
in the case of  a second unit again. The Ministry has informed that the layout plan was
originally submitted to the local body i.e. Coonoor Municipality during September, 2006. In
November, 2008 another  set of  drawings was submitted for approval for the construction of
the facility. Subsequently, the Oversight Committee visited the Institute in September, 2009
and the conceptual layout plans of  all proposed buildings/blocks of PII were modified and
finalized by it in October, 2009. Thereafter, the revised layout plan was again resubmitted
to the local authorities for approval. The Committee is constrained to observe that a gap
of almost three and a half years between the submission of the first layout plan and the
last revised layout plan not only reflects poorly on the decision making process in the
Ministry but also shows a lack of urgency on the part of the Ministry for reasons best
known to it, in addressing this vital issue in a proactive manner. The Committee
apprehends that given the pace with which the approval of the previous plan had progressed,
a similar situation may arise for the revised plan. The Committee, therefore, suggests that
the Ministry should, henceforth, leave no stone unturned to expedite the approval of the
revised plan so that it is not inordinately delayed. (Para 5.5)
VI PROCUREMENT PRICE OF V ACCINES
The Committee observes that from the year 2004-05 onwards the prices of the four
vaccines namely BCG, DPT, DT and TT remained stable untill 2007-08. However, in the year
2008-09, and especially in 2009-10, the prices of vaccines have nearly doubled with the price
of BCG rising from Rs.13.00 per vial of 10 doses in 2007-08 to Rs.17.50 in 2008-09 and to
Rs.27.85 in 2009-10. Similarly, in the case of DPT vaccine which was earlier procured from
the other public/private sector units at the rate of Rs.13.50 per vial of 10 doses to Rs.13.40
for the quantities procured from Indian Immunological Limited (IIL), Rs.14.37 from Serum
Institute of India (SII), Pune and Rs.16.88 from Biological E. (BE) Ltd., Hyderabad during
2008-09. While, in 2009-10 the price per vial of 10 doses for DPT rose to Rs.23.59 for
supplies procured from IIL and BE, and Rs.23.49 from Shanta. Similarly, the price of the
DT vaccine rose from Rs.9.14 per vial of 10 doses in 2007-08 to Rs.12.00 (IIL) and Rs.13.85
(BE) for the quantities procured for the year 2008-09. For TT vaccine, the price per vial of
10 doses was Rs.6.20 in 2007-08 which rose to Rs.8.40 (IIL) and Rs.11.85 (BE) for the
quantities procured for the year 2008-09 which again shot up to Rs.17.69 for the quantities
procured from IIL, BE and SII for the year 2009-10. (Para 6.4)

17
The Committee observes that within two years of the closure of the three PSUs, the
competitive prices of vaccines have shot up to more than double the figures. The Committee
notes that with the rising prices of vaccines, the expenditure incurred in the
implementation of the Universal Immunization Programme in the country would surely add
to the burden of the Public Exchequer and the very objective of providing highly essential
drugs like vaccines to the targeted population at affordable prices would stand defeated.
Thus it is beyond doubt that the Ministry’s argument that the vaccines have been procured
at relatively fair prices is not factually correct. It is also evident that after the closure of
the captive units, the challenge to the private sector to provide vaccines at competitive
prices has been nullified. Hence, the prices of vaccines have been spiraling upwards. The
Committee has been given to understand that the Integrated Vaccine Complex at
Chengalpattu, Tamil Nadu would be completed by the year 2012 and until then the vaccines
required under UIP would be procured through the process of tendering as has been
continuing since the last two years. The Committee apprehends that given the present trend
of price rise, the prices of vaccine may rise manifold in the coming years which would hit
hard the general public as well as the Government Exchequer. The Committee, therefore,
observes, even at the cost of repetition, that for stabilizing the prices of vaccines, there may
be no other alternative than revoking the suspension of the manufacturing license of the
three vaccine Institutes to enable them to start production forthwith. (Para 6.5)
VII SHORTAGE OF V ACCINES
The Committee is not inclined to agree with the explanation given by the Ministry
about the actual requirement and the projected requirement of vaccines under UIP. The
Committee wonders as to how the Ministry could deny the information submitted by it
under RTI. Fact of the matter is that somewhere something is gravely wrong. Either the
categorical information given under RTI supplemented by the fact that requirement details
of some states were yet to be received is wrong or the subsequent clarification given by the
Ministry is misleading. Either way, position seems to be very disturbing. Besides that,
requirements projected being not judiciously made or non-utilization of available vaccines in
a year cannot be considered an ideal situation. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that necessary steps may be taken for assessment of actual requirements of vaccines by
different states followed by monitoring of their timely utilization. The Committee would also
like to point out that inspite of overall coverage of states under UIP being satisfactory, very
low coverage in some of the crucial states is a cause of serious concern. Committee’s
attention has been drawn by the below 50 per cent coverage of vaccines under UIP in Delhi
in 2008-09, showing a downward trend when compared with 2007-08 figures. When this is
the state of affairs in the capital city of the country, factual position in respect of other
States is likely to be different from what is shown on paper. (Para 7.2)
VIII EFFICACY OF PSU-V ACCINES VIS-A-VIS WHO NORMS
The Committee notes that despite the Secretary’s admission before the Committee
on 26th October, 2009 that “there is no evidence to show that the vaccines produced by the
three PSUs were unsafe for the children” the Ministry has not taken any concrete steps
towards resuming production of vaccines at the three PSUs. The Committee would like to
make it abundantly clear that neither will it compromise on safe vaccines nor is it against
GMP compliance, innovations or building competencies for new technology. However, it
cannot remain a mute spectator to a situation where in the name of exports, GMP
compliance and new technology, the entire vaccine market is handed over to the private
sector and an impending shortage of vaccines is allowed to loom large over the Universal

18
Immunization Programme. It is in this context that the Committee is of the considered
view that revoking of the manufacturing licenses of the three PSUs should not wait for the
submission of the Javed Chowdhary Committee Report. (Para 8.3)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that while the Ministry continues its
exercise towards making the three vaccines Institutes GMP compliant, it should immediately
revoke suspension of the manufacturing licenses of the PSUs to enable them to resume
production of the vaccines produced by them earlier so that the flow of adequate supply of
the vaccines at affordable prices for the UIP is maintained uninterrupted. (Para 8.4)
IX INTRODUCTION OF NEW V ACCINES
The Committee notes that the price of Pentavalent Vaccine is about Rs.100 per dose
whereas the price inclusive of CST/V AT @ 4% in the case of DPT vaccine is Rs.2.45 and
for Hepatitis B Rs.4.96 per dose. The Committee has also been given to understand that Hib
vaccine is available for Rs.300-400 per dose in the market. The Committee finds that now
a review is being undertaken in view of high price and concerns for relevance of
Pentavalent vaccine. The Secretary, Health Research has, accordingly, been requested to
organize a discussion with paediatricians and experts. Only, thereafter, the policy on
Pentavalent vaccine would be developed. The Committee is constrained to observe that the
decision of NTAGI for Introduction of Pentavalent vaccine was not based on any scientific
assessment of its requirement in the country. (Para 9.3)
The Committee is happy to note that ultimately the Ministry has realized the
essential need for going for an objective assessment in co-ordination with all concerned
before arriving at a final decision on a vital issue relating to the health of our children,
the future of the country. (Para 9.4)

19
MINUTES

20

21
21
II
SECOND MEETING
(2009-10)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26th October, 2009 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ashok Argal
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
9. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
12. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
13. Shri N. Kristappa
14. Dr. Tarun MandaI
15. Shri Datta Meghe
16. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
17. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shrimati Meena Singh
21. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

22
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Secretary
2. Shri V . Venkatachalam, Additional Secretary
3. Mrs. Shakuntala Gamlin, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Surinder Singh, Drug Controller General (India)
2. * * *
3. The Committee then heard the Secretary and other senior officers of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare on the Action Taken Note (ATN) furnished by the Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the Thirty-Fourth Report of the Committee on “Functioning of the three vaccine
producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, Himachal Pradesh; the
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, Tamil Nadu and the BCG V accine Laboratory (BCGVL),
Chennai, Tamil Nadu”.
4. During the course of the evidence, Members sought clarifications on a number of issues
like the rationale behind suspension of licenses of the three vaccine producing PSUs despite no
adverse reports about their safety and efficacy; the reasons behind the Department's failure to take
timely corrective action on the recommendations made by the WHO – National Regulatory Authority
(NRA) in their first two inspections in 2001 and 2004; the updated status of the efforts towards
making the above PSUs Current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) compliant; status of
availability of vaccines during the current year and other allied aspects. The Secretary replied to
some of the queries raised by the Members during the course of the meeting and assured to furnish
written replies to all the queries raised during the deliberation.
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.34 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

23
23
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2009-10)
The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th December, 2009 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Dr.(Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
11. Dr. Tarun MandaI
12. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
14. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and briefed them about
the agenda of the meeting. The Committee then considered the draft 38th Report on the ‘Major
issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research Institute
(CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory
(BCGVL), Chennai’. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report with certain minor
changes.

24
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 18th December, 2009. The Committee
authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shrimati Brinda Karat to present the
Report in Rajya Sabha, and, Dr. Jyoti Mirdha, and in her absence Dr. Tarun MandaI to lay the
Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.