Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-eighth Report on Demands
for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH 
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
 
 
REPORT NO. 
75
SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-eighth Report on Demands
for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  9 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  9 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available.

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—29
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—9
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 10—20
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 21—28
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 29
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 30—31
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 33—36
7. L IST OF R EPORTS P RESENTED E ARLIER ............................................................................... 37—41

(i)
* Vacant vide disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
 
*7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
hereby present this Seventy-fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Sixty-eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for the year 2013-14.
2. The Sixty-eighth  Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26
th April, 2013. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of AYUSH were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on
the 29
th November, 2013 .
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 29 th November, 2013.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
29th November, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
8 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

ACRONYMS
1. ACDP – Acquisition, Cataloging, Digitization and Publication
2. AFCL – Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd.
3. AIIA – All India Institute of Ayurveda
4. ASUDCC – A yurveda, Siddha, Unani Drugs Consultative Committee
5. ASU&H DRUGS – A yurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic Drugs
6. ASUDTAB – A yurveda, Siddha, Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board
7. ATNs – Action Taken Notes
8. BE – Budget Estimates
9. CCH – Central Council of Homoeopathy
10. CCIM – Central Council of Indian Medicine
11. C-DAC – Centre for Development of Advanced Computing
12. CCRAS – Central Council of Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
13. CCRYN – Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy
14. CRIM – Central Register of Indian Medicine
15. CTRI – Clinical Trials Registry – India
16. DA VP – Directorate of Audio Visual Publicity
17. DIPAS – Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences
18. DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
19. EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
20. GCP – Good Clinical Practices
21. IMCC Act, 1970 – Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970
22. IEC – Information, Education and Communication
23. JIPMER – Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research
24. LHT – Local Health Traditions
25. MDNIY – Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
26. MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
27. NEIFM – North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine
28. NEHU – North Eastern Hill University
29. NEIAH – North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
(iv)

30. NIA – National Institute of Ayurveda
31. NGO – Non Government Organisation
32. NIH – National Institute of Homoeopathy
33. NIMHANS – National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences
34. NIIMH – National Institute of Indian Medical Heritage
35. NMPB – National Medicinal Plants Board
36. NPCCL – National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd.
37. OPD – Out Patient Department
38. PCIM – Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine
39. PMU – Project Monitoring Unit
40. RE – Revised Estimates
41. SAC – Scientific Advisory Committee
42. SMPBs – State Medicinal Plants Boards
43. SFC – Standing Finance Committee
44. UCs – Utilization Certificates
45. UG – Undergraduate
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Sixty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48) of the
Department of AYUSH for the year 2013-14.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 68
th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.5, 2.18, 4.3, 4.6, 4.13, 4.15, 5.5, 5.6, 6.6, 7.2,
7.9, 7.12, 8.11, 9.5 Total–14 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 2.7, 2.8, 2.10, 2.13, 3.2, 4.18, 4.21, 4.22, 4.27,
6.8, 7.3, 7.8, 8.5, 12.2 Total–14 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.6, 4.8, 4.10, 4.24, 5.4, 6.7, 8.8, 10.3, 11.4,
11.7 Total–10 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: 7.10, 12.1 Total–2 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee is concerned to note that except for the year 2010-11, the total actual
expenditure has invariably been considerably lower than Budget Estimates, in 2011-12 and 2012-13.
For Example, the total actual expenditure for the year 2008-09 was Rs. 471.13 crore against
Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 534.00 crore; for the year 2009-10, Rs. 678.97 crore as against BE
of Rs. 734.00 crore; for the year 2011-12, Rs. 611.46 crore as against BE of 900.00 crore; and
for the year 2012-13, Rs.580.27 crore as against BE of Rs. 990.00 crore. The Committee is not
happy with this recurrent and persistent underutilization of plan funds allocated for the Department.
The Committee is constrained to observe that such a persistent shortfall in the utilization of plan
funds is indicative of fiscal indiscipline and serious shortcoming in formulating the Budget
Estimates. The Committee in its 55th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department
had recommended to take measures for exercising greater fiscal prudence. However,
underutilization of the funds to the tune of Rs.409.73 crore vis-à-vis BE for 2012-13 indicates that
the Committee’s advice was not heeded to. The Committee, therefore, even at the cost of
repetition, strongly recommends that concrete measures be taken to exercise utmost fiscal discipline
and ensure absorption of the allocated funds.
(Para 2.5)
Action Taken
1.2 As recommended by the Committee the Department would strive to exercise utmost fiscal
discipline and ensure absorption of allocated funds. The underutilization has been happening mainly
because of pending Utilization Certificates, particularly those belonging to grants with respect to
Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
1.3 As regards the shortfall in the utilization of Plan funds during last year, this has mainly been
due to pending UCs and subsequent instructions of Ministry of Finance putting further restrictions.
According to these instructions issued on 14.11.2012 funds can be released for a new project or
for subsequent installment to any Institution only if it submits all Utilization Certificates for the
grants taken for all schemes till 31
st March 2011 from all four Departments of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. The implications of these instruction were as follows:
(i) Funds cannot be released to any agency if UC is pending against the agency for the
grant under any scheme of same Department.
(ii) Fu nds cannot be released to the agencies if UC is pending against the grants given
under any scheme of other three Departments.
1.4 Further, the ceiling on incurring expenditure during the last quarter (33%) and during last
month (15%) of the financial year was tightened to make it applicable for each of the schemes
separately as against the overall budget provision in the previous years.
2

3
1.5 As per Government decision on restructuring of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
Department of AYUSH has formulated a comprehensive National AYUSH Mission for implementing
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Department of AYUSH. Simultaneously, the Department
has initiated evaluation of its Central and Centrally Sponsored Schemes by independent agencies.
The evaluation of 27 components/sub-scheme is at an advanced stage of completion. Based on the
evaluation report, the schemes would be modified to increase its impact and optimize the output.
However in the current financial year the Department has been formulating dynamic comprehensive
plan and monitoring effectively for utilization of allocated funds. There has been substantial
improvement in the utilization of allocated funds as compared to the same period of the previous
years as may be seen from the following details:
(Rs. in crore )
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Expenditure till 30
th June 59.73 51.31 79.08
Expenditure till 31 st July 84.79 69.90 153.78
Utilization of Plan Allocation for North Eastern States and Sikkim
Recommendation/Observation
1.6 The Committee lends its full support to the activities and budgetary provisions for the
benefit of the North Eastern States and Sikkim. The Committee observes that it is essential for
inclusive growth that the benefits of the growth of our economy reach the people of the distantly
located North Eastern States of the country. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department
to closely monitor the progress of various schemes in the North Eastern Region and ensure that
the ongoing projects there are not hamstrung for lack of funds or due to under utilization thereof.
The Committee would also like to impress upon the Department to ensure that the projects/
schemes sanctioned for the North Eastern Region are not delayed due to lack of approvals.
(Para 2.18)
Action Taken
1.7 The views/suggestions/recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
IV . National Institutes
National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA)
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 The Committee observes that the NIA is inter-alia mandated to develop high standards of
teaching in Ayurvedic System of Medicine and therefore the acute shortage of the faculty is certain
to adversely affect the functioning of this premier Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should take immediate measures towards filling up vacancies in faculty posts
with priority and urgency. The Committee also observes that in pursuance of the recommendation
of the Committee, the Department in its Action Taken Note on the 55th Report of the Committee
had assured to take action to appoint professionally qualified persons on short-term contract or
deputation basis to overcome the staff crunch in senior faculty positions. The Committee is not
aware whether any forward movement has been made in this regard. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to take immediate action towards appointing professionally qualified

4
persons on short-term contract or deputation against these posts till regular appointments are made
and desires to be kept apprised of the headway made in the matter.
(Para 4.3)
Action Taken
1.9 The Department has taken following steps to fill up key faculty posts:
● 3 posts of Professor, 4 posts of Associate Professor and 11 posts of Assistant
Professor have been filled by promotion in April 2013.
● All the vacant teaching posts of Professors and Associate Professors meant for Direct
Recruitment have already been notified on all India basis. Scrutiny of the applications
received is being done and interview for these posts for selecting candidates will be
conducted soon.
● The Department had deputed officer/expert to assess critical needs and accordingly
National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA) has appointed 7 Professors and 4 Associate
Professors on contract basis.
National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH)
Recommendation/Observation
1.10 The Committee observes that the delay in completion of projects often results in cost
overrun. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to closely monitor the progress of
construction of Academic-cum-Library Building on a quarterly basis in order to avoid time overrun
and resultant cost escalation.
(Para 4.6)
Action Taken
1.11 Progress of the work is being closely monitored. Committee’s direction to assess the
progress on quarterly basis has been noted for compliance.
1.12 The construction of Phase-I (upto 3
rd floor) has been completed. The building (Phase-I) has
also been taken over from the executing agency (NPCCL) on 19.7.2013 by NIH. Necessary
approval for Phase-II and III also conveyed along with funds with instruction to complete the same
as per schedule.
Morarji Desai National Institute of YOGA (MDNIY)
Recommendation/Observation
1.13 The Committee observes that one of the main factors contributing to underutilization of the
budgeted funds is delay in necessary approvals. The Committee would, therefore, like to impress
upon the Department to proactively pursue and complete all pre-approval activities for the new
schemes/additional components under the above head so that the approved outlay for the Twelfth
Plan is utilized gainfully and there are no instances of sub-optimal utilization of the approved outlay.
(Para 4.13)
Action Taken
1.14 Observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.

5
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee welcomes the evaluation of the Advanced Centres of Yoga by the Scientific
Advisory Committee and desires to be apprised of its findings and action taken thereon.
(Para 4.15)
Action Taken
1.16 The findings of the Scientific Advisory Committee on the evaluation of the Advanced
Centres of Yoga and the action taken thereon is given below:
Sl.
No.
1
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Name of the Advanced
Centres of Yoga
2
Advanced Centre for Yoga
Therapy and Research in
Mental Health and Neuro-
sciences at NIMHANS,
Bangalore
Advanced Centre for Yoga
Education, Therapy and
Research in Cardio-vascular
Diseases and Diabetes
Mellitus at JIPMER,
Puduchery
Centre for Advanced
Research and Training in
Yoga at DIPAS, Delhi
Advanced Centre for Yoga
Education and Research in
Respiratory Diseases and
Geriatric Care at Gujarat
Ayurveda University, Jamnagar
Findings of the Scientific
Advisory Committee (SAC)
of MDNIY in the matter
3
SAC appreciated the
excellent work done and
has agreed to publish
research papers as a
supplementary in Indian
Journal of Psychiatry as
recommended by the
Monitoring Committee of
Advanced Centre for Yoga.
The work done in the
Centre has been appreciated
and recommended to take
up standalone research
projects in the years to
come.
The specific Yoga protocol
and Yoga Training Pro-
grammes designed by
MDNIY and DIPAS and
their utility at altitude and in
extremely difficult environ-
mental conditions were
appreciated and found very
useful. It was suggested to
publish the findings in the
form of monographs.
SAC accepted the report of
two research projects
completed by the Centre.
The committee recommended
that the research papers
Action taken on the finding
of SAC
4
The research papers have
been sent to the Indian
Journal of Psychiatry for
publication as supple-
mentary, which is likely to
be published in the month
of August, 2013.
The matter is being placed
before the Governing
Council of MDNIY for its
consideration.
The five Monographs have
been prepared. But the data
could not be disclosed
since the matter is sensitive
and related to Defence.
The Monographs have been
prepared and the research
papers are being prepared
and will be sent for the
scrutiny by the experts of

6
1 23 4
(v)
(vi)
Advanced Centre for Yoga
Therapy and Research in
Chest Diseases at Govern-
ment Medical College,
Jammu
General Remarks of SAC
shall be prepared and sent
for peer-reviewed Journal
for publication.
The Committee was
informed that the Centre
has been started at a late
stage and as such research
work could not be taken up
because of certain admini-
strative reasons.
The Scientific Advisory
Committee of MDNIY
expressed its appreciation
for the excellent work done
in these Advanced Centers
of Yoga of MDNIY and
opined that the work needs
to be highlighted and the
knowledge be disseminated
to the needy people.
Gujarat Ayurveda University.
Thereafter action will be
taken accordingly.
The matter is being pursued
with the Principal of
Government Medical
College, Jammu and
Government of J&K to
expedite the research work.
The research papers are
being published in the peer-
reviewed Journals. The
research findings of the
Advanced Centers are being
used in the Yoga Therapy
and Training programmes at
MDNIY and its Yoga
therapy and training
centers. Further action will
be taken to publish the
Monographs.
V . Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Institutions
Recommendation/Observation
1.17 The Committee would recommend to the Department to expedite submission of the report
of the independent agency and find out the exact reasons for gross underutilization of the budgeted
amount under the above head and take corrective action accordingly by way of making realistic
projection of budgetary requirements and optimal utilization thereof. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of the findings of the independent agency and action taken thereon.
(Para 5.5)
Action Taken
1.18 An Independent Agency, which was entrusted to conduct a comprehensive study of the
various Schemes being regulated by this Department including “Development of AYUSH
Institutions” has recommended inter alia to increase the quantum of Grant-in-aid under different
components of financial assistance to States for setting up of new AYUSH Educational Institutions
in States where it is not available in the Government Sector and to provide financial assistance
through interest free subsidy for development of private AYUSH Educational Institutions. These
new measures would boost the utilization of allocated funds during the Twelfth Plan.
Recommendation/Observation
1.19 The Committee observes that a substantial outlay of Rs. 450.00 crore has been approved
for the above scheme for the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like the Department to gear up

7
its monitoring mechanism so as to avoid recurrence of such gross financial underperformance as
witnessed during the Eleventh Plan.
(Para 5.6)
Action Taken
1.20 Department of AYUSH is setting up National AYUSH Mission during the Twelfth Plan. This
is also in line with the recommendation of the Planning Commission to merge the existing Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department under one umbrella scheme, i.e. National AYUSH Mission.
This would help in achieving the targets under the component “Development of AYUSH Institutions”.
PMU of the scheme will also keep a regular watch over the progress of various components and
utilization of funds so that funds would be utilized to the extent of the budgeted amount.
VI. Assistance to Accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Governmental/Private
Sector engaged in AYUSH Education/Drug Development
Recommendation/Observation
1.21 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another instance of unrealistic
formulation of Budget Estimate and under utilization thereof. The Committee disapproves of such
unrealistic projection of fund requirements and impresses upon the Department to ensure that such
large variations in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure do not recur in
future.
(Para 6.6)
Action Taken
1.22 The budget allocation for 2013-14 has been made taking into account committed liability of
Rs.47.34 crore for the sanctioned projects during the Eleventh Plan and corresponding due 2
nd/3rd
installment. Further, new projects will also be considered as the scheme would continue during the
Twelfth Plan. The Budget Estimate projections are realistic and as per requirement of the sanctioned
projects. This will be utilized during 2013-14.
VII. Research and Development including Medicinal Plants
Recommendation/Observation
1.23 The Committee notes that the outlay for the above head for the Twelfth Plan is substantially
higher than the Eleventh Plan allocations. A large number of important activities are included under
this head. The Committee is of the view that scientific validation of classical formulations of Indian
Systems of Medicine for their safety and efficacy is of vital importance for promotion of these
systems of medicine. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department should regularly
monitor the utilization of allocated funds under this head to ensure that the funds are utilized
judiciously and the on-going research activities are strengthened.
(Para 7.2)
Action Taken
1.24 The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
1.25 The Department regularly monitors the utilization of the allocated funds. The position
of utilization of funds for the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 (till 31.07.2013) is given below,

8
which shows appreciable increase in utilization of funds during 2012-13 and 2013-14
(till 31.7.2013).
(Rupees in crore )
Eleventh 2012-13 2013-14
Plan
Actual Budget Revised Actual Actual Budget Actual
Expenditure  Estimate Estimate Expenditure Expenditure Estimate Expenditure
(provisional) (till 31.7.12) (till 31.7.13)
612.10 181.26 179.54 178.96 27.41 228.30 98.67
National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
Recommendation/Observation
1.26 The Committee notes with concern that a substantial amount of central funds for the
previous years continues to remain unaccounted for under both the schemes of NMPB which is
indicative of non-adherence to the basic financial norms. The Committee feels that the delay in
timely submission of UCs would adversely affect execution of the projects under this head. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Department to draw up a concrete action plan for
quicker liquidation of pending UCs within a designated time-line. The Committee desires to be kept
apprised of the measures taken and results achieved in this regard.
(Para 7.9)
Action Taken
1.27 The NMPB is taking the matter of liquidation of pending UCs at the level of concerned
project officers by deputing them to states to sort out issues of pending UCs. Also, lists of pending
UCs are sent to Nodal Officers and Area Officers appointed by the Department of AYUSH to take-
up the matter with the concerned departments/agencies. Senior officers of the Department are also
taking it up with State Government officials at higher levels to expedite the process and the matter
is followed up at New Delhi through extensive reviews.
Recommendation/Observation
1.28 The Committee notes that in pursuance of its recommendation, some progress has been
made towards filling up of the posts. The Committee would like to impress upon the Department
to vigorously pursue the matter and ensure that the remaining vacancies are filled up within the
shortest possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts made and results
achieved in this regard.
(Para 7.12)
Action Taken
1.29 The following achievements have been made:
● The revival of the posts for the period 27.06.2013 to 26.06.2014 has been obtained
from the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure.
● The post of Director (Technical)-cum-Deputy Chief Executive Officer has since been
filled-up. The efforts to fill-up the remaining posts are being made regularly and the
progress thereon is being monitored from time-to-time.

9
● Recruitment Rules (RRs) for posts which have been advertised repeatedly but have not
got adequate applicants, are under submission to the Department of Personnel and
Training (DoPT) for revision of Recruitment Rules.
VIII. Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic (ASU&H) Drugs
Central Drug Controller for AYUSH
Recommendation/Observation
1.30 An early action may be taken to establish and appoint AYUSH Drug Controller.
(Para 8.11)
Action Taken
1.31 Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has concurred in the proposal of creating
13 posts for the Central Drug Controller for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs. The
approved posts include– Drug Controller General (AYUSH) (1), Deputy Drug Controller (1),
Assistant Drug Controller (4) and Drug Inspector (7).
1.32 The Department of Expenditure has advised the Department of AYUSH to seek approval of
the Cabinet for setting up a separate office for Central Drug Control of AYUSH headed by Drug
Controller General (AYUSH), as it is a Joint Secretary level post. Necessary action in this regard
is being initiated.
IX. Central Sector Schemes for Development of AYUSH Industry Clusters
Recommendation/Observation
1.33 The Committee notes that 9 AYUSH Industry Clusters were set up during 2012-13. It is a
matter of concern that not a single new AYUSH Industry Cluster has been set up since then which
is indicative of the tardy progress in the matter. In its 55th Report, the Committee had suggested
that there should be at least one AYUSH industry cluster in each State. Though the Department has
assured to move in this direction there is little action on the ground. The Committee, therefore,
exhorts the Department to quickly finalize re-designing of the Scheme and ensure that concrete
progress is made towards setting up of at least one AYUSH Industry cluster in each State which
is also necessary for supply of quality drugs at affordable prices.
(Para 9.5)
Action Taken
1.34 The EFC note for Central Sector Scheme for Development of AYUSH Industry Clusters for
Twelfth Plan is under process.
1.35 After the approval of the revised scheme efforts will be made to set up at least one AYUSH
Industry Cluster in each State through wide publicity of the scheme.

10
10
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
II. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee notes that a provision of Rs. 1069.00 crore has been made in B.E. 2013-14
on the plan side. The Committee would expect the Department to initiate concrete measures at least
from this year onwards to ensure that the sanctioned funds are administered in a more diligent
manner. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the steps taken for more efficient
deployment and utilization of the funds budgeted for 2013-14.
(Para 2.7)
Action Taken
2.2 The Department has taken the following steps for the liquidation of UCs which has been
the main cause for underutilization of funds:–
1. Letters have been written to the State Government authorities to urgently liquidate all
pending UCs.
2. In order to ensure speedy liquidation of UCs, the Department has appointed nodal
officers who have been instructed to fortnightly monitor the pendency of UCs for their
respective States.
3. Nodal officers have also been directed to visit the States periodically, to assist the State
authorities in submission of UCs and rectifications of errors in UCs already submitted.
4. A meeting of State level Secretaries was organized on 10
th May, 2013 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary(AYUSH) in which the States were asked to submit UCs or
refund the unspent amount.
5. A meeting of 10 States having largest pendency has been scheduled separately between
29
th July-2 nd August, 2013 for each State.
2.3 As mentioned in the reply of para 2.5, the utilization of budget till 31 st July is relatively
satisfactory.
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 The Committee also takes note of the fact that the share of AYUSH in the total health outlay
has been substantially enhanced to Rs. 10044.00 crore in the Twelfth Plan, which is an increase
of 235.47% over the actual expenditure of Eleventh Plan of Rs. 2994.00 crore. The Committee is
aware that health needs of a vast and diverse country like India cannot be met by a single
healthcare system and AYUSH health care systems have a very vital role to play in expanding the
outreach of health care to the people because of their inherent advantages in terms of diversity,
modest cost, low level of technological input, etc. Indian system of medicines and traditional

11
medicines should be complementary to Modern system of Medicine. It is in this context that the
Committee welcomes the enhanced allocation of funds for AYUSH in the Twelfth Plan. The
Committee also appreciates the efforts made by the Department in getting enhanced allocation for
the year 2013-14 in spite of the fact that there was considerable underutilization of funds during
the previous year i.e. 2012-13. Persistent underutilization of funds to such extent is a serious
concern for the Committee. The Committee is also apprehensive about the utilization of such
enhanced allocation in 2013-14. Therefore, the Committee would expect the Department to put in
place a dedicated mechanism for stricter expenditure monitoring and financial discipline so that the
scarce resources do not remain locked up and surrendered later.
(Para 2.8)
Action Taken
2.5  In compliance of the expectations of the Committee regarding utilization of the enhanced
allocation for 2013-14,concerted efforts are being made in this financial year. Some of the steps
which have been undertaken and envisaged to overcome the shortcoming have been elaborated in
Reply of Para 2.5 and 2.7.
2.6 Further, following the reasoning implicit in the recommendation of the Committee, the
Department has suggested stricter measures for regular financial monitoring of the scheme in
proposed National AYUSH Mission Document.
2.7 Hopefully due to steps taken/being taken, this Department would ensure better utilization of
funds during 2013-14 as compared to previous years.
2.8 The results of the rigorous drive already undertaken by the Department is reflected in the
better utilization in current financial year as compared to the same period during the previous years
as given below:
(Rs. in crore )
 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Expenditure upto 30
th June 59.73 51.31 79.08
Expenditure upto 31 st July 84.79 69.90 153.78
Pending Utilization Certificates
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee observes that pendency of UCs and the huge amount involved therein have
implications for further release of funds and thus impinges on the effective implementation of the
projects. Though the Department has drawn up an ambitious plan of reducing pendency of UCs
to nil, the past trends in this regard inspire little confidence. The Committee, therefore, desires to
be informed of the detailed action plan on bringing down the pendency of UCs to nil and the
success achieved so far so that a fair assessment could be made about the efficacy of the plan.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken
2.10 As explained in the reply to para 2.7, the Department is regularly monitoring the position
of the UCs and regularly writing to the State Governments for timely submission of the UCs as
well as liquidation of pending UCs. The Department is organizing frequent meetings with State
Health Secretaries to expedite liquidation of pending UCs. The Department has also emphasized to
State Governments to make serious efforts in submission of UCs to eliminate the pendency.

12
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee to note that the number of pending UCs
and the amount involved therein is too substantial to be ignored. Of more serious concern is the
fact that UCs dating as far back as to 2000 and 2001 are still pending. The Committee notes with
disapproval that the steps taken by the Department for liquidation of the pending UCs are of routine
nature and have not yielded the desired results so far. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Department to expedite evaluation of the Schemes and formulate appropriate remedial measures
accordingly. The Committee would also expect the Department to play a more proactive role in the
capacity building of the States so that with better absorption capacity the funds could be utilized
in a more efficient manner. The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation made
in its 55th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2012 that the Department should
formulate an action plan in coordination with the State Governments for developing an effective and
efficient coordination mechanism for timely submission of UCs. This would also speed up
execution of all the projects well within the approved cost.
(Para 2.13)
Action Taken
2.12 Regarding timely submission of UCs, the steps taken have been explained in para 2.7 and
2.10. The Department of AYUSH has already awarded the contract to six selected independent
agencies for evaluation of the 27 components of the schemes including National Medicinal Plants
Board schemes implemented during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Out of this, evaluation reports for
20 components have been received and accepted. Remaining evaluations are under process.
III. Updation of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 The Committee is not happy to note that despite its recommendation made in its
55th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department that all such information should
be made available in the public domain in an updated form on the touch of a button, little progress
seems to have been made in this regard, which is evident from the fact that out of 23 States in
respect of which information pertaining to updation of Central Register of Indian Medicine has been
made available, eight States are lagging behind in sending updated information. As regards the
Status of updation of the Central Register of Homoeopathy, the Committee is surprised to note that
in three cases, i.e., Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Tripura, it took sixteen or more months to incorporate
the information in the Central Registers. The Committee is aware that there is a provision in the
IMCC Act 1970 mandating the State Boards to submit updated registers of practitioners on the
1st April every year. The Committee would, therefore, like to be intimated of the impediment
coming in the way of updation of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy despite
there being mandatory legal provisions. The matter may be taken up at the Minister level and
frequent review meetings be held.
(Para 3.2)
Action Taken
Central Register of Indian Medicine:
2.14 Major impediments in the way of updating the Central Register of Indian Medicine (CRIM)
are as follows:
1. As per section 24 of the IMCC act 1970, the State councils shall submit the State
Registers of Indian Medicine from time to time to the CCIM. But it has been observed

13
that in spite of several reminders, the State Registration Boards/Councils are not
supplying the State Registers in time. Even some State boards like Assam had not
supplied the state registers for the last few years.
2. The State Registers received from the State boards are having several discrepancies in
nomenclature of degrees etc. Therefore the CCIM is compelled to return the State
Registers to the concerned boards to rectify the discrepancies.
3. Moreover, Government of India has also decided to include the name of the college/
Institution on year to year basis. Therefore, before granting registration, recognition
of the college should also be ensured by the Registrar of respective State Board/
Council. It has also been noticed from time to time that some Universities/Awarding
Bodies have been renamed. Therefore, it is mandatory to get the University
recognized by the State Government and the Central Government as well in the first
instance.
4. It has been noted that, duplicacy/multiple registrations have been found in the Central
Registers as well as the state registers of Indian medicine.
2.15 The updation of the Central Register of Indian Medicine with the help of information
technology is given highest priority by CCIM. To sort out the issues mentioned above and other
related issues the following steps have been taken by the CCIM:
1. A meeting was held with the registrars of all State Registration Board/Councils on
14.03.2013 to discuss the various issues regarding updation of the CRIM, Renewal of
registration, Duplicacy in CRIM etc.
2. Moreover to develop the software to maintain/update the CRIM a committee has been
constituted by the President, CCIM and the committee had meeting with the C-DAC
(Center for Development of advanced computing) in this regard on 7.4.2013 and the
matter is under continuous follow up.
3. One member of CCIM of the concerned State has been nominated to every State board/
council by the President, CCIM to take up the matter of discrepancies found in the
State Register supplied by the State Boards/Councils personally and the responsibility
of updating of state register of the concerned state is given to that member for
continuous follow up.
4. There are provisions in some State acts that are in conflict with the provisions of
IMCC Act 1970 in the matter of Renewal/Registration/Recognition of qualification.
Therefore instructions have been given to registrars of the concerned state councils/
boards to take up the matter with their State Governments to amend their State Acts
on the basis of the Central Act, i.e., IMCC Act 1970.
5. Some registrars of State boards stated that they have acute shortage of staff and
financial assistance from the State Government However, in order to provide financial
assistance several letters have been sent to all State Boards/Councils with the request
to inform about the estimated cost to be incurred by them for typing work of the State
Registers from the approved agencies per entry-wise so that financial assistance may
accordingly be provided. The State Registrars have been assured by CCIM to provide
financial assistance for updation of State Register. To look after this matter a
committee consisting of Vice-President (Siddha) and Vice-President (Unani) has been
constituted by the President, CCIM.

14
2.16 In some States like Maharashtra and Karnataka the process of computerization of State
Register from its inception is under process. The work relating to updatation of register and
development of software to maintain/ update the Central Register of Indian Medicine is under
process with the help of Center for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC).
2.17 Central Register of Homoeopathy:
(i) Bihar State Register was received on 13.5.11 containing mixed entries of Part-I and
Part-II (qualified and experience based practitioners), besides other deficiencies like
non mention of father’s name, incomplete address, etc. The matter was taken up with
the Bihar State Board during meeting as well as in writing. However, all the entries
so received were first checked and names of total 13888 of Part-II practitioners were
identified and were taken in the Central Register after typing both in English and Hindi
and after checking of typed entries, it was sent to Press for publication on 25.7.12.
The Part-I Register of Bihar is still awaited.
(ii) T amil Nadu State Register was received on 16.12.09 containing 2738 entries of
Part-I. All the entries were scrutinized from second schedule and certain deficiencies
were noticed. Therefore, T.N.State Council was addressed, vide Council’s letter dated
13.10.2010. It was again received on 21.12.2010 from the State Council but still with
deficiencies and a letter was again written to TN Council on 10.1.2011 with reminder
on 12.7.2011. However, rest of the entries numbering 2606 were got typed in English
and later on in Hindi separately and were again checked for their accuracy. After
finalizing of 2606 entries in the Central Register, the same was sent to the Government
Press for publication in Gazette with consolidated list containing the entries of some
other State Registers too, on 23.2.11.
(iii) Tripura State Register was received in English on 30.4.2007 and entries therein were
scrutinized with second schedule. Thereafter other State Registers which were being
worked upon were also taken along with it in the Central Register.
2.18 Impediments in updation of the Central Register for Homoeopathy have been following:–
1. State Registers are not received in both Hindi and English languages.
2. Whatever meager staff is deployed in Registration Section of this Council they are
looking after, besides preparation of the Central Register, the huge work concerning
renewal of Central Register which includes removal/restoration of names of
practitioners from the Central Register in which lot of time and energy of the staff
and officials is consumed.
3. The State Registers are found deficient and for that reason a lot of time is consumed
in seeking clarifications from concerned State Boards/Councils.
2.19 Apart from this, the work of renewal for Part-I and Part-II of the Central Register
published in 1993 (near about 43000 entries) was also in process with above cited work. Directly
Registered persons with this Council are available on CCH website.
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong
Recommendation/Observation
2.20 The Committee notes that the proposal for establishment of NEIAH was approved by the
Cabinet on the 27th March, 2008. More than five years have passed since then, but the full

15
operationalisation of the project is still a far cry. Though the Department claims that there is no
cost escalation so far, the Committee is convinced that the delay is certain to entail cost overruns.
The Committee gathers from the information furnished that out of Rs. 64.50 crore allocated during
the Eleventh Plan, Rs.45.00 crore only could be utilized which is indicative of the inefficient
utilization of the budgeted funds. The Committee, therefore, desires that an action plan be drawn
for better deployment of the financial resources during the Twelfth Plan so that any possibility of
financial under-performance could be obviated and there is no breach of the revised time-line of
October, 2013 for the operationalization of NEIAH.
(Para 4.18)
Action Taken
2.21 A Project Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH) monitors
progress of the establishment of Institute. The construction of Phase-I of the project is expected
to be completed by October, 2013. To operationalize the Institute, following actions have been
taken:
1. The memorandum of association, Rules and regulation and Bye-Laws have been
approved by the competent authority.
2. The Institute has been registered under the Meghalaya Registration of Societies Act.
3. Case of submission of application for affiliation of NEIAH with North eastern Hill
University (NEHU) has been taken up.
4. The technical committee has identified the equipment. Steps have been taken for
procurement of equipment, accessories and furniture.
5. The proposal for creation of 297 posts was taken up with the Department of
expenditure. That Department has desired certain clarification/additional information
which is being referred back to them for their consideration and approval.
6. The draft recruitment rules for various categories of posts to be created have been
prepared.
7. The application for permission to start Ayurveda and Homoeopathy courses at UG level
submitted.
OPD centre:
2.22 The North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy is presently running an office cum
city OPD centre in Shillong city area and providing health care service to the people of Shillong since
4
th November, 2010. The number of patients benefitted by the OPD centre is given below:
Sl. No. Year Number of patients benefited
1 2010-11  1447
2 2011-12  9587
3 2012-13 12198
2.23 It is expected that steps taken so far would not only lead to opertionalising the institute but
also lead to better utilization of funds. Committee’s observation for further action plan for better
deployment of financial resources has been noted for compliance.

16
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh
Recommendation/Observation
2.24 The Committee is constrained to note the contradictions in the information furnished by the
Department. On the one hand, the Department claims that there is no proposal for escalation of
the cost estimate of the project, on the other, the approved outlay of Rs.72.90 crore for the project
gives an impression that the enhanced allocation has been made to meet the cost overrun. The
Committee, therefore, like the Department to explain this apparent contradiction.
(Para 4.21)
Action Taken
2.25 The original projects cost was Rs.32.88 crore and there is no cost escalation till date.
Allocated of fund includes operation cost after establishment. The allocation of Rs.72.90 crore
for Twelfth Plan includes the expenditure for running the Institute and second phase of
development.
Recommendation/Observation
2.26 The Committee is also not happy with the tardy progress made towards operationalisation
of the project. A delay of more than three years have already taken place, which is inordinate by
any standard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department streamline its monitoring
mechanism and ensure that the revised time-line for completion of the project is not extended in
any event. The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken to ensure timely implementation
of this project.
(Para 4.22)
Action Taken
2.27 Project Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH) monitors
progress of the Project regularly. In the last meeting held on 4.03.2013, the Committee was
informed that the expected time line for completion is made after due consideration of prevailing
hindrances. In addition to monitoring the work, funds are sufficiently provided. The proposal for
creation of posts is under process.
Documentation and validation of traditional health practices in the North Eastern Region
2.28 Training of Field Investigators for Documentation of Local Medicines used by the Local
Health Practitioners has been completed in all the North Eastern States and first phase of
documentation of LHT has been completed. Some 492 Nos. of folk remedies/local health practices
have been documented; and will now be assessed for safety and efficacy.
2.29 T ill such time as the Institute’s own building is ready, an OPD is being run at the old TB
Hospital, Pasighat with an Ayurvedic Doctor and 3 folk medicine practitioners and an average of
22-30 patients per day are getting treatment.
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi
Recommendation/Observation
2.30 In its 55th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2012, the Committee expressed
its concern over the delay in implementation of this project and the resultant time and cost

17
overruns and recommended that a rigorous monitoring mechanism be put in place to ensure
execution of the project within the approved cost and designated time-line. The Committee is
constrained to note that despite the Department’s assurance made in past that the project was
on track, this project has witnessed time and cost overruns. The Committee strongly disapproves
of the Department’s failure to deliver the targeted outcome within the designated time-line. The
Committee only hopes that the Institute would be operational at least during current financial
year.
(Para 4.27)
Action Taken
2.31 The AIIA building is at an advanced stage of construction. Civil works of Hospital Block
consisting of OPD is almost over. Further, all electrical and HV AC works are also on the verge
of completion. Colouring of OPD and Hospital Block are completed.
2.32 Regarding Academic block, civil work is almost over and Electrical and HV AC works is in
an advanced stage.
2.33 Further, to complete the other related works especially for the Academic Block, a rigorous
road-map is being prepared by AIIA to monitor all construction activities on fortnightly basis with
the agencies engaged in construction and design.
2.34 Simultaneously, AIIA is making all efforts with the concerned university and Department of
AYUSH, etc. for getting affiliation, etc. to impart education at the level of MD (Ay) and Ph.D(Ay.)
in all major streams.
2.35 OPD of the institute is functioning. The proposal for creation of posts has reached the
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for approval.
VI. Assistance to Accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Governmental/Private
Sector engaged in AYUSH Education/Drug Development
Recommendation/Observation
2.36 The Committee would also like to draw attention of the Department to the fact that on the
one hand, the Department has informed that the outlay for the Scheme for the Twelfth Plan is
97.50 crore, on the other, the Outcome Budget 2013-14 states that the Scheme was only for the
Eleventh Plan and fresh proposal could be considered only on approval of continuation of this
Scheme. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to justify as to how such a huge
amount of Rs. 97.50 crore is targeted to be utilized if the continuation of the above Scheme is
yet to be approved, though the first year of the Twelfth plan has already elapsed. When the
experience in the Eleventh Plan shows that there are very few eligible non-profit NGOs/Private
Sector organizations in AYUSH, then Department should better wind up the scheme.
(Para 6.8)
Action Taken
2.37 The outlay of the scheme during the Twelfth Plan is kept at Rs.97.50 crore. Out of this,
the Department has committed liability of Rs.47.34 crore for the sanctioned projects during the
Eleventh Plan. Further, the rest amount will be utilized for new projects during the Twelfth Plan.
The scheme guideline for Centre of Excellence is being amended as per the suggestions of the
3
rd party Evaluation Report and efforts will be made for getting more proposals through wide
publicity of the scheme.

18
VII. Research and Development including Medicinal Plants
Recommendation/Observation
2.38 The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation made in its 55 th Report
presented to Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2012 that the Department should establish a national
registry of all AYUSH research studies and get the health outcomes accruing from the research
projects of the Research Councils evaluated by an independent agency. The Committee desires to
be apprised of the developments in this regard.
(Para 7.3)
Action Taken
The status is as follows:
Council
CCRAS
CCRH
CCRUM
CCRS
CCRYN
Establishment of National Registry
Registration of research projects have been
done at Clinical Trials Registry of India
(CRTI) for the period 2011-12.
Registering its clinical trials in Clinical
Registry of India since 2008. So far 21
clinical trials have been registered.
Registering its clinical trials in Clinical
Registry of India.
Registering its clinical trials in Clinical
Registry of India.
Being initiated
Evaluation of Research outcomes by
an independent agency.
The Evaluating agency has since
submitted its report, which is being
examined.
The Evaluating agency has since
submitted its report, which is being
examined.
The Evaluating agency has since
submitted its report, which is being
examined.
The Report submitted by the
Evaluating agency has since been
accepted
E- Portal of the Department of AYUSH
2.39 The Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India
emphasizes on dissemination of the merits of AYUSH systems across the globe. A web based
“AYUSH Research Portal” was launched on 18
th April, 2012. The Central Council for Research in
Ayurvedic Sciences is the coordinating body and the National Institute of Indian Medical Heritage
(NIIMH), Hyderabad is maintaining the web portal in collaboration with National Informatics
Centre, Hyderabad.
2.40 A YUSH Research Portal is meant for dissemination of Research outcomes in AYUSH
systems and allied sciences making them accessible. The key objectives of the Research Portal
comprise;
● Showcase the research findings in an organized fashion
● Avoid duplication of work
● Encourage interdisciplinary research

19
● Generate evidence for wider acceptance of AYUSH system worldwide
● Enhancing translational potential of core strengths and merits
2.41 Information on about 15557 published research papers, conference proceedings,
postgraduate and Ph.D. work, etc. has been incorporated so far and the current status of the portal
is as follows:
MEDICAL SYSTEMS
Categories Ayurveda Yoga and Unani Siddha Homoeopathy Total
Naturopathy
Clinical Research 1628 985 312 79 594 3598
Pre-clinical Research 4158 199 167 78 92 4694
Drug Research 3056 – 933 224 347 4560
Funda-mental 707 212 533 215 1038 2705
Research
TOTAL: 9549 1396 1945 596 2071 15557
National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
Recommendation/Observation
2.42 The Committee is of the view that full-fledged SMPBs with full-time chief Executive Officer
will certainly lead to better implementation of the Schemes and programmes of NMPB and more
efficient deployment of financial resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to expedite its decision on increasing support for full fledged SMPBs.
(Para 7.8)
Action Taken
2.43 The State Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPBs) are sought to be strengthened and supported
to a greater extent in the proposed revised schemes of NMPB for the Twelfth Plan. The
recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
VIII. Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic (ASU&H) Drugs
Recommendation/Observation
2.44 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Department for strengthening of the
regulatory mechanism of ASU&H drugs. However, the Committee is aware that quality control and
standardization of ASU&H drugs, which are mainly herbal/herbo-mineral preparations, is very
complex and different from synthetic molecules of the allopathic system which are produced under
controlled laboratory conditions. However, given the current scenario where regulation of ASU&H
drugs leaves much to be desired, the Committee feels that strengthening and streamlining of
regulatory mechanism of ASU&H drugs needs to be speeded up. The Committee desires that the
Department should accord high priority to the task of laying down standards of quality control of
ASU&H drugs by using modern techniques.
(Para 8.5)

20
Action Taken
2.45 In order to strengthen regulatory mechanism for ASU&H Drugs, the Department of AYUSH
has taken steps for augmenting quality control on the recommendations of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani
Drugs Technical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) and Ayurveda Siddha Unani Drugs Consultative
Committee (ASUDCC), which are statutory bodies constituted under the provisions of the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act. Lot of thrust has been given to develop quality standards of drugs with the
establishment of Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine (PCIM) and use of sophisticated
scientific techniques and tools. Focused activities for effective quality control of drugs are
envisaged in the Twelfth Five Year Plan with enhanced budget allocation and outcome targets.
Restructuring of Pharmacopoeia Commission, establishment of Central Drug Controller for AYUSH
and publication of Essential Drug Lists of ASU&H and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines for
Clinical Trials in ASU are important steps in this direction taken by the Department.
XII. Miscellaneous
Recommendation/Observation
2.46 The Committee also observes that during the Eleventh Plan, 150 tours for documentation
of reported cases of prevention/treatment of vector-borne/infectious diseases by Siddha Drugs were
targeted; however, only 31 tours could be conducted. The Committee is of the view that there is
an urgent need for improvement in documentation of the reported episodes of prevention/treatment
of vector-borne/ infectious diseases by Siddha drugs and recommends that the Department should
make all out efforts to complete documentation of all the reported cases of prevention/treatment/
cure of vector-borne/infectious diseases not only by Siddha drugs but also by Ayurvedic and other
traditional drugs.
(Para 12.2)
Action Taken
2.47 The reason for conducting 31 tours only as against the planned 150 tours was attributed
to the fact that pertaining to claims most of the drugs were already mentioned in the classical text
books and diagnosis stated by the practitioners were doubtful. This led to the withdrawal of the
scheme of “Documentation of reported episode of prevention/treatment of vector borne/infectious
diseases of Siddha Drugs” by Central Council of Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) on
27.9.2010.
2.48 Notwithstanding the above, it was decided that all claims of effective Ayurveda and Siddha
drugs for prevention/ treatment of vector borne infectious diseases can be directly communicated
by the practitioners in the prescribed format under already existing claim scheme of CCRAS.

21
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee notes that the extent of surrendered funds is substantially higher under
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (30.9% with reference to RE) than that under Central Sector
Schemes (7.8% with reference to RE). The Committee also takes note of the remedial steps for
better absorption of funds but is not impressed by the half measures taken by the Department
to overcome the sub-optimal utilization of Plan funds as it is obvious that these efforts have not
yielded the desired results. In view of the fact that the allocations have persistently remained
under-utilized in the past several years, the Department should have undertaken a comprehensive
analysis in this regard and taken corrective measures accordingly. Now that an evaluation of all
the Schemes is being done by an independent agency, the Committee is sanguine that the
corrective measures will be initiated for ensuring optimal and judicious utilization of the budgeted
funds. The Committee recommends that the evaluation be completed in a time-bound manner.
The Committee desires to be apprised of the outcome of the independent evaluation and action
taken thereon. The Committee would also like the Department to devise ways to evaluate the
impact of its various schemes. The Committee, simultaneously, impresses upon the Department
to be more prudent in their budget formulation and project their fund requirements in a more
realistic manner after timely collection of all the information pertaining to fund requirement from
the State Governments.
(Para 2.6)
Action Taken
3.2 The Department would strive to judiciously utilize the approved outlays and is
simultaneously working to handle the existing constraints. With regard to review of the norms
for the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, it is stated that as per recommendations of the Planning
Commission on restructuring of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Department of AYUSH is
proposing a National AYUSH Mission for implementing the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the
Department of AYUSH. Simultaneously, the Department has initiated evaluation of 27 components
of Central and Centrally Sponsored Schemes by independent agencies. Out of these 27
evaluations, report for 20 evaluations have been received, accepted and the remaining are in
progress.
3.3 The Department has taken note of the evaluation findings and suitably incorporated changes
in the revised schemes, both in the Central as well as the Centrally Sponsored Schemes for the
Twelfth Plan. The Department has merged 4 Centrally Sponsored Schemes and dropped 2 Central
Sector Schemes (ACDP and LHT).
3.4 The Department undertakes budgetary planning meticulously. However the issue of
pending UCs got aggravated due to change of stand by Ministry of Finance and States not
21

22
coming forward to provide requisite UCs along with supporting documents. To ensure that the
entire requirement of funds is assessed realistically so that the quantum of un-utilized funds is
minimized in future, the Department has been reviewing comprehensively and adopting
appropriate strategy w.r.t. the expenditure profile of each major scheme/programme at regular
intervals and applying the result of such analysis at the time of preparing the budget estimates
and revised estimates.
Further Recommendation
3.5 The Committee while making the above recommendation intended that the
shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning should be identified and necessary
corrective action taken so that the under-utilization of budgeted funds being witnessed does
not recur in future. The reply of the Department is not satisfactory. Instead of dwelling
upon the measures taken or proposed to be taken in this regard, the Department has
chosen to attribute the under-utilization of funds to change of stand by Ministry of Finance
and the States not coming forward to provide requisite Utilization Certificates (UCs). The
Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for formulating appropriate remedial measures
for projection of realistic fund requirements so that the scarce resources do not remain
locked up.
IV. National Institutes
National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH)
Recommendation/Observation
3.6 The Committee observes that the expansion of the Hospital from 100 to 250 beds was
targeted to be achieved during 2010-11. Two years have elapsed since then, but the project is yet
to be completed. The time-overrun has led to cost overrun. The Committee has been advising the
Department to streamline its monitoring mechanism so that such slippages in timely implementing
the project and the resultant cost overrun could be minimized. The Committee is constrained to
observe that the delay in completion of the project is indicative of slack monitoring and bad
planning. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to pay focused attention owards
expansion of the Hospital from its existing bed strength of 100 to 250 beds. The Committee desires
to be kept apprised of the progress of implementation of the project.
(Para 4.8)
Action Taken
3.7 On 15.05.2013 Joint Secretary (AYUSH) visited NIH to hold a meeting with the
representatives of CPWD in connection with stoppage of work of expansion/development of the
institute’s building by CPWD. The issue was sorted out with the decision that balance amount
of the Original Estimate would be released immediately and the work would be resumed.
Accordingly, payment has been made. Director, NIH has been advised to monitor the work
closely and intimate position to the Department regularly. Observations of the Committee have
been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendations
3.8 The Committee observes that the work of expansion/development of NIH’s building
was stopped by CPWD over some disputes regarding payment of dues. Though the

23
Department in its action taken note has claimed that the issue has been sorted out and
payments made, it is not clear whether the work has resumed since then. The Committee
would therefore like the Department to shed more light in this regard. The Committee
would also like the Department to explore the possibility of putting in place a dedicated
mechanism for vigorous monitoring of the work of expansion/development of NIH. A time
line may be fixed for completion of the works.
Recommendation/Observation
3.9 The Committee expresses its concern over such a large number of vacant posts in teaching
cadre which is certain to impair the functioning of NIH. The Committee observes that the main
objective of NIH is to develop excellence in homoeopathic education and conduct UG and PG
courses. It is, therefore, imperative for the Department to urgently take steps to fill up the
vacancies in a specific time-frame. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures taken
by the Department and progress made towards filling up all vacant posts of NIH.
(Para 4.10)
Action Taken
3.10 Out of 32 vacancies in Group-A; 6 in Group-B and 37 in Group-C, the selection procedure
has been completed against 8-vacancies in Group-A, (which includes 7 posts of Lecturers and
1 post of Physiotherapist); 2 in Group-B and 16 in Group-C respectively. Moreover, the vacancy
notices has already been sent to DAVP for advertisement for remaining vacancies. In the meantime,
NIH has appointed 7 Readers and 3 Lecturers on contract basis.
Further Recommendations
3.11 The Committee observes that though some headway has been made towards filling up
the vacancies in Group A,B and C, a lot still needs to be done to overcome the problem of
shortage of manpower in NIH. It is, therefore, imperative on the part of the Department
to vigorously pursue the matter with the authorities concerned. The Committee desires to
be apprised of the progress made towards filling up the vacancies in all categories.
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh
Recommendation/Observation
3.12 The Committee observes that this project is intended to validate folk medicine practices and
integrate them into mainstream health care system. However, its operationalisation in the true sense
of the word can not be accomplished until the requisite faculty and staff are appointed. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to proactively process the matter in the
Integrated Finance Division and thereafter pursue it with the Department of Expenditure. The
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.
(Para 4.24)
Action Taken
3.13 Proposal regarding creation of posts in NEIFM has been pursued with Integrated Finance
Division for their consideration and onward forwarding of the same to Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance.

24
Further Recommendations
3.14 While making its recommendation in para 4.24 of its 68 th Report, the Committee had
expected the Department to pursue the matter with the Integrated Finance Division with
priority and urgency. However, the Committee notes from the reply that the proposal for
creation of posts in NEIFM is still with the Integrated Finance Division, though more than
3 months have elapsed since the Committee made the recommendation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the creation of posts be pursued with priority and the efforts
made by the Department in this regard intimated to the Committee.
V . Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Institutions
Recommendation/Observation
3.15 The Committee does not understand as to why State Governments do not come forward
to get funds for strengthening the AYUSH colleges. The Department should make introspection in
this regard and discuss with State Governments.
(Para 5.4)
Action Taken
3.16 There are 501 AYUSH Colleges/institutions in the country out of which 123 are
Government/Government aided colleges. Till 2011-12, 102 Government/Government aided colleges/
institutions including some private institutions have already availed the benefit of grant in aid. The
scheme is under revision. It is expected that sufficient proposals would come in accordance with
the revised scheme.
Further Recommendations
3.17 The Committee notes that out of 501 AYUSH Colleges/institutions in country, only
102 have availed the benefit of Grant-in-aid Scheme for Development of AYSUH
Institutions. This clearly suggests that the Scheme could not make much impact. The
Committee, therefore, desires that the on-going revision of the Scheme be completed in a
time-bound manner and the infirmities found in the Scheme be addressed comprehensively.
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the developments in this regard.
VI. Assistance to Accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Governmental/Private
Sector engaged in AYUSH Education/Drug Development
Recommendation/Observation
3.18 The Committee gathers from the information furnished that the Scheme is being evaluated
by an independent agency and would be modified as per its suggestions. The Committee welcomes
this exercise and desires to be apprised of the follow-up action taken in this regard.
(Para 6.7)
Action Taken
3.19 The SFC note for the revised scheme is under process and suggestion of evaluation agency
will be considered in the revised scheme guidelines for making smooth and effective implementation
of the scheme.

25
Further Recommendations
3.20 The Committee recommends early revision of the Scheme so that its efficacy and
scale could be enhanced. There should not be any delay in this regard.
VIII. Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic (ASU&H) Drugs
Recommendation/Observation
3.21 The Committee observes that there is a separate chapter-IV A in the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act 1940 which regulates the manufacture and sale of ASU&H drugs. Since the enforcement of
provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules made there under is under the purview of State
Drug Licensing and Drug Control Authorities, the State drugs regulatory framework has a crucial
role to play in ensuring safety and quality of ASU&H drugs. It is in this context that strengthening
of State Drug Testing Laboratories which are facing infrastructure constraints, and shortage of
manpower, assume added significance. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department
to quickly revise the Quality Control Scheme and its funding pattern for greater efficacy of the
Scheme.
(Para 8.8)
Action Taken
3.22 As the evaluation report of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme meant for supporting state
Drug Testing Laboratories, Pharmacies and Enforcement mechanism has been received, the
Department has initiated action to revise the scheme with enhanced scope and suitable modification
of funding pattern in the Twelfth Plan. It is intended to make the scheme broad-based for covering
priority requirements of quality control of ASU&H drugs including improvement of infrastructural
and functional capacities of State Drug Testing Laboratories.
Further Recommendations
3.23 The Committee is not happy with the snail’s pace of the progress made in the
matter. It is already the 2
nd year of the Twelfth Plan and if the Department is still in the
process of revising the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for supporting State Drug Testing
Laboratories and Pharmacies, it is a sad commentary on its decision making process. The
Committee is at a loss to understand as to how the requirements of quality control will be
met if the revision of the Scheme is delayed inordinately. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to quickly finalize Scheme and implement the same.
X. International Cooperation
Recommendation/Observation
3.24 The Committee notes that no MOUs have been signed or are in the process of being signed
with the developed countries like U.K, Germany, U.S.A, Canada etc. The Committee observes that
signing of MoUs for promotion of research projects of AYUSH with the countries, which have
well-developed and credible regulatory mechanisms, will go a long way in establishing the
therapeutic credential of AYUSH medicine globally. This needs to be taken further ahead and India
should become frontrunner in alternative systems of medicine.
(Para 10.3)

26
Action Taken
3.25 The observation of the Committee has been Noted for compliance.
Further Recommendations
3.26 The Committee is dismayed to note the tepid response of the Department in the
matter. The Committee would like to be enlightened as to what concrete steps are being
taken in this direction. The Department should strive to make India frontrunner in
alternative systems of medicine.
XI. Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee welcomes the evaluation of IEC and desires to be apprised of the final
findings of AFCL and the action taken thereon.
(Para 11.4)
Action Taken
3.28 A report on evaluation of the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) Scheme
submitted by Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd. (AFCL) has since been accepted by the
Department. On the basis of recommendations made by the agency, a draft note for consideration
of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) is under process of approval.
3.29 Few of the findings and key observations of AFCL are as follows:
● AROGYA programme provides a common platform to AYUSH manufacturers to display
a variety of products in which they specialize. Besides this, free distribution of
medicines at selected stalls, sale of drugs at discounted rates, demonstration of home
remedies for treatment of common ailments, display material on a healthy lifestyle and
availability of brochures, small books, pamphlets, etc. have helped in increasing the
awareness generation.
● General awareness about Ayurveda and Yoga among general public have far exceeded
than that of Siddha and Unani.
● Arogya Mela helps generate information and awareness among the people of the
district where the mela is organized.
● A unanimous view emerged about the usefulness of Arogya Mela as an effective
medium to reach out to people to inform, educate and motivate.
● Prejudices and stereotypes regarding the acceptability or rejection of all the traditional
systems of medicine was still an issue among people in general and even among
distributors.
● The communication campaigns have played an important role in changing the health
behaviors of public.
● The target audience of the audio-visual material seems quite clear in the analysis of
settings and characters that are featured in the video spots.
● The media materials under study are significantly providing information about
prevention techniques, behaviors and regimes; information about diseases, including

27
information about symptoms, prevalence and transmission; and information about the
streams of AYUSH, and their respective abilities to aid curative procedures and
recovery. In terms of the information available through media materials, the content
analysis provides an uniformly high score across materials.
● During survey, it has been observed that AYUSH media materials have focused largely
on the curative aspects of the individual streams. Focus has also been given on
preventive medication or processes.
● The information also offered curative aspects of health, the pamphlets and booklets
were quite informative, providing information about the plants or herbs that are used
under a particular stream to heal specific diseases.
● The AROGYA Mela was a good platform for networking and outreach because it
attracts people from various sections of the society and with different capacities, and
enables direct contact. There was an increase in the net knowledge level as to how
the AYUSH system can be used in its totality through the course of the Mela visit.
3.30 The Department is in the process of taking action on the suggestions/recommendations.
Further Recommendations
3.31 The Committee desires to be apprised of a point-wise action taken on the key
findings of Agricultural Finance Commission Ltd. (AFCL).
Recommendation/Observation
3.32 The Committee observes that no tangible progress has been made towards curtailing
misleading advertisements concerning AYUSH, over the electronic media and in the print media. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the matter with the
authorities concerned with renewed vigour as the issue is too important for maintaining credibility
of AYUSH systems to be left unattended. The Committee desires to be apprised of the final
outcome in the matter.
(Para 11.7)
Action Taken
3.33 As recommended by the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee, the matter of checking
objectionable advertisements on AYUSH drugs has been taken up with Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and Directorate of Audio-visual Publicity (DA VP) with a request to take action as
appropriate for stopping improper advertisements on AYUSH in electronic and print media. DAVP
has informed that it does not have regulatory power over private advertisement. Press Council of
India has also informed that as per the Press Council Act, 1978 the Council enjoys statutory
authority for the print media and it is sensitive on the issue of objectionable advertisements and
have norms of Journalistic Conduct-2010. However, these guidelines carry only ethical backing as
there are no enforcement powers with the Press Council of India. The Department of AYUSH has
also written to all State Drug Licensing Authorities/Drug Controllers of AYUSH to bring instances
of misleading advertisements concerning AYUSH drugs in TV , Radio and print media to the notice
of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for remedial action and to take corrective measures
in preventing inappropriate advertisements in electronic and print media including newspapers. The
states like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Goa, Kerala are taking action against the misleading
advertisements in respect of AYUSH drugs in channels/newspapers which are in violation of the
provisions of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act 1954.

28
Further Recommendations
3.34 The Committee observes that there have been plenty of advertisements in electronic
and print media where tall claims are made about providing cure to Cancer, Liver Cirrhosis,
diabetes and other chronic ailments without any scientific evidence. The Department of
AYUSH has admitted that the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements)
Act 1954 has not made the desired impact on curbing misleading advertisements related to
AYUSH drugs and the Press Council of India also does not have sufficient powers to curb
such advertisements as the guidelines as laid down in the Press Council Act, 1978 carry only
ethical backing. DAVP also does not have regulatory powers over private advertisements.
Keeping all the above factors in view, the Committee observes that there is an imperative
need for stringent norms in the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements),
1954 and urgent measures need to be taken to amend the said Act to tackle the menace
of misleading advertisements related to AYUSH drugs.

29
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
VII. Research and Development including Medicinal Plants
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee has also been given to understand that an evaluation of the Schemes of
NMPB is going on and in the light of the suggestions made, the NMPB will be revised. The
Committee welcomes the ongoing evaluation of NMPB and desires to be kept apprised of the
suggestions made and action taken thereon.
(Para 7.10)
Action Taken
4.2 The evaluation is under process. The Committee will be apprised of the suggestions and
action taken thereon.
XII. Miscellaneous
Recommendation/Observation
4.3 The Committee observes that 20 yoga therapy Centres were targeted to be set up in
AYUSH/ Allopathy hospitals during the Eleventh Plan, but only 6 such centres could be set up
during the Plan period. The Committee expresses its displeasure over this sorry state of affairs and
strongly recommends that such yoga therapy centres be set up in all AYUSH/ Allopathy hospitals
all over the country during the current Plan period. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made in this regard.
(Para 12.1)
Action Taken
4.4 Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDNIY) has established 6 Yoga Therapy Centres
during the Eleventh Plan period. However, the competent authority had decided that such Centres
should be established by the Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN), New
Delhi. Accordingly, the CCRYN had established another two Yoga Therapy Centres during Eleventh
Plan period.
4.5 Further, recommendation of the Committee to set such centres in all AYUSH/ Allopathy
Hospitals during the current Plan period has been noted and the Committee will be apprised of the
action taken thereon.
29

30
30
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee while making the above recommendation intended that the
shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning should be identified and necessary
corrective action taken so that the under-utilization of budgeted funds being witnessed does
not recur in future. The reply of the Department is not satisfactory. Instead of dwelling
upon the measures taken or proposed to be taken in this regard, the Department has
chosen to attribute the under-utilization of funds to change of stand by Ministry of Finance
and the States not coming forward to provide requisite Utilization Certificates (UCs). The
Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for formulating appropriate remedial measures
for projection of realistic fund requirements so that the scarce resources do not remain
locked up. (Para 2.6)
National Institutes
National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH)
The Committee observes that the work of expansion/development of NIH’s building
was stopped by CPWD over some disputes regarding payment of dues. Though the
Department in its action taken note has claimed that the issue has been sorted out and
payments made, it is not clear whether the work has resumed since then. The Committee
would therefore like the Department to shed more light in this regard. The Committee
would also like the Department to explore the possibility of putting in place a dedicated
mechanism for vigorous monitoring of the work of expansion/development of NIH. A time
line may be fixed for completion of the works. (Para 4.8)
The Committee observes that though some headway has been made towards filling up
the vacancies in Group A,B and C, a lot still needs to be done to overcome the problem of
shortage of manpower in NIH. It is, therefore, imperative on the part of the Department
to vigorously pursue the matter with the authorities concerned. The Committee desires to
be apprised of the progress made towards filling up the vacancies in all categories.
(Para 4.10)
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh
While making its recommendation in para 4.24 of its 68
th Report, the Committee had
expected the Department to pursue the matter with the Integrated Finance Division with
priority and urgency. However, the Committee notes from the reply that the proposal for
creation of posts in NEIFM is still with the Integrated Finance Division, though more than
3 months have elapsed since the Committee made the recommendation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the creation of posts be pursued with priority and the efforts
made by the Department in this regard intimated to the Committee. (Para 4.24)
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Institutions
The Committee notes that out of 501 AYUSH Colleges/institutions in country, only

31
102 have availed the benefit of Grant-in-aid Scheme for Development of AYSUH
Institutions. This clearly suggests that the Scheme could not make much impact. The
Committee, therefore, desires that the on-going revision of the Scheme be completed in
a time-bound manner and the infirmities found in the Scheme be addressed
comprehensively. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the developments in this
regard. (Para 5.4)
Assistance to Accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Governmental/Private Sector
engaged in AYUSH Education/Drug Development
The Committee recommends early revision of the Scheme so that its efficacy and
scale could be enhanced. There should not be any delay in this regard. (Para 6.7)
Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic (ASU&H) Drugs
The Committee is not happy with the snail’s pace of the progress made in the
matter. It is already the 2
nd year of the Twelfth Plan and if the Department is still in the
process of revising the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for supporting State Drug Testing
Laboratories and Pharmacies, it is a sad commentary on its decision making process. The
Committee is at a loss to understand as to how the requirements of quality control will be
met if the revision of the Scheme is delayed inordinately. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to quickly finalize Scheme and implement the same. (Para 8.8)
International Cooperation
The Committee is dismayed to note the tepid response of the Department in the
matter. The Committee would like to be enlightened as to what concrete steps are being
taken in this direction. The Department should strive to make India frontrunner in
alternative systems of medicine. (Para 10.3)
Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
The Committee desires to be apprised of a point-wise action taken on the key
findings of Agricultural Finance Commission Ltd. (AFCL). (Para 11.4)
The Committee observes that there have been plenty of advertisements in electronic
and print media where tall claims are made about providing cure to Cancer, Liver Cirrhosis,
diabetes and other chronic ailments without any scientific evidence. The Department of
AYUSH has admitted that the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements)
Act 1954 has not made the desired impact on curbing misleading advertisements related to
AYUSH drugs and the Press Council of India also does not have sufficient powers to curb
such advertisements as the guidelines as laid down in the Press Council Act, 1978 carry only
ethical backing. DAVP also does not have regulatory powers over private advertisements.
Keeping all the above factors in view, the Committee observes that there is an imperative
need for stringent norms in the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements),
1954 and urgent measures need to be taken to amend the said Act to tackle the menace
of misleading advertisements related to AYUSH drugs. (Para 11.7)

MINUTES

34

35
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 29 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Dr. Tarun Mandal
8. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Ramkishun
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
***
***
II . Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and informed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. (A) To consider and adopt draft:- (i) 75
th Report of the
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the
68th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of AYUSH;
35
*** Relates to other matters.

36
*** Relates to other matters.
(ii) 76 th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/
Observations contained in the 70 th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
the Department of AIDS Control; and (iii) 77 th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the 69 th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Health Research; and ** *
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the three draft Reports mentioned above.
After some discussion, the Committee adopted the three Reports. The Committee, thereafter,
decided that the said Reports along with the 73
rd and 74 th Reports on the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013 respectively (presented to the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and forwarded to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on
20
th November, 2013) may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha
on Monday, the 9 th December, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman to finalise the names
of the Members to present the reports in both Houses.
***
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the Committee was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.

37
37
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health (Ministry of Health
and family Welfare)
2. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and family Welfare)
3. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
4. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
5. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
6. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
7. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
8. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
9. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
10. Report on the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005
11. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005
12. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill-2005
13. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
14. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

38
12
15. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
16. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and family Welfare)
17. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
18. Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill-2005
19. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill-2005
20. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
21. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
22. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and family Welfare)
24. Report on Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Puducherry Bill-2007
25. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare, (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
26. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
27. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
28. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
29 Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
30 Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)Bill, 2007
31. Report on the Paramedical And Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill-2007

39
12
32. Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration And Regulation) Bill, 2007
33. Report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. Report on the functioning of the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
35. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
36. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty eighth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
37. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty ninth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
38. Report on Major Issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, Namely the
Central Research Institute(CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor,
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
39. Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
40. Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
41. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Health Research.
42. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
43. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of india (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
44. Report on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Report on Issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded
Medicines, Their Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness
46. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2010
47. Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill 2010
48. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No.
48) of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

40
12
49. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 of the
Department of AIDS Control(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
50. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Fortieth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
51. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand
No. 46) of the Department of Health And Family Welfare.
52. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health And Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in it’s 38th Report on
major issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
53. Report on the National Institute of Mental Health And Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore
Bill, 2010
54. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
55. Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.47) of the Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
56. Report on Demands For Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.48) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
57. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
58. Report on Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the forty fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic, Generic-
Branded and Branded Mediciens, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and
Effectiveness
59. Report on the Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO)
60. Report on the National Commission For Human Resources For Health Bill, 2011
61. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
62. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

41
12
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
64. Report on Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare; (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
65. Report on the Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
Course
66. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty Ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards
Control Organisation (CDSCO)
67. Report on Demands For Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
68. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of
AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
69. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.49) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
70. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
71. Report on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
72. Report on Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies Using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) Vaccine by Path in India
73. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
74. Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.