REPORT NO.
REPORT NO. 
64
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
65
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
The Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science
(Community Health) Course
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013)  


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTH-FIFTH REPORT
The Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science
(Community Health) Course
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (v)-(vi)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( vii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—17
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 18
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 19—43
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 45 —119

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2010-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Rasheed Masood
*10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
16. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
19. Dr. Tarun Mandal
20. Shri Datta Meghe
21. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
22. Dr. Chinta Mohan
23. Shrimati ayshreeben Patel
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri M.K. Raghavan
26. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Saha
29. Shrimati Meena Singh
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
31. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  21 st September, 2010.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
#2. Shri Janandhan Dwivedi
*3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
@8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shrimati B. Jayashree
10. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
# Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  27 th January, 2012 and re-nominated to the Committee on 2 nd February, 2012.
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012.
@ Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9 th March, 2012.s

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee hereby present this 65 th Report of the
Committee on the proposal to introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health) course in the
country.
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on 18 th January, 2011, took note of the media reports
regarding Government’s move to introduce Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course (now
Bachelor of Science (Community Health)) to overcome the shortage of the doctors in the country.
The Committee felt that it would be in the fitness of things to take up the subject for detailed
examination for studying all the pros and cons of the proposed move of the Government, since
the Committee felt that shortage of doctors looming in the country is a cause of serious concern
and needed to be addressed immediately.
3. The Committee deliberated on the issue in its meetings held on the 27
th January,
06th May, 1 st July, 22 nd, 27 th December, 2011, 20 th March, 09 th April, 8 th November, 2012,
8th February, 2013 and 13 th March, 2013.
4. During the course of examination of the subject mentioned above, the Committee heard the
views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare along with the Chairman, Board of
Governors and Medical Council of India on 27
th January, 22 nd December and 27 th December, 2011
and 8 th November, 2012. The Committee also had the benefit to hear the views of certain experts
in this field during its meetings held on 06 th May and 01 st July, 2011 (List of Experts at
Annexure-I). The Committee expresses its wholehearted thanks to all the witnesses who
enlightened the Committee with their views.
5. During the course of the examination of the subject under reference and finalization of its
Report thereon, the Committee relied upon the following documents/papers:–
(i) Status Note and Concept Note received Department of Health and Family Welfare
and Medical Council of India (MCI);
(ii) Report of the Task Force on Medical Education for the National Rural Health Mission
headed by Shri Javid Chowdhury, Ex-Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare
(iii) O ral evidence tendered by the Secretary and other officers of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare and representatives of Board of Governors, Medical
Council of India;
(iv) Write-up received from Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation
of India and Dr. Meenakshi Gautham, Post doctorate fellow with the Institute of
Health Policy and Management, Erasmus University, Netherlands.
6. The Committee at its meeting held on the 13
th March, 2013 considered and adopted the
Draft Report.

7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13th March , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Phalguna,  1934 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(vi)

(vii)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ANM – Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
BRHC – Bachelor of Rural Health Care course
B.Sc (CH) – Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
BPHP – Bachelor of Primary Health Practice
BRIC – Brazil, Russia, India and China countries
CHCs – Community Health Centres
CHOs – Community Health Officers
DGHS – Director General of Health Services
GDMO – General Duty Medical Officer
IMA – Indian Medical Association
MCI – Medical Council of India
MDGs – Millennium Development Goals
MHPs – Mid-level Health care Providers
PHFI – Public Health Foundation of India
PHCs – Primary Health Centres
RHS – Rural Health Care System
SCs – Sub Centres.

1
REPORT
I. Introduction
Taking suo motu notice of the media reports that the Government was considering the
proposal of introducing “Bachelor of Rural Health Care” (now Bachelor of Science (Community
Health) course to cater to the needs and requirements of the rural people and also to bridge the
gap of patients: healthcare professionals ratio in rural areas, the Committee discussed the issue in
its meeting held on the 18th January, 2011 and keeping in view the wider ramifications of the
introduction of proposed BRHC course for the delivery of healthcare services to the rural people
of the country, decided to examine and report on the same. The Committee in the first instance
asked the Ministry to furnish background Note on the proposed course.
2. The Department of Health and Family Welfare in its status Note, explaining the background
of the proposal stated that the said proposal for setting up of a Rural Medical Corp., having three
year training was first mooted in the Ministry in November 2009 and Medical Council of India
(MCI) was requested to prepare a draft proposal. It was proposed that the said Corp., would act
as a pool of medical professionals who can be posted at Sub-Centre/Primary Health Centre level.
3. The Department further stated that MCI made a presentation on the subject, and later held
a National Workshop on 4th and 5th February, 2010 wherein Vice-Chancellors of various Health
Sciences Universities/deemed Universities, Directors of Medical Education of various States and
Deans of all the medical colleges in the country were invited to participate and render their inputs
pertaining to the “Alternative Model of Undergraduate Medical Education”, primarily aimed at
generating trained health manpower which would be catering to the needs and requirements of the
rural masses in the country. The Department further added that based on the outcome of this
event, MCI sent a proposal for Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course to the Ministry on
28th February, 2010. According to the Department, the salient features of the proposed course
were as follows:
(a) The course is proposed to be conducted by a medical school attached to the district
hospital and will be affiliated to an examining university for conferring the degree. The
medical practitioners will be registered with the concerned State Medical Council;
(b) The duration of the course will be three years with six months of rotational internship;
(c) The candidates eligible for the course will be those who have completed their entire
schooling and passed their qualifying examinations (10+2) from notified rural area in
the concerned district;
(d) Admission will be district based as far as possible;
(e) After acquiring this degree, the graduates will be employed only in sub-centres;
(f) The quality of education will not be compromised;
(g) The doctors acquiring this degree will handle common ailments compared to MBBS
doctors who are competent to handle difficult ailments;
(h) The Medical Officer with MBBS degree or/and PG degree with certain stipulated
experience will be permitted to teach in the medical schools;
(i) Medical college teachers who have superannuated from the medical college can also
be re-employed till the age of 70 years etc;

2
4. It was further stated in the status note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
discussed the proposal with MCI and Director General of Health Services (DGHS) in a meeting
held on 12th April 2010 and it was decided to reduce the duration of the course from 4 years to
3 and half years.
5. It was also stated that in May 2010, four sub-groups were formed to incorporate the
desired changes and frame a draft curriculum for the BRHC (now B.Sc. (Community Health))
course. In consultation with the sub groups, DGHS readied a draft course curriculum of BRHC.
The draft curriculum was sent to MCI on 28th October 2010. The course was discussed in the
Eleventh Conference of Central Council of Health and Family Welfare held on 30th August 2010
and received an overwhelming support from the States. The proposal was again brought up for
discussion in the State Health Ministers meeting held in Hyderabad on 12-13 January, 2011 and was
endorsed unanimously.
6. The Department further stated that the comments of MCI on the draft course curriculum
prepared by DGHS had been received on 30th December, 2010 and DGHS would re-examine the
draft in the light of these comments and, if required, revise the draft. Thereafter, MCI would be
asked to notify the course.
II. Official Presentation
7. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare during the course of his
presentation made before the Committee on 27th January, 2011 justified the need for introduction
of Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course, stating that the basic premise for the need for
introduction of such a course was the paucity of doctors in the rural areas.
8. He stated that in the year 1950, there were 20 medical colleges in the country which has
now increased to 314. These medical colleges have 35000 under graduate seats and 2000 post
graduate seats in total. There was a huge gap in the doctor-patient ratio in the country. In some
states there was only one doctor for 23000 persons. The ministry has, therefore, taken an initiative
to introduce a scheme called the ‘Rural Health Care Course’ to provide trained health personnel for
providing comprehensive health care in rural areas at the sub-centre level. According to him, the
proposed BRHC course would basically complement and supplement the ANM working at the sub-
centre level which would help in strengthening the health services existing in the rural areas.
9. Explaining about the modalities of implementing the course, the Secretary stated that in
order to implement this course, some medical schools would be opened and in every district
hospital there would be a provision for intake of 50 students. Reiterating the admission procedure
mentioned in the status Note, the Secretary clarified that the BRHC graduates were not targeted
to replace MBBS doctors at the PHC level, but to man the sub-centres and would be in addition
to the ANM. On being asked whether the BRHC personnel would be doctors or paramedics, the
Secretary categorically clarified that the BRHC personnel would be degree holders in community
medicine but not doctors.
10. Not being satisfied with the presentation made by the Health Secretary on BRHC, the
Committee asked him to furnish a detailed concept note on the entire spectrum of the issues
involved in the BRHC. The Ministry, accordingly, submitted a Concept Note on 1st March, 2011,
salient features of the same are briefly enumerated below:
(i) The Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) proposal is currently still a matter under
discussion. It has been raised with State Governments both at the meeting of
Central Council on Health and Family Welfare in August, 2010 and at a meeting of
State Ministers of Health in January, 2011. There was overwhelming support from
the States, especially those States which are currently very poorly served with

3
primary health care facilities. Assam has a 3 years course to train a Rural Medical
Practitioner with adequate skills for primary health care; the Assam Rural Health
Authority Act governs this arrangement. Chhatisgarh had begun, and given up, a
similar programme but over 950 Rural Health Assistants with such qualifications
have been employed by the State Government. West Bengal has begun the training
of nurse-practitioners.
(ii) The Lancet Issue of January, 2011 dedicated to the theme of Universal Health
coverage in India point out to the poor health infrastructure in India and observed
that:
“India has a severe shortage of human resources for health. It has a shortage
of qualified health workers and the work force is concentrated in urban
areas. Bringing qualified health workers to rural, remote and under-served
areas is very challenging. Many Indians, especially those living in rural areas,
receive care from unqualified providers. The migration of qualified allopathic
doctors and nurses is substantial and further strains the system. Nurses do
not have much authority or say within the health system and the resources
to train them are still inadequate. Little attention is paid during medical
education to the medical and public health needs of the population, and the
rapid privatization of medical and nursing education has implications for its
quality and governance. Such issues are a result of under-investment in and
poor governance of the health sector- two issues that the Government
urgently needs to address.”
(iii) International experiences suggest a minimum density of 250 health professionals per
1,00,000 population to achieve basic public health goals. This is only counting
doctors, nurses and trained midwives. Based on 2001 census adjusted for only
qualified personnel, India has about 62 doctors, nurses or midwives per 100,000
today, and of these about 38 are doctors and 24 are nurses and nurse- midwives.
In order to reach the international norm we would at the very least, require, 6 lakh
additional doctors and 12 lakh additional nurses. Even if MBBS doctors of the
appropriate quality in sufficient numbers were produced, it would be impossible to
keep them in public service in the rural areas.
(iv) The current proposal, therefore, is to create, not MBBS doctors but a cadre of
graduate health workers with a degree of BRHC.
(v) There has been always a dialogue on whether in addition to the basic MBBS course
a three year course should be made available to provide a public health oriented
graduate with appropriate primary health care skills to serve in rural areas. The
most recent of these was the study group of the Medical Council of India set up
in 1999 under the chairperson Dr G.P. Dutta, a former president of the Indian
Medical Association. The report on the alternative/Innovative model of medical
education was approved by the executive committee, and subsequently by the
General Body of the Medical Council in March, 2000 and forwarded to the
Government of India in June of the same year. The Ministry further stated that the
study group of the Medical Council updated the model in December, 2009, and held
a wider national consultation in early February, 2010, which enabled finalisation of
the main features of the approach.
(vi) That the proposal also draws support from the Task Force on Medical Education
of the National Rural Health Mission.

4
(vii) That the commission on Macro-Economics and Health, 2005 and the Knowledge
Commission also made a similar recommendation for mid-level care providers.
(viii) This arrangement would in a few years time lead to a large organized force of
health workers providing a service considerably more than that being provided
today by ANM though not comparable with the service provided by an MBBS
qualified doctor posted at Primary Health Centre. The Ministry was of the further
view that given the alarming shortage of MBBS qualified doctors at the Primary and
Community Health Centre level, the BRHC health worker would be in a position to
refer serious cases to the district hospital (Concept Note at Annexure-II )
11. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare allaying the fears that BRHC programme is an
attempt to either water down the content of a medical education or institutionalize the provision
of semi-skilled doctors in the rural areas, assured that a, “ BRHC health worker is not, and cannot
be, a doctor”. A BRHC health worker will only be competent to function within the skills provided
to him and with no pretence to any superior medical ability. The Ministry further stated that the
great strength of the BRHC medical officer is that he will be available at the sub centre and will
have a degree of formalized education and training much beyond that being currently available.
12. The Ministry, however, admitted that there are many issues of investment and governance
that arise, which need to be addressed.
III. V iews of Experts/Stakeholders
The Committee heard the views of some experts/ stakeholders to have the views of all
concerned before taking a decision in the matter. Their views are given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Views of Dr. M. K. Daga, Director & Professor, Department of Medicine, Maulana Azad
Medical College, New Delhi
13. Dr. M. K. Daga informed the Committee that a course akin to the proposed BRHC course
was introduced in Chhatisgarh in 2001-02 under which a few hundred rural medical assistants were
trained. However, only a few of those were posted as Medical Assistants in PHCs. However, the
course had been stopped due to combination of various factors like lack of strong institutional
support structures, lack of future employment opportunities and career path, low quality of training,
improper communication and lack of focused training needed to address rural public health needs.
Opposing the proposed BRHC course on the basic premise, he made the following submissions:
(i) there can not be two standards of healthcare for citizens of India - one state-of-
art for urban population and a second sub-standard care for rural masses as it is
a violation of Fundamental Rights of equal treatment;
(ii) even the Bhore Committee in the year 1946 had recommended the abolition of
courses akin to proposed BRHC courses like LMP, LAM, MCPS, RMP which were
subsequently stopped;
(iii) any move to introduce BRHC course would be a retrograde step;
(iv) there is no stopping such BRHC practitioners from migrating to cities after a certain
number of years;
(v) as per statistics of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (2008) only in 4 States
i.e., U.P., Maharashtra, Punjab and Assam, the number of doctors are less in the
PHCs and Sub-Centres. In other States, there is a surplus of doctors at PHC level;

5
(vi) there is gross deficiency of Medical Specialists, Health Workers, Pharmacists and
Lab Technicians;
(vii) training of BRHC is a major area of concern because as per the scheme the
concerned District Hospital which is ill-equipped, poorly staffed and over-worked
would have to train such rural practioners too;
(viii) such rural practitioners as per the proposed course would not be trained in
performing surgical procedures which would be a handicap in situation requiring
surgery like accidents and surgical emergencies, agricultural mishaps and
emergency obstetric care; and
(ix) three and half years BRHC course would produce inferior quality doctors who
would lack credibility to lead the team of other health workers like Nurses having
diploma in nursing (three and half years)/B.Sc. nursing (4+1 years) or Pharmacy
(4 years).
14. Giving his viewpoint on solution to overcome the shortage of doctors in rural areas,
Dr. Daga made the following suggestions:
(i) That there is a need to provide waiver or high concession in fees for those who
join the MBBS course under bond and surety to serve in rural areas for 3 years
after graduation and a job assurance in Government or private set up in the same
areas and in case it is not possible, such graduates could be helped to set up
practice in rural areas (with financial assistance);
(ii) alternatively, 25per cent reservation for candidates from rural areas (with population
less than 10,000) in MBBS admissions may be provided with a pre-condition for
those joining under the said quota to serve in rural areas for 5 years;
(iii) to improve present healthcare delivery system in rural areas, there is a need to
undertake a comprehensive health care personnel manpower assessment;
(iv) enhanced budgeting allotment for healthcare;
(v) encourage Indian Medical graduates working overseas to return home;
(vi) amend Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 to lay down that doctors would receive
only temporary licence to practise in the defined rural areas either in service or own
practice for 3 years at least and permanent registration after 3 years;
(vii) reserve seats for post-graduation for the doctors serving in rural areas;
(viii) mandatory one year rural service for all MBBS graduates-prior to permanent
registration;
(ix) increase the number of MBBS and post-graduate seats;
(x) full utilization of private medical sector;
(xi) opening new medical colleges in rural areas of Assam, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, etc.
15. Dr. Daga concluded that instead of introducing the proposed BRHC course, there is a need
to strengthen the existing B.Sc. Nursing course which is a 4 years course with hands on training
could be re-designated as Nurse Medical Practitioners. He also suggested that a one year training
of AYUSH doctors to deal with common medical problems by posting them at District Hospitals
may be mooted.

6
Views of Dr. T. Sundararaman, Executive Director, National Health System Resource Centre, New
Delhi
16. Dr. Sundaraman advocated that it is important to introduce a mid-level care provider who
not only has a strong public health orientation with a focus on preventive and promotive care but
also has the ability to manage common illnesses, screen for serious diseases and follow up cases
seen by specialists and medical doctors at the local level.
17. He further submitted that several third world countries had achieved the deployment of one
medical service provider for a population of 5000, for example Brazil or Thailand. The country
currently base health care provision at the 5000 population unit through two trained nurse-midwife
(pre-service training of 18 months) and one male health worker. The male health worker is not in
place in most States. Their main work is defined as disease control, in particular, malaria, TB and
response to epidemics but this is only a very small part of disease control or the care provision
that is needed at this level.
18. Dr. Sundaraman felt that India should move to a scenario by the year 2020 where mid level
care provider is available at every single unit of 5000 population especially in those rural areas
where expanding urbanization and connectivity to qualified doctors and nursing homes of urban
areas are still a difficult proposition. The current allopathic medical officer in the PHC would also
continue to be there and guide the mid level care provider. The medical officers may be trained
under family medicine courses and other short term courses to respond to referrals from the
primary care level.
19. Giving his perspective on the often-suggested approach to overcome shortage of doctors in
the rural areas, he stated that an MBBS post should be created in the health sub-centre or the
MBBS should be made to stay at the PHC and visit the subcentres in all working days; seats in
the medical colleges should be increased to provide these extra doctors; monetary incentives should
be given and rotational posting should be used to fill up the vacancies. Dr. Sundaraman also made
the following submissions:–
(i) Currently, vacancies in PHCs are very high. In some states and districts it could be
as high as 40 per cent. Informal vacancy or absenteeism is even higher. One study
puts it at over 50 per cent. The reasons for doctors not serving in rural areas are
many.
(ii) Most entrants to medical colleges are from urban middle class backgrounds and there
are both economic and cultural reasons why they and their families would consider a
rural posting as a failure or loss of status. They tend to face a sense of social isolation
when posted in rural areas.
(iii) Most medical graduates are taught the practice of medicine in a technology intensive
setting, where peer support is plentiful. Their role models are very successful
clinicians who provide high degree of specialist care and are often well known in the
research world. The aspiration built up is therefore of becoming a successful specialist
with a focus on diagnosing and treating diseases known for their complexity. They
find themselves facing a sense of professional loss and professional isolation when
they are posted in rural areas, and are practising with relatively limited support.
(iv) For patient satisfaction, it is not only necessary that there is a service provider
available, it is also important that there is patient to provider bond. This requires that
the provider is happy to be working in a rural area, and happy to be providing this
level of service. Forcing, by either regulations, or rotation posting for a doctor to go
for a short time to a PHC, is not the ideal way to fill the gap. The aim must be to
find a person who is happy to work in such an area, and who finds himself

7
professionally and socially fulfilled in working in such conditions. Any doctor in a rural
area is not a solution. The aim must be to find the right person, with the right set
of skills for the right place.
20. During the course of his oral evidence reiterating the submission made in his Note,
Dr. Sundaraman backed the proposed BRHC course with an evaluation of the Chattisgarh and
Assam models of rural health service. He informed that the course for rural health practitioners in
Chhatisgarh akin to the proposed BRHC course had to be stopped after three batches because the
students of these batches, demanded Government jobs and demanded to be designated as doctors,
which was objected to by the professional doctors. However, these batches were useful to fill up
all the vacancies in primary health care centres and were called rural medical assistants and were
given government jobs and salaries. Many PHCs which were over 50 long years had never been
able to get a doctor, now had the health workers. He felt that evaluation study showed that their
knowledge and skills for primary care and patient satisfaction was the same as that of a regular
medical doctor. With regard to the Assam model, Dr. Sundaraman informed that all 92 graduates
from the first batch had been posted in rural sub-centres and there was strong support from the
public for continuation of this Rural Health Practitioners programme. Moreover, there was no
resistance from professional doctors for this programme. He asserted that the main lesson learnt
from the above was that the three year proposed course can be very useful to fill up primary health
care posts in public sector, even in PHCs. He suggested that selection to the said course should
strictly be confined to rural locality with conditional licensing and on completion of the course they
can be employed and paid by the Government. He also informed the Committee that in States such
as Chhatisgarh and Assam performance and output of such rural health practitioners was
comparable to that of five-year doctors in both clinical and quality and patient satisfaction and they
had been rated better than doctors trained in traditional medicines, pharmacy, etc. The Committee
was also informed that internationally this concept of rural health care practitioners was well
studied and evidence was very positive in terms of increased number of graduates from rural
background coming to practice in rural communities. Dr. Sundaraman further highlighted the fact
that the objective of proposed BRHC course was to make universal access to primary health care,
even in remote rural areas a reality by the year 2020. The idea behind BRHC course was to
generate a cadre of mid-level health care providers who would be motivated to live in and provide
comprehensive primary health care in rural areas at the health sub-centre level. According to him,
such BRHC graduates would be able to address all public health priorities both preventive and
promotive, treat minor ailments, address much of communicable and non-communicable disease
burden as required in primary health care. They could also act as appropriate referrals, acting as
a responsive filter on ‘who should go where for further treatment’.
21. However, Dr. Sundaraman also underlined certain challenges facing the proposed BRHC
course. According to him, the biggest challenge was faculty development and development of a
new approach to the teaching of medical science and of institutions to organise and manage this
course. According to him, there was a need to develop a career path for such graduates where
after five years rural service, they should be provided an option to take another two years of study
and become an MBBS to reduce pressure on the few who need/want to leave the area for various
reasons. He concluded by stating that as apprehended, the proposed BRHC course would not result
in discriminatory care for poorer or rural patients and would not result in lower standard of care;
rather it would ensure having the right person with right skills in the right place. He further stated
that the proposed course would not cut back on the current deployment of doctors, as the single
doctor norm at the PHC would stay and BRHC graduate would be placed in Sub-Centre. He was
of opinion that the said course would only add a ‘doctor’ where an ANM was available hitherto.
The design of the said course favours students from families for whom this course favours social
mobility. This course was conceived as a reform in medical education specifically aimed at

8
generating a cadre of healthcare providers who by virtue of the way they are chosen, deployed and
supported would be motivated to live in and provide comprehensive primary health care in rural areas.
On being asked as to why there was a need to bring such a course at the central level when States
(read Chhatisgarh and Assam) can legislate in the matter Dr. Sundaraman replied that funding is very
important in introduction of the proposed course as a huge amount of funding was involved.
Views of Dr. Bir Singh, Professor of Community Medicine, AIIMS
22. Dr. Bir Singh, during the course of his presentation on BRHC course, informed the
Committee that as per the existing health care system there was only one specialist plus GDMO
available for a rural population of 15-17 lakhs at the district hospital level. At the block level
(CHCs) the ratio was one specialist doctor for 1-1.2 lakhs population. At the PHC, it was one
doctor for 20,000/30,000 population. At the cluster of villages (Sub-Centre), it was 1 health worker
(male or female) for 5000 population. At the village level, it was one health worker (male or
female) per 1000 population. Therefore, he felt that the proposed BRHC course may lead to some
benefits, such as it may lead to improvement in infrastructure in rural areas, may reduce migration
of people from rural to urban areas and could counteract the quacks prevalent in rural areas.
However, he was of the view that the proposed course may cause some major problems like the
possibility of producing half-baked Health care practitioners, due to inadequacies in the proposed
curriculum and training of the BRHC practitioners. He felt that restricted practice for these
graduates will render them less effective. He also stated that it would be difficult to prevent their
migration to urban areas. He, therefore, suggested that for the time being, instead of introducing
the course at the National level, it may be introduced as a pilot project in one State like UP or
MP and its efficacy be evaluated after 5 years. In addition, he felt that there was a need to
strengthen the existing 3-tier Rural Health Care System (RHS) with high quality health care by
strengthening facilities at the Sub-Centres by way of refresher training for Health workers already
available at Sub-Centres, and by correcting the unequal distribution of MBBS doctors in Urban and
Rural areas by seriously considering introducing a bond for doctors to work in rural service, giving
incentives for setting up of rural practice and reserving PG seats for those working in rural areas.
He was, therefore, of the view that if the shortcomings in the existing health sector dilineated
above were suitably addressed then perhaps there would not be any need for any additional system
such as the proposed BRHC course.
Views of Dr. Vinod Kumar Paul, Prof. & Head, Division of Neonatology, Department of
Pediatrics, AIIMS
23. Dr. Vinod Kumar Paul argued that the BRHC would go a long way in empowering the rural
people as it would improve the health and with one-third of seats reserved for girls for the
proposed course as it would change the rural scene in many ways. During the course of his
presentation, Dr. Paul highlighted the issues like (i) mismatch between doctor : population ratio;
(ii) huge shortage of Medical Officers at Primary Health Centre and Sub-Centre level; (iii) need-
based curriculum of BRHC; (iv) ideologically aligned faculty for BRHC; and (v) need for a National
Task Force to roll out the programme, etc. Dr. Paul opined that the course of MBBS was not
directed to core health needs of rural population. He also stated that in the current scenario of
doctor: population ratio, the number of doctors required in the rural areas was enormous and target
of one-doctor-for-1000 population cannot be met before 2035 and, therefore, introduction of BRHC
was warranted. In reply to a question regarding posting of MBBS doctors in rural areas, Dr. Paul
opined that due to their different orientation and mindset, MBBS doctors were unlikely to stay and
serve in rural areas. Dr. Paul also felt that there was a need for a National Board for Quality
Assurance and Accreditation in this regard. Dr. Paul wanted that the Board should be steered by
educationists/professionals and should include people with grass-root experience.

9
Views of Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalya, Bangalore, Karnataka.
24. Dr. Shetty, during the course of his presentation, informed the Committee of the reasons
behind India having the worst indicators in respect of health, vis-à-vis, other BRIC (Brazil, Russia,
and China) countries. He stated that India is the only country in the world managing healthcare
totally dependent on M.B.B.S doctors and where an ICU nurse with 30 years experience was not
allowed to give an IV injection. In contrast, in U.S.A, a nurse anesthetist can independently
anaesthetize a patient for major heart surgery without any anaesthetist around the hospital; a dialysis
nurse effectively manages the dialysis centres. While in India a doctor with M.D. and having 10
years experience was not allowed to manage dialysis without a doctor with DM in nephrology. It
was a travesty of justice that even after 100 years when the first heart surgery was conducted,
India which needs at least 2.5 million heart surgeries a year, could manage to conduct
approximately only 90,000 heart surgeries a year. He was of the view that the main problem was
not lack of money, but the shortage of manpower in which there was need for the Government
to keep the interest of the patient paramount over the interest of doctors. He informed the
Committee that at present India was short of one million doctors and if 100 new medical colleges
are added every year for the next 5 years, India will be able to have adequate number of doctors
by 2025 only. The limitation of existing infrastructure in producing adequate number of doctors in
future was compounding factor in this regard. Given the current scenario, there would not be any
applicant for our PHCs in three years’ time. To top it, female doctors who constitute more than
60 percent of the medical students, were unwilling to take jobs at PHCs in the absence of adequate
supporting infrastructure there. Further, a significant number of doctors do not practise medicine.
A good number of IAS officers are doctors, adding to the problem of the already overburdened
health care system.
25. Dr. Shetty suggested a dual strategy for rural health viz. Rural doctors course and one year
bridge course for AYUSH doctos to prescribe allopathic medicines. The rural doctors course, to
begin with, can be undertaken as a ten year pilot study and afterwards a bridge course to join the
main stream service after serving for 5 years in a rural area. If need be technological tools in this
regard can be used to bridge the gap. He suggested that instead of waiting for MCI to notify the
said course, which seemed a remote possibility, IGNOU School of Medical Sciences is the ideal
organisation to conduct the rural doctors course. The respective State Health Ministries could
create a body to monitor the quality and ethics of rural doctors. Replying to a query as to what
was the guarantee that BRHC like MBBS doctors, would not migrate to cities, Dr. Shetty stated
that BRHC would get jobs in the Sub-Centres in the designated areas and if they migrate to the
cities, their licence would not allow them to practise there. He concluded his discussion favouring
introduction of the BRHC course with the rationale that the ultimate aim was to retain trained
healthcare providers in rural areas and provide good health to the patients residing there and opined
that the proposed BRHC course may well become a means to achieving that end.
Dr. Shyam Prasad, Executive Director, National Lutheran Health and Medical Board.
26. During the course of his presentation Dr. Shyam Prasad, explaining about the benefits of
introduction of the proposed BRHC course, stated that India had only four years left until the 2015
deadline to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which presented a critical
opportunity for action to increase investment and support to countries to strengthen their basic
health systems, including their health work force to deliver essential health services that could save
the lives of women and children. However, survey data confirm that many countries continue to
retain a medical monopoly over essential clinical functions, despite having inadequate numbers and
inequitable distribution of doctors. He informed that the latest report on Millennium Development
Goals reveals a dark picture of India with distressing trends on education, child mortality and
maternal mortality rates. He felt that in order to reduce the child mortality/maternal mortality rates

10
there was an urgent need to introduce the proposed BRHC course. He cited the success of mid-
level health practioners, who are akin to the proposed rural health practitioners in Malawi, Ethiopia,
who have successfully implemented such course. In support of his claim, he cited the success of
treatment of patients by paramedical staff instead of by doctors in Chhatisgarh, according to a
study conducted by Dr. Srinath Reddy of the Public Health Foundation of India. He felt that
favorable report of Task Force on Medical Education Reforms of National Rural Health Mission for
introduction of the proposed course further strengthen the move. He informed that though there
was an elaborate public health delivery system for rural areas i.e. Sub-Centre for 5000 population
serviced by 1 ANM and 1 Male Health Worker, Primary Health Centre (PHC) for 30000 population
serviced by minimum 1 doctor, 14 paramedical staff and Community Health Centre for 120000
population serviced by 1 Surgeon, 1 Obstetrician, 1 Physician and 1 Paediatrician, but the PHCs
and CHCs were plagued by huge shortfall of doctors. Quoting from the Bulletin of Rural Health
Statistics in India, Government of India 2009, he informed that out of 23391 PHCs, 2320 PHCs
were with a single doctor. Similarly, shortfall of specialists at CHC level was to the tune of 67.9
per cent. Citing the findings of an assessment of Primary Health Care Providers in Chhatisgarh by
K.D. Rao, according to which patient-satisfaction with the services of a Medical Officer and Rural
Medical Assistant was almost at par, Dr. Shyam Prasad stated that lesser but well-trained mid-level
healthcare providers can be competent doctors in primary health settings. He further stated that
while global standard set by the World Health Organisation for doctor patient ratio was 1:250, this
ratio was 1:34000 in rural areas in India. He argued that there was an urgent need to place a
healthcare provider for every 1000 population so that unnecessary deaths could be stopped in rural
areas. He summarized that in the last six decades MBBS Doctors had failed to serve three-fourth
population of the country by stating that the debate over whether non-physician clinicians were a
reasonable substitute for physicians misses the point because the correct comparator was not the
physician but the situation where no physician was present.
27. He concluded by stating that even the Delhi High Court in its judgment of December, 2010
had ordered to start this course within eight weeks from the date of the judgment.
Views of Dr. Asok Samanta, Vice President and Dr. Anusum Mitra, Executive Member,
Medical Service Centre, West Bengal
28. During the course of their presentation, Dr. Samanta and Dr. Mitra informed the Committee
that they were not in favour of BRHC course in India at the present juncture. To justify their claim,
they stated, inter alia, that neither the Bhore Committee nor the Alma Ata Declaration had
recommended any short course to create a cadre to stand for the MBBS qualified medical officers.
They felt that the manpower shortage of doctors was not the main issue but infrastructure shortage
in the field of health care was the main hindrance in assuring quality health care to Indian
population. According to them, the current doctor-population ratio in India is 1:1440.97 taking only
MBBS doctors; moreover, the Government of India had taken steps to implement vision 2015 to
increase the number of MBBS doctors to achieve a target of 1:1000 for MBBS doctors. They felt
that the real cause of lack of heath care in rural areas is the poor or unequal distribution of
abundant health resources across the country. The inequitable distribution of resources in rural
areas, vis-à-vis, the urban areas can be seen from the fact that the ratio of hospital beds to
population in rural areas was fifteen times lower than in urban areas; the ratio of doctors to
population in rural areas was almost six times lower than that in the urban population; the per
capital expenditure on public health was seven times lower in rural areas, compared to Government
health spending for urban areas (national average is Rs.220/-p.a.). They instead suggested that there
was a need to initiate move to introduce health and education as fundamental rights. They also
suggested that time-bound community service should be made mandatory for all medical graduates.
Concomitantly, remote area benefits, post-graduate training, neutral and transparent transfer policy

11
should be implemented to do away with the problem of lesser presence of Health Workers in Rural
areas. They opposed creation of BRHC course stating that such an arrangement would create a
half-baked doctor for the rural population.
Views of Dr. Vinay Aggarwal, President and Dr. D. R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General, Indian
Medical Association
29. Dr. Vinay Aggarwal, and Dr. D.R. Rai were also not in favour of introduction of the
proposed BRHC course. They informed the Committee that it was the duty of the Government to
treat its citizens equally and the proposed BRHC course was violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution viz. ‘Right to Equality’. Moreover, the proposed BRHC course which is of three years
duration impacts safety of the patient on the ground that the full 5½ years MBBS course equips
the medical graduates to function as competent practioners of modern medicine and any deviation
from the exacting standards and schedule would certainly impact patient safety. They further stated
that the proposed course was fraught with dangers of becoming a non-starter as the Government
was yet to come out with changes in the structure and strategy of primary health care delivery
system to justify creation of BRHC course. Further, neither the NRHM nor the Planning
Commission or the National Commission on Macro-economics and Health, 2005 have conceived a
restructuring of primary healthcare. The representatives of IMA instead suggested (i) creation of
an All-India Rural Health Service with short and permanent commission; (ii) provide financial and
non-financial incentives for Government doctors in rural areas; (iii) compulsory rural service for
promotion purposes in government services; (iv) retainership of private doctors to do public health
duties in rural areas.
30. They also felt that if the Government was still keen on introducing the proposed BRHC
course, the persons graduating under the said course may be declared as healthcare workers who
may be registered under a Paramedical Council. The representatives of the Indian Medical
Association, informed the Committee that in the last ten years, the Government of India has been
able to establish few medical colleges in the Government sector. There are 300 districts in the
country which have no medical colleges. About 50 per cent of the medical colleges are there in
just four States of the country. They suggested to open medical colleges instead of medical schools
in rural areas and admit students from rural and tribal areas to them, giving them relaxation and
making it mandatory for them to serve in rural and underserved areas at least for 3 years to tackle
the shortage of doctors in rural and underserved areas. Giving their views on the charge that the
doctors were not going to villages, he blamed lack of proper infrastructure and governance deficit
for the problem. Elaborating further, they stated that absenteeism was an issue of governance and
cannot be cited as a reason to create a cadre of half-baked doctors. They disputed the notion that
over 20-30 percent PHCs do not have an MBBS doctor. According to them only 5.3 per cent of
PHCs were without a qualified doctor. They suggested one year’s compulsory rural posting for
rural MBBS graduates after internship. They also suggested that Government should come out with
an Ordinance requiring 350 odd medical colleges in the country to accommodate 30 students from
rural areas who should be selected separately not by common competition. Such students may also
be asked to furnish a bond to serve in rural areas. This would negate the need for setting up new
infrastructure to set up medical schools for such graduate health workers. There was a need to
take a relook at the total health infrastructure. Moreover, the Rural Health Machinery Fund should
be utilized in developing the rural infrastructure for which purpose this Fund was created.
Views of Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India
31. Dr. K. Srinath Reddy in his written submission to the Committee was in favour of the
BRHC course. He outlined the reasons for the same. As per his written submission, the
positioning of well-trained mid-level health care providers (MHPs) in the health system to provide

12
essential primary health care to underserved populations was now a growing trend, especially in
Africa and Asia but also seen in some developed countries. In India, there was need for MHPs
to support and strengthen primary healthcare in both rural and urban areas. They should become
part of the National Rural Health Mission as well as the National Urban Health Mission. According
to him, the course should be renamed as “Bachelor of Primary Health Practice” (BPHP) and the
course content, curriculum and competencies should be customized to the primary health care
needs of the population (district) they were expected to serve. He was of the view that this could
be achieved by linking their education to the district hospital and the district health system in
their home district or an analogous district in their home state. He has further stated that these
MHPs were not doctors and should not be designated as such. Their training programme also
should not be treated as ‘MBBS Bonzai’ but as a carefully constructed course emphasizing
practical aspects of primary healthcare. If the rural BPHP course content is mainly tailored to
infectious disease and other prioritized health needs of the rural population, the urban BPHPs may
have a greater content of routine chronic care related to non-communicable diseases (such as
cardiovascular diseases and diabetes) in their training. The licensing of such MHPs should be
restricted to the local areas of their district/adjoining districts. After a period of 5 years of
service after their initial education, they may become eligible for instruction, through bridge
courses, to obtain further training to become doctors or public health specialists, based on clearly
defined eligibility criteria. Given the growing acceptance of alternate and complementary systems
of health care as part of an expanded health service, the BPHP curriculum may combine essential
and relevant elements of both allopathic and AYUSH systems. India may, thereby, be the first
country to formally create an innovative fusion product of both systems at the MHP level. This
complementarity is likely to be useful in primary health care. Studies conducted by PHFI’s
researchers in Chhattisgarh indicated that the MHPs who have undergone training for 3 years
were competent to handle a range of primary healthcare problems like the diagnosis and
treatment of malaria, diarrhoea, hypertension and diabetes mellitus and demonstrated the same
competency as medical officers in treating several medical conditions commonly seen in Primary
Health Centres. He was, therefore, of the view that the introduction of MHPs into India’s health
system through a well-designed BPHP programme can increase the outreach and performance of
the health system and strengthen primary health care in both rural and urban areas. He opined
that the proposed move of the Government was not meant to provide second-rate care to rural
population but strengthen and enable the delivery of primary care for all.
Views of Dr. Meenakshi Gautham, Post Doctorate fellow with the Institute of Health Policy
and Management, Erasmus University, Netherlands
32. Dr. Meenakshi Gautham was also in favour of introduction of the proposed BRHC course.
According to her, the idea behind the said course was not to develop a rural substitute for MBBS
doctors but rather to fill a huge gap at the first level of care existing in rural areas. She on the
basis of research undertaken by her in different States came to the following conclusions:
(i) At a macro level, different States may show variations in the mix and density of
different types of public and private providers at the primary level; more mobile
informal practitioners in AP, more clinicbased ones in UP, more public sector ones in
Orissa. These differences were also repeated in mix of qualified doctors available at
level two in different States. Altogether these could reflect interstate differences in
wealth ( e.g. monthly per capita expenditure was Rs. 704 in AP and 460 in Orissa- NSS
2005-06) and number of medical colleges (33 in AP, 8 in Bihar and 6 in Orissa),
among others. The important message was that even in high-income States like AP,
with more private colleges and private doctors, the first part of call in villages was
usually not a qualified allopathic doctor.

13
(ii) There are around 6,00,000 villages in India of which 60 per cent are small and
scattered with roughly 1,000 population. They represent a massive need for primary
healthcare providers (almost one per village) who are within easy access, can be
trusted by their local communities, and are trained to manage most common illnesses.
For practical, social and economic reasons doctors produced through the current
model of medical education were unlikely to meet this first level of need substantially,
at least not in the next several years. There was a need to consider mid-level clinical
care providers as a competent alternative for the first level of health care. This was
also the conclusion of a recent study by the Population Foundation of India on the
three-and-a-half years trained Rural Medical Assistants posted in remote PHCs in
Chhattisgarh. The study found that medical officers and RMAs were equally competent
to manage conditions commonly seen at the primary level.
33. She, therefore, concluded that the rural health providers’ course can develop competent
primary care providers in the long term, but in the short term Government must consider training,
certifying and regulating selected providers who already live and work in villages. These could
include eligible and willing informal practitioners, public sector paramedics, nurses and also AYUSH
doctors. The planning of this course must be responsive to interstate variations and avoid a one-
size-fits-all formula.
IV. Report of Task Force
34. The Committee also considered the “Report of the Task Force on Medical Education for the
National Rural Health Mission”. The Task Force was headed by Shri Javid Chowdhury, Ex-
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and presented its Report in the year 2006. In a
comprehensive study and analysis of the various aspects like the possibility of revamping Medical
Education with reference to the requirements of medical professionals under the NRHM; the
feasibility of a short-term certificate course in medicine for creating a cadre of Health Professionals
for rendering basic primary health care to underserved rural population; making rural service
attractive for doctors; promotion of opening of medical colleges in the rural and other underserved
areas; etc, the Task Force has made certain recommendations basically focusing on the fact that
the medical graduates were reluctant to work in rural set up owing to numerous reasons despite
incentives and encouragements and a very substantial portion of the primary health care was
provided by the untrained providers and often by quacks which could be handled by health
practitioners with limited training. Supporting the idea of trained community health practitioners, the
Task Force made certain recommendations. ( Annexure-III.)
V. Further evidence of Health Secretary
35. The Committee also heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare along with the representatives of Board of Governors, Medical Council of India on 22nd
December and 27th December, 2011 in order to have the latest status on the introduction of BRHC
course in the country. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Ministry was now giving
more focus on the primary health care services. In this context, the role of a Sub-Centre has to
be much more than what was being provided presently. Besides ensuring full ante-natal checkup
of pregnant mothers and detection of high risk pregnancies, focus was also being made on post-
natal care. Further, he apprised that there was also a need for very close monitoring of
immunization activity to ensure full immunization of children, home based new-born care to ensure
timely detection of diseases and timely referral to high level sub-centres. He felt that there was also
a need to very closely monitor low birth-weight babies because about 23 per cent of babies were
low birth-weight babies. While the Ministry was making efforts to provide more facilities at the
district level but when it comes to Sub-Centre level, there was difficulty in monitoring the same.

14
In case of severe anaemic patient or mothers who give birth to low birth-weight babies, they also
need to be monitored very closely so that the next child was not the low birth-weight baby. He
apprised that as far as communicable diseases were concerned, besides vector control, timely
detection of TB, leprosy, etc., was also quite important which was not very adequately attended
to. Gram panchayats were also assigned a role in this regard but they were not functional at all
levels. In addition, Government was now focusing on non-communicable diseases. Further on a
pilot basis, the Ministry started screening of persons for diabetes in 100 districts. But in addition
to screening of person for detection of diabetes, regular monitoring in future was also required.
He asserted that to strengthen all these activities related to primary health care, the sub-centre has
to be substantially strengthened. And, this was not possible with only ANM who has limited scope
and with focus on the midwifery. He stated that keeping this in view, there was a strong need for
a mid-level health worker who would oversee the activities of ANMs and the male health workers.
These health workers could look more on preventive healthcare side. Besides, he stated that there
was also a need to take the new technology to the remote areas. In that case, Sub-Centre was
also to be linked with higher level health facilities, so that they could, at least, consult in case of
necessity.
36. He stated that keeping all these facts in view, there was a need for a more competent
person than ANM at the sub-centre level. Therefore, the Ministry had conceived to introduce a
mid-level public health worker who would primarily have a public health orientation and he would
be more trained in preventive healthcare. He could be selected from the District and trained at
district-level facility at the public health college attached to a district hospital. The person would
be conferred a Bachelor’s degree, viz., B.Sc. in Public Health. He further informed that the initial
course curriculum was referred to the MCI which had raised a lot of issues. The matter was
examined by the Ministry and was again referred to the MCI. The Secretary informed that the
decision of MCI in the matter was still awaited.
37. The Members then sought clarifications on the proposed introduction of BRHC course,
particularly with reference to the standardization of the course; notification of the course;
monitoring of the exams/practice; ethical aspects; status of the revised course curriculum of BRHC;
mandate of MCI to notify the BRHC course; financial burden of BRHC course on the exchequer;
mandate of MCI to standardize and define curriculum etc. The Members also sought queries
covering a large number of issues related to the proposed course such as whether it was right to
create two sets of doctors-one for urban population and one for rural population; details of any
other country having a course similar to the BRHC course; details of the States which were in
support or against the said course; whether the nomenclature of the said course was apt or
required to be changed; capability of a BRHC Graduate to take care of the rural population with
limited exposure. The Committee particularly highlighted the following observations made by Board
of Governors, MCI with regard to the said course and sought to know whether it was ethically
correct for the Ministry to send the same proposal to the new Board of Governors without acting
on any suggestions made by the MCI:–
(i) It would be appropriate to re-designate this course as B.Sc., Rural Health Sciences
rather than the current nomenclature which is BRHC.
(ii) The holder of this degree is not qualified to practice independently as a fully competent
medical practitioner.
(iii) There is a vast subject content spread over three years’ course, which may not be
feasible.
(iv) The curricular logic sequence needs to be maintained in all the three phases. Phase II
is system-based learning and unless it is fully integrated into the teaching of basic

15
sciences and disease pathology, there will be disjointed learning. Phase III learning is
department-wise, which is irrelevant in the primary care setting.
(v) This course should be re-designed to meet the generalist approach to basic concepts
of preventive medicines, symptomatology of disease approach to early management of
common diseases, mainly acute conditions, and an early recognition of complicated
and complex problems.
(vi) This course needs to be integrated with early signs of warning of impending systemic
malfunction in trauma, infection, and metabolic disease. The Board of Governors, MCI,
recommends that this Course should be redesigned in view of the above comments and
redesignated as B.Sc. in Rural Health Sciences. The MCI is not in a position to notify
this course as it is not a medical course.
38. Secretary, responding to the queries raised during the discussion, stated that the
Government had never envisaged doctors at the Sub-Centre level so far. Doctors are available only
at PHC level and there are 23,000 PHCs and 1.47 lakh Sub-Centres. Providing a doctor at the Sub-
Centre level had never been envisaged and could never be fulfilled also. So the Government was
proposing either providing preventive care by the ANMs or by some higher level persons.
39. At its meeting held on 27th December, 2011, the Committee again heard the views of
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare along with the Chairperson, Board of
Governors, MCI on the proposed introduction of the BRHC course. In his deposition, the Secretary
reiterated that a BRHC graduate would not be called a doctor but a health worker. He further
apprised the Committee that the MCI had been asked to standardize the course content and the final
view on the course curriculum would be taken by MCI. He also apprised that it would be left to
the State Governments to accept this course and implement it. He stated that even the Committee
on Universal Health Coverage had recommended the course as a BRHC graduate which would help
in strengthening the primary health care at sub-centre level and help in bridging the gap in
availability of Doctors at Sub-Centre level by making available a qualified health worker especially
in the Northern and Eastern parts of the country.
40. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide its communication dated 13th September,
2012, informed the Committee that the curriculum for the said course has been revised and the
nomenclature has been changed to B.Sc (Community Health) . The Committee at its meeting held
on 8th November, 2012 again heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare along with the Chairperson, Board of Governors, MCI in the matter in view of the changed
nomenclature and revised curriculum. The Secretary in his deposition before the Committee
submitted that the proposal for the said course has been mooted keeping in mind the Sub-Centres
(SCs) catering to a population of 5000-7000. In the present scheme of things 1.4 lakh Sub-Centres
in the country are being manned by ANMs designated with the functions of pre-natal and ante-natal
care of children; educating the mothers about basic child health care etc. The Secretary reiterated
the fact that there was a need for a mid-level Health worker to strengthen the Sub-Centres so as
to enable them to provide much higher level of primary health care than being offered at present.
In pursuance thereof the Medical Council of India (MCI) constituted a Committee under the
chairpersonship of Prof. Vinod K.Paul (Head, Department of Pediatrics, AIIMS) to develop a
curriculum for the B.Sc (CH) course. The Committee was apprised that the said graduates would
not be called ‘doctor’ and would be designated as Community Health Officers (CHOs), who would
man the SCs. He also submitted that the course would be regulated through MCI in all aspects.
41. However, some Members of the Committee were of the view that (i) instead of providing
doctors in the village the Government is coming up with a scheme to get the Sub-Centres manned
by such B.Sc (CH) Graduates who may not be able to distinguish the nuances between a simple

16
fever and jaundice; (ii) there is no clarity about the status of a person who has passed the exams
in one State and has to migrate to other State due to reasons beyond his/her control and the validity
of the degree in such a case; (iii) as per the information received from the Department, schools
for training these graduates would be attached to district hospitals thereby raising serious
apprehensions on whether the Government would be able to establish such schools in all the
districts and how would the Government be able to provide teachers who would teach such
graduates keeping in view the shortage of teaching facility in the country; (iv) serious
apprehensions were raised on the clinical competencies of graduates who would be churned out
of these schools; (v) how would the Government ensure that such graduates would not carry on
private practice as can be seen from the fact that Government has not been able to rein in the
Government medical doctors from carrying on private practice; (vi) whether the opinion of the Law
Ministry was taken on the issue of introduction of the said course as to whether a citizen of India
staying in rural area should be treated by a second rung practitioner and whether it was not
violative of his constitutional right to equality; (vii) Since the Planning Commission (in the 12th
Plan) in concrete terms had mooted the proposal to set up medical colleges in each district, this
would automatically ensure increased intake of doctors.
42. To frame its final view regarding introduction of the said course in the context of the
foregoing, the Committee at its meeting held on 8th February, 2013 discussed the issue. Majority
of the Members were against the introduction of the said course on the ground that providing
two different sets of Health facilitators for Urban and Rural masses was not only ethically wrong
but also unconstitutional. The Members also raised the following objections (i) Infrastructure in
the District Hospitals is woefully inadequate to train such students pursuing this course;
(ii) production of half baked doctors by introduction of such course would endanger the lives
of patients; (iii) there are severe inadequacies of the proposed curriculum and training of the
B.Sc. (CH) practitioners; (iv) restricted practice for these graduates will render them least
effective; (v) probability of their migration to urban areas for illegal practice; (vi) the volume of
curriculum including various advanced aspects which are not taught to MBBS graduates may not
be a viable proposition for B.Sc. course and (vii) such graduates, after completing their course
and after being posted in the Sub-Centres, may start demanding better status and practice at
other places etc.
43. In view of the above, majority of the Members were of the opinion that to mitigate shortage
of doctors, there was a need to increase intake of MBBS graduates and provision for one year
compulsory rural posting for MBBS doctors after internship instead of introducing the proposed
course. The Members also made the following suggestions to address the issue of non-availability
of adequate health care in the rural areas:- (i) more number of medical colleges may be opened
to meet the shortage of doctors; (ii) possibility of posting of nursing graduates at sub-centres may
be explored; (iii) intake of nursing graduates may be increased; (iv) to meet the immediate demand,
graduates and post graduates in the AYUSH may be posted in the Sub-Centres.
44. However, a few Members of the Committee were in favour of introduction of the said
course on the grounds of failure of the Government to provide adequate healthcare at Sub-Centres;
success of such course in States like Chhattisgarh and Assam and practically no resistance from
the MBBS doctors in these States to such course resulting in patient satisfaction in rural areas,
objective of the proposed course to make universal access to primary healthcare even in remote
areas a reality by the year 2020; design of the said course favoured students from the rural
background and hence ensures social mobility, etc.
VI. Recommendations
45. In view of the opinion of majority of the Members being against the introduction of

17
B.Sc(CH) course, the Committee recommends that the Government should not go ahead with the
proposal for introduction of the course.
46. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that a very substantial portion of
primary healthcare is provided by untrained providers and often by quacks and there is
acute shortage of health care professionals in rural areas. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Ministry to devote its energies towards devising new strategies to overcome this
gigantic problem. Keeping these fact in view, the Committee recommends that the
Government should continue its focus on strengthening the existing Health care
infrastructure by increasing intake of MBBS graduates and make provision for one year
compulsory rural posting for them after internship which would help in providing healthcare
for rural people. The Committee also recommends that the following measures may be
taken to improve healthcare infrastructure in rural areas viz. (i) more number of medical
colleges should be opened to meet the shortage of doctors; (ii) more nursing graduates may
be posted in sub-centres; (iii) intake of nursing graduates may be increased in the nursing
schools; (iv) to meet the immediate demand, graduates and post graduates in the AYUSH
stream may be appointed.

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
VI. Recommendations
In vew of the opinion of majority of the Members being against the introduction of
B.Sc(CH) course, the Committee recommends that the Government should not go ahead
with the proposal for introduction of the course. (Para 45)
The Committee is, however, constrained to note that a very substantial portion of
primary healthcare is provided by untrained providers and often by quacks and threre is
acute shortage of health care professionals in rural areas. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Ministry to devote its energies towards devising new strategies to overcome this
gigantic problem. Keeping these facts in view, the  Committee recommends that the
Government should continue its focus on strengthening the existing Health care
infrastructure by increasing intake of MBBS graduates and make provision for one year
compulsory rural posting for them after internship which would help in providing healthcare
for rural people. The Committee also recommends that the following measures may be
taken to improve healthcare infrastructure in rurla area viz. (i) more number of medical
colleges should be opened to meet the shortage of doctors; (ii) more nursing graduates may
be posted in sub-centres; (iii) intake of nursing graduates may be increased in the nursing
schools; (iv) to meet the immediate demand, graduates and post graduates in the AYUSH
stream may be appointed. (Para 46)
18

MINUTES

VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2010-11)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 27 th January, 2011 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ashok Argal
6. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
7. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
10. Shri N. Kristappa
11. Dr. Tarun MandaI
12. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
13. Dr. Chinta Mohan
14. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
17. Shrimati Meena Singh
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
19. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Dr. V . K. Agnihotri, Secretary General
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer
21

22
WITNESSES
Representatives from Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri K. Chandramouli, Secretary
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director General of Health Services (DGHS)
3. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Addl. Secretary
Representatives from Medical Council of India (MCI)
1. Dr. S.K. Sarin, Chairman, Board of Governors
2. Dr. Ranjit Roy Chowdhary, Member, Board of Governors
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e. (i) discussion on the issue of the proposed introduction of the Bachelor
of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course by the Government; and (ii) * *  *
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare,
and Dr. S.K. Sarin, Chairman & Dr. Ranjit Roy Chowdhary, Member, Board of Governors of the
Medical Council of India (MCI) on the proposed introduction of the Bachelor of Rural Health Care
(BRHC) course by the Government. The Secretary made a brief presentation on the circumstances
warranting introduction of BRHC course by the Department. The issues dwelt upon by him
included scarcity of doctors in rural areas; low doctor – patient ratio in rural areas of many States;
requirement of a new cadre for mitigating this imbalance. The Secretary highlighted the point that
the BRHC personnel would be posted in sub-centres in addition to ANMs and would act as an
interface between doctor & ANM and would help the ANMs to take care of minor ailments.
However, quite a few Members felt that the role-clarity of BRHC personnel was missing in the
Department’s scheme of things which may lead to a perception that the Government was pushing
BRHC which may result in producing second grade medical professionals catering to health
requirements of the rural population of the country. The Committee, accordingly, desired that it
may be furnished with a detailed status note inter-alia covering all the aspects associated with the
introduction of such a course like role/designation of such degree holders, requirement in various
States, its financial implications  including sharing of financial burden between the Centre and State
Governments, etc. The Secretary, Health and Family Welfare and Chairman, Board of Governors
of the MCI replied to some of the queries raised by Members during the course of the meeting.
The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish replies to the queries which remained unanswered
within a week’s time.
4 . ***
5 . ***
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.26 
P.M. to meet next on the 18 th February, 2011.
*** Relate to other matters.

23
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
(2010-11)
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Friday, the 06 th May, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
5. Shri Rasheed Masood
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
7. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
10. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
11. Shri N. Kristappa
12. Dr. Tarun MandaI
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
17. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
18. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
19. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi
Dr. M.K. Daga, Director Professor, Department of Medicine
23

24
National Health Systems Resource Centre, New Delhi
1. Dr. T. Sundaraman, Executive Director
2. Dr. Krishna Rao, Public Health Foundation of India
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
1. Dr. Bir Singh, Prof. of Community Medicine
2. Dr. Vinod Kumar Paul, Prof. & Head, Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics
2 . ***
3. Then, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
of the meeting. He informed that the Committee would hear the views of the experts, namely,
Dr. M.K Daga, Director Professor, Department of Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College; Dr. T.
Sundaraman, Executive Director, National Health Systems Resource Centre; Dr. Bir Singh, Prof. of
Community Medicine, AIIMS; and Dr. Vinod Kumar Paul, Prof. & Head, Division of Neonatology,
Department of Pediatrics, AIIMS, on the Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BHRC) course proposed
to be introduced by the Government.
4 . ***
5 . ***
6. Thereafter, the Committee heard views of Dr. M.K Daga, Director Professor, Department
of Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College on the BRHC by way of power-point presentation. The
salient features of his presentation were the inadequacies of Chhattisgarh experience of Rural
Medical Assistants; PHFI study conclusions on short duration course for rural practitioners;
inadequacies of proposed BRHC and possible migration of BRHC practitioners to the cities; rationale
given for the introduction of BRHC; need for a comprehensive healthcare manpower assessment
etc.. Dr. Daga was in general not in favour of introduction of BRHC course. Dr. T. Sundaraman,
Executive Director, National Health Systems Resource Centre then presented his views. He
highlighted Health Worker Density throughout India; rural-urban distribution of health workers in
India, presence of large number of unqualified doctors in rural areas; vacancies of staff, specialists
and nurses existing at PHCs, CHCs; strategies of attracting/retention of professionals for rural
areas; evaluation of Chhattisgarh and Assam Models of rural health service; features of Assam Rural
Health Regulatory Authority-2005; main lessons learnt; WHO Report on strategies to increase
access to health workers in underserved areas; objectives of BRHC; challenges confronting
implementation of BRHC in terms of faculty development for BRHC and upgradation of skills of
MBBS doctors in rural areas; etc. Dr. Sundaraman was in favour of introduction of BRHC as he
felt that this would help strengthen the existing health scenario and ensure presence of health
workers in rural areas. After that, Dr. Bir Singh, Prof. of Community Medicine, AIIMS shed light
on existing health care system in rural areas; likely benefits of the proposed course of Bachelor
of Rural Health Care (BRHC); some of the major problems with the proposed BHRC course like
possibility of producing half baked Health Care practitioners, inadequacies in proposed curriculum
and the training of BRHC practitioners, restricted practice proposed for BRHC graduates rendering
them less effective etc. Dr. Bir Singh was not in favour of introducing BRHC at national level,
instead he opined that it may be introduced as a pilot project in one or two States like U.P. or M.P.
He was also of the view that if the shortcomings in the existing health setup were addressed
suitably then perhaps there would not be any need for any additional system such as BRHC.
Dr. Vinod Kumar Paul, Prof. & Head, Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, AIIMS
was the last witness to present his views on the subject. Dr. Paul highlighted doctor: population
*** Relates to other matters.

25
ratio; huge shortage of Medical Officers at Primary Health Centre and Sub-Centre level, need-based
curriculum of BRHC, need for ideologically aligned faculty for BRHC; need for a National Task
Force to roll out the programme etc. Dr. Paul opined that the course of MBBS was not directed
to core health needs of rural population. He also stated that in the current scenario of doctor
population ratio, the number of doctors required in the rural areas was enormous and cannot be
met before 2035 and therefore introduction of BRHC was warranted. Dr. Paul also felt that there
was a need for a National Board for quality assurance and accreditation in this regard. After the
presentation by all the four witnesses, Members raised queries some of which were partly
answered by the witnesses.
7. A verbatim record of the evidence tendered before the Committee was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.

26
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
(2010-11)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 1 st July, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Balbir Punj
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ashok Argal
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
9. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
10. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
11. Shri N. Kristappa
12. Dr. Tarun MandaI
13. Shri Datta Meghe
14. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
15. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
18. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
National Lutheran Health and Medical Board, Tamil Nadu
Dr. K. M. Shyam Prasad, Executive Director
26

27
Narayana Hrudayalaya, Banglore, Karnataka
Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman
Medical Service Centre, West Bengal
Dr. Asok Samanta, Vice-President
Dr. Ansuman Mitra, Executive Member
Indian Medical Association, New Delhi
Dr. Vinay Aggarwal, President
Dr. D.R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda of
the meeting, i.e. oral evidence of the experts on the Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BHRC) course
proposed to be introduced by the Government.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard views of Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalaya
who made a power point presentation. During the course of the presentation, Dr. Shetty highlighted
the health indicators of India vis-a-vis other BRIC countries; role of paramedical and nursing staff
in health care in India vis-a-vis that of their counterparts in developed countries, role of nurse
practioners in developed countries in managing primary healthcare; primacy of the interest of the
patients over the interests of the doctors; global trends in supply and demand of healthcare
personnel; huge shortage of doctors and limitation of existing infrastructure in producing adequate
number of doctors in future; unwillingness of female doctors to take jobs at PHCs; rationale behind
rural doctors course; role of State Health Ministry to create a body to monitor the quality and
ethics of rural doctors etc. Dr. Shetty stated that India is the only country in the world managing
health care totally dependent on MBBS doctors and where an ICU nurse with over 30 years
experience is not allowed to give an IV injection. He also stated that significant percent of doctors
after completion of their studies do not practice medicine, and join other professions, putting
pressure on health care system which is already reeling under severe shortage of quality health care
specialists. Dr. Shetty accordingly favoured introduction of BRHC course.
4. Dr. K.M. Shyam Prasad was also in general in favour of introduction of BRHC course. He
also made a power point presentation to buttress his claim covering issues like success of mid level
practitioners (who are akin to the proposed rural health practitioners) in Malawi, Ethiopia; success
of Paramedical staff in treatment of patients instead of by doctors in Chhattisgarh, according to
study conducted by Dr. Srinath Reddy of Public Health Foundation of India; favourable report of
Task Force on Medical Education Reforms of National Rural Health Mission in this regard. He
summarized that in the last six decades MBBS doctors had failed to serve three-fourth population
of the country. He concluded that even the Delhi High Court in its judgement of December, 2010
had ordered to start this course within eight weeks from date of the judgement.
5. Dr. Ashok Samanta, Vice President and Dr. Ansuman Mitra, Executive Member, Medical
Service Centre, Kolkata then presented their views. They were not in favour of BRHC course in India
as they felt that the manpower shortage of doctors was not the main issue but infrastructure shortage
in the field of health care was the main hindrance in assuring quality health care to Indian population.
To justify the claim, they stated inter alia that neither the Bhore Committee nor the Alma Ata
declaration had recommended any short course to create a cadre to stand for the MBBS qualified
medical officers; they felt that real cause of lack of health care in the rural areas is poor/uneven
distribution of abundant available health resources across the country. They instead suggested that
there was need to initiate move to introduce health and education as fundamental rights.
6. Dr. Vinay Aggarwal, President and Dr. D.R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General, Indian Medical
Association were also not in favour of introduction of BRHC as they felt that it is the duty of the

28
Government to treat citizens equally and any course deviating from the full five and half years
MBBS course would be a compromise of the exacting standards and schedules that the MBBS
course provides. They also suggested creation of All India Rural Health Service with short and
permanent commission, provide financial and non-financial incentives for Government doctors in
rural areas; compulsory rural service for promotion purposes in government services. They
concluded that if the Government was still keen on introducing BRHC, the persons graduating
under the said course may be declared as health care workers who may be registered under a
Paramedical Council. After the presentation by all the witnesses, Members raised queries some of
which were answered to by the witnesses.
7 . ***
8. A verbatim record of the evidence tendered before the Committee was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

29
III
THIRD MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22 nd December, 2011 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Chinta Mohan — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Balbir Punj
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree
7. Shri Derek O'Brien
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Dr. Monazir Hassan
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri P. Lingam
12. Shri Datta Meghe
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
15. Shri M. K. Raghavan
16. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma
17. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shri P. K. Pradhan, Secretary
Shri Debasis Panda, Joint Secretary
29

30
Representative of Medical Council of India
Dr. (Prof.) H. S. Rissam, Member
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Dr. Chinta Mohan was elected to the
Chair. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of
the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare along with the representative of Medical Council of India on the proposed introduction of
the Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
and the representative of MCI on introduction of the Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course.
In his deposition, the Secretary highlighted the status of sub-centres which at present are being
run by Auxiliary Nurse Mid-wifes (ANMs). He emphasised the need for close monitoring of low
birth-weight babies and severely anemic patients, detection of communicable and non-eommunicable
diseases, timely referal to higher centres, timely detection of TB/Leprosy, etc., which requires more
trained and competent mid-level health workers than ANMs in rural areas. He also informed the
Committee that BRHC students would be conferred a B.Sc.  degree after three and a half years of
course duration; however the same was still at conceptual stage.
4. During the course of the discussion, the Members sought clarifications on the proposed
introduction of BRHC course, particularly on mandate of Medical Council of India (MCI);
standardization of the course; notification of the course; monitoring of the exams/practice; ethical
aspects; status of the Revised course curriculum of BRHC; mandate of MCI to notify the BRHC
course; financial burden of BRHC course on the exchequer; mandate of MCI to standardize and
define curriculum etc. The Members also sought queries on whether there was a need to create
two sets of doctors-one for urban population and one for rural population; need for making it
mandatory for doctors to serve in rural areas; details of any other country having a course similar
to the BRHC course; details of the States which are in support or  against the said course; need
for change in nomenclature of the said course; capability of a BRHC Graduate to take care of the
rural population with limited exposure. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
answered some of the queries. The discussion remained inconclusive and the Committee decided
to hear the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Chairperson of the Medical
Council Of India (MCI) later.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 11.00 
A.M.

31
IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27 th December, 2011 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
4. Shri P. Lingam
5. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
6. Dr. Chinta Mohan
7. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
8. Shri M. K. Raghavan
9. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shri P. K. Pradhan, Secretary
Shri Debasis Panda, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Medical Council of India
Dr. K. K. Talwar, Chairman, Board of Governors
Dr. (Prof.) H. S. Rissam, Member
Dr. (Prof.) K. S. Sharma, Member
2 . ***
31
*** Relate to other matters.

32
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting i.e., to further hear views of the  Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare and Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical Council of India (MCI), on the proposed
introduction of the Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course as the evidence remained in-
conclusive during the previous meeting of the Committee held on 22nd December, 2011.
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare along with the Chairperson, Board of Governors, MCI on the proposed introduction of the
BRHC course. In his deposition, the Secretary informed the Committee that the BRHC course has
been conceived to strengthen preventive care of communicable and non-communicable diseases at
sub-centre level and prevent quacks to exploit the rural people. He also informed the Committee
that a BRHC graduate would not be called a doctor but a health worker. He further apprised the
Committee that the MCI had been asked to standardize the course content and the final view on
the course curriculum would be taken by MCI. He also apprised that it would be left to the State
Governments to accept this course and implement it. He stated that even the Committee on
Universal Health Coverage had recommended the course as a BRHC graduate which would help in
strengthening the primary health care at sub-centre level and help in bridging the gap in availability
of Doctors at Sub-Centre level by making available a qualified health worker especially in the
Northern and Eastern parts of the country.
5. During the course of discussion, Members sought clarifications on the proposed
introduction of BRHC course viz. whether the BRHC graduate would be called a doctor or not;
changing the name of the course to B.Sc. from BRHC; BRHC not a substitute for MBBS doctors;
mandate of MCI to carry on this course; establishing BRHC course under a paramedical council
instead of under MCI; regulation of the BRHC course preventing them from private practice and
practice outside his home state; curb on quackery prevailing in all parts of India including in Delhi;
motivating doctors to serve in Rural areas instead of introducing BRHC course; promotion of
traditional medicine; financial burden to be shared by the Centre and States on the cost of
introduction of such a course etc. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and
the Chairperson, Board of Governor, MCI answered some of the queries. The Chairman directed
the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare to provide replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
6. A Verbatim Record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 3.50 
P.M.

33
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 20 th March, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Monazir Hassan
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
6. Shri P. Lingam
7. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri M.K. Raghavan
11. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
12. Shri Ratan Singh
13. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed members of the Committee and briefed them about
the agenda of the meeting. * *   *
3 . ***
4 . ***
5 . ***
33
*** Relate to other matters.

34
6 . ***
7 . ***
8. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the members that draft Reports on four subjects pending
consideration of the Committee have been prepared, namely (i) * (ii) * (iii) * and (iv) Proposed
introduction of Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) course by the Government. The Committee
decided the reports may be circulated to Members of the Committee for consideration & adoption
in the next meeting of the Committee.
9. The Committee adjourned at 10.45 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

35
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 9 th April, 2012 in Room No. G-074,
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Balbir Punj
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
7. Shrimati B. Jayashree
8. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ashok Argal
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Shri P. Lingam
13. Shri Datta Meghe
14. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
18. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
35

36
WITNESSES
***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee  and briefed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e., * * *
3 . ***
4 . ***
5. The Chairman informed the Members about the BRHC course proposed to be introduced by
the Government and sought specific comments of the members as to whether (i) the course is
necessary; (ii) if so, should it be a Medical degree or a University degree; (iii) who should have
control over it - Centre or the States; and (iv) period of course - three and half years or four and
a half years. However, the discussion on the subject remained inconclusive.
(The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 
P.M. for lunch to meet again at 2.00 P.M.)
6 . ***
7 . ***
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 5.30 
P.M. to meet again on the 10 th April, 2012
*** Relate to other matters.

37
III
THIRD MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 08 th November, 2012 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri H.K. Dua
7. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ashok Argal
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
11. Shrimati Priya Dutt
12. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
13. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
14. Dr. Monazir Hassan
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
16. Dr. Tarun Mandal
17. Shri Mahabal Mishra
18. Shri Harin Pathak
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
21. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
37

38
Representatives from Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary
Representatives from Medical Council of India (MCI)
Dr. K.K. Talwar, Chairperson, Board of Governors
Prof. Sanjay Srivastava, Secretary, Board of Governors
Representatives from AIIMS
Dr. Vinod Paul, Head of Department (Pediatrics), AIIMS and Chairman, Committee to
develop curriculum for B.Sc. (CH)
I. Opening Ramarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them of the agenda of the
meeting viz. to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare along
with Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical Council of India (i) on the Bachelor of Science
(Community Health)-B.Sc.(CH) course and (ii) * * *
II. Oral evidence on Bachelor of Science (Community Health)-B.Sc.(CH)
3. The Committee then heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
along with Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical Council of India on the Bachelor of Science
(Community Health). The Secretary in his deposition before the Committee submitted that the
proposal for the said course has been mooted keeping in mind the Sub-Centres (SCs) catering to
a population of 5000-7000. In the present scheme of things 1.4 lakhs SCs in the country are being
manned by Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) designated with the functions of pre natal and ante
natal care of children; education of the mothers about basic child health care etc. The Secretary
further submitted that there was a need for a mid-level Health worker to strengthen the Sub-
Centres so as to enable them to provide much higher level of primary health care than that at
present. In pursuance thereof the Medical Council of India(MCI) constituted a Committee to
develop a curriculum for the B.Sc. (CH) under the chairpersonship of Prof. Vinod K. Paul, Head,
Department of Pediatrics, AIIMS. The said graduates would not be called  ‘doctor’ and would be
designated as Community Health Officers (CHOs), who would man the SCs. He also submitted that
the course would be regulated through MCI in all aspects.
4. During the course of the meeting, the members discussed various issues viz. mandate of
B.Sc. (CH); whether any other country had introduced such a course and if so, its salient features;
whether there is a provision for recognition of degrees in states other than in which such graduate
has passed out; intra state transfer; mechanism for ensuring checks on migration of such graduates
from rural to urban area; incubation period for this course in the light of the fact that the setting
up of Rural Health School(RHS) will take time as district hospitals would have to be upgraded to
hold classes for 50 odd students; inclusion of traditional forms of medicine in the said course in
order to utilize local and more accepted medicine(herbs) for ailments; standardization of
examination process for all states who wish to adopt the said course; apart from entrance exam
weightage to both 10
th and 12 th class examination marks; guarantee of employment to such
graduates by the State Governments, with continuation in service subject to a good service record;
helping CHOs to take up vocational courses in order to update their knowledge along with soft skill
development; periodic engagement of illustrious visiting faculty to keep students abreast of
emerging public healthcare concepts and technologies; linking of additional increments and
*** Relate to other matters.

39
promotion of CHOs on the basis of refresher courses undertaken by such CHOs; number of CHOs
required in the country and provision for their strengthening; need for setting up such similar
facilities in areas which have recently acquired staus of towns/cities; career prospects of CHOs;
prescription of only defined drugs by CHOs; supervision of CHOs by trained doctors; mode of
transfer of CHOs; relationship between Sub-Centres and Primary Health Centres; strengthening of
District Hospitals; mobility of CHOs; similarity of training of all CHOs in the country etc. Some
of the queries were answered by the witnesses. The Chairman directed the witnesses to send
written replies to queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
III. ***
5 . ***
6 . ***
7. The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written replies to all the queries within a
week’s time.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

40
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Thursday, the 8 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Dr. Tarun Mandal
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
14. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
15. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
16. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Ramarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them of the agenda of the
meeting viz. (i) * * * and (ii) to further discuss the issues related to proposed
introduction of Bachelor of Science (Community Health) course by the Government.
40
*** Relate to other matters.

41
II. ***
3 . ***
III. Proposed introduction of Bachelor of Science (Community Health) course by the
Government
4. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the issue of the proposed introduction  of Bachelor
of Science (Community Health) course by the Government. Majority of Members were against the
introduction of the said course on the grounds that providing two different sets of Health
facilitators for Urban and Rural masses was not only ethically wrong but also unconstitutional. The
other issues raised by them against the proposed course are as under: (i) the inadequacy of
infrastructure in the District Hospitals to train such students pursuing this course; (ii) possibility
of production of half baked doctors by introduction of such course which would endanger the lives
of patients; (iii) inadequacies of the proposed curriculum and training of the B.Sc. (CH)
practitioners; (iv) restricted practice for these graduates will render them least effective,
(v) probability of their migration to urban areas for practicing; (vi) the volume of curriculum
including various advanced aspects which are not taught to MBBS graduates may not be a viable
proposition for B.Sc. course.
To mitigate shortage of doctors the members were of the opinion that there was a need
to increase intake of MMBS graduates and provision for one year compulsory rural posting for
MBBS doctors after internship instead of introducing the proposed course which would help in
providing healthcare for rural citizenry, etc. The Members also made the following suggestions:-
(i) more number of medical colleges should be opened to meet the shortage of doctors; (ii) more
nursing graduates may be posted in sub-centres; (iii) intake of nursing graduates may be increased;
(iv) to meet the immediate demand, graduates and post graduates in the AYUSH stream may be
appointed.
5. However, some Members of the Committee were in favour of introduction of the said
course on the grounds of failure of the Government to provide adequate healthcare at Sub Centres;
success of the proposed course in states like Chhattisgarh  and Assam and practically no resistance
from the MBBS doctors in these states to such course resulting in patient satisfaction in rural
areas, objective of the proposed course to make universal access to primary healthcare even in
remote areas a reality by the year 2020; design of the said course favoured students from the rural
background and hence ensures social mobility, etc.
6. In view of the majority opinion of Members, the Committee decided that the Government
may be asked not to go ahead with the proposal in its present form. The Secretariat was directed
to prepare draft report on those lines.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

42
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 13 th March, 2013 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shri H.K. Dna
4. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Shrimati Priya Dutt
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
11. Dr. Tarun MandaI
12. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
13. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
14. Shri P. T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Ramarks
2. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, in the Chair, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that
due to certain urgent work, the Chairman would not be able to attend the meeting and requested
him to chair the meeting. The Committee, thereafter, elected Dr. Jaiswal to preside the meeting.
The Chairman then  apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting viz. to consider and adopt
draft (i) * (ii) 65
th Report of the Committee on the proposal to introduce the Bachelor of Science
(Community Health) course.
42
* Relate to other matters.

43
II. Consideration and adoption of draft * and 65 th Reports
3. The Committee considered the draft * and 65 th Reports of the  Committee and after some
discussion, adopted the Reports with minor amendments. The Committee, thereafter, decided that
the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on
Tuesday, the 19
th March, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri
H.K. Dua and Dr. Prabhakar Kore to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Shri Kirti Azad, and
in his absence, Shri Mohd. Azharuddin to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
III. ***
4 . ***
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

46

47
47
ANNEXURE-I
List of Experts
(i) Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and representatives of Medical Council
of India (MCI).
(ii) Dr. M. K. Daga, Director Professor, Department of Medicine of Maulana Azad Medical
College, New Delhi.
(iii) Dr. T. Sundaraman, Executive Director of National Health Systems Resource Centre, New
Delhi.
(iv) Dr. Bir Singh, Prof. of Community Medicine of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi.
(v) Dr. Vinod Kumar Paul, Prof. & Head, Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics,
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
(vi) Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman of Narayana Hrudayalaya, Banglore, Karnataka
(vii) Dr. K. M. Shyam Prasad, Executive Director of National Lutheran Health and Medical
Board, Tamil Nadu.
(viii) Dr. Ashok Samanta, Vice-President and Dr. Ansuman Mitra, Executive Member of Medical
Service Centre, West Bangal.
(ix) Dr. Vinay Aggarwal, President and Dr. D.R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General of Indian Medical
Association, New Delhi.

48
48
ANNEXURE-II
Concept Note on the proposed Bachelor of Rural Health Care (BRHC) Course
1. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in consultation with the Medical Council of
India, has been working for the last year on putting in place a scheme which would enable the
creation of a cadre of health workers, especially in those parts of the country where health
indicators are poor and health care professionals not available in adequate numbers. Recently, the
Chairman and Hon’ble Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare have  called for the evidence  of Ministry officials on this matter and had directed that a
detailed note be presented outlining the Government’s  intentions in working on this issue.
2. At the outset, the Ministry would wish to clarify that the Bachelor of Rural Health Care
[BRHC] proposal is currently still a matter under discussion. It has been raised with State
Governments both at the meeting of Central Council on H&FW in August, 2010 and at a meeting
of State Ministers of Health in January, 2011. The subject has been discussed at other gatherings
and it is clear to the Ministry that there is overwhelming support from the States, especially those
States which are currently very poorly served with primary health care facilities, states such as
Tamil Nadu which have had an organized public health administration for many decades now do
not need a cadre of public health workers. However, several of the northern states are not so
fortunately placed. It must also be noted that some States have taken important steps in the matter.
Assam has a 3 years course to train a Rural Medical Practitioner with adequate skills for primary
health care; the Assam Rural Health Authority Act governs this arrangement. Chhattisgarh had
begun, and given up, a similar programme but over 950 Rural Health Assistants with such
qualifications have been employed by the State government. West Bengal has begun the training of
nurse-practitioner.
3. This debate is best placed in the context described by The Lancet  in  its January, 2011 issue
dedicated to the theme of Universal Health Coverage in India.
India has a severe shortage of human resources for health. It has a shortage of qualified
health workers and the work force is concentrated in urban areas. Bringing qualified health
workers to rural, remote and under-served areas is very challenging. Many Indians,
especially those living in rural areas, receive care from unqualified providers, The migration
of qualified allopathic doctors and nurses is substantial and further strains the system.
Nurses do not have much authority or say within the health system and the resources to train
them are still inadequate. Little attention is paid during medical education to the medical
and public health needs of the population and the rapid privatization of medical and
nursing education has implications for its quality and governance. Such issues are a result
of under-investment in and poor governance of the health sector- two issues that the
Government urgently needs to address.
4. The Lancet report recognizes the fact that since independence the focus has been on
creating a cadre of basic, MBBS doctors Licentiate physicians were not allowed to practice and
only one type of allopathic physician, a graduate with a five year medical degree, was allowed to
practice. The Indian Medical Service was abolished. Indian systems of medicine were neglected.
The identification of health care as State subject limited the Central Government’s responsibilities.
The report further notes the sporadic efforts made in the past decades to recruit community based

49
health workers, The most recent, and possibly the most successful, of these efforts has been the
recruitment of over 700,000 Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs); however, ASHAs receive
very little, training and cannot be expected to play a definitive role in the delivery of healthcare.
5. International experiences suggest a minimum density of 250 health professional per 1,00,000
population to achieve basic public health goals. This  is only counting doctors, nurses and trained
midwives. Based on 2001 census adjusted for only qualified personnel, India has about 62 doctors,
nurses or midwives per 100,000 today, and of these about 38 are doctors and 24 are  nurses and
nurse-midwives. It is estimated that in order to reach the international norm we would at the very
least, require, 6 lakh additional doctors and 12 lakh additional nurses. We have learnt from
experience that even if we were to produce MBBS doctors of the appropriate quality in sufficient
numbers, it would be impossible to keep them in public service in the rural areas.
6. The current proposal, therefore, is to create, not MBBS doctors but a cadre of graduate
health workers with a degree of BRHC. This requires that district hospitals become teaching
centres and are  adequately strengthened both in terms of physical infrastructure and with additional
teaching faculty, to support a teaching programme with an annual intake of 25 or 50 students.
These students would have completed a class 12 school leaving examination with Science subject
and would be selected from amongst school leavers from the same district, preferably from a rural
background, on the basis of an entrance examination. (This would be very similar to the process
of selection of 80 students every year into class 6 of the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas, a central
scheme which operates in over 500 districts in the country.)
7. Reform and innovation in professional education is not new. There has been always a
dialogue on whether in addition to the basic MBBS course a three year course should be made
available to provide a public health oriented graduate with appropriate primary health care skills to
serve in rural areas. The  most recent of these was the study group of the Medical Council of India
set up in 1999 under the Chairperson Dr. G.P. Dutta, a former president of the Indian Medical
Association. The report on the alternative/innovative model of medical education was approval by
the executive Committee, and subsequently by the General Body of the Medical Council in March,
2000 and forwarded to the Government of India in June of the same year. The study group of
the Medical Council updated the model in December, 2009 and held a wider national-consultation
in early February, 2010, which enabled finalisation of the main features of the approach.
8. The proposal also draws support from the Task Force on Medical Education of the National
Rural Health Mission. This Task Force chaired by Shri Javed Chowdhury submitted its report in
2006. Endorsing the idea of a three year course the Task Force specifically noted that–
“The variant examined by them is not of a short-course health practitioner with an open
license to practice in the entire universe of Allopathy; the option under examination is of
a short-course training after which the practitioner would be licensed to provide medical
services within a notified package of primary healthcare.”
Also that it is the considered view of the Task Force that in the suggested scheme (the short
duration course) the risk of quackery would stand reduced, rather than increased. Also,  it
would result in good quality primary healthcare services being delivered to the citizenry on
a much wider scale than is available through graduate doctors today.”
The Commission on Macro-Economics and Health, 2005 also made a similar
recommendation for mid level care providers. The Knowledge Commission which has a section on
health care provision also made  such a recommendation.
9. The BRHC programme, like  other under-graduate teaching courses, will last for 3 years with
the focus being on primary health care issues and in imparting a clearly defined set of skills. These

50
skills will include the ability to treat simple or common ailments and also the skill to identify more
complicated ailments and make appropriate referrals. The present MBBS course has a number of
areas of knowledge which are suited for laying the foundations for becoming specialists and
teachers of medical science, but which are not essential in creating the primary care provider. Such
foundations of medical science as needed would however be an integral part of the curriculum.
BRHC skills would not include the more complicated teaching which would be part of a regular
MBBS programme; the focus would be on communicable and non-communicable diseases, public
health, hygiene and sanitation, communication· and awareness building, the ability to conduct mass
programmes, etc. On completion of 3 years class room work at the district hospital, the student
will undertake 6 months internship after which she would be eligible to receive a BRHC Certificate
from an affiliating University.
10. The Ministry proposes that the BRHC is taught in the district hospital on the principle that
teaching of the rural health care provider should occur in settings similar to where she would have
to live and work. The role models for the BRHC would be primary care physicians serving
communities with the limited tools available, rather than specialists focussed on addressing a very
limited range of diseases with an array of resource intensive technological tools, The pedagogy
would ensure that the BRHC health provider would be competent in a set of essential skills with
no compromise in quality. In addition their training would ensure that there is a high professional
status given to prevention and promotion of illness and relief of suffering in the patient as a whole
and that this is built up as a central value and aspiration.
11. Successful BRHC graduates would be entitled to be posted as Rural Health Worker at sub-
centres in the same districts where they are trained or possibly in other districts in the same State
depending on availability of positions. The success of the scheme depends crucially on the
initiative, shown by the State Governments in creating the adequate number of posts (25 to 50
starting from year 4) at the sub-centre. The BRHC health worker would also need to be adequately
supported with equipment, computer and IT-enabled technologies, basic medicine for first aid, etc.
12. It is believed that this arrangement would in a few years time lead to a large organized
work force of health workers providing a service considerably more than that being provided today
by the ANM though not comparable with the service provided by an MBBS qualified doctor posted
at the Primary Health Centre. However, given the alarming shortage of MBBS qualified doctors at
the Primary and Community Health Centre level, it is expected that the BRHC health worker would
be in a position to refer serious cases to the district hospital. In a similar situation today poor
patients are usually dependent on semi-qualified quacks or on expensive, and not necessarily
effective, private care.
13. It is clear that there are many issues of investment and governance that arise. An indicative
list of questions which need to be addressed include the following:
(i) Central funding for strengthening of district hospitals and support to faculty positions.
(ii) Central support, at least initially, towards the salaries to BRHC health workers at sub-
centres, as also for strengthening of sub-centres.
(iii) Framing of curriculum and syllabi and writing of text books for the BRHC Course.
(iv) Setting guidelines regarding affiliation to universities as per current UGC norms and
regulations. The Medical Council of India has been involved in facilitating the
discussion on the BRHC; however, the syllabus, content, etc., of the BRHC will not
be notified by the Medical Council of  India as it is not within the purview of medical
education as currently recognized by law. The BRHC programme as a graduate
programme in health care, will need to be recognized by and affiliated to a University.

51
(v) Planning for the future career of a BRHC health worker who cannot be expected to
work permanently at a sub-centre.
(vi) Government will need to consider creation of new types of health professionals and
may also need to consider establishing equivalences between a successful BRHC
course and some part of and MBBS course.
(vii) Government will need to, in a parallel process, address issues related to the ANM and
Nursing cadres with the specific objective of training nurse practitioners and creating
posts for nurse practitioners at the primary health centre and community health centre
levels.
(viii) Government must also take an integrated view on the role, in a system which is
primarily allopathy oriented, of the practitioners of Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and
Homeopathy collectively referred to as AYUSh, as also Naturopathy.
(ix) Government will separately need to address issues related to health professionals in
parallel activities. As for instance, pharmacists, technicians, and allied technical
professionals such as nutritionists, opticians, physiotherapists etc. likewise there are
issues related to unlicensed health practitioners with little or no formal medical
training but who nonetheless give allopathic treatment and work in rural areas. There
are also traditional medicine practitioners and faith healers with a recognized position
in Indian society. These are all issues which the Ministry believes will be addressed
in greater detail in the proposed National Commission on Human Resources for Health
(NCHRH).
14. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would wish to allay the fears of those who
believe that the BRHC programme is an attempt to either water down the content of a medical
education or to institutionalize the provision of semi-skilled doctors in the rural areas. It is clearly
understood that a BRHC health worker is not, and cannot be a doctor. A BRHC health worker will
only be competent to function within the skills provided to her and with no pretence to any
superior medical ability. However, the great strength of the BRHC medical officer is that she will
be available at the sub centre and will have a degree of formalized education and training much
beyond any currently available.

Report:
Task Force on Medical
Education for the
National Rural Health
Mission
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
ANNEXURE-III

INDEX
Page Nos.
Chapter I: Overview of the National Health System 59—69
1.1 Health-A Basic Human Right
1.2 Health for All Goal
1.3 Burden of Disease
1.4 Revitalizing Primary Healthcare
1.5 Regional Variation in the Health Status
1.6 Family Welfare and Primary Healthcare
1.7 Public Health Expenditure
1.8 Health Expenditure and Poverty
1.9 Challenges for a National Health System
1.10 The Challenge for NRHM
1.11 Health Manpower in Rural Areas
1.12 Nursing Resources
1.13 Public Sector Services
1.14 Private Sector Services
1.15 Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) Sector
1.16 Strengthening Primary Healthcare
1.17 Investing in Development of a Primary Healthcare System.
Chapter II: Task Force on Medical Education 70—72
2.1 Constitution of the Task Force
2.2 Terms of Reference
Chapter III: Term of Reference–1 73—84
3.1 Medical Graduate Curriculum Issues
3.2 Introduction of Modules for exposing students to Social Sciences
and Allied Disciplines.
3.3 Inclusion of a six-week Rural Orientation Package in the MBBS
Curriculum
3.4 Reallocation of duration of study time/postings in different Disciplines
3.5 Prioritizing the Curriculum and Enhancing Skill Development
3.6 Integrated teaching of the non-clinical disciplines with the clinical
disciplines
3.7 Focusing the examination system on common conditions and Hands-on
skills
3.8 Modification of duration of postings of interns
53

54
Page Nos.
3.9 Introduction of Evaluation at the end of Internship
3.10 Creation of Medical Education Cells and Faculty Development
3.11 Experimentation with Alternative Model of Undergraduate Medical
Education
3.12 New Proposal
3.13 Innovation in Medical Education
Chapter IV: Term of Reference–2 85—95
4.1 The Need for Three-level Healthcare
4.2 Short-term Course for Training Community Health Practitioners
for providing Primary Healthcare
4.3 Critical Gaps in Skills for Primary Healthcare
4.4 De-valuation of Public Health and Community Health
4.5 Training for Nursing Personnel
Chapter V: Term of Reference–3 96—100
5.1 Incentives for Encouraging Rural Service
5.2 Emoluments
5.3 Age of Retirement
5.4 Reservation of PG seats for doctors from State Public Health
Cadres
5.5 Facilities for Continuing Medical Education for Public Health
Doctors
5.6 Provision of Infrastructure for Doctors
5.7 Compulsory Rural Practice
5.8 Overview of Recommendations for TOR 1, 2 & 3
Chapter VI: Term of Reference–4 101—105
6.1 Promotion of Medical Colleges in the Underserved Areas.
Chapter VII: Terms of Reference–5 & 6 106—107
7.1 Possibility of setting up joint ventures to establish Medical
Colleges attached to Government General Hospitals
Chapter VIII: Conclusion 108—110
8.1 Imperatives for Change
8.2 From Recommendation to Action Need for a Health Manpower
Education Action Group
Bibliography 111—112
Acknowledgement 113
Annexures I–VI 114—119

55
List of Tables
Table-1: Household, Public and Total Health Expenditure in India (2004-05)
Table-2: Health manpower in rural areas – Doctors at Primary Health Centres
(PHC) – as on 31.03.2001.
Table-3: Health manpower working in rural areas – Total Specialists Government
as on 31.03.2001.
Table-4: T opic-wise breakup of Modules
Table-5: Rural Orientation Package
Table-6: Minimum Teachings Hours in various disciplines
Table-7: Monthly Emoluments at entry level in state health cadre
Table-8: Recommendation of norms for establishment of Medical College
List of Figures :
Figure-1: Sources of Finance in the Health Sector in India during 2001-02.
Figure-2: Mismatch between curricular content & morbidity pattern in ambulatory
setting (OPD)
Figure-3: Schematic Presentation of Task Force Recommendations.

56
Abbreviations
A
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
ANM – Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASHA – Accredited Social Health Activist
AWW – Anganwadi Worker
B
BPL – Below Poverty Line
B.Sc – Bachelor of Science
C
CBR – Crude Birth rate
CCM – Centre for Community Medicine
CEHAT – Centre for Inquiry into Health and Allied Themes
CGHS – Central Government Health Scheme
CHC – Community Health Centre
CHC – Bangalore- Community Health Cell
CHS – Central Health Service
CMET – Centre for Medical Education and Training
CMC, vellore – Christian Medical College, Vellore
CMO – Chief Medical Officer
CMP – Common Minimum Programme
CPR – Couple Protection Rate
D
DA – Dearness Allowance
DGHS – Director General of Health services
DP – Dearness Pay
E
ESIS – Employees state Insurance Scheme
EAG – Empowered action Group
ENT – Ear, Nose & Throat
F
FRCH – Foundation for research in Community health
G
GDP – Gross development Product
GDMO – General Duty Medical Officer
GOI – Government of India

57
H
H A – Health Assistant
HIV – Human Immuno-deficiency Virus
HRA – House Rent Allowance
HW – Health Worker
I
IA – Information Awaited
ICDS – Integrated Child Development Scheme
ICMR – Indian council of medical Research
ICSSR – Indian Council of Social Science Research
IGNOU – Indira Gandhi national Open University
IMA – Indian Medical association
IMNCI – Integrated management of Neonatal & Childhood illnesses
IMR – Infant Mortality Rate
INC – Indian Nursing Council
L
LHV – Lady Health Visitor
M
M A – Medical Allowance
MBBS – Bachelor of Medicine & bachelor of Surgery
MCH &FW – Maternal Child Health & family Welfare
MCI – Medical Council of India
MoHFW – Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
MO – Medical Officer
MPW – Multi Purpose Worker
MV A – Manual vacuum Aspirator
N
NA – Not Applicable
NCMH – National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health
NGO – Non-Governmental Organization
NHP – National Health policy
NHS – National Health Service
NIHFW – National Institute of Health and Family welfare
NPA – Non Practice Allowance
NPP – national population Policy
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
NSSO – National Sample Survey Organization

58
O
OB & G – Obstetrics & Gynecology
OOP – Out of Pocket
OPD – Out Patient department
P
PH – Public Health
PHC – Primary health centre
PSM – Preventive and Social Medicine
R
R A – rural Allowance
RGUHS – Rajiv Gandhi university of Health Sciences
RMP – Registered Medical Practitioner
RNTCP – Revised national Tuberculosis control Programme
S
SC – Sub Centre
SEARO – South East Asia Regional Office
STD – Sexually Transmitted Diseases
T
TFR – Total fertility Rate
TOR – Terms of reference
U
UPA – United progressive alliance
V
VMMC – V ardhman Mahavir Medical College
W
WHO – World Health Organization

59
CHAPTER-I
OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH SYSTEM
1.1 Health – A Basic Human Right
Health is a basic need of a human being and access to healthcare a basic  human
right. In a general way, our country has always recognized this fundamental claim of the citizenry.
Article 47 of the Constitution enjoins the State to improve the standard of Public Health as one of
its primary duties . However, with the distribution of power under the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution, under Entry No. 6 of the State List, ‘Public health and sanitation; hospitals and
dispensaries,’ comes within the domain of the state government. Despite this Constitutional
position, the role of the central government in the national health system has always been
significant. While, on account of the fiscal squeeze, the state government expenditure on health
over the 1980s and 1990s has dropped from 7% of the budget to 5%, the central government
expenditure has remained steady at 1.3% of its budget over the 1980s and 1990s, and has latterly
risen to 1.7% by year 2003-04. Currently, central government expenditure is around 30% of the
total public health expenditure. Thus, the incremental resources that have been available to the
national health system year-on-year have come through the central government’s contribution. It
is widely accepted that the resource position of the state governments is not likely to
dramatically improve in the foreseeable future; and in that situation the central
government has accepted its fallback responsibility of trying to fund the minimum resource
requirements of the national health sector. It is in recognition of this position that from time
to time the government has launched initiatives in the health sector, the most recent one being the
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). The Common Minimum Programme (CMP) of the United
Progressive Alliance (UPA) Government has committed the government to an increase of resources
up to the level of 2-3% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) over the remaining period of its
current term.
1.2 Health for All Goal
In broad conceptual terms, India has always been committed to comprehensive health care
for all. This gained formal articulation as the ’Health for All’ declaration at  Alma Ata in 1978.
However, the all-encompassing declaration was expressed in the most general terms; in truth, the
government never spelt out what constituted ‘comprehensive healthcare.’ With the goal itself being
indeterminate in its contours, there was little systematic progress towards a standardized and
sustainable health system. Progress, when it did occur, was sporadic and the result of fortuitous
circumstances, or an accidental convergence of dedicated and competent performers.
1.3 Burden of Disease
Over the five decades since independence, the overall state of health in the country has,
no doubt, improved. The trend over time of basic health indicators reveals this clearly: life
expectancy at birth (years): 54 to 65 (1981-2000); crude birth rate (CBR): 41 to 26 per 1000
population (1951-1998); total fertility rate (TFR): 6.6 to 2.9 (1960-1997); Infant Mortality rate
(IMR): 146 to 60 per 1000 live births (1951-2003). However, despite this improvement, the general
health indices in the country are below the average for developing countries, and are also way
below socially acceptable levels. The country still carries an enormous share of the global disease
59

60
burden. With 17% of the global population, the country accounts for 20% of the total global
disease burden, 23% of the child deaths, 20% of the maternal deaths, 30% of Tuberculosis cases,
68% of Leprosy cases, and 14% of HIV infections. India continues to bear a disproportionate
portion of the global burden of the pre-transition communicable diseases – Tuberculosis, Malaria,
Leprosy, acute respiratory illnesses, diarrheal diseases and other vaccine preventable diseases.
Orders of magnitude of mortality figures for communicable diseases indicate 2.5 million child
deaths and an equal 2.5 million adult deaths, in a year.
1.4 Revitalizing Primary Healthcare
From the above description of the disease profile and causes of mortality, it is clear that
targeting these diseases does not require very high clinical expertise, or expensive and high-tech
diagnostic aids – most of the target areas come within the broad ambit of primary healthcare
services. This provides a credible pointer that it would be possible to meet the most pressing health
needs of the country by revitalizing the broad-span, primary healthcare services in the country. The
NRHM covers many areas in its ambit, but the easily achievable target is of an accessible
quality primary healthcare system. The recognition of this reality has prompted the central
government to constitute this Task Force to make recommendations on the educational
requirements for the health functionaries under the NRHM.
1.5 Regional Variation in the Health Status
More significant than all these macro-level statistics is the fact that the average health
indicators hide a wide range of variations between different parts of the country. This makes the
task of putting in place an efficient and sustainable health system more difficult. As an illustration,
IMRs in Madhya Pradesh (82) and Orissa (83) are more than eight times higher than that for
Kerala (11). There is also a pronounced disparity between rural and urban areas – in Andhra
Pradesh, the rural IMR is 67 compared to 33 in the urban areas; and, in Karnataka, and the rural
IMR is 61 as against 24 in the urban areas. Abnormal IMR differentials also exist between the
genders in different parts of the country–in Haryana, for instance, female IMR is 73 as against 54
for males. On the basis of the health status of the population, and the existing capacity of the
health service delivery system, the states within the country can be divided into four main groups.
The group with the highest health standards (Kerala and Tamil Nadu) covers 9.1% of the
population; and at the other end of the spectrum, the group with the lowest health standards
(Assam, Bihar and Jharkhand) covers 13.1% of the population. To tackle these widely varying
conditions, the country has to plan out and operate on a sustained basis, a health system
that is appropriately structured for the situation. The high degree of variation of health
indices is itself a reflection of the high variance in the availability of healthcare services
in different parts of the country. The first level of healthcare services would be the primary
healthcare services and, hence, the emphasis in the NRHM is on its improvement.
1.6 Family Welfare and Primary Healthcare
A major goal of the health sector is that of population stabilization. Though the annual
exponential growth rate of population has come down to 1.93% in the 1991-2001 decade, an
enormous gap still remains to be covered. The percentage of the population estimated to be in the
reproductive age group is in excess of 58%. Even after a four-fold improvement since the
year 1971, the Couple Protection Rate (CPR) is only at 44% today. Also, today, 45% of the
increase in population is through children with a birth order of three and above. There is also a
wide variation in the status of population stabilization between different states. Six states covering
11.4% of the population have already reached replacement levels of fertility. At the other end of
the spectrum are eleven states, covering 60% of the population, that still show a TFR of over

61
three. Out of these, five states – Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh–will
contribute the larger part of the increase in population in the country over the next fifteen years.
Looking to the current demographic profile, a massive effort would be required to achieve the
targets of the National Population Policy (NPP) –2000 -for bringing down the TFR to replacement
level by year 2010, and to achieve a stable population by year 2045. The family welfare
initiatives have always been closely linked with primary sector health services, principally
in the public domain. The drive for population stabilization would, therefore, have to be an
inherent part of the primary healthcare services; and most of this would have to be
delivered through public service providers, or at least would have to be publicly funded. It
is self-evident that the goals relating to population stabilization in the NRHM would be
critically dependent on the efficient delivery of primary healthcare services.
1.7 Public Health Expenditure
One very adverse feature of the national health scene is the excessive dependence on private
health expenditure. The total annual expenditure in the national health sector is of the order of 5.1%
of the GDP, which is only a little lower than the average for lower and middle-income countries.
But, public health expenditure barely reaches 17% of the total health expenditure ( i.e. 0.9%
of GDP or Rs. 220 per capita); and the more regressive fact is that 68.8% of the total
health expenditure is ‘out-of-pocket’ expenditure (OOP). (Figure-1). This level of public
health expenditure compares extremely unfavorably with an average public health spending of 2.8%
of GDP for the low and middle-income countries of the globe, and 1.7% for even the impoverished
sub-Saharan countries. Only four countries of the globe –Myanmar, Indonesia, Sudan and Nigeria
– invest a lower percentage of their GDP as public health expenditure.
Figure-1
Sources of finance in the health sector in India
during 2001-02

62
1.8 Health Expenditure and Poverty
The Table-1 makes it clear that only in a few states the public expenditure is significant
in comparison to OOP. Though the OOP by itself is not insignificant in quantum, it does not
provide any measure of health security. Also, the contribution of central Government is mainly
confined to the National Health Programs. In view of the fact that only 11 % of the population
of the country is protected by any type of health security scheme, improvement in quality and
accessibility of health services provided by the government is likely to reduce OOP expenditure on
health.
Private health insurance protocols are neither scientific nor cost-effective. Much of the
diagnostic and treatment regimens are profit-driven. Individuals make private expenditure when the
family liquidity position permits it, and not in any manner linked to the medical need. After the
harvest is in, an individual may spend liberally on even a minor medical condition, while in the lean
season, even a dangerous condition may go untreated. Another significant aspect is that the average
per capita expenditure is often not funded from current earnings or past savings. As has been
indicated earlier, often the individual may not have funds available at the time of a medical
emergency. On such an occasion the funds would have to be obtained by borrowing from the
extended family, or even worse, from the informal credit market. In this situation the individual is
inevitably sucked into a financial trap. Some startling conclusions of the extent of financial
catastrophes on account of illnesses are: an Indian who is hospitalized spends more than 50% of
his annual income on health; 24% of those hospitalized fall below the poverty line as a result of
the financial blow; and, out-of-pocket expenses can push 2.2% of the population below the poverty
line in a year.
Table–1: Household, Public and Total Health Expenditure in India (2004-05)
States Household Govt. Other Aggregate Household Public Other
Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. (Rs. as % of Exp. Exp.
(Rs. (Rs. (Rs. crores) T otal % of as %
crores) crores) crores) Health T otal of
Exp. Health T otal
Exp. Exp.
1 234 5 6 7 8
Central 0 14819 730 15549 0 95.3 4.7
Govt.
Andhra 6441 1696 640 8777 73.38 19.39 7.29
Pradesh
Arunachal 430 6 7 0 497 86.51 13.49 0
Pradesh
Assam 3054 672 52 3778 80.84 17.78 1.38
Bihar 11854 1091 202 13147 90.17 8.3 1.53
Delhi 1004 721 55 1780 56.41 40.48 3.11
Goa 524 116 22 662 79.17 17.48 3.35
Gujurat 4893 996 424 6313 77.51 15.78 6.71
Harayana 3385 421 175 3981 85.03 10.56 4.4

63
1 234 5 6 7 8
Himachal 2126 306 40 2472 85.99 12.38 1.63
Pradesh
J&K 1759 471 47 2277 77.26 20.69 2.05
Karnataka 3847 1267 355 5467 70.36 23.18 6.46
Kerala 8373 1048 281 9702 86.3 10.8 2.9
MP 6432 1051 228 7711 83.41 13.63 2.96
Maharastra 11703 3527 726 15957 73.34 22.1 4.55
Manipur 420 89 8 517 81.24 17.2 1.56
Meghalaya 5 8 9 4 8 160 36.45 58.37 5.18
Mizoram 38 58 0 96 39.39 60.61 0
Nagaland 1024 84 7 1116 91.74 7.57 0.7
Orissa 2999 684 111 3795 79.04 18.02 2.93
Punjab 3493 827 273 4593 76.05 18 5.95
Rajasthan 3399 1190 267 4855 70 24.5 5.5
Sikkim 72 55 0 127 56.89 43.11 0
Tamil Nadu 3624 1590 760 5974 60.67 26.61 12.72
Tripura 253 100 13 366 68.99 27.35 3.66
UP 17158 2650 550 20359 84.28 13.02 2.7
West Bengal 7782 1715 433 9929 78.38 17.27 4.36
U.Ts. 3160 325 227 3712 85.13 8.74 6.12
G
RAND TOTAL : 109308 32784 6636 148727 73.5 22 4.46
Source: Background Papers- Report - National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, 2005.
1.9 Challenges for a National Health System
The above outline of the national health system makes it clear that it is not functioning
satisfactorily. It is inadequately supported by state funding, and its structure provides no measure
of health security. The number of trained medical practitioners in the country is as high as 1.4
million, including 0.7 million graduate allopaths. However, the rural areas are still unable to
access the services of the allopaths. 74% of the graduate doctors live in urban areas,
serving only 28% of the national population, while the rural population remain largely
unserved. In large parts of the country there is no semblance of a subsisting primary
healthcare system. For the ordinary citizen, in the public sector the preferred service centers are
the hospitals, whether general or specialty. Because of the enormous burden of patients with
ordinary ailments requiring only ambulatory services, these specialty hospitals also largely lose their
specialist character. Since the primary service centers are generally not functioning, there is no
screening of the primary care disease load, whether through a screening process or a referral
process, and the unscreened burden falls upon the few and scattered tertiary care centers. As a
result, the hospitals come to be inordinately overloaded –All India Institute of Medical Sciences,

64
New Delhi has an annual turnover of 2.6 million patients and Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi of
1.93 million patients.
1.10 The Challenge for NRHM
There is an acute shortage of the physical infrastructure in the public health sector. The
deficiencies as a percentage of the normative entitlement, for different levels of service centers
in year 2004, were as follows: Community Health Centre (CHC)–68%; Primary Health Centre
(PHC)–31%; Sub Centre (SC)-29%. Providing additional service centers in rural areas based on
the norms would require an additional capital expenditure of Rs. 9700 crores, and an additional
recurring expenditure of Rs. 3500 crores. Large though these infrastructure gaps appear, these
can easily be bridged under the NRHM, considering the increase in public funding up to 2-3%
of GDP promised by the Common Minimum Programme of the central government of the United
Progressive Alliance.
1.11 Health Manpower in Rural Areas
The norms for public health service providers have been set long ago and can be considered
very inadequate by today’s requirements and expectations. Despite these outdated norms, the public
health functionaries are markedly short, as seen from the Table–2 and Table–3. Table 2 indicates
an overall shortfall of 13% in the doctors at PHCs. Table–3, in turn, shows a shortfall of 38%
of Specialists – clearly an alarming situation. It is because of this large shortfall of Specialists that
CHCs are unable to deliver the larger part of the Primary Healthcare package. It is important to
note here that doctors/specialists in position does not necessarily mean that doctors/specialists are
physically present at their respective centres and performing their duties; in fact, absenteeism is
very high.
An interesting point to note is that public health qualified physicians, who were available in
larger numbers in the first decade after Independence, have progressively disappeared from the
system. This has occurred largely on account of greater allocation of posts under the health
services to the clinical cadres rather than public health cadre.
Table–2: Health Manpower in Rural Areas – Doctors at Primary Health Centres – as on
31.03.2001
Doctors at PHC
Sl. No. State/UT Sanctioned In Position V acant
12 3 4 5
1 Andhra Pradesh 1895 1495 400
2 Arunachal 80 80 0
Pradesh
3 Assam 610 610 0
4 Bihar# 2121 2121 0
5 Chhattishgarh * * *
6 Goa 113 105 8
7 Gujarat 972 949 23

65
12 3 4 5
8 Haryana 935 935 0
9 Himachal Pradesh 354 326 28
10 Jammu and Kashmir 158 158 0
11 Jharkhand * * *
12 Karnataka 2143 1901 242
13 Kerala 1239 1131 108
14 Madhya Pradesh# 1760 1469 291
15 Maharashtra 3441 3160 281
16 Manipur 95 95 0
17 Meghalaya 96 86 10
18 Mizoram 58 49 9
19 Nagaland 29 29 0
20 Orissa 2636 2351 285
21 Punjab 484 424 60
22 Rajasthan 1639 1537 102
23 Sikkim 48 41 7
24 Tamil Nadu 2899 2648 251
25 Tripura 161 120 41
26 Uttaranchal * * *
27 Uttar Pradesh# 3787 2263 1524
28 West Bengal 1841 1547 294
29 A and N Islands 29 28 1
30 Chandigarh 0 0 0
31 D and N Haveli 6 6 0
32 Daman and Diu 3 3 0
33 Delhi 6 6 0
34 Lakshadweep 6 6 0
35 Pondicherry 45 45 0
T
OTAL : 29689 25724 3965
# Figures are prior to re-organization of States.
* Data not available
Source: PHS Section, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, 2002.

66
Table–3: Health Manpower in Rural areas – Total Government Specialists – as on 31.03.2001
Total Specialists {Surgeons, OB&G,
Physicians and Pediatricians}
Sl. No. State/UT Sanctioned In Position V acant
12 3 4 5
2 Arunachal Pradesh 3 0 3
3 Assam 200 200 0
4 Bihar# NA NA NA
5 Chhattishgarh
6 Goa 13 9 4
7 Gujarat 308 138 170
8 Haryana 256 25 231
9 Himachal Pradesh 115 108 7
10 Jammu and Kashmir 16 4 12
11 Jharkhand * * *
12 Karnataka 357 244 113
13 Kerala 154 148 6
14 Madhya Pradesh# 485 100 385
15 Maharashtra 1152 1032 120
16 Manipur 40 19 21
17 Meghalaya 2 2 0
18 Mizoram 4 4 0
19 Nagaland 12 0 12
20 Orissa 707 435 272
21 Punjab 315 315 0
22 Rajasthan 754 555 199
23 Sikkim 20 3 17
24 Tamil Nadu 54 54 0
25 Tripura 0 0 0
26 Uttaranchal * * *
27 Uttar Pradesh# 1152 577 575
28 West Bengal 310 133 177
29 A and N Islands 0 0 0

67
12 3 4 5
30 Chandigarh 7 7 0
31 D and N Haveli 0 0 0
32 Daman and Diu 0 0 0
33 Delhi 1 0 1
34 Lakshadweep 0 0 0
35 Pondicherry 4 4 0
T
OTAL : 6617 4124 2493
# Figures are prior to re-organization of States.
* Not Available
Source: PHS Section, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, 2002.
1.12 Nursing Resources
For the year 2004 the Nurse-Population ratio in India was 1:1250. This is very inadequate
compared to Europe (1:100-200), and is even less than developing countries like Sri Lanka (1:1100)
and Thailand (1:850). The Nurse-Doctor ratio in the country is 1.35:1 as compared to 3:1 in the
developed countries. The adverse statistics in respect of nurses confirms the earlier observation of
the Task Force, that the graduate doctors excessively dominate the national health system.
The current strength of government staff nurses in rural areas is 27,336, while 17% of the
positions are vacant. The NRHM itself has generated an additional requirement of 1,40,000 staff
nurses. The capacity of institutions within the country for training of nurses is quite substantial
– 20,000 graduate seats and 40,000 diploma seats. However, the standard of skills imparted to
fresh nurses is grossly inadequate. Supervision over the nursing institutions is unsatisfactory and
training standards are uneven. Also, the nursing resources in the country are subject to considerable
attrition, as many trained nurses seek careers abroad for monetary considerations.
1.13 Public Sector Services
Public sector provides 18% of the total outpatient care, 44% of the inpatient care, 54% of
the institutional deliveries, 60% of the pre-natal care visits and 90% of the immunization.
Considering ours is a struggling developing country, the quantum of public delivery of health
services is low in several categories, particularly outpatient care. The data from the National
Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) Survey (1995-96) reveals that the public heath services are
reasonably focused on the lower consumption quintiles, particularly the Below Poverty Line (BPL)
category. Public health services are generally of poor quality. This is particularly true for
those provided at the CHC/PHC/SC levels; at the tertiary service centres, quite often, the
professional skills of the service providers is very good, even though the physical infrastructure
and quality of nursing care may be extremely poor. Beneficiaries of these facilities also frequently
complain of the poor work culture and indifferent attitude of the public service providers.
1.14 Private Sector Services
Now turning to the private sector, this provides 58% of the hospitals, 29% of the beds in
the hospitals and 81% of the doctors. The quantum of health services it provides is large but is
of poor and uneven quality. Health services in the country, whether public or private, are largely

68
unsupervised and unregulated. These services, particularly in the private sector have shown a trend
towards high-cost, high-tech procedures and regimens. Another relevant aspect borne out by
several field studies is that private health services are significantly more expensive than public
health services – in a series of studies, outpatient services have been found to be 20-54% higher
and inpatient services 107- 740% higher.
1.15 Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) Sector
One strand of empirical evidence deserves to be recounted, as it highlights encouraging
possibilities for primary sector healthcare services. Studies of the operations of successful field
NGOs have shown that they have produced dramatic results through primary sector healthcare
services at costs ranging from Rs. 21 to Rs.91 per capita per year. Though such pilot projects
are not directly up scalable, they demonstrate promising possibilities of meeting the health
needs of the citizenry through a focused thrust on primary healthcare services.
1.16 Strengthening Primary Healthcare
On a conceptual level, it is quite clear that no national health system can work through only
a network of tertiary care hospitals. The remedies for most of the deficiencies of the health system
narrated above largely fall within the ambit of primary healthcare- whether they are in the
promotive, preventive or curative category. There is, therefore, a dire need for strengthening
primary healthcare services in the country. By primary health care services we imply,
principally, primary sector services (promotive, preventive and ambulatory curative
services), along with a small package of inpatient services in general hospitals. Family
Welfare services would also largely come within the purview of primary healthcare services.
1.17 Investing in Development of a Primary Healthcare System
The primary care sector public expenditure comprises 50% of the total health
expenditure (2003-04). Expenditure in this sector being the most cost effective would
deserve to be preferentially boosted in a resource-deficit country. Also, success in the Primary
Care Sector reduces the disease load for the secondary care and tertiary care sectors. However,
primacy has not always been given to investments in the primary care sector. In the past, in the
period between 1985-86 and 1998-99, public expenditure in the primary and secondary care sectors
has increased by only 50%, while that in the tertiary care sector has increased disproportionately
by 100%. More worrisome is the fact that the public sector services have a very small base
in the national health system, and their role seems to be reducing over time. It is seen that
between 1985-86 and 1995-96 the private sector share of outpatient services rose from 74% to
82% and that for inpatient care rose from 40% to 56%. Looking to the existing disease profile,
the need of the country is to focus the healthcare system on the pre-transition communicable
diseases. However, despite this need, the expenditure on communicable diseases has shown a
regressive trend and this has reduced from 58% in 1988 to 47% in 2001. This trend fits in with
the earlier observation that the emphasis in the period has been excessively placed on the tertiary
care sector.
The National Health Policy–2002 considered the issue of the relative size of the three
sectors of the health system and recommended an increase in public expenditure in the primary
care sector from the current level, to 55% of the total health expenditure. With such considerations
in mind, government has been anxious to strengthen the primary healthcare delivery system,
particularly in the rural areas. The National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (NCMH)
has also recommended in its report the implementation of three healthcare packages of progressive
sophistication. First, is a Core Package covering all the national health programmes, childhood

69
diseases, ante and post natal care, preventive and promotive health education, etc. The cost of this
package has been estimated to be Rs.150 per capita per annum. The second is the Basic Package
covering, diabetes, hypertension, respiratory diseases, injuries, surgery, etc. The estimated cost of
the Basic Package is Rs. 310 per capita per annum. And, third is the Secondary Care Package
that covers vascular diseases, cancer and mental illness at the general hospital, with a larger
component of inpatient services. This Basic Package, along with the Core Package, is one
possible module of a primary healthcare package ( i.e.  preventive, promotive and curative
ambulatory care, with some element of inpatient care in a general hospital). The principal thrust
of the NRHM is on such a module of primary healthcare services, substantially composed of
outpatient services. If the NRHM is to achieve any measure of success, a concerted effort will
have to be focused on primary healthcare. In the current health system there are several
obstacles to deeper penetration and an even spread of primary healthcare over the country.

70
CHAPTER-II
TASK FORCE ON MEDICAL EDUCATION
Some of the major problems in primary healthcare relate to training and capacity building
of health service providers in foreseeable future. It is in this background that government set up
a Task Force to review the effectiveness of medical education currently imparted to different
categories of health service providers, and also to explore the alternative training opportunities and
capacity building of the health functionaries to bridge the gap generated by NRHM.
2.1 Constitution of the Task Force
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) under order No.14011/4/2005 EAG,
dt. 18th August, 2005 constituted the Task Force on ‘Medical Education for the National Rural
Health Mission’ consisting of the following members:
1. Mr. Javid Chowdhury. Ex-Secretary, MoHFW; Chairman of the Task Force.
2. Mr. Deepak Gupta, Additional Secretary, MoHFW.
3. Mrs. Bhavani Thyagarajan, Joint Secretary, MoHFW.
4. Dr. N.H. Antia, Foundation for Research in Community Health (FRCH), Pune.
5. Dr. Gauri Pada Datta, Member, Planning Commission, West Bengal.
6. Secretary, Medical Council of India, New Delhi.
7. Principal and MS, Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh.
8. Dr. Shyamprasad, Vice President, National Board of Examination, Chennai.
9. Director, Shri Ramachandra Medical Institute, Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
10. Nominee of DGHS (Principal of any Central Medical College).
11. Dr. H. Sudarshan, Karuna Trust, Bangalore.
12. Dr. C.S. Pandav, Professor & Head, Centre for Community Medicine, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
13. Dr. Sudipto Roy, President, Indian Medical Association (IMA).
The task force decided to invite the following experts to its subsequent meetings.
(i) Dr. Ravi Narayan, Community Health Adviser, Society for Community Health
Awareness, Research and Action, Bangalore.
(ii) Dr. L.M. Nath, former Professor and Head, Centre for Community Medicine and
former Director, AIIMS, New Delhi.
(iii) Dr. A. Rajasekharan, President, National Academy of Medical Sciences, Chennai.
70

71
The Centre for Community Medicine, AIIMS, New Delhi assisted in carrying out desk
studies of the literature on the subject under consideration and also assisted in drafting of the
report.
2.2 Terms of Reference
The terms of reference of the Task Force are as under:
Term of Reference–1
■ To examine the possibility of revamping Medical Education with reference to the
requirements of medical professionals under the National Rural Health Mission.
Term of Reference–2
■ To examine the feasibility of a short-term certificate course in medicine for
creating a cadre of Health Professionals for rendering basic primary health care
to underserved rural population. If found feasible, the Group would recommend
on the following;
(a) The duration of such a course.
(b) Whether it can be an integrated course containing the basic principles of
various approved systems of medicines.
(c) Whether it can be covered under the provisions of the respective Acts
governing existing approved systems of Medicines or a separate legislation
would be required at State level.
(d) Criteria for admission.
(e) Syllabus of the course.
Term of Reference–3
■ In order to make rural service attractive for doctors, the Task Group would give
its recommendations on the following;
(a) The various incentive schemes, which could be prescribed for this purpose.
(b) Whether the medical graduates before grant of permanent registration by
Medical Council of India (MCI) should be made to serve in the rural areas
as a part of extended internship.
(c) Whether rural service should be made an eligibility requirement for doing
the Post Graduate course.
Term of Reference–4
■ In order to promote opening of medical colleges in the rural and other
underserved areas, the Task Group would give its recommendations on the
following;
(a) Whether certain relaxations could be provided in the norms of MCI for
opening of medical colleges in such areas in terms of infrastructural
requirements, staff complement and the clinical  material without lowering
the standard of education.

72
(b) To encourage private entrepreneurs to move towards rural areas for new
medical colleges. Whether opening of medical colleges in the urban and the
well served areas can be discouraged by enforcing strict norms.
Term of Reference–5
■ In order to promote opening of medical colleges in rural areas, the Task Group
would recommend whether a joint venture could be permitted whereby the
government hospital at district level is allowed to be used for teaching purposes
subject to the condition that the hospital continues to be run by the government
while recurring expenditure is borne by the private body.
Term of Reference–6
■ The Task Group would also recommend on the modalities of strengthening the
infrastructure of existing government medical colleges particularly in the
Empowered Action Group (EAG) and North Eastern States.

73
73
CHAPTER-III
TERM OF REFERENCE–1
■ To examine the possibility of revamping Medical Education with reference to the
requirements of medical professionals under the National Rural Health Mission.
3.1 Medical Graduate Curriculum Issues
3.1.1 There is a widespread perception in the country that the MBBS curriculum is too theoretical
in its content. After 4½ years of the main course and 1 year of internship, the finished graduate
has very little ‘hands-on’ experience. Most graduates are not confident enough at that stage to even
provide primary healthcare services independently. The MBBS curriculum is closely linked to a
tertiary care hospital. And, therefore, the graduates cannot function in a setting where
there is no multi-disciplinary support, or advanced diagnostic hardware. A large percentage of
the graduates treat that stage as a launching pad for the post-graduate course. It is generally
assumed that the clinical experience to equip the doctor to deliver medical services is only gained
at the post-graduate stage. Whether this situation is inescapable, has never been critically examined.
The medical graduate course of 5½ years is one of the longest professional courses . Lawyers
undergo a 5 year course (after 12th standard), Masters of Business Administration a 2 year course
(after graduation), Engineers a 4 years course (after 12th standard), etc. These other courses equip
the individual to pursue their professions independently, though, of course, the standard of
performance improves with time. It is only in the case of the medical graduate that an
assertion is made that even 5½ years of professional training is not enough, as the
management of health of a human being is a uniquely complex and demanding
responsibility. As a solution it is suggested that the duration of the course be further extended in
order to provide more intensive clinical experience.
3.1.2 The Task Force has carefully examined this issue and feels that the claim of clinical
complexity of the medical profession is an over-stated one. Any professional course should equip
the fresh graduate to practice his profession at the level of the more common tasks and
services. If the medical graduate does not have the requisite skills and confidence at the
time of graduation, the fault lies with the curriculum and the pedagogic methodology. In a
later chapter the Task Force will examine the syllabus and the system of teaching to determine
whether it is appropriately structured to provide medical graduates confidence to practice their
profession in the more common and simple settings. The Committee was of the view that a
fresh graduate must at least be able to deliver services contained in the primary healthcare
package. The suggestion that the duration of the course be extended to give more intensive clinical
exposure is not a practical proposition. As it is, the graduate medical course is one of the longest
professional courses, and the students and their guardians, are exposed to a prolonged financial and
familial burden. With the extended time and substantial financial resources involved in a medical
education, graduates are increasingly drawn towards the more lucrative specialisations, their choice
often being in direct conflict with broad community requirements. Increasing the duration of the
graduate course would only worsen those pressures.
3.1.3 The Pre-clinical, Para-clinical and Clinical subjects are taught in compartments, and the
pedagogic methodology does not connect the elements of these disciplines with the diagnostic and

74
therapeutic aspects of the clinical topics. In most institutions, the teaching methodology is not
problem-based and does not integrate the various non-clinical and clinical subjects. The Pre-clinical
and Para-clinical subjects, no doubt, form the bedrock of a scientifically sound approach to clinical
diagnosis and therapy. However, in a practical sense, the total time allotted to the clinical subjects
(in all the modes of teaching–lectures, postings and internship) would have to be balanced with the
need for adequate clinical exposure to equip a medical graduate to function as a competent working
professional. There is an overload in the syllabus on the information content at the cost of
clinical skills. As a result, the graduates are well equipped, with a sound theoretical base, to go
into post-graduate specialization; however, they are not adequately equipped to begin providing
health services, at least for the common and uncomplicated conditions in the primary healthcare
setting.
3.1.4 Several studies have identified the shortcomings in the field of graduate medical education.
One landmark study was that by WHO-SEARO: “Inquiry–driven strategies for innovation
in medical education in India–Curriculum Reforms, 1995”. This study noted a disconnect
between the focus in the syllabus by way of teaching/examinations and the actual morbidity
pattern observed at the ambulatory level. The disease pattern from three different perspectives
– actual morbidity pattern observed in ambulatory setting; diseases as prioritised during teaching;
and, the diseases as prioritised during examinations – is depicted in the Figure–2.
Figure–2: Mismatch between Curricular Content and Morbidity
Pattern in Ambulatory Setting (OPD)
Morbidity Pattern in
Ambulatory Setting
• Upper Respiratory Tract
Infection
• Skin Diseases
• Trauma
• Musculo-skeletal
• Anemia
• Fungal
• Epilepsy
• Helminthiasis
• Hypertension
Content Coverage
Faculty Perception
• Ischemic heart disease
• Diabetes
• Hypertension
• Urinary Tract
Infection
• Upper Respiratory Tract
Infection
• Convulsions
• Low Back pain
• Vertigo
Topics Covered in
Examination – Students’
Perception
• Asthma
• Malaria
• Thyroid
• Typhoid
• Tetanus
• Anemia
• Renal failure
• Pericardial disease
Figure-2 reveals that the priorities accorded in the three situations, are very different. In order to
ensure that fresh graduates are competent to operate in the primary healthcare setting, an attempt
should be made to achieve as close a match between the morbidity patterns as observed in the
ambulatory setting and the priorities reflected in the course of teaching/examination. The study
highlighted that the conditions relating to primary healthcare which are not given adequate attention
in the course of teaching/examinations, included: ante-natal care; normal labour; pre-ecclampsia;
nutrition during pregnancy; normal menstruation; cervical cancer; vasectomy; neo-natal tetanus;
prematurity; primary complex tuberculosis; protein energy malnutrition; Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS); etc. About two-thirds of the fresh graduates felt that their

75
skills in medicine needed improvement for them to operate independently; about 30% of
the graduates expressed lack of confidence in providing services independently, and one
third of these were not even confident of providing the services under supervision.
3.1.5 In 1992 the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare (Status Study of Training in
MCH &FW in Medical Colleges of India, NIHFW, 1992) carried out another significant study on
the effectiveness of the training given in the graduate course on issues relating to Maternal and
Child Health and Family Planning . This showed that a large number of fresh graduates had no
knowledge of simple procedures and conditions, like: immunization; nutritional advice; IV
Fluids; oral pills; IUCD; etc.
3.1.6 Another survey conducted by Community Health Cell-Bangalore, focused on medical
graduates with at least two years experience at the primary care level. The survey showed that they
required improved knowledge and skills in many areas, including: basic nursing procedures;
emergency medicine; minor surgical procedures; obstetrics; and local anesthesia. They also needed
to gain experience in running a small laboratory, assessing community health needs; delineating
simple programmes for training health workers; etc. The graduates suggested some improvements
in the graduate curriculum: integrated teaching focusing on common problems and clinical
applications; reduction in the basic science subjects; and increase in responsibility and decision-
making in the course of ward work.
3.1.7 The shortcomings perceived by the fresh medical graduates are principally the
outcome of their urban orientation and the skewed pattern of their aspirations. Most of
them have only lived and trained in the urban setting. The few with a rural background
acquire an urban mindset in the course of their training that is focused around a tertiary
care hospital. They do not have the confidence to function in a setting in which there is
no multi-disciplinary support or advanced diagnostic hardware. Most graduates aspire to
spend their career in the same urban ambience that they are familiar with. This is, in a
way, a distant ripple effect of the macro- trend of the commodification of health services
observed globally over the last two decades. It is often felt that it is because of this fixed mind-
set that the young graduates fail to position themselves comfortably in the social ambience of the
country, and also fail to recognize health services as a fundamental requirement of the community.
3.1.8 For medical education to serve the community, it would have to be socially oriented
towards primary healthcare. The pedagogic methodology would have to be problem-based –
where the non-clinical principles would have to be meshed with clinical training. In short,
it is felt that medical training should largely be in a decentralized setting outside a tertiary care
hospital, in close proximity with the public health and social environment. And with a different
orientation to the curriculum, and a community-centric pedagogy, one can reasonably expect
a much more even spread of service providers over the country.
Package of Reform:
‘The Task Force discussed the shortcomings of the MBBS curriculum in detail and
came to the conclusion that certain significant modifications/additional elements are
required to be introduced immediately. The recommended additional features of the syllabus
are discussed hereafter.’
3.2 Introduction of Modules for exposing students to Social Sciences and Allied
Disciplines.
3.2.1 The introduction of the following modules in the curriculum is suggested:
(a) Communication Skills; (b) Management Skills; (c) Psychology (d) Political Science,
Anthropology and Sociology; (e) Health Economics; and (f) Ethics & Human Rights.

76
A health practitioner has to function in a multi-faceted universe. He must be equipped to
comfortably place himself in the diversity of that universe. It is, therefore, of importance that he
is given at least an introductory exposure to the various other facets of the universe that he will
have to interact with. In this context, the Task Force recommends that modules of a total
duration of 60 hours on the subjects listed in Table 4 below be introduced in the curriculum.
Table–4: Topic-wise break-up of Modules.
No. Topic Duration (Hours)
1 Administrative Management 10
2 Communication Skills 15
3 Sociology and Psychology 15
4 Political Science, Civics and Local Administration 06
5 Anthropology 04
6 Health Economics 04
7 Ethics and Human Rights 06
8T
OTAL :6 0
3.2.2 The modules could be scheduled at different stages of the graduate course, as they would
require varying levels of background knowledge to absorb the contents. The modules for Political
Science, Psychology, Anthropology, Sociology, Ethics and Human Rights could be scheduled for the
1st & 2nd semesters, while the modules for Communication Skills, Management Skills and Health
Economics could be scheduled for the 7th semester. The Task Force feels that it would be of value
to draw up national modules for these introductory subjects. These could serve as a basic
framework around which individual medical colleges could finalize their own modules in the context
of their perceived needs.
3.2.3 The Task Force is aware that certain medical education research institutions - Community
Health Cell, Bangalore; CEHAT, Mumbai and Pune; Achutha Menon Centre, Trivandrum; and some
Medical Colleges-AIIMS, New Delhi; Christian Medical College, Vellore; St. John’s Medical College,
Bangalore; Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram; JIPMER, Pondicherry-have
acquired significant experience in designing and experimenting with such modules. The Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare could consider the launching a participatory exercise along with
representatives from these resource centers and medical colleges, also involving some health
educators, academics from the field of social sciences, to draw up such national modules. The
group engaged in the exercise could draw upon the experience of the institutions that have been
experimenting in this field.
3.2.4 At present in most medical colleges, the different curriculum subjects are taught as
independent bodies of knowledge. At a different point in this report, the Task Force will comment
on the desirability of adopting an integrated teaching methodology with a problem-based approach.
When this pedagogic methodology comes to be adopted, the modules mentioned above could also
be merged in the integrated teaching methodology. In fact, most of these topics are of a nature
where they would best be understood when taught in an integrated manner, along with the
conventional clinical and non-clinical subjects. However, the introduction of these modules on
the listed subjects brooks no delay and should be started as stand-alone modules till such
time as the integrated pedagogic methodology is put in place. The Curriculum Committee/

77
Medical Education Cell/Academic Committee of the respective Medical College should be in-
charge of implementing these curricula. The performance of the students during the course
of the modules should be evaluated.
3.3 Inclusion of a six-week Rural Orientation Package in the MBBS Curriculum
3.3.1 The Task Force has earlier commented on the attitude of the medical graduates that are
produced by the existing educational system. By and large they carry the values of the urban
middle class. Even those from a rural background are unwittingly co-opted into the urban milieu,
discarding their social roots. As a result, fresh graduate doctors have no concept of broad
community healthcare needs. Their professional world-view, regardless of whether they pursue a
career in the public or private sector, is of providing curative services with considerable high-tech
backup. Professionally they aspire to specialise in one or the other clinical disciplines, and their
skills are organically linked to the back-up infrastructure of a tertiary care hospital. The Task Force
sees the lack of an understanding of broad community health needs in the fresh medical graduates,
as a critical deficiency. This results in a misconceived approach to primary healthcare, whether in
the public or private sectors. There is an inordinate reliance on curative care and high-tech
diagnostic tests on the part of the service providers.
In the context of this deficiency the Task Force feels the need and recommends the
introduction of a rural orientation package of six weeks duration under the Community Medicine
Department for the second year MBBS students (3rd & 4th semesters). The suggested elements
of this rural orientation programme are given in the Table-5 below.
Table–5: Rural Orientation Package
Time frame Training Location
½ week Briefing Medical college
1 week First Aid Certificate Course Medical college
2 weeks Rural orientation camp Field
1 week ASHA* + AWW* Field
1 week HW* +HA* +MO* Field + PHC
½ week Debriefing Medical college
* ASHA-Accredited Social Health Activist
AWW-Anganwadi Worker
HW-Health worker
HA-Health Assistant
MO-Medical Officer
3.3.2 The training should be in batches of 20-25 students. The training package should include
an exposure to the principal facets of the rural community, covering aspects like: agriculture,
other occupations, local-self-government institutions, health & education facilities, markets,
transport & communication, family structure and dynamics, caste and communal dynamics,
cultural and religious traditions, festivals, local maternity and child health practices, etc. The
students should also undergo training on the roles of the various public healthcare functionaries
(Health workers, Health assistants, Anganwadi workers and ASHAs) by attachment to these
functionaries. This would expose the students to the national health programmes as implemented
at the ground level.

78
3.3.3 The four weeks of field activities shown in the above schedule should require actual stay in
the villages. Medical colleges should make reasonable arrangements for the stay as are appropriate to
a rural setting. Past experience has shown that students do not pay adequate attention to the portion
of the syllabus connected with Community Medicine. To discourage this tendency, the Task Force
recommends that 20% of the total marks of internal assessment in Community Medicine be allotted
to the assessment of the student during the rural orientation training.
Some medical colleges - AIIMS, New Delhi; St. John’s Medical College, Bangalore;
Christian Medical College, Vellore; Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha; and
JIPMER, Pondicherry - have experimented with such rural postings and they could be associated
in the exercise for drawing up national guidelines for other institutions.
3.4 Reallocation of duration of study time/postings in different disciplines
3.4.1 The Table-6 lists the duration of study time allotted for lectures in different subjects in the
current syllabus. On reviewing the time allotted in the syllabus for lectures to the different
disciplines, the Task Force feels that the overall distribution of study-time between Pre-clinical/
Para-clinical subjects and clinical subjects is appropriate in the ratio of 1/3rd and 2/3rd. This norm
would result in transfer of lecture time from non-clinical-subjects to clinical subjects. The Task
Force has noted that within the time allotted to non-clinical subjects, a considerable portion is going
into practicals. It is felt that in some of the nonclinical disciplines-Pharmacology, Biochemistry –
little purpose is served in allotting a significant portion of time. The Task Force is of the view that
the allocation of time to non-clinical subjects may be reviewed and should be made pertinent to
applied aspect, and any excess that may be found should be transferred to lecture time.
Table-6: Minimum Teaching Hours in various disciplines
Subjects Lecture time allotted Clinical postings TOTAL (%)
(in hours) (in hours)
MCI–1997 M CI–2004** MCI–1997 MC I–2004** MCI–1997 MCI –2004**
1 234 56 7
Anatomy 650 (16.2)# 650 (14.9)# N.A. N.A. 650 (9.9) 650 (9.2)
Physiology 480 (11.9)* 480 (11.0)* N.A. N.A. 480 (7.3) 480 (6.8)
Biochemistry 240 (6.0)* 240 (5.5)* N.A. N.A. 240 (3.6) 240 (3.4)
Pathology 300 (7.5)* 300 (6.9)* N.A. N.A. 300 (4.6) 300 (4.2)
Pharmacology 300 (7.5)* 300 (6.9)* N.A. N.A. 300 (4.6) 300 (4.2)
Microbiology 250 (6.2)* 250 (5.7)* N.A. N.A. 250 (3.8) 250 (3.5)
Forensic 100 (2.5)* 100 ( 2.3)* N.A. N.A. 100 (1.5) 100 (1.4)
Medicine
General 300 (7.5) 350 (8.0) 468 504 768 (11.7) 854 (12.1)
Medicine
General 300 (7.5) 350 (8.0) 468 504 768 (11.7) 854 (12.1)
Surgery
Paediatrics 100 (2.5) 130 (3.0) 180 216 280 (4.3) 346 (4.9)
Orthopedics 100 (2.5) 130 (3.0) 180 216 280 (4.3) 346 (4.9)
Community 310 (7.7) 310 (7.1) 216 216 526 (8.0) 526 (7.4)
Medicine
Pre-
Clinical
Subject
Pre-
Clinical
Subject
Clinical
Subject

79
1 234 56 7
Obstetrics and 300 (7.5) 300 (6.9) 360 396 660 (10.0) 696 (9.8)
Gynecology
TB and Chest 20 (0.5) 20 (0.5) 36 36 56 (0.9) 56 (0.8)
diseases
Ophthalmology 100 (2.5) 100 (2.3) 180 144 280 (4.3) 244 (3.5)
Psychiatry 20 (0.5) 20 (0.5) 36 36 56 (0.9) 56 (0.8)
ENT 70 (1.7) 70 (1.6) 144 144 214 (3.3) 214 (3.0)
Skin and STD 30 (0.7) 30 (0.7) 108 108 138 (2.1) 138 (2.0)
Radiology 20 (0.5) 20 (0.5) 36 36 56 (0.9) 56 (0.8)
Dentistry 10 (0.2) 10 (0.2) 36 36 46 (0.7) 46 (0.7)
Anesthesia 20 (0.5) 20 (0.5) 36 36 56 (0.9) 56 (0.8)
Emergency – 150 (3.4) 72 72 72 (1.1) 222 (3.1)
Medicine
Medical – 15 (0.3) N.A. N.A. – 15 (0.2)
Ethics
Tropical – 15 (0.3) N.A. N.A. – 15 (0.2)
medicine
Common – 10 (0.2) N.A. N.A. – 10 (0.1)
Poisons
TOTAL : 4020(100) 4370(100) 2556 2700 6576(100) 7070(100)
*Includes Laboratory training; # Includes laboratory and dissection classes ; N.A.– Not Applicable;
**MCI proposal of 2004.
3.5 Prioritizing the Curriculum and Enhancing Skill Development.
3.5.1 The medical colleges in India have traditionally followed a curriculum stuffed with
information. With the explosion of medical knowledge in the last half century, the students are
faced with an ever-increasing burden of information. It is necessary to find a way to cope with
this problem so that space can be found in the curriculum to impart to the students the clinical
knowledge and hands-on experience that is so necessary. One way would be to prioritize all the
information in the medical field so that appropriate attention can be given to the different
categories. Conceptually, the categories could be as under:
➢ Must learn/essential.
➢ Useful to learn/should learn.
➢ Nice to learn/may learn/additional – but does not need to be given the same
emphasis.
Given these categories, one could even hypothesize as to how much study time should be
given to each category. In order to provide adequate skills to operate independently in the primary
healthcare domain, as a subjective assessment of the Task Force, we would suggest the
allocation of study time to the three categories in the ratio of 6:3:1. Such an allotment of
study time would enable the student to concentrate on the ‘hands-on’ skills for providing service
in the primary healthcare area. More study time would be available to acquire the various essential
skills for independent functioning – psychomotor and performance skills; attitudinal and
communication skills; judgment to take decisions on balance, without access to accurate evidence.

80
3.5.2 Certain Medical Colleges and Health Institutions ( e.g. AIIMS-New Delhi, RGUHS-Bangalore)
have undertaken such exercises and the scheme has been incorporated in their syllabus. The MCI
should build upon this and develop a model curriculum relevant to the NRHM. The classification
of items in the curriculum would assist the teachers in the medical colleges in creating course
material in proportion to the importance of the three groups of knowledge.
3.5.3 The Task Force feels that in order to equip a medical graduate with the skill mix essential
for providing broad-based community healthcare, the students should spend most of the time in the
hospital/field rather than in the classroom. This objective would not be achieved if there were only
a casual relationship between the medical college and the decentralized public health service centers.
The participation of the students in the activities of providing service would only be effective if
the service centers are under the management of the medical college.
3.5.4 In this backdrop, the Task Force recommends that each medical college must itself
undertake the responsibility of managing one CHC and four PHCs. The government should
hand over the CHC/PHCs to the medical college along with the paramedical staff and the
normative funds available to these service centers. The medical college must provide its own
doctors and use the caseload to give hands-on training to the medical students. The actual
management of the service centers by the medical college would provide an opportunity to train
the students in all aspects of operation of the centres – ranging from administrative management
to independently providing primary healthcare services. In this manner, in the period of their
graduate course, the students must acquire certain fundamental skills, such as: basic nursing
procedures, immunization procedures and basic laboratory procedures.
3.5.5 Students should also gain hands-on experience in diagnosis and management of common
health conditions, such as: cases of normal delivery; application of the module for Integrated
Management of Childhood Neonatal Illness (IMNCI); management of fever cases; management of
gastroenteritis and cholera cases in infants; management of Tuberculosis cases under the Revised
National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP); etc. One can also expect that the CHC/PHCs
managed by the medical colleges, would provide high quality service, thus making these centers
model units in the area they serve.
3.6 Integrated teaching of the non-clinical disciplines with the clinical disciplines
3.6.1 In most medical colleges the different disciplines are taught in isolation. Pre-clinical and
Para-clinical specialties are, no doubt, very important as they form the bedrock for the
understanding of the clinical disciplines. However, in the current pedagogic methodology, the
interconnections between the features of the clinical and non-clinical disciplines are generally
established in the minds of the students only in the course of subsequent medical practice, much
after they have graduated. An integrated curriculum, along with a problem-based teaching
methodology, would ensure that the interconnections between the clinical and non-clinical
subjects would unravel as the curriculum is taught in the undergraduate course. The problem-
based learning process would reveal the context of the relevant aspects of the subjects. The
adoption of the methodology of integrated teaching would reduce the fragmentation of the
medical course.
3.6.2 In the context of these considerations, the Task Force recommends that the medical
colleges should be made to shift to an integrated, problem-based pedagogic methodology in
a phased manner over time.
3.6.3 It would also be of advantage to associate general physicians in teaching the course, as
their methodology of diagnosis and treatment relies on the integrated approach. It is realized that
the change involves a massive exercise in reframing the course material.

81
3.6.4 Also, it is not a brief, one-time exercise – the teaching faculty of the medical colleges
would have to evolve the course material in an interactive exercise with the students over an
extended period of time, based on the feed-back received. The MCI should set a phased time-
bound, programme for the medical colleges to move to the integrated, problem-based pedagogic
methodology. They should also monitor the progress made by individual colleges in adopting the
new pedagogy, during the course of their periodic inspections.
3.7 Focusing the examination system on common conditions and ‘hands-on’ skills
3.7.1 The assessment system in medical education largely determines the graduate physicians it
is producing. It is essential to move away from the knowledge-dominated examinations to more
skill-oriented examinations. It is well known that the cases kept for examination are the so-called
‘interesting’ cases, which are the uncommon ones. No attempt is made to test the knowledge of
the student in respect of the common conditions and the hands-on skills. In result, the fresh
graduate does not have the confidence and skills for independently handling the common conditions
coming beneath the umbrella of primary healthcare.
3.7.2 Looking to this undesirable trend in examinations, the Task Force recommends the MCI
issue guidelines requiring that examination should be based on common disease conditions and
hands-on knowledge. The MCI, in the course of its periodic inspections, should also review
whether this particular aspect is satisfactorily ensured while conducting examinations. More marks
should be allotted to internal assessments and practical examinations.
3.8 Modification of duration of posting of interns
3.8.1 In several parts of the report, the inadequate ‘hands-on’ skills of the fresh graduates have
been commented upon. The typical mind-set of the fresh graduate is to look towards an
opportunity for a post-graduate course. This tendency in the health system is highlighted by two
interesting statistics–the country has about 27,000 undergraduate seats in the various medical
colleges, and against that there are as many as 10,500 post-graduate seats (39% of undergraduate
seats). The herd instinct drives the fresh graduates to try to get admission into a post-graduate
course in a clinical discipline, for which they have a reasonable chance looking to the large number
of post-graduate seats. Many of those who do not get a post-graduate seat settle into general
practice in a periurban or urban area with a tie-up with some high-tech, diagnostic service
providers. Through this cycle of events, very few doctors are drawn into providing what is a
conventional primary healthcare service. The period of internship provides one whole year when
the attention of the to-be-doctor can be turned towards the hands-on skills, which is meant
to form the very foundation of his professional worth.
3.8.2 The widespread impression is that the students do not take their internship seriously. In
fact, most use the time to prepare for the post-graduate entrance examination. In the circumstances
the Task Force has been at pains to devise appropriate conditions that compel the student to
acquire ‘hands-on’ knowledge of the broad span of community health issues. This, in fact, was
the very objective of the one-year of internship. The existing (MCI-1997) provisions describe
internship as a phase of training when a graduate is expected to actually provide healthcare services
and acquire skills, so that he becomes capable of functioning independently.
3.8.3 The MCI in its proposals of year 2004 has suggested an amendment so that internship is
described as ‘a period to learn methods and modalities for actual practice’ of medical and
healthcare. A plain reading of this would imply that the expectation from the student after the
internship, of providing services independently, is even further diluted. It is the considered view
of the Task Force that this suggestion of MCI-2004 is not an appropriate one, which should
not be accepted by the Government.

82
3.8.4 Another connected issue is that of the appropriate period of attachment to the Community
Medicine discipline as a part of internship. The prescribed period has been 3 months since year
1983; prior to that it was 6 months. Again in the year 2004 the MCI has suggested a further
reduction to 2 months. This period of attachment is at one of the levels of the decentralized
structure of the public health system – CHC, PHC and SC. The attachments to the public health
centre provide an ideal setting for gaining hands-on experience in primary healthcare, with or
without supervision. The period of internship provides the best opportunity to expose medical
students to the multiple facets of community healthcare. In view of this, the Task Force
suggests that the Government not accept the proposal made by MCI for reduction of the
duration of internship in community health from the existing 3 months to the proposed
2 months.
3.8.5 One central objective of the recommendations of this Task Force is to ensure that, to the
extent possible, the training be located in the decentralized setting in the public health organizational
structure. This is with the explicit objective of equipping the medical graduates with adequate
practical experience to provide primary healthcare independently. Currently, the broad breakup of
the internship period is: PHC–3 months; Secondary hospital–3 months; and Tertiary hospital-6
months. To reduce the baneful influence of Tertiary healthcare on the national health system, the
Task Force recommends that the breakup of the period of internship be modified as follows:
Tertiary hospital–3 months; Secondary hospital/District hospital–6 months; and PHC–3 months.
3.8.6 The Secondary hospital/District hospital selected for attachment of the interns should be
well equipped and should have a substantial patient-load. The faculty from the medical college must
be involved in the training at the secondary hospital and the PHC. Department of Community the
Medicine colleges would be the appropriate nodal point for the training of the interns at these
service centres.
3.9 Introduction of Evaluation at the end of Internship
3.9.1 The common perception is that the students fritter away the period of internship. This is
a year when the theoretical training is over, and the student is expected to only absorb hands-on
knowledge during the attachments to various departments. The Task Force has carefully considered
the various steps possible to make internship a more serious period of training, and now makes
the following recommendations:
3.9.2 Introduction of the requirement to maintain a logbook during internship. All the hands-on
work performed by the intern during internship should be entered in the logbook. Already some
Medical Colleges and health Universities have introduced log books during internship.
3.9.3 The curriculum of internship should include the requirement to write a dissertation on a
topic encountered at the PHC/CHC level. This will make the intern focus on some community
health issue, or on an issue relating to primary healthcare.
3.9.4 An evaluation of the ‘hands-on’ knowledge and skills should be made at the end of the
internship. This will put some pressure on the students to concentrate on the events during the
period of internship.
3.9.5 Permanent registration with the Medical Councils should be granted only after successful
submission of the dissertation and passing in the evaluation.
3.10 Creation of Medical Education Cells and Faculty Development
3.10.1 The teacher is the cornerstone for any system of education . An appropriate method of
selection and training in pedagogic methodology ensures that the teachers meet the objectives of

83
the medical education system. Unfortunately, teacher training is perhaps the most neglected
of issues in medical education.  There has been a virtual explosion in the last half-century in the
area of medical knowledge. This poses challenges to the teachers to ensure that their pedagogic
methodology continues to be relevant. The principal goal of a developing India is to prepare the
medical graduates for providing primary healthcare to the community at large. Except in some
scattered pilot projects the integrated, problem-based methodology has not been adopted. The Task
Force has recommended a phased introduction of the integrated, problem-based teaching
methodology, and for the success of that a large part of the responsibility rests on the dynamism
and innovativeness of the faculty members. It is they who have to go through the painful exercise
of restructuring the course material to integrate the various clinical and non-clinical strands. To
carry out this task, the faculty members need to make an even greater effort than in the ordinary
circumstances when there is a stabilized pedagogic methodology.
3.10.2 In view of all this, there is a dire need of adopting a systematic approach to faculty
development. The MCI has issued guidelines for establishing medical education units in all medical
colleges. The MCI should monitor the activities of the medical education cells as a part of
their periodic inspection.
3.10.3 There is a need for reviewing the contents of the syllabus every five years. Medical
knowledge is expanding at an unbelievable pace. Subjects like genetic engineering and biotechnology
were scarcely known in this country a decade ago. To keep pace with the expanding areas of
medical science, the MCI should periodically carry out an exercise of reviewing the syllabus on
the basis of inputs received from the medical education units.
3.10.4 The Task Force is aware that some of these recommendations have been made in
some form even earlier. These suggestions have become particularly urgent in view of the
requirements of the NRHM. The present Task Force reiterates the urgent need to introduce
these reforms in Medical Education to make it more relevant to national priorities. If
necessary, a small full-time action group should be constituted to work with the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, MCI and the Medical Colleges to make these changes a
reality.
3.11 Experimentation with Alternative Model of Undergraduate Medical Education
3.11.1 While the above package of reforms will make the existing medical curriculum more
relevant for achieving the NRHM goals, there is an urgent need to also provide some autonomy
and space for more radical alternative models of under-graduate medical education. This has been
done in many countries of the world, leading to the now well-known ‘Network of Community-
Oriented Health Science Institutions.’ After over 50 years of medical education in India, only one
college (out of the 242 colleges in the country) has qualified to be admitted as a member of this
Network— this innovative institution is the Christian Medical College, Vellore. The Task Force is
aware that several novel experiments have been tried in the past –the Kottayam Experiment; the
Alternative Curriculum suggested by Medicos Friends Circle, a radical group of doctors and health
workers; and an alternative track curriculum proposed by the MCI to train doctors who are suitable
for primary healthcare. All these experiments faced operational obstacles and never came to
fruition. There is an urgent need to support more experiments of alternative models of Medical
Education and to ensure that they get a fair field trial in order to assess their wider
implementability.
3.12 New Proposal
3.12.1 A model has been developed and proposed by Dr. G.P. Dutta, a veteran medical educationist.
The model shifts the fulcrum of medical education from the tertiary care hospital to the

84
community. Under this model, 1½ years of the training is centered on a CHC, another 1½ years
is centered on a secondary care hospital, and the last ½ year’s training is centered on a tertiary
care hospital The philosophical underpinning of the model rests on the belief that a sustainable and
effective health system has to be located in the community. The concept envisages a health system
with the following elements: community health planning, community healthcare volunteers, socially–
oriented graduate doctors and supervision of the healthcare services by local-self-government
institutions and community groups. One element of this holistic model has also been included in
the NRHM through the provision of ASHA, who would perform the role of community health
volunteers. This proposed model curriculum has been approved by the MCI.
3.12.2 The Task Force has carefully studied the proposed model and finds much merit in it.
However, it is observed that it has not been tried out on a pilot basis so far. The success of the
model rests critically on the success of the health educators in preparing course material linked to
teaching at the decentralized levels of the primary healthcare network in the rural sector. The Task
Force feels that all opportunities should be made available to try out this proposed model in
different parts of the country.
3.12.3 The Task Force also recommends that the government should encourage pilot studies
of this model in government medical colleges. The MCI already having approved the
syllabus should have no difficulty in granting registration to graduates from such
institutions. On the successful completion of the pilot projects, the application of this model can
be extended to privately managed medical colleges also.
3.13 Innovation in Medical Education
3.13.1 There is an urgent need for the creation of space and opportunity for experimentation in
medical education in the country. Several novel experiments have been conducted – e.g. Kottayam
experiment and MCI’s Alternative curriculum; but these were in limited operational conditions.
Institutions that have capacity and a socially relevant approach need to be identified and given all
support for their experimentation. With the increasing privatization and commercialization of medical
education, and the drifting away from primary healthcare to technology-dominated medical care,
experiments in primary healthcare are urgently needed, and Dr. Dutta’s decentralized teaching
module, deserves consideration.

85
85
CHAPTER-IV
TERM OF REFERENCE–2
■ To examine the feasibility of a short-term certificate course in medicine for
creating a cadre of Health Professionals for rendering basic primary health care
to underserved rural population. If found feasible, the Group would recommend
on the following:
(a) The duration of such a course.
(b) Whether it can be an integrated course containing the basic principles of
various approved systems of medicines.
(c) Whether it can be covered under the provisions of the respective Acts
governing existing approved systems of Medicines or a separate legislation
would be required at State level.
(d) Criteria for admission.
(e) Syllabus of the course.
4.1 The Need for Three-level Healthcare
4.1.1 The need for reaching primary healthcare services to all corners of the country has been
highlighted earlier. It has been seen that, despite all incentives and encouragement, graduate doctors
have not been able to provide this in more than a small part of the country. As a result, even a
half-century after independence, most of the citizens of the country are still without access to
costeffective and sustainable primary healthcare services, whether in the private or the public
sector. The trend towards specialization of graduate allopathic doctors is increasing by the day, and
there does not appear to be any reasonable possibility of reaching primary healthcare on a
widespread scale exclusively through graduate doctors. In these circumstances, community interest
demands that a three-level healthcare system be put in place, with the first level of healthcare being
limited to a restricted service package of primary healthcare provided by practitioners with
appropriate training. The second level envisaged is that of graduate doctors; and the third that of
specialists.
4.1.2 We have for too long clung to the belief that only graduate doctors can render
competent healthcare, and that all other attempts to deliver health services are ill conceived
and against patient interest. The Task Force is of the view that this bland assertion needs
to be critically  examined. On a macro-view, the contribution of graduate doctors to primary
healthcare in the country has been limited. While the aggregate number of graduate doctors
(0.7 million doctors) is not very low for a developing country, only 28% of them are located in
the rural areas. As a result, in rural areas, health services, to the extent they are available, are
provided by practitioners trained in alternative systems of Medicine (Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha,
Homeopathy), or those who are not trained in any discipline at all. Even the practitioners trained
in the alternative systems of Medicine indulge in, what is called, cross-practice i.e.  using
therapeutic drugs of the allopathic system when trained in an alternative discipline. In a study
conducted in rural Uttar Pradesh in 1995, only 3% of medical practitioners were MBBS graduates
or allopathic practitioners, while 68% of them had no training in any form of Medicine.

86
4.1.3 In this backdrop, the stark reality is that a very substantial portion of the primary
healthcare services are delivered by untrained providers. Such providers are able to attract
clientele for two reasons: firstly, there is no reliable graduate allopathic doctor in the proximate
distance to whom they can turn, if allopathy is the discipline of their choice; and, secondly,
because most of the medical conditions for which they require services are of the common type,
for which the quasi-trained practitioners can often offer some relief. However, one must hasten to
add that the medical services provided by practitioners, who largely practice in a discipline in
which they have no training, is in the broader context, highly damaging. Even for the common
medical conditions, the treatment regimens of the untrained practitioners are almost always
unscientific and cost-inefficient. Moreover, quite often, such practitioners are known to offer
treatment linked to the financial capacity of the patient, rather than based on scientifically
established regimens of essential drugs. The use of antibiotics based on the capacity-to-pay is, in
fact, the one of the principal causes of drug resistant mutant pathogens that has triggered off a
self-propelled spiral of new diseases.
4.1.4 All in all, because of such factors the mode of delivery of health services in the country
is highly detrimental to the quality of the national health system. All of us in the country, and
particularly the graduate doctors’ fraternity, need to reflect on why such an iniquitous and harmful
mode of health service delivery exists over much of the country. Often it is argued that the
financial rewards in the public health sector are too low to attract the graduate doctors to the
scattered rural areas. Another reason cited is that the absence of minimal physical and social
infrastructure makes it impossible for young medial graduates to serve in the rural areas, whether
in public or private assignments.
4.1.5 It is the view of the Task Force that these reasons are only partially true. The emolument
structure of public health doctors is not adequately attractive in all States. While it would be
correct to expect that the compensation in Government for public health doctors should not be
inferior to other Class 1 Services of the State Government, it would not be feasible to envisage
a compensation structure for the health cadres completely different to that in other equivalent State
cadres. Reverting to the second standing complaint, the Task Force noted that the inadequacy of
social and physical infrastructure in the rural areas is itself a manifestation of underdevelopment.
These handicaps cannot be removed selectively for the health sector. And, it is necessary to note
that when, as a part of the process of development, such deficiencies are mitigated, by that stage
the requirement of state-driven health services on such a broadband basis, would itself have
diminished. In other words, the providing of basic health services is itself an integral component
of the development process that will eventually ensure that infrastructural and social facilities are
more evenly available across the country.
4.1.6 Looking to the nature of complaints of the fresh graduates, it is unlikely that
government can radically relieve these in a generalized manner in the near future. The
shortcomings perceived by the fresh medical graduates are principally the outcome of
their urban orientation and the skewed pattern of their aspirations. Most of them have
only lived and trained in the urban setting. The few with a rural background acquire an
urban mindset in the course of their training that is focused around a tertiary care
hospital. They do not have the confidence to function in a setting in which there is no
multi-disciplinary support or advanced diagnostic hardware. Most graduates aspire to
spend their career in the same urban ambience that they are familiar with. This is, in
a way, a distant ripple effect of the macrotrend of the commodification of health
services observed globally over the last two decades. It is often felt that it is because of
this fixed mind-set that the young graduates fail to position themselves comfortably in the
social ambience of the country, and also fail to recognize health services as a fundamental
requirement of the community.

87
4.1.7 As a result, primary healthcare comes to be neglected and high-tech tertiary care is the
single preferred option. It is often emphasised that to fulfill the basic requirements of the broad-
based community, the social orientation of the students would have to be altered. For medical
education to serve the community, it would have to be socially oriented towards primary
healthcare. The pedagogic methodology would have to be problem-based – where the non-
clinical principles would have to be meshed with clinical training. In short, it is felt that
medical training should largely be in a decentralized setting outside a tertiary care hospital, in close
proximity with the public health and social environment.
4.1.8 Conceptually, private health services were always visualised to be distinct from other
commercial services. It is obvious that health services would only be delivered on payment, as no
one can expect it to be a charitable activity. However, with a different orientation to the
curriculum, and a community centric pedagogy, one can reasonably expect a much more
even spread of service providers over the country. The government has previously tried any
number of initiatives to improve the spread of the graduate service providers in the public sector
at least. Compulsory rural attachment for fresh graduates has been tried out in several states;
priority admission to the post-graduate courses after a stint of rural posting has been offered as
an incentive; and, enhanced allowances, with an assurance of a rotational transfer policy, so that
those who serve in the rural areas, can expect a more socially congenial posting at a later stage,
have also been attempted. However, all these attempts have failed on account of brazen defiance,
subterfuge, nepotism, etc. As a result, even five decades after independence we face an
indefensible situation in which we are not able to provide trained primary healthcare over large
parts of the country.
4.1.9 A democratic polity has its own internal dynamics, visible evidence of which may only
surface very slowly. In the past, it has often been noted with surprise that there was no discernable
countrywide demand for improved health services. After all, the most basic interventions a citizenry
can demand of its government are services in the education and health sectors. Yet, despite the
appalling poverty and pervasiveness of ill health, no strident demand has been heard from the
northern states for improved health and education facilities. By contrast, the status of the health
system in the southern states is much superior. It is seen that in the southern states, the health
issues have come to occupy space in the political arena. The citizenry expects better health
services, and the dynamics of a democratic polity ensures that this is at least delivered in some
measure. The churning of fresh expectations, and the raising of demands in the social sector, is
always early evidence of the maturing of the polity. Whilst in the first four decades after
independence, such demands in respect of the health sector were not seen to be emanating from
most parts of the country outside the southern states; signs of change are now visible.
Increasingly, we seem to be receiving signals from several under-developed parts of the country,
that the citizenry has acquired an appetite for development services in the social sectors; an
increased insistence on improvement in availability and quality of health services is now apparent.
4.1.10 We are now seeing the early signs of these democratic impulses being reflected in the
dynamics of the polity. The near complete absence of healthcare facilities in a large part of the
country cannot be ignored any longer. Even if comprehensive healthcare for all remains a distant
dream, at least a modest spread of primary healthcare services would be the irreducible minimum
expectation of the citizenry. As has been discussed in detail earlier, one major shortcoming in the
current health scene is the non-availability of graduate service providers in vast tracts of the
country. Given this insurmountable problem, the Task Force addressed the issue whether we
could create another category of trained service practitioners who would be given the
responsibility over the domain of primary healthcare. The course for such service providers
could be a shorter one, with a focus on the clinical conditions, situations and treatment
regimens within the primary healthcare domain.

88
4.1.11 At a conceptual plane, it is possible to visualize a health system with health services
provided at more than one level. It is always possible to arrange a continuum of levels of public
health initiatives and conditions requiring a progressively increasing level of skill and training. At
the practical field level, however, it would not be convenient to adopt several such levels, as that
would require separate defining of service modules, and independent regulation of the services
within the authorized packages. However, we can quite conveniently divide the health services in
three levels: one level can be the more common health conditions and public health initiatives
coming within the purview of the short-course practitioners; the second level can be the more
complicated conditions (and procedures not included in the first category) which would remain in
the exclusive domain of the graduate doctors; and the third would be the level of the Specialist.
A commonly prevailing misconception is that the specialist provides the best treatment, regardless
of the nature of the medical condition. In other words, there is a subconscious belief that the best
health system would be one arranged through a consortium of specialists. Such a view is ill
conceived. An array of specialists offering health services to the general community would be a
very costly and inefficient arrangement. The elementary concepts shaping an efficient organizational
structure would require that the more common medical conditions be screened out at the general
practitioner level, and the more complex conditions be referred to the specialist level. The system
of functioning of several public tertiary care institutions, like AIIMS, New Delhi provides evidence
of the inefficiency caused by exposing the specialists to a general mix of patients at the first
contact point. The functioning of tertiary care institutions is not only rendered needlessly
inefficient, but serious transactional problems also arise at the interface between different specialist
disciplines when unscreened patients have to be attended to.
4.1.12 Health Practitioners with limited training in a package of primary healthcare can competently
handle most common diseases that have not advanced to a complicated stage. For the typical
conditions coming within the package of primary healthcare, no value is added if a graduate MBBS
doctor provides the services, rather than a short course practitioner.
4.1.13 In the above backdrop it would be logical to conceive of three levels of health services in
the health system. The three levels would not constitute different degrees of superior and inferior
standards of clinical treatment, but would be demarcated on the basis of the complexities of the
medical condition. One level can cover common ailments, family welfare initiatives and other
conditions requiring ambulatory services; the second level could cover complicated variants of
conditions listed in the first level, non-communicable disease cases and surgery cases; and the third
level would be the conditions requiring the services of a Specialist. The appropriate medical
education required for service providers of the first level would be less elaborate than that
required for a graduate MBBS degree, but it is considered entirely feasible to ensure that
the skills available to a short-course service provider would be fully adequate for the
common conditions included in that level of healthcare.
4.1.14 As a legacy from the British times we had Licentiate Medical Practitioners (LMP) who had
to undergo a three-year course. These practitioners were registered with the Medical Council of
India and were authorized to practice over the entire range of medical conditions. With the intention
of improving the standard of medical services in the country, the cadre was discontinued after
1964. However, subsequent events have shown that instead of improving the availability of skilled
medical services to the citizenry, this, in fact, reduced it. While graduate doctors may have
increased in number, this did not improve the access of the citizenry to skilled medical services.
The other category of quasitrained allopathic practitioners that exist in almost all States of the
country are the Registered Medical Practitioners (RMPs). For this category the minimum
qualification is 6th Class and no formal training in the science of Medicine is required. Typical
RMPs could be Sales Assistants in chemists’ shops or Compounders attached to doctors. These
practitioners, who are found in vast numbers over the country, are unquestionably quacks. In this

89
background the Task Force notes that the effort of the State to provide medical services only
through graduate doctors, has inadvertently generated a vast army of quacks.
4.1.15 The Task Force would like to clarify that the variant examined by them is not of a
short-course health practitioner with an open license to practice in the entire universe of
allopathy; the option under examination is of a short-course training after which the
practitioner would be licensed to  provide medical services within a notified package of
primary healthcare. A statutory council would monitor the functioning of the short-course
practitioners. The scheme envisages a training course that would adequately equip the practitioners
to competently deliver primary health services. In other words, the capacity of the practitioner
would be up to the skills required for primary healthcare services. This attempt to create a package
of simple health conditions requiring a lesser degree of theoretical knowledge, and to license the
short-course practitioners to provide the services for these conditions, is conceptually very different
from the span of services of a graduate MBBS doctor. Equally, the short-course practitioners would
also be very different to the quacks masquerading as RMPs. For the optimal treatment of many
medical conditions the level of training imparted to graduate MBBS doctors, is not required. The
attempt is to segregate medical services at three levels – one, which is the level of primary
healthcare services that can be delivered with an optimal level of competence by the short-
course health practitioner; the second category of the balance of the medical conditions (as
also the complicated cases of the first category), where only the graduate MBBS doctor
would be licensed to deliver services; and the third is the domain of the Specialist with post-
graduate qualifications.
4.1.16 In all professions, different grades of service require different levels of skills and training.
An average engineering diploma holder does not possess the same level of skills as the average
degree holder. The same differential is observed in the case of lawyers who practice in subordinate
courts vis-à-vis  those who practice in the High Courts/Supreme Court. The argument is often
advanced that in the case of the other professions, if the practitioner oversteps his level of
competence, he would merely blotch an assignment without causing any grave damage. On the
other hand, it is asserted, that if a medical graduate oversteps his competence level and mishandles
a case, the damage may be irreversible and life threatening. However, the Task Force feels that
such a conclusion would be an overstretched one. Health practitioners of all levels, whether
graduate doctors or others, need to be sensitized that they must venture to provide services
only within their area of training and competence, and to refer the cases to a level of
higher competence if the circumstances are more complicated. Some doubt is always raised
that the short-course practitioner would never restrict himself to the primary healthcare situations,
and would feel free to practice over the entire domain of medical conditions. In other words, for
much of his practice he would be indulging in quackery. It needs to be recognized that today most
of the practitioners in the rural areas are quacks in as much as they have no training in allopathy,
which is the discipline they are practicing in. The concept examined by the Task Force is to train
the short-course health practitioners in the Allopathic discipline for delivering services limited to the
domain of primary healthcare. There would also be a statutory authority, similar to the MCI for
graduate doctors, which would monitor the working of the short-course health practitioners. It is
the considered view of the Task Force that in the suggested scheme the risk of quackery
would stand reduced, rather than increased. Also, it would result in good quality primary
healthcare services being delivered to the citizenry on a much wider scale than is available
through graduate doctors today.
4.1.17 The operation of a three-level health system, with the requisite regulatory controls,
would not result in a ‘twin-track’ health system. On the contrary, service providers with
three levels of appropriate skills would service the medical requirements specified for the
three levels. This would result in a more equitable spread of service providers over the

90
country; and, more importantly, the providers for the first level of medical services would
be well positioned to spearhead the national primary healthcare campaign on a countrywide
span. At a later stage of the report, the Task Force will spell out the detailed outline of the
suggested scheme for introduction of short-course practitioners for delivery of primary healthcare
services in the national health system.
4.1.18 The Task Force is aware that this particular issue has been the subject of much discussion
in the past. The fraternity of graduate MBBS doctors has been averse to it on the ground that this
would create a ‘twin-track’ health system under which the elite would have superior health
services, and the others would have sub-standard health services delivered by inferior service
providers. Such criticism has been answered in detail in earlier sections of this report. The Task
Force would like to record its considered view that the health system in the past, in trying
to provide comprehensive curative services only through graduate MBBS doctors, has
created an impasse where no health services of any acceptable quality can reach a vast
number of the citizenry. By insisting on health services through graduate doctors, or
nothing, the medical fraternity has created a situation in which vast numbers get nothing.
The Task Force is aware of the growing feeling that it is indefensible to accept a situation in which
even primary healthcare cannot reach all. Increasingly, people are getting impatient with the
insistence of the graduate doctor fraternity, that health services are only acceptable when delivered
through them. The delivery of primary healthcare services through the short course community
health practitioners runs no untoward risks. In fact, if the delivery of primary healthcare services
were further delayed, the un-served population would have reason to believe that the restriction,
which is purportedly being enforced in their interest, is actually the vested interest of a group. In
this backdrop, it is time that the graduate doctors’ fraternity accepts the ground reality and
endorses the option of trained Community Health Practitioners delivering services within an
authorized package of Primary healthcare. This would reaffirm their commitment to the community,
which is a relationship that is sacred to their vocation.
4.2 Short-term Course for Training Community Health Practitioners for providing
Primary Healthcare
4.2.1 The Task Force has deliberated at length as to the structure of the module of service
delivery at the first level of healthcare. It is felt that the practitioners at this first level of healthcare
must go through a three-year degree course–B.Sc. (Health Science) -qualifying them to be called
Community Health Practitioners. The Task Force suggests that the syllabus of the short course
could be broadly as under.
First year –
– Basic medical sciences: Anatomy , Physiology, Biochemistry, Pharmacology, Microbiology
and Pathology, along with an introduction to Public Health and Psychology.
Thereafter –
– Study of common clinical problems through integrated problem-based teaching
– Training in clinical assessment, therapeutics, and other clinical skills.
– Addressing rural health crises- obstetric and mental health emergencies, rural trauma and
farming and industrial accidents.
4.2.2 The course must encourage students from the underserved areas, whether rural or urban.
To that end, 25% of the seats should be reserved for candidates from the rural areas, and another
25% for those from the same district. Minimum educational qualification for admission to this

91
degree course should be 12th pass from the Science stream, with at least 50% marks in Physics,
Chemistry and Biology. The training should be over two years in the institution and one year
internship, both in the allopathic discipline. The course should include both clinical and non-clinical
subjects. However, since the duration is much shorter than the graduate course, the detail in which
the subjects are taught would be much less.
4.2.3 The pedagogic methodology would be an integrated, problem-based one covering the
medical conditions and other initiatives relating to the primary healthcare package. This is a
departure from the methodology currently being used in graduate medical courses where the
subjects are taught in isolation. Separately, the Task Force has recommended that, even for the
graduate medical course, the pedagogic methodology be shifted to the integrated, problem-based
one. However, it will take considerable time before this is successfully put in practice in the
existing medical colleges. In the case of the proposed short-course, it is possible to introduce this
from the start, as the course material would have to be created afresh. The integrated, problem-
based methodology would be particularly suited to the short-course where the emphasis is on
‘hands-on’ experience and independent work-skills.
4.2.4 At the end of the course the students would be expected to independently provide allopathic
services covering the entire primary healthcare package wherever it is required in the country,
whether urban or rural. Considering that the primary healthcare package has large components of
promotive and preventive aspects, the trained practitioner would also be equipped to lead initiatives
in these areas.
4.2.5 An independent statutory body, similar to the MCI, would oversee the training of the
practitioners, and their work in the field. To ensure uniformity all over the country, the structure
of the body would have to be created centrally through statute leaving the application of the law
to the state. The state unit of the central statutory authority will carry out the day-to-day
operations. These operations would include: registration of institutions authorised to run the short
course; registration of practitioners who have passed the short course; evaluation of the working
of the training institutions and the hospitals attached to them; taking of disciplinary action against
the registered practitioners for misconduct; etc. The states that wish to adopt the law may notify
it for their territory.
4.2.6 The graduates from the alternative systems of medicine, who have subsequently taken the
short-course, can, in addition to providing service under the allopathic discipline, continue to
practice the alternative system, for which they will be under the purview of their respective
regulatory authority.
4.2.7 The institution running the short-term course must also manage a hospital, of the minimum
size of a district hospital, for imparting clinical training to the students.
4.2.8 The government could enter into joint-venture agreements under which the district hospital
(or other government hospitals) is attached to the teaching institution.
4.2.9 The running expenses of the hospital must be borne by the institution organising the training
course in lieu of use of the government facilities for training the students.
4.2.10 Each community health practitioner should be linked to a MBBS graduate doctor for the
purpose of referral. All the conditions and situations that are outside the primary healthcare
package, for which the practitioner is authorised to provide services, must be referred to the
graduate doctor with whom the community health practitioner is linked.
4.2.11 A variant module of this course could be a 2-year course for graduates of Ayurveda, Unani,
Homeopathy, Pharmacy, Dentistry and Nursing. These graduate students would join the course one
year after its start. The three-year course should have a section for the non-clinical subjects, which

92
would be taught in the first twelve months. The graduate entrants (Ayurveda, Unani, Homeopathy,
Pharmacy, Dentistry and Nursing) need not go through this, as they would have covered it in their
earlier graduation. For the remaining 2 years they would undergo a clinical course with fresh
entrants. The 2 years of clinical course should be structured to focus on acquiring hands-on
clinical experience. The focus on hands-on training and acquisition of practical skills should be
reflected in the evaluation system.
4.2.12 Government health functionaries–Auxillary Nurse Midwives (ANMs), Nurses and Multi
Purpose Workers (MPWs) – should be encouraged to undertake the short course after they have
put in a minimum of five years service in the rural area. This would improve their capacity to
discharge their current functions. They should be sanctioned study leave with pay to undertake this
course.
4.2.13 At PHCs where government is finding it impossible to place graduate doctors, community
health practitioners could be placed to provide services within the authorised span of primary
healthcare services.
4.2.14 The short-course could be conducted by any health university, ordinary university with a
health science faculty, medical college, dental college or nursing college that is able to satisfy the
conditions set out by the statutory body for the running of the short-course.
4.3 Critical Gaps in Skills for Primary Healthcare-
4.3.1 In almost no part of the country are surgical procedures, even of a minor character,
conducted in CHCs/PHCs. The principal reason is the non-availability of Anesthetists and
Radiologists. Even routine caesarian operations cannot be conducted in CHCs/PHCs because of
large-scale shortage of Anesthetists in the rural health organizational structure. One would expect
that graduate doctors would be able to provide the services that are normally considered a part
of the primary healthcare package. However, even the recommendations of the Task Force in
regard to modifications in the graduate syllabus, will only change the range of skills of graduate
doctors in the long run. It is imperative that the skills required–clinical, surgical and other
support procedures – for effective service delivery at the primary healthcare level, becomes
widely available as early as possible. To this end, it would be of advantage if a series of one-
year duration Certificate Courses were drawn up and launched in the deficit disciplines for
strengthening primary healthcare services. The package of services that the certificate-holder
could provide would have to be designed and notified. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
would be the agency to authorise institutions to run such Certificate Courses and issue
certificates. The areas in which short courses could be considered are: Pediatrics, O&G, Rural
Surgery ( i.e. General Surgery in conditions with limited infra-structure support), Anesthesia and
Radiology. MBBS graduates would be eligible to undergo this certificate course. These Certificate
Course would provide additional skills to graduate MBBS doctors to independently provide health
services.
4.3.2 Of late, some courts have taken the position that only a post-graduate practitioner can
undertake certain types of procedures–for example administering anesthesia. In other words the
courts have held that any mishap, when an ordinary graduate provides these procedures, would
amount to professional negligence. As it is, graduate doctors show very little confidence in
independently providing even primary health services, and with the threat of court action, they
acquire a convenient cover for avoiding any initiative. It is felt that in the court cases, the State
was, perhaps, not able to put across the point concerning broad public interest. The Task Force
feels that in a suitable case, where the question of graded health services arises, the State can
claim, as a matter of public policy that it is in favour of a three-level health system. This would,
of course, be further elaborated to clarify that it did not amount to a ‘twin-track’ health system.

93
The Task Force feels that it should be possible to satisfy the Court that, a three level
health system, based on different complexities of medical conditions, along with three types
of service providers with the appropriate level of skills, would, in broad public interest, be
a desirable health system structure.
4.3.3 At this stage of the report the Task Force would like to make a clarificatory statement
in regard to its general approach to the variety of suggestions that were made in the course of
the discussions. It would not be an exaggeration to say that more than a hundred suggestions,
small and big, were made. Many of these related to upgradation of skills of small categories of
skilled personnel having niche expertise. Typically, the suggestions envisaged that the trained
personnel be authorized to carry out differing degrees of functions particularly of the curative
category. The Task Force has been quite conservative in suggesting new categories of trained
personnel for use under the NRHM. Each new category of new trained personnel carries with
it the requirement of drawing up of the curriculum, holding of examinations, monitoring of the
performance of the trainees in the field, registration of the training institutions, maintenance of
the training standards, etc. These are huge responsibilities. Increasing the number of skill
development programmes increases the difficulty of maintaining standards and preventing abuse.
Because of the extraordinary situation existing in the health system of the country, the Task
Force has, as an exception, ventured to recommend two new levels of skills: Community Health
Practitioners and short term certificate courses for deficit clinical skills. These recommendations
increase the responsibility in respect of supervision and control. However, with the objective of
making skilled primary healthcare more easily accessible, this approach has had to be adopted.
At the same time several suggestions for creation of different levels of skill have had to be
ignored because of the perceived problems in maintaining standards and control in a country as
large as ours. For a health programme in a country as large as India some standardisation
becomes necessary, or we risk anarchy. Thus, the Task Force would like to make it clear that
their reluctance to suggest other small-span, supplemental educational modules for health
personnel is because of the inherent constraints in regulating large-span procedures and
institutions.
4.4 De-valuation of Public Health and Community Health
4.4.1 At the level of policy, India has always thought in terms of a broad-based community healthcare
system. The NHP-1983 – drawn up after the signing of the Alma Ata declaration of 1978 – aimed at
‘Health for All by the year 2000 AD’. Subsequently, in the NHP-2002, realizing that the goal of
comprehensive primary healthcare, in the widest sense, was an unreachable target, we settled for
a package of broad-based community health services within the financial and managerial capacity
of the country.
4.4.2 However, despite the several well-meaning policy declarations, the health system of the
country has grown in its own ad-hoc and disjointed manner. With 83% of the total health
expenditure being in the private sector, the dominant influence in the health system has been the
private sector. The private sector, driven by the impulse to maximize profit, has drifted towards
a system dominated by curative initiatives, increasingly dependent on high-cost, high-tech
diagnostic support. This undesirable distortion went largely unnoticed because, even within the
small public health sector, there is almost no expertise in the discipline of Community/Public health.
4.4.3 A few statistics will reveal the seriousness of the situation. Out of a total sanctioned
strength of 4712 in the Central Health Service (CHS), only 78 (1.6%) posts exist in the Public
Health Sub-cadre. The rest are General Duty Medical Officers (GDMOs) or clinical or teaching
Specialists. The situation in the state public health cadres is even worse. It is quite clear that
within the government, there are very few who can be expected to analyse the health

94
scenario, frame plans and offer policy advice on Community/Public Health issues. In order
to restore the balance between the public and private sectors, and to play a meaningful role
in policy-making relating to community healthcare issues, expertise in Community Health/
Public Health has to be rapidly acquired.
4.4.4 In another part of the report, the need for giving the graduate syllabus a social orientation
has been discussed. However, on a long-term basis, if government were to acquire a community/
public health orientation, they would need to increase the pool of expertise available within the
allied disciplines-Public Health and Family Medicine. To that end, as a long term goal, the Task
Force recommends that 25% of the CHS posts be placed in the Public Health sub-cadre – this
at current CHS strength would mean 1178 (25% of 4712) posts in the Public Health sub-cadre.
While saying this, the Task Force does not wish to give the impression that these doctors
from the public health sub-cadre are to stop offering curative services as Chief Medical
Officers (CMOs)/Medical Officers (MOs). It is felt that, if over time, 25% of the CHS
cadre comes to possess post-graduate qualifications in the public health discipline, the
entire mind-set and approach to health system planning, would stand strengthened. The
Task Force is conscious of the limitation that the number of post-graduate seats in Community
Health/Public Health/Preventive and Social Medicine in the country today are very few–163
degree seats and 106 diploma seats. The recent establishment of the Public Health Institute of
India raises possibilities of increased post-graduate training in the public health discipline.
However, if the extant eligibility requirements for recruitment to the public health sub-cadre are
retained, it would be several decades before adequate number of candidates could be recruited
in the sub-cadre. Though the extant eligibility requirements permit recruitment of both post-
graduate degree holders and diploma holders, the required qualifying experience is 3 years for the
former category and 5 years for the latter category. In view of these conditions it takes long
before these doctors trained in the public health discipline become available to the CHS cadre.
Also, there are very few private job opportunities in the area of public health where graduate
doctors can acquire experience before entering government service. Government’s principal goal
is to strengthen community healthcare, and without adequate number of public health specialists,
its capacity to achieve that is greatly handicapped. To remedy that, the Task Force
recommends that 25% of the CHS posts be placed in the Public Health sub-cadre. The
Task Force also recommends that the Recruitment Rules be amended so as to require
only two years experience for post-graduate diploma holders, and not require any
experience for post-graduate degree holders. The infusion of public health specialists,
whether diploma or degree holders, would bring about a much-needed change in the range
of skills and mind-set of the CHS, which is mandated to strengthen the community
healthcare system in the country.
4.4.5 The pathetic condition of the public-health sub-cadre in the CHS has also been noted in the
NHP–2002. To give this discipline the required status and visibility in the national health system,
the NHP-2002 had recommended that, government should progressively over time earmark up to
25% of the seats (both diploma and degree) at the post-graduate level for Community Health/Public
Health/Preventive and Social Medicine. This could be achieved by issuing a directive to the MCI
to make necessary regulations to that effect. So far the government has not taken any action on
the recommendation under the NHP –2002. The Task Force strongly reiterates the
recommendation of NHP—2002 for reservation of 25% of the post-graduate seats (diploma
or degree) for CCM/PH/PSM.  It is hoped that over a period of time, with the increase in post-
graduate seats in the discipline of Community Health/Public Health/Preventive & Social Medicine
and Family Medicine, and the gradual change in mind-set of health service providers, particularly
in the public sector, there would be a shift away from the dominance of the curative services to
an increased focus on community healthcare.

95
4.5 Training for Nursing Personnel
4.5.1 The Task Force has carefully considered as to what additional educational inputs can be
imparted to nurses to equip them better for achieving the objectives of the NRHM. The first
recommendation of the Task Force in this area would be regarding the up gradation of the skills
of nurses. An additional module of skills could be provided to the nurses in the form of a
Certificate course. It is suggested that the course be of six-month duration for graduate
nurses and one-year duration for diploma nurses. The contents of the module could include:
hands-on training in maternal and child health and family welfare procedures; training in
skilled birth attendant module; and training in integrated management of new born and
child illness. The curriculum should be drawn up and notified by the INC. The INC should also
notify a package of procedures, which the certificate nurse would be authorized to provide
independently under the NRHM.
4.5.2 The Task Force is aware that several developed countries, such as USA, Australia and UK,
have introduced a cadre of Nurse Practitioners for supplementing healthcare services. It is the view
of the Task Force that in India also healthcare practitioners can be gainfully sourced from the
graduate nursing stream. The earlier mentioned proposal for training short-course community
practitioners provides for entry from amongst qualified nurses. As mentioned there, nursing
graduates can become qualified practitioners after a two-year training and diploma nurses can
similarly qualify after a three-year training. Thereafter, the community health practitioners from the
nursing discipline can provide healthcare services within the domain of primary healthcare, much
like the Nurse Practitioners in the developed countries. This window of opportunity not only
provides an avenue for career progression, but would also contribute to better access to skilled
primary healthcare services on a widespread basis.
4.5.3 In year 2001 the INC took a decision to upgrade all diploma schools of nursing to graduate
colleges, and to discontinue the diploma course from year 2010. The strength of the nursing cadre
in the country is normatively short. Also, well-trained nurses are leaving the country to take up
foreign assignments for better monetary prospects. The impact of the shortage will be most acutely
felt in the rural areas which come under the purview of the NRHM. In this background, the earlier
decision to discontinue the diploma course in nursing needs to be reviewed. The Task Force
recommends that the Government may consider postponing the implementation of this
decision till the availability position of trained nurses shows a distinct improvement in the
country.

96
96
CHAPTER-V
TERM OF REFERENCE–3
In order to make rural service attractive for doctors, the Task Group would give its
recommendations on the following;
• The various incentive schemes, which could be prescribed for this purpose.
• Whether the medical graduates before grant of permanent registration by Medical
Council of India (MCI) should be made to serve in the rural areas as a part of
extended internship.
• Whether rural service should be made an eligibility requirement for doing the
Post Graduate course.
5.1 Incentive Scheme for Encouraging Rural Service
5.1.1 The doctors find rural posting unattractive as these areas lack facilities both in terms of
individual and professional satisfaction. Hence, to promote rural services, the Task Force suggests
that the Central Government/State Governments consider some incentives in order to attract
graduate doctors.
5.2 Emoluments
5.2.1 The emoluments of doctors serving in the State Health Services, as obtained from some of
the States, are summarized in the Table-7.
It is clear that the pay scales, gross monthly emoluments and other facilities vary widely.
Also, it is observed that in several States – Jharkhand, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh,
West Bengal, Orissa, Meghalaya and Assam – the overall compensation package is extremely
meagre compared to the prospects in private institutions and private practice. In the liberalised
economy, compensation packages in the organized private sector have increased unrecognizably.
Public health service providers cannot altogether be insulated from this trend. It is recognized that
the delivery of health services cannot be treated as equivalent to other commercial services that
are driven entirely by profit. However, doctors, while catering to a basic human need, cannot treat
their services as a charitable activity. To some extent, the ambient social atmosphere also influences
the expectations of the public health service providers. Therefore, the compensation package
offered by the state public health cadres must to some extent relate to the compensation package
available in private employment.
5.2.2 In this backdrop, the Task Force is of the view that the pay scale of a doctor at entry level
should not be lower than the lowest Class 1 scale in each State. The NPA also varies as between
the States. The NPA is one allowance that can justifiably be offered to doctors without generating
a competitive claim from other State cadres. The existing level of NPA for doctors of the Central
Health Service is 25%. The NPA in the States is either much lower or not available at all. In a
recent report on ‘Retention of Health Manpower in Government Sector’, an Expert Committee has
recommended that the NPA be increased to 30% for the Central Health Service doctors, consistent
with the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission. The Task Force feels that for the

97
doctors of the state health services the rate of NPA should at least be uniformly fixed at
25% of the basic pay, as in the Central Health Service at present.  While making this
recommendation the Task Force is well aware that the bulk of the cost of the medical
establishment is borne by the state governments. However, in order to ensure that skilled medical
manpower is adequately available in the states, the Task Force feels that the state governments
should sympathetically consider the possibility of offering a better compensation package for
medical personnel.
Table-7: Monthly Emoluments at Entry Level in the State Health Cadre
Zone State Basic salary NPA RA D A/DP HRA MA T otal PG seat
(Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.) Emoluments Reservation
(Rs.)
12 3 45 6 78 9 1 0
North Haryana 8000-275-10,500 1,600 Nil As per NO 250 18,000 50% seats
Central reserved in
Govt government
medical colleges
after 5 years of
rural service
Delhi 8000-275-13,500 3,000 (-) 2,520(21%) (-) (-) 18,000 (-)
Uttar 8,000-275- 1,500 100 2,423 1,355 (-) 18,328 (-)
Pradesh 13,500 DP- 4,750
Jharkhand 6500-10,500 Nil (-) 50% 15% (-) 11,000 (-)
South Karnataka Nil (-) (-) (-) (-) 11,000 Eligible for PG
entrance
examination
after 2 years
Andhra 11,000-330 (-) 1000 7.36% 10% (-) 14,000 30% - clinical &
Pradesh 50% - non-
clinical seats are
reserved in PG
entrance exam
after 3 years of
rural service
West Maharashtra 6000-240-12,000 (-) 150 (-) (-) (-) 15,000- 50% seats after
16,000 5 years,
preference for
rural experience
Goa 8000-275-13,500 3,000 (-) 2,520 (-) (-) 19,000 (-)
Andaman and 8000-275-13,500 3,250 @25% 5,625 (-) (-) 23,000 (-)
Nicobar of
basic
pay,
NPA
& DP
East Orissa 6500-150-10,500 Nil (-) 7000 for 8% NO 10,000 50% seats
three reserved after 5
backward years (3 years
tribal rural)
districts
West 8,000-13,500 1,700 Nil 50% 1,500 (-) 15,300 After three years
Bengal 35 seats reserved
Chhattisgarh 8000-275-13000 Nil 59% NA (-) 13,000-14
000

98
12 3 45 6 78 9 1 0
North Meghalaya 6575-225 Nil 210 4777 500 350 11,842 After 3 years
East service
Assam 6,970 (-) (-) (-) (-) (-) 8,000 (-)
ARMY 9,600-300-11,440 25% (-) 50% - DP Nil Nil 18,000 After 5 years of
21%-DA service – 50%
seats in Army
NPA – Non Practice Allowance RA – Rural Allowance
DA – Dearness Allowance DP – Dearness Pay
HRA – House Rent Allowance MA – Medical Allowance
(-) Information not available
5.2.3 Certain allowances – Dearness Allowance/Dearness Pay; House Rent Allowance; Medical
Allowance – cannot be raised exclusively for the medical cadres, as these are applicable to other
State cadres, from whom similar claims would immediately be raised. However, one allowance
available in certain States–the Hardship Allowance/ Rural Allowance – is particularly relevant on the
State health cadres. This allowance would be generally applicable to all government servants in the
North East and other hilly areas. All such areas encounter serious logistic and infra-structural
problems. However, apart from these identified areas, the functionaries of the public health sector,
who are posted in PHCs/Sub-Centres, face similar hardships over the length and breadth of the
country. A large number of public health sector functionaries work outside district headquarters and
other major urban habitations. To enable such health sector functionaries to cope with social and
infrastructural shortcomings, it would be necessary to offer some monetary compensation by way
a Hardship Allowance/Rural Allowance. Each State should identify the PHCs where they are finding
it difficult to post personnel on account of weak social/physical infrastructure. The Task Force
feels that the State governments should notify a Hardship Allowance/Rural Allowance of at least
Rs. 3000/- per month to provide an adequate compensation for functionaries posted at these
difficult locations.
5.2.4 The Task Force is of the view that a fresh graduate doctor should be inducted in
Class 1 Service in any State, and should not be paid gross emoluments lower than
Rs. 18,000/- per month. This figure should be a minimum of Rs. 21,000/- in the notified
hardship areas.
5.3 Age at Retirement
5.3.1 The prospect of a career in the State health service is not found to be very attractive by
young graduate doctors. The Task Force feels that it would be in public interest to increase
the attractiveness of a career in the state health service by increasing the age of retirement
to 62 years against the current 60 years. The government recognizes the principle of extended
age of retirement in the case of technical professionals and scientists. Looking to the difficulty
faced by State Governments in recruiting and retaining doctors in the public health cadres, it would
appear appropriate to increase the age of retirement. As it is, it is observed that several doctors
with clinical skills privately practice or seek employment in private institutions after retirement. As
a broad assessment it can be stated that they are physically fit to provide services at least till the
age of 65 years.
5.3.2 In this backdrop, increasing the age of doctors in the state public health services till 62
years would be a step towards retaining their scarce expertise within the public health system.
Further, doctors above 62 years age and up to 65 years may be retained on contract basis
on the consolidated gross emoluments last drawn, provided they are prepared to serve in the
service centers located in the Hardship/Rural areas.

99
5.3.4 To sum up, the Task Force recommends that the age of retirement of the doctors in
the state public health cadres be increased from 60 years to 62 years. Also, the Task Force
recommends that state public health doctors be retained on contract basis for a further
period of three years (till the age of 65 years), provided they work in the notified hardship
areas. During the contract period they should be paid a consolidated amount equivalent to
their gross emoluments at the time of retirement.
5.4 Reservation of PG seats for doctors from State Public Health Cadres
5.4.1 The medical education scene in the country is characterized by an obsessive pursuit of
post-graduate courses by the young graduate doctors. This obsession for post-graduation has to
be harnessed to increase the attractiveness of the state public health cadres. Some states have tried
to improve the attractiveness of the state cadres by providing reserved seats in post-graduate
courses in government medical colleges to government doctors who have rendered a minimum
qualifying service in rural areas. The attempts have been sporadic and the scheme has not been
seriously enforced.
5.4.2 The Task Force is of the view that the reservation policy should be imposed across the
board in all states of the country. To make government employment reasonably attractive, the Task
Force recommends that 50% of the postgraduate seats (both degree and diploma) in medical
colleges (both government and private) be reserved for government doctors who have served
in rural areas for over five years. This can be carried out through a MCI notification
making it compulsory for all medial colleges running post-graduate courses. Such a
provision would make over 5000 post-graduate seats available to government doctors, and
this would be a significant incentive for young doctors serving in rural areas.
5.5 Facilities for Continuing Medical Education for Public Health Doctors
5.5.1 Government doctors need to be encouraged to continue their studies and updating of their
knowledge. Though much of this will have to be done on the initiative of individual doctors,
government can make a significant contribution by providing free internet access at each public
service centre. This window to the scientific universe would facilitate the doctors in staying up
to date regardless of their place of posting.
5.6 Provision of Infrastructure for Doctors
5.6.1 As has been mentioned earlier in the report, most graduate doctors have an urban mind-
set and have aspirations that are linked to that mind-set. When a doctor is posted in a rural area
the minimum expectation is for a residential accommodation of reasonable quality, with water and
electricity connection. This would be possible in most PHCs scattered over the country. However,
the quality of water and the regularity of electric supply would be what are generally available in
that area. It needs to be recalled that the quality of such services is not particularly high class even
in most urban locations. In the totality of circumstances the Task Force recommends that special
care needs to be taken that the accommodation and water and power supply provided to health
functionaries in the rural areas is as good as is possible in the local circumstances.
5.7 Compulsory Rural Practice
5.7.1 A large part of this report has been devoted to the attitude and the mindset of the doctors
who graduate from the existing medical education system. To recapitulate in brief, the training is
linked to a tertiary hospital, and is dependent on multi-disciplinary specialists and high-tech
diagnostic aids. As a consequence, it is unconnected with the decentralized social and economic

100
setting, and graduate doctors are unable to provide even primary healthcare services. The Task
Force has made a number of recommendations to make the medical training more practical and
hands-on. In furtherance of that, the Task Force would recommend that each medical
graduate should be made to undergo a two-year stint in a rural setting before he can
register for a PG course.  The Task Force is aware that this has been tried out in some states
though without visible impact. It has been found that the lack of success was largely on account
of indifferent implementation. The young graduates were averse to this stint and brought pressure
on the bureaucratic and political executive to not enforce it. Now a stage has been reached when
it is accepted all around that the existing national health system is entirely failing to deliver even
primary health services in the larger part of the country. What may have been considered a very
severe condition earlier would only be considered the minimal acceptable today. The two years
compulsory service in rural areas will ensure more doctors join the state health services at least
for the qualifying period. For the rest, who undertake rural private practice or work for a
NGO/ Voluntary Agency/private institution in the rural area, at least it will be a period
when the young graduate is exposed to the primary healthcare needs of the country at
large.
5.8 Overview of Recommendations of TOR- 1, 2 and 3
The Task Force has considered the various shortcomings related to the TOR-1,2 and 3.The
recommendations made by the Task Force to better equip the graduate doctors to independently
provide services, particularly for the primary health care package, which is an important component
of NRHM are depicted in Figure-3.
Figure – 3
Schematic Presentation of the Recommendations
of the Task Force


101
CHAPTER-VI
TERM OF REFERENCE–4
In order to promote opening of medical colleges in the rural and other underserved
areas, the Task Group would give its recommendations on the following;
■ Whether certain relaxations could be provided in the norms of MCI for opening
of medical colleges in such areas in terms of infrastructural requirements, staff
complement and the clinical material without lowering the standard of education.
To encourage private entrepreneurs to move towards rural areas for new medical
colleges. Whether opening of medical colleges in the urban and the well served areas can
be discouraged by enforcing strict norms.
6.1 Promotion of Medical Colleges in the Underserved Areas
6.1.1 The statistical details regarding the medical colleges in the country are given in the Annexure
listed below:
(i) State-wise distribution of Medical Colleges and Medical Seats –  Annexure 1
(ii) S tates with a very large number of Medical Colleges/Seats – Annexure 2
(iii) Number of Medical Colleges/Seats in Empowered Action Group States (EAG) –
Annexure 3
(iv) Number of Medical Colleges/Seats in North Eastern/Hilly States – Annexure 4
(v) Number of Medical Colleges/Seats in Jammu and Kashmir –  Annexure 5
(vi) Number of Medical Colleges/Seats in the Rest of India – Annexure 6
From the statistics given in the Annexures it is observed that the aggregate number of
colleges/seats in the country is not inadequate. However, a very large number of them are
concentrated in the six states listed in Annexure-2 (Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu, Kerala, and Gujarat). These States cover about 63% of the total number of colleges and 67%
of the number of seats. In contrast to this, a disproportionately small number of colleges/seats are
located in the Empowered Action Group States (Annexure-3) and the North Eastern/Hilly States
(Annexure-4) – 20% of the aggregate number of colleges and 18% of the seats in the case of
the Empowered Action Group States and 3% of the aggregate number of colleges and 3% of the
seats in the North Eastern/Hilly States. The unbalanced regional distribution of the medical colleges
and seats has certain adverse implications, which will be discussed hereafter.
6.1.2 The need for an even regional distribution of graduate doctors in the country has been
discussed in another section of the report. There is an undesirable tendency for the graduate
doctors to practice their profession only in urban areas. The Task Force has made several
recommendations to alter the training pattern, so that the mindset of the graduate doctor is not
unduly skewed in any one direction. It is hoped that by shifting the focus of the training from the
tertiary hospital to the community setting, the skills and attitudes of the graduates would become
much more broad-based. The Task Force is of the view that this thrust towards a social-
101

102
orientation, would be significantly reinforced by ensuring the balanced spatial distribution of the
medical colleges. If the entrants in a medical college come from a non–urban setting and are trained
through a socially-oriented methodology, the chances of them opting for their future career in a
non-urban setting, is much greater.
6.1.3 In this background, the Task Force feels that certain positive initiatives need to be adopted
to induce promoters to choose locations for medical colleges that are much more widely distributed
over the country. There are two obvious advantages to this: firstly, as mentioned in passing earlier,
the graduates are less likely to be obsessed with the urban setting; and, secondly, the teaching
hospital linked to the medical college would automatically become a high quality service hub for
an otherwise underserved area. Thus, the functioning of a teaching hospital in a backward area is
expected to have a beneficial impact on the overall health services in the hinterland. For the reasons
given above, the Task Force recommends certain incentives to set up medical colleges in the
underserved areas i.e. EAG States and North Eastern/Hilly States. The specific recommendations
are discussed below.
6.1.4 The norm for a plot – a minimum size of 25 acres for a medical college - is considered
excessive for a North Eastern/Hilly State. In the three North Eastern states without a single medical
college (Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland), it would seem impossible to get a plot of land
of that size in an urban habitation. Even other North Eastern States may find it impossible to
conform to the norm for plot size at many other locations where they may want medical colleges.
The terrain in that region is undulating, and the populations being sparse, urban habitations are of
small size. Moreover, it would not be feasible to choose a location in the wilderness, as neither
the patients nor the medical professionals would be prepared to go there. Therefore, if one were
to examine the possibility of setting up a medical college in the North East, one would have to relax
the norm for the plot size. Also, it appears that such a large plot size is not an absolutely
irreducible requirement for a medical college. To a large extent a minimum built-up area would be
one component of the irreducible infrastructure for a medical college. This could be ensured with
a smaller plot size, by constructing multi-storied buildings. In this context, it would appear possible
to reduce the norm for the minimum plot size for a medical college for this type of terrain. In
today’s world it would be considered a reasonable aspiration on the part of the smallest of States
to set up a medical college within its territory. Such regional aspirations can only be ignored at
the peril of the cohesion of the country. Also, at a practical level, a medical college in an otherwise
backward area serves as a developmental hub. For all these macro-considerations, the Task
Force is of the considered view that the norms for setting up medical colleges in such
remote areas need to be relaxed.
6.1.5 The committee has also considered at length the need for relaxation of other
infrastructure and patient-load norms for hospitals in the North Eastern/Hilly States, and also in
the EAG States. If one is aiming for a regional balance in the location of the medical colleges,
one cannot realistically insist on a key norm of a 500-bedded hospital with 80% bed occupancy.
A major recommendation of the Task Force is to change the fulcrum of graduate medical
education from the tertiary hospital to the service delivery centers at lower formations, in order
to give a social orientation to the training content. It is the view of the Task Force that the health
needs of the country require a skill-mix amongst the graduates that the current training, linked
to a tertiary hospital, does not adequately provide. In fact the training that would be available
in the spatially dispersed medical colleges would, in the view of the Task Force, be much
superior than what is available centered on a tertiary hospital. To take advantage of the rural
orientation of medical colleges attached to decentralized service providing centers, one will have
to ensure that, in practical terms, the rules encourage medical colleges to come up in the
underserved areas. Under the current norms, one cannot entertain much hope that medical
colleges can come up in the EAG States or the North Eastern/ Hilly States. In order to avail of

103
the benefits of a social orientation, the government would, on balance, have to trade-off some
of the marginal advantages that come from infrastructure norms linked to a high hospital bed-
capacity and patient-load.
6.1.6 In this spirit, the Task Force recommends that for EAG States and for North
Eastern/Hilly States, the infrastructure norm for a 50-seat medicalcollege be reduced to a
200-bed hospital.  Hospitals in such areas can never have the same bed-occupancy in hospitals
as is common in other urban or developed areas. While the disease-load in the rural areas may
be as high as anywhere else, the patients have a much lesser capacity to afford inpatient
treatment, and for that reason bed-occupancy is seldom very high. In this context, the Task
Force further recommends that the norm for bed-occupancy also be reduced to 60% in
North Eastern/Hilly States and 70% for EAG States. However, it is important to emphasize
that these medical colleges should have well established and functioning field practice
areas in their vicinity.
6.1.7 In the case of the North Eastern /Hilly States, looking to the local constraints, the
area norm may be fixed at 15 acres in not more than two plots, separated by a distance
of not more than 5 km, and connected by an all-weather road. There appears to be no need
for relaxation of the area norm for the EAG states as land is not a scarce input in the rural areas
of the EAG states. For the North Eastern/Hilly States & EAG states, the other norms for facilities
and faculty strength, linked to a 200-bed hospital, would have to be separately determined by the
MCI. It is felt that any loss in value to the education on account of reduced size of the hospital
and minimum patient load would be more than compensated by the improved social orientation
when the medical college is set up in a decentralized setting.
6.1.8 In order to ensure that this does not set-off another race for proliferation of medical
‘teaching shops’, as has been experienced in certain states in the past, the Task Force
would add a further condition that the relaxed norms should be available to only one 50-
seat medical college in each district that has no medical college today. New medical colleges
wishing to avail of the relaxed norms in EAG States must be located at a distance of at least
100 KM from the state headquarters, and a distance of at least 200 KM from the other
nearest medical college. Because of the small size of North Eastern/Hilly States, this
particular distance restriction is not recommended in their category.
6.1.9 It is the view of the Task Force that the suggested modifications in the medical college
norms would bring about a more regionally balanced distribution of institutions in the country; and,
at the same time the distancing of these institutions from large urban conglomerations would bring
about a desirable social orientation in the value system of the young graduates. It is reiterated that
the suggested concessions are only for the EAG States and North Eastern/Hilly States for setting
up the first medical college with a capacity of 50 seats in a district. For any expansion of the
medical college, they must conform to the general norm. In other words, if the three states that
have no medical college, plan to have a capacity of more than 50 seats in the future, they must
factor in the general norms right from the start. The Task Force feels that, limiting the relaxation
to one college in each district without a medical college would not in any way prove a damper
to the objective of regional balance as one medical college attached to a 200-bed tertiary hospital,
would adequately meet the needs of the district for both medical education and good quality
healthcare at the decentralized level. All in all, the Task Force is of the considered view that the
relaxation of the norms as suggested above, would meet the broader needs of the national health
system without in any way compromising the essential components of an appropriate graduate
medical education.
6.1.10 The existing MCI norms for infrastructure and faculty strength have always been very
high and stringent. The Task Force is of the view that these need to be reviewed so that that

104
they are only retained at a level necessary to ensure that the quality of training is not
compromised. All other aspects that are linked to the best international standards can be
relaxed. Being a developing country, India has always tried to realistically link its norms in
respect of the facilities in different types of institutions, to the irreducible functional
requirements, disregarding the other esoteric features that may be found in the best
international institutions. It may be mentioned that in the year 2004 the MCI had sent a set
of suggestions for relaxing several aspects of the infrastructure and faculty strength norms.
The Task Force has scrutinized these carefully and strongly recommends to the government
that they be approved early.
6.1.11 Going beyond that recommendation, the Task Force is of the view that, at a subsequent
stage, the government could also ask the MCI to revisit its proposals of the year 2004 to see
whether any further cuts can be applied without loss of quality. The burgeoning cost of setting
up a medical college in the recent past has lead to several undesirable trends. To recover their large
investments, private promoters of medical colleges have resorted to a variety of unethical and illegal
practices, such as clandestine levy of capitation fees, etc. Also, the new colleges are known to cut
on expenditure by showing staff strength by fabricating their records. It would be in the interest
of good order in the field of management of medical colleges if the MCI norms are pitched at the
functionally required level, and, thereafter, these are strictly enforced. The scope and need for
manipulation of the records would consequentially stand reduced. On scanning the existing norms
of the MCI for a 50-seat medical college, the Task Force has observed that, prima facie , some
of them could bear further reduction down to a minimal acceptable level. Some of the doubts that
have occurred to the Task Force are listed below:
(i) Requirement for air-conditioned libraries/ lecture theaters in India – is this necessary?
(ii) Cannot the staff norms for clinical and non-clinical disciplines be reduced? Particularly,
for non-clinical subjects, that are taught only in the 1st year, why are a minimum of
three teachers necessary: Professor/Associate Professor/Asst. Professor?
(iii) Why do you need to provide for a research laboratory in an ordinary medical
college?
6.1.12 The Task Force also feels that the MCI should be asked by government to expeditiously
study and suggest staffing/infrastructure norms for the medical colleges in EAG States and North
Eastern/Hilly States for 50-seat medical colleges (with 200-bed hospitals and reduced patient-
load). The norms should be suggested looking to the objective of spreading the medical colleges
so as to obtain a regional balance. For several years now there has been a rush of medical
colleges to certain states in the country. This is undesirable on many counts. It is necessary to
restore a balance in the distribution of the medical colleges as soon as possible. With the further
rationalizing of the infrastructure and faculty norms, it is expected that it would become possible
to channelise the establishment of new medical colleges to areas where few are located. Recently,
consequent upon the decision to introduce OBC reservations in professional training institutions,
the Central Government has decided to increase the aggregate capacity for professional training
in the country, so that the net number of seats available to the unreserved categories is not
reduced. This occasion would be an appropriate one for introducing reduced norms for new
medical colleges in EAG States and North Eastern/ Hilly States. The convergence of these two
government decisions would lead to the resolution of the problem on account of increased
reservation, and also provide an opportunity for setting up medical colleges in a balanced manner
over the entire country.
6.1.13 The broad recommendations for revised norms for medical colleges are depicted in
the Table 8.

105
Category I: Manipur, Sikkim, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Uttaranchal, Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh
Category II: Bihar, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan
and Orissa.
Table 8: Recommendation of norms for establishment of Medical Colleges
Variable MCI
(50 students)
Category I Category II
Area
Number of Beds
Bed Occupancy
Distance from state
head quarter/nearest
medical college
25 acres
500
80%
No restriction
Two plots totaling 15
acres, not more than
5 km apart, and
connected by all
weather road
200
60%
No restriction
Normal plot size of 25
acres
200
70%
100 KM/200 KM

106
106
CHAPTER-VII
TERM OF REFERENCE–5
In order to promote opening of medical colleges in rural areas, the Task Group would
recommend whether a joint venture could be permitted whereby the government hospital at
district level is allowed to be used for teaching purposes subject to the condition that the
hospital continues to be run by the government while recurring expenditure is borne by the
private body.
7.1 Possibility of setting up joint ventures to establish Medical Colleges attached to
Government General Hospitals:
7.1.1 The Task Force has examined this possibility and finds considerable potential in it. In the
rural areas the only hospitals are the government hospitals, mostly district hospitals. The
government can enter into joint ventures with private promoters of medical colleges. The district
hospital would be required to have a minimum of 200 beds, or the private promoter would be
required to install additional beds to make good the deficiency. The joint venture would also be
required to separately obtain permission from the MCI/Government for running the medical college
under the prevailing norms. This report has recommended a reduced norm for 200 bed hospitals
in EAG States and North Eastern/Hilly States. These norms would also apply to the joint ventures.
The private promoter will bear the cost of running the district hospital. Under the joint-venture
agreement, the medical college should be required to provide free medical services at the hospital.
7.1.2 Normally, the government has a standard policy of retaining substantial control over
its institutions even as joint-ventures. However, in this case, the Task Force deliberately
recommends that the management of the hospital be handed over, as it is felt that basic
principles of efficient management would require that the two principal divisions of the
institution – the medical college and the attached hospital - be under a single management.
In order to operate a medical college that meets MCI norms, it is quite likely that the private
promoter would have to spend much more than what the government was earlier spending. Such
an eventuality would result in improved services at no cost to the state.
7.1.3 In an earlier section of the report the Task Force has suggested that each medical college
should be required to manage one CHC and four PHCs, which would also be utilized for the
training of the students. If the joint venture conceptualized above materializes, the medical college
would in effect be managing the entire public health organizational structure from the district
hospital to the PHC. Such a comprehensive integration with the public health organizational
structure would add to the quality of the training. Also, the medical college by running the district
hospital, one CHC and four PHCs would be greatly improving the quality healthcare services in the
district.
7.1.4 In the totality of the circumstances the Task Force recommends that as a pilot
project the government may sanction four such joint-venture medical colleges in different
parts of the country.  The MCI should be directed to keep a close watch on the operations of
the joint ventures. If the joint-venture arrangement stabilizes and proves sustainable, government
can consider encouraging this modality on a larger scale.

107
TERM OF REFERENCE–6
The Task Group would also recommend on the modalities of strengthening the
infrastructure of existing government medical colleges particularly in the Empowered Action
Group (EAG) and North Eastern States.
7.2 As no inventory of the present infrastructure in these institutes is available, the task force
did not find it possible to address this TOR.

108
108
CHAPTER-VIII
CONCLUSION
8.1 Imperatives for Change
8.1.1 Though the new programme of the health sector is called the National Rural Health Mission,
in practical terms, only certain elements of it can be implemented in the mission mode. The Task
Force is of the opinion that one significant element which can be achieved within the fixed mission
period is that of relaunching the primary healthcare system. It is recognized that the delivery of
the primary healthcare services is an ongoing activity, and no milestone draws it to a closure.
However, it is the perception of many, including the members of the Task Force, that as a
conceptual package of efficiently delivered health services, the present primary healthcare system
has practically become defunct. What can be attempted as a reasonable target within the mission
period is to reactivate it, and to get it running as an efficient delivery system of health services,
both in the private and public sectors. In order to achieve this derived mission target of reactivating
the primary healthcare system, one of the significant initiatives that would have to be undertaken
relates to the education system of health manpower. This is necessary to ensure that the manpower
has the necessary skills and motivation to address the primary healthcare needs of the country.
8.1.2 The Task Force must be candid in admitting that it has faced considerable problems in
addressing itself to the wide-span issues posed before it as the terms of reference. The members
of the fraternity of health educationists, many of who are members of the Task Force, have a
wealth of ideas. Their vision offers many radical alternatives to the structuring of the body of the
health system. Many of these visions are rooted in their philosophical understanding of the nature
of community relations, and the resultant mode of development appropriate to that. Many of the
thinkers in the health sector, if given an opportunity, would like to radically reconstruct not merely
the health sector, but also the allied sectors, and even beyond that, if possible, the societal
relationships.
8.1.3 Though the members of the Task Force empathised with these innovative visions, it was
nonetheless recognized that the recommendations of the report must be of a nature that could assist
the government in pushing forward its day-to-day programmes. Many of the alternative visions that
were discussed in the course of the deliberations, would require a total dismantling of the existing
structure, and the reinstallation of what the protagonists consider, a more humane and mutually-
supportive structure of societal relations. While recognizing the conceptual value of these visions,
the Task Force could not adopt them as a basis for their recommendations.
8.1.4 In the practical world, the health system of the country cannot be put on hold for a period
of, say, five years in which the old is dismantled and the new is installed and commissioned. The
recommendations of the Task Force are, therefore, necessarily limited changes of a
gradualist nature, taking care to ensure that they do not cause a major dislocation of the
existing functioning in the short term. Within that ambit, of course, the recommendations
are directed at core elements of the health education system.
8.1.5 The thrust of the recommended changes in the graduate medical course has been on the
need to meet the principal requirements of the national health system. Access to healthcare is a
basic human right; and one of the principal duties of the state, as a part of its role of governance,

109
is to make healthcare accessible to all. The most effective modality for making healthcare available
widely is through the primary healthcare network. The healthcare services in the country are
unequally divided between the private and public sectors – being heavily skewed in the direction
of the former. Primary healthcare services in much of the country are provided through untrained
personnel, practicing, what may be called quackery. In this dismal situation the Task Force
considered it appropriate to suggest changes in the graduate syllabus in order to make medical
graduates better equipped for providing primary healthcare services, whether in the public or
private sector.
8.1.6 The Task Force is aware of the viewpoint held by certain sections that medical education
must target for technical excellence, regardless of all else. However, the Task Force feels that this
desirable objective of technical excellence would need to be harmonized with the even greater need
for providing healthcare to all. The physicians produced by the existing graduate course are
characterized by an inadequacy of hands-on skills and a marked incapacity to deliver services
independently. This is an unacceptable shortcoming in a profession, particularly in one with such
a long study period. Tolerating of such a glaring deficiency in the practical aspects would not be
justified on any ostensible grounds of pursuit of theoretical excellence. The approach of the Task
Force in the course of framing its recommendations has been to make the graduate syllabus
friendlier to the needs of primary healthcare. The higher levels of specialization will be reached
through the post-graduate courses, as is the original intention. In other words, the
recommendations in regard to the graduate course are intended to generate MBBS doctors who are
competent general physicians, while the post-graduate courses will generate medical professionals
that will serve as accomplished specialists. This approach envisages three levels of healthcare,
without degenerating into two qualities of healthcare. The same approach marks the
recommendation of the Task Force regarding the short course for community health practitioners.
The span of the primary healthcare package does not cover very complex technical issues.
However, it does require hands-on skills and a mental preparedness to work independently.
Adequate skills to meet the limited requirements of the primary healthcare package can be expected
from an appropriately trained practitioner, even when he is not a MBBS graduate. Matching
different degrees of experience with different situations is a common working practice in many
professions. So long as the short-course practitioner provides services within the approved span
of primary healthcare, he would be providing services of the same quality as a graduate medical
doctor.
8.1.7 The Task Force is of the view that the short-course practitioners, who may include a large
number who originated from the alternative systems of medicine, would be located in a much more
spatially dispersed manner than the graduate medical doctors. In the rural areas, a large part of the
ambulatory care that is provided by quacks today can be substituted by the services of the spatially
dispersed community health practitioners. In the history of the country, the graduate medical
practitioners have never provided a predominant part of the primary health services, and are
unlikely to do so in the future also. The introduction of the trained community health practitioners
in the domain of primary healthcare is likely to significantly remedy this deficiency. It would be
a lasting contribution to community welfare if the graduate doctors, as also their representative
professional body, the MCI, constructively encouraged the introduction of the short-course
practitioners. A widespread perception, mentioned in passing in several sections of the report, is
that the absence of even rudimentary healthcare services is now being viewed as an intolerable
social situation. Democratic dynamics have their own inevitable outcomes. A situation, in which
even such basic human needs cannot be met, is increasingly being seen by the sufferers as a
deliberate dismissal of their needs by the powers that be. Such a feeling of disaffection, if wantonly
permitted to grow, would have its own cathartic outcome. In this emerging situation, it would be
desirable if the graduate doctors’ fraternity avoided taking a position that may be interpreted as an
insensitive denial of the irreducible needs of a large section of the population.

110
8.1.8 The Task Force for its two main recommendations–modifications in the graduate syllabus
and introduction of a short course – has tried to think through the proposals to a safe-stage from
where it can be further developed by the MCI or the state governments, for the purpose of
implementation. While it is convinced that the recommendations are feasible, the Task Force has,
in a large measure, only responded to what they sense as the silent but strong signal of disapproval
of the existing situation on the part of a large unserved constituency.
8.1.9 This Task Force report is largely in the nature of a consensus report. The representative
of the MCI has had some reservations regarding some of the observations in this report. The
comments of the MCI are reproduced in Annexure 7 to this report. With a number of public health
stalwarts serving as members on the Task Force, if the report had to meet the full satisfaction of
every one, we would have had to submit many versions of it! The report in its present form
substantially represents a consensus document in constructive support of the National Rural Health
Mission. The Task Force would like to commend these recommendations to the government
for their early consideration and implementation. It may be mentioned that in the approach
to the recommendations, wherever there were competing alternatives, the Task Force has
adopted the one that disturbs the present system the least.  With this in view, in their totality,
the recommendations are not likely to cause any untoward disturbance in the system. Since most
of the recommendations relate to changes in syllabus and course content, they can only be
expected to have an impact on the primary healthcare system when the first products of the new
educational modules move into the profession. It would be a major achievement if, during the
currency of the mission period, the major changes suggested are put into operation and are
stabilised. The fruits of the new initiatives would, of course only be visible later on. The attempt
of the Task Force can be considered one to bring about a gradual and evolutionary change in the
mind-set and the skills of the service providers in the country. The progress from year-to-year may
not seem spectacular, but when the package of recommendations are implemented and stabilized,
it is likely to result in a changed health system that would be unrecognizably superior to the
currently existing one.
8.2 From Recommendation to Action
8.2.1 Need for a Health Manpower Education Action Group
While accepting inevitable diversity of experience and perceptions of the members of the Task
Force, the experience of the Task Force brought out a unanimous sense of urgency in the need for
reformative and remedial action in the area of Medical Education and Health Manpower Development
to meet the goals of the National Rural Health Mission. In view of this urgency, the Task Force takes
the initiative to suggest to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that these recommendations need
to be followed up urgently by constituting a small, full-time Health Manpower Education Action
Group. This Group could consist of some resource experts drawn from the medical education and
nursing fraternity. The Group, which could be funded by the NRHM, could interact with the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, the MCI and the other professional Councils to transform the Task
Force recommendations into a practical, step-by-step action plan.
8.3 In the course of the Task Force deliberations, a large number of documents, publications
and resource material were taken into consideration. These are listed in the Bibliography at the end
of the Report.
8.4 In the order constituting the Task Force dated 18-8-05, the Ministry had asked for
completion of the report by 30-10-05. Because of the vast span of the terms of reference, the Task
Force was not able to complete the report by the indicated date. In the circumstances, it is
requested that the Ministry may technically extend the period till the actual date of submission of
this report.

111
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Health Services and Medical Education – A programme for immediate action. Group on
Medical Education and support Manpower (Srivastava Report) GOI. Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, GOI. 1974
2. Health Services and Medical Education – A programme for immediate action. Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, GOI. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GOI. 1976
3. Research in the Methodology of Health Delivery – Training Programme for Community
Nurses/Health Supervisors. Narayan, Ravi. 1977.
4. In Search of Diagnosis analysis of present system of health care. Patel, Ashwin J. 1977
5. Methodology of self education and self evaluation. Indian Medical Association. Indian Medical
Association. 1977.
6. Health for All – An Alternative Strategy. Indian Council of Social Sciences Research ad Indian
Council of Medical Research. Report of a joint study group of ICSSR/ICMR. Published by
Indian Institute of Education, Pune. 1981.
7. Recommendations on Graduate Medical Education. Medical Council of India. Booklet of
Medical Council of India. 1982.
8. National Health Policy. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GOI. A Pamphlet of Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare. 1982.
9. MCI Recommendations on Graduate Medical Education. Medical Council of India. 1983.
10. Compendium of Recommendations of various committees on Health and Development
(1943 – 1975). Central Bureau of Health Intelligence. Directorate General of Health Services. 1985.
11. Health and Family Planning Services in India – An epidemiological, social-cultural and political
analysis and perspectives. Banerji, Debabar. Lok Paksh, New Delhi. 1985.
12. Under the lens – Health and Medicine. Jayarao, Kamala S. 1986.
13. MCI Recommendations on Post Graduate Medical Education. Medical Council of India. 1988.
14. Manual for training on concepts of Essential Drugs and Rationalised Drug Use. National
Teachers Training Centre, JIPMER. 1989.
15. Draft National Education Policy for Health Sciences. Bajaj, J S et al . Indian Journal of
Medical Education, V ol. 29 (1 & 2), 1990.
16. Inquiry driven strategies for Innovation in medical Education in India. Consortium of Medical
Institutions. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi. 1991.
17. Medical Education Re-examined – A medico friend circle anthology. Dhruv Mankad Ed.
Centre for Education and Documentation, Bombay. 1991.
18. Draft Paper on Revised Curriculum for Undergraduate Medical Education. Report of the
committee appointed by the MCI under the Chairmanship of Prof. S. K. Kacker for
reviewing the undergraduate medical education. Medical Council of India. 1992.
111

112
19. Status study of training in MCH & FW in Medical Colleges of India. National Institute of
Health and Family Welfare. 1992.
20. Chapter of the book ‘State of India’s Health’. V oluntary Health Association of India, New
Delhi. 1992.
21. CME on Essential Drugs Concept and Rational Use of Drugs. Indo – US CME Programme.
1992.
22. Strategies for Social Relevance and Community Orientation – Building on the Indian
Experience. Narayan, Ravi et al . Community Health Cell Team, Bangalore. 1993.
23. Evolving Medical Curriculum through graduate doctor feedback – based on experience in
peripheral health institutions. Narayan, Thelma and Narayan, Ravi. Community Health Cell
Team, Bangalore. 1993.
24. Stimulus for Change – An annotated bibliography. Narayan, Ravi. Community Health Cell
Team, Bangalore. 1993.
25. Media in Medical Education. CMET, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
1994.
26. Inquiry driven strategies for Innovation in medical Education in India. Verma, Kusum. 1995.
27. Assessment in Medical Education. CMET, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
1995.
28. Confronting Commercialization of Health Care. Jan Swasthya Sabha, New Delhi. 2000.
29. Perspectives in Medical Education. Narayan, Ravi. The Community Health Cell, Bangalore.
2001.
30. Accreditation guidelines for Educational/Training Institution and Programmes in Public Health.
World Health Organization, Geneva. 2002.
31. Perspectives in Health Human Power Development in India. Dutta, G. P. and Narayan, Ravi.
V oluntary Health Association of India, New Delhi. 2004.
32. Review of Health Care in India. Shukla, Abhay. CEHAT, Mumbai. 2005.
33. Workshop on Public Health Education in India – a resource file. 2005.
34. Medical Education – Search for Destination. Shiv Chandra Mathur. 2005.
35. Medical Education – Life long study of man in relation to his health and disease. Kothari,
L K. 2005.
36. Background papers. Financing and Delivery of Health Care Services in India. National
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. 2005.
37. Report of the National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. National Commission on
Macroeconomics and Health. 2005.
38. SRS Bulletin April 2005. Office of Registrar General of India

113
113
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Before closing, the Task Force would like to acknowledge the huge contribution made to
the finalization of the report by those who were connected with the deliberations but were not
members of the Task Force. The Centre for Community Medicine, AIIMS, New Delhi and more
specifically the Residents therein, have taken great pains to service the Task Force with research
information and other secretarial assistance. The Task Force gratefully acknowledges the
contribution of all these persons. The Task Force also records the support of Community Health
Cell, Bangalore, which provided a large volume of the background material and editorial support
for this report.

114
ANNEXURE–1
State-wise distribution of Medical Colleges and Medical Seats
Name of the State Total no. of Total Number
medical colleges of Seats
Maharashtra 39 4410
Karnataka 32 4005
Andhra Pradesh 31 3925
Tamil Nadu 22 2515
Kerala 15 1650
Gujarat 13 1625
Uttar Pradesh 13 1412
West Bengal 9 1105
Bihar 8 510
Madhya Pradesh 8 970
Rajasthan 8 800
Punjab 6 520
Pondicherry 5 475
Delhi 5 560
Orissa 4 464
Jammu and Kashmir 4 350
Assam 3 391
Haryana 3 350
Jharkhand 3 190
Chhattisgarh 2 200
Himachal Pradesh 2 115
Uttaranchal 2 200
Chandigarh 1 50
Goa 1 100
Manipur 1 100
Sikkim 1 100
Tripura 1 100
T
OTAL : 242 27192
114

115
ANNEXURE–2
States with a very large number of Medical Colleges/Seats
Name of the State Total Total No. of Seats
Maharashtra 39 4410
Karnataka 32 4005
Andhra Pradesh 31 3925
Tamil Nadu 22 2515
Kerala 15 1650
Gujarat 13 1625
Percent 62.8% 66.6%
ANNEXURE–3
Number of Medical Colleges in Empowered Action Group States
Name of the State Total Total No. of Seats
Uttar Pradesh 13 1412
Uttaranchal 2 200
Bihar 8 510
Jharkhand 3 190
Madhya Pradesh 8 970
Chhattisgarh 2 200
Rajasthan 8 800
Orissa 4 464
Percent 19.8% 17.5%
115

116
ANNEXURE–4
Number of Medical Colleges in North-Eastern/ Hilly States
Name of the State Total Total No. of Seats
Assam 3 391
Manipur 1 100
Sikkim 1 100
Tripura 1 100
Arunachal Pradesh – –
Meghalaya – –
Mizoram – –
Nagaland – –
Percent 2.5% 2.5%
ANNEXURE–5
Number of Medical Colleges in Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh
Name of the State Total Total No. of Seats
Jammu and Kashmir 4 350
Himachal Pradesh 2 115
Percent 2.5% 1.7%
116

117
ANNEXURE–6
Number of Medical Colleges in the rest of India
Name of the State Total Total No. of Seats
West Bengal 9 1105
Punjab 6 520
Pondicherry 5 475
Delhi 5 560
Haryana 3 350
Chandigarh 1 50
Goa 1 100
Percent 12.4% 11.6%
117

118
ANNEXURE–7
Observations of the MCI on the draft report of the Task Force on Medical Education-
NRHM, MH&FW, Government of India.
“The MCI has its reservations in respect of under mentioned inclusions in the draft report.
1. Chapter 3 Medical curriculum issues – The council does not agree to the so called
“widespread perception in the country that the MBBS curriculum is too theoretical in
its contents. After 4 ½ years of the main course and 1 year of internship, the finished
graduate has little hands on experience” and other observations thereon. It is primarily
because the council has formulated the medical graduate curriculum with due care and
caution and desired inputs. The palpable limitations have been effectively tackled in the
draft curriculum formulated by the council through 3 regional workshops and a
concluding national workshop, wherein the deans of the various medical colleges,
DMEs, Health Secretaries of various states and eminent medical educationists
participated. The same upon due approval by the competent bodies in the council has
been forwarded to GOI and is pending notification.
2. Introduction of a new short term course to train community health practitioners-the
short term certificate courses in the certain primary health care disciplines in Para
4.2.3 of the report in the disciplines of anesthesiology, Radiology, OBS & Gynae,
Pediatrics and Community health contemplates that, the certificates issued for the
disciplines of anesthesiology and Radiology will need to be notified by the MCI as
authorized to provide health care package. Such a notification by the council is not
permissible under the provisions of the IMC Act, 1956, hence the reservation.
3. The short-term certificate course in Medicine for creating a cadre of health
professionals for rendering basic primary health care to underserved rural population
included in the report is not feasible within the tenets of the provisions of the IMC
Act, 1956. The privileges that are accruable under the act for practicing modern
Medicine are permissible only on acquiring the qualifications included in the Schedules
appended to IMC Act, 1956. It is a statutory position that the modern Medicine can
be practiced exclusively by a person who has to his credit the qualifications included
in the schedules appended by the Hon’ble courts from time to time that a person with
any health sciences qualification other than Modern Medicine is not entitled to practice
modern Medicine.
4. The present scheme incorporated in the report entails the concerned individual to be
under the “dual” control of the parent council which has registered him or her vide
the qualification in its schedule and another registration by the newly contemplated
statutory council for registering him or her in modern medicine after acquiring short
term qualification. This will mean “dual” control of 2 statutory councils permitting use
of 2 different therapies to be practiced by him or her which is neither open nor
permissible in the eyes of the provisions of the present IMC Act and interpretation
thereof vide pronouncements by the court of law.
5. The minimum prescribed requirements for opening of a new medical college being
further relaxed is untenable especially in regard to the number of teaching beds and
118

119
occupancy thereon. The hand on training is vital aspect of medical training. Any
compromise on this count could not only result in dilution of the desired academic
expertise but would also result in generating ‘half baked’ health personnel. The council
upon due and diligent application of mind has proposed the desired alterations in the
minimum requirements in the proposed draft regulations forwarded to the GOI in
respect of the minimum requirements for opening of a new medical college for an
intake of 50, 100 and 150 seats respectively. The contemplated relaxations in the draft
report are bound to generate academic dilution which would not be a conducive to be
desired standards of medical education in the country, hence reservations.”

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.