 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
137 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
On 
 
"VACCINE DEVELOPMENT, DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT AND 
MITIGATION OF PANDEMIC COVID-19"  
PERTAINING TO  
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
On 
 
"VACCINE DEVELOPMENT, DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT AND 
MITIGATION OF PANDEMIC COVID-19"  
PERTAINING TO  
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)   
2.  PREFACE (ii) - (iv) 
3.  ACRONYMS (v) – (vi) 
4.   
Chapter- I      Resurgence of Pandemic Covid-19 
Chapter-II      Vaccine Research and Development 
Chapter - III   Vaccine Procurement and Distribution 
Chapter-IV   Unfolding of the National Covid -19 Vaccination   
Programme  
Chapter-V Views of the State Governments, other     
Departments/Ministries and other stakeholder 
 Chapter- VI Challenges in Covid-19 Mitigation and Management 
Chapter- VII Pandemic is far from Over 
 
1 - 18 
19 - 28 
29 -37 
38 - 46 
 
47 - 70 
 
71 - 85 
86 - 90 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
91 - 124 
6.  MINUTES 125 – 155 
7.  ANNEXURE 156 - 157 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Vacant 
5. Vacant 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu   
9. Vacant 
10. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                       Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary  
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (i)  

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, present this One -Hundred Thirty Seventh Report on the Vaccine Development, 
Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid-19.   
 
2. The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare examined the outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19 and its management and presented its 
123rd Report to the Chairman Rajya Sabha on 21 st November, 2020 and presented to the 
Parliament on 2nd February, 2021. Taking note of the eventuality of second Covid wave in 
other countries, the Committee in that Report had warned the Government regarding the 
possibility of the increase in Covid cases an d the need for upgrading the health infrastructure 
to tackle possible subsequent Covid wave. The Committee further presented its 130 th Report 
on the Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the 123 rd Report in the Par liament on 3 rd December, 2021.  The Committee in that Report 
recommended the Government to focus on strengthening of health infrastructure, ensuring 
adequate availability of beds, adequate supply of oxygen cylinders and essential medicines 
etc.  
3. Keeping in view the continued outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19 with its mutating 
variants, the Committee, in its meeting held on 30 th December, 2020 decided to undertake the 
subject ―Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation Plan of Pandemic 
Covid-19 for detailed examination. During the examination of the subject, the Committee 
heard the views of the Secretaries, Department of Health and Family Welfare and Department 
of Health Research in its Committee meetings held on 12th January 2021 and 10th Au gust, 
2021. The Committee also heard the views of Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government 
of India and AIIMS Director in the Committee meeting held on 22nd January, 2021.  
4. With Omicron becoming the dominant Covid variant globally, the Committee in its 
meeting held on 9 th December, 2021 heard the views of Secretaries, Department of Health 
and Family Welfare and Department of Health Research on the ''Challenges posed by 
Omicron variant of Covid -19, the strategy adopted and measures taken to combat t he same''.  
Continuing with the examination of the subject, the Committee in its meetings held on 4 th 
April, 2022 heard the views of the Ministry of Women and Child Development, the 
Department of Biotechnology, SAMA - Resource Group for Women & Health and t he 
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP). In it subsequent meeting held 5 th 
April, 2022,  the Committee heard the views of Dr. Gagandeep Kang, Virologist and 
Microbiologist, Jan Swasthya Abhiyan and the representatives of the State Govern ment of 
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala on the subject "Vaccine Development, Distribution 
Management and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID 19''.  
(ii) 
 

 
 
5. The Committee also undertook two study visits to (i) Srinagar and Chandigarh 
from 6 th to 9 th  September, 2021 and (ii) to Guwahati, Bangluru and Mumbai from 25 th  to 
29th  April, 2022 and held deliberations with the representatives of the State Governments 
regarding the status of the vaccination drive in the respective States and the steps being taken 
to mitigate the onslaught & affects of the pandemic Covid-19.   
6. The Committee also sought the written views of various organizations/associations 
and the State Governments and the Union Territories on the subject.  In response to that the 
Committee received Memoranda from several States/UTs.  
7. During the finalization  of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following 
documents/ papers:- 
(i) Background Note on " Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and 
Mitigation of Pandemic Covid -19" received from following 
Departments/Ministries (a) Department of Health and  Family Welfare, (b) 
Department of Health Research, (c) Department of Biotechnology, (d) 
Ministry of AYUSH, (e) Department of Pharmaceuticals, (f) Ministry of 
Panchayti Raj etc. 
(ii) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretaries, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of Health Research and Ministry of AYUSH;  
(iii) Oral Evidences tendered by representatives of the Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Women & Child Development , State 
Governments, other stakeholders and their written submissions;  
(iv) Written submissions of various Organizations/Associations; 
(v) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of  Health and 
Family Welfare, Department of Health Research and Ministry of AYUSH; 
and 
(vi) Other relevant documents pertaining to the subject. 
 
8. The Report is divided into seven chapters, viz: - Chapter- I deals with the 
resurgence of the pandemic Covid -19; Chapter -II stipulates vaccine Research and 
Development; Chapter-III deals with Vaccine Procurement and Distribution;  Chapter- IV 
covers the unfolding of the National Covid -19 Vaccination Programme;  Chapter-V focuses 
on the views of the State Government, Other Departments/Ministries and other stakeholders; 
Chapter- VI enumerates the Challenges in Covid -19 Mitigation and Management ; and 
Chapter- VII highlights how Pandemic is far from Over. 
9. The Committee in its meeting held on 8th August, 2022 considered  the Draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
10. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations  and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body  of the Report and also 
reproduced at the end of the Report  at ‗Observations/Recommendations of the Committee -
at a Glance‘ . 
11. On behalf of the Committee and on my own behalf, I extend special thanks to 
Secretaries and officers of the (i) Department of Health and Family Welfare and (ii) 
Department of Health Research for their useful inputs on the subject. I also acknowledge the 
contribution of the stakeholders for their deep insight and useful suggestions during the 
course of interactions. I further extend special appreciation to the officers & staff attached 
with Health & Family Welfare of the Committee Section for their tireless efforts in 
assimilating all relevant information and enabling the Committee in producing this 
magnificent Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi 
8th August, 2022 
Sravana , 1944 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
Chairman, Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABHWCs   Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres  
AB-PMJAY   Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
ASU&H   Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy  
AYUSH   Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Riga and Homeopathy  
CCC     COVID Care Center 
CEPI   Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations 
CFR   Case Fatality Rate  
CGRMS   Central Grievance Redressal Management System  
CHC   Community Health Centers  
CHE    Current Health Expenditure  
CII   Confederation of Indian Industry  
CPHC    Comprehensive Health Care  
CSOs   Civil Society Organizations  
CSU    Central Surveillance Unit  
DBT   Department of Bio Technology  
DCH    Dedicated COVID Hospital  
DCHC   Dedicated COVID Health Centre  
DGHS   Director General of Health Services 
DHR   Department of Health Research 
DLE   Direct Lab Empanelment  
DSOs   Disease Surveillance Officer 
DSU    District Surveillance Units  
EUA    Emergency Use Authorization  
GE   Genus Epidemicus  
GERD   Gross domestic expenditure on R&D  
GHE    Government Health Expenditure  
GHSA   Global Health Security Agenda  
GOI    Government of India 
GoM    Group of Ministers 
HBPs    Health Benefit Packages  
HCQ   Hydroxychloroquine  
HEM   Hospital Empanelment Module  
IAPSM   Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine  
IAS   Indian Administrative Service  
ICMR   Indian Council of Medical Research  
ICTV   International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme  
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training  
IHIP    Integrated Health Information Platform  
IHS   Indian Health Service  
IJMR   Indian Journal of Medical Research  
ILI    Influenza Like Illness 
IPHA   Indian Public Health Association  
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 
 
IPHS   Indian Public Health Standard  
IST    Indian Standard Time  
JMG   Joint Monitoring Group 
LMWH    Low Molecular Weight Heparin  
MEA   Ministry of External Affairs 
MERS   Middle East Respiratory Syndrome  
MHA    Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MRHRUs  Model Rural Health Research Units  
MRUs   Multi Disciplinary Research Units  
MSMEs   Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
NAFU   National Anti-Fraud Unit  
NARI    National AIDS Research Institute  
NCDC   National Center for Disease Control  
NDMA   National Disaster Management Authority 
NEC   National Executive Committee  
NHA   National Health Authority 
NIV   National Institute of Virology  
PHC   Primary Health Centers  
PHEIC   Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
PM-ASBY  Prime Minister Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana  
PMGKY   Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana  
PoE   Points of Entry  
PPE   Personal Protective Equipment  
RRTs   Rapid Response Teams  
SAFUs    State Anti-Fraud Units  
SARI    Severe Acute Respiratory Illness  
SARS   Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
SDRF   State Disaster Response Fund  
SHA    State Health Agencies  
SII   Serum Institute of India  
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure  
SOPs   Standard Operating Protocols  
SOR    Objects and Reasons 
SSU    State Surveillance Units  
STI   Science, Technology and Innovation  
STWs   Standard Treatment Workflows  
STGs   Standard Treatment Guidelines 
TDABC   Time Driven Activity Based Costing 
THE   Total Health Expenditure  
TMS    Transaction Management System  
UIS data   UNESCO Institute of Statistics data 
VBM   Vande Bharat Mission  
VHSNC   Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee  
VRDLs   Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories  
VTMs   Viral Transport Media  
WFH    Work From Home 
(vi) 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
RESURGENCE OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 
 
1.1 The world witnessed the severe impact of Covid -19 pandemic that brought the global 
economy to a standstill. Economies around the world are still struggling to overcome the 
economic and social distress that the pandemic ravaged. India also faced a major first Covid 
wave and then a more distressing & devastating second wave that exposed the loopholes in the 
Indian Healthcare system. The Department -related Parliamentary Standin g Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare examined the Outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19 and its Management 
and presented its 123 rd Report to the Chairman Rajya Sabha on 21 st November, 2020 and 
presented to the Parliament on 2 nd February, 2021. The Committee, i n its said Report, had 
assessed the response of the Government to contain and mitigate the pandemic and made several 
recommendations regarding its management, the poor state of health infrastructure, and possible 
second wave of Corona etc. The Committee in  the said Report had also emphasized on the 
pivotal role played by ICMR in the fight against the pandemic and highlighted on the need to 
devise a suitable strategy to combat such outbreaks. Taking note of the eventuality of second 
Covid wave in other count ries, the Committee in that Report had warned the Government 
regarding the possibility of the increase in Covid cases and the need for upgrading the health 
infrastructure to tackle  any possible subsequent Covid wave. However, the alarming rate of 
Covid ca ses and deaths during the second wave uncovered weak planning and poor 
implementation of strategies laid down by the Government.  
1.2 The Committee further presented its 130 th Report on the Action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations  contained in the 123 rd Report in the 
Parliament on 3 rd December, 2021.  The Committee, in that Report, recommended the 
Government to focus on strengthening of health infrastructure, ensuring adequate availability of 
beds, adequate supply of oxygen cylinde rs and essential medicines , etc. The Committee also 
recommended the Government to undertake massive R&D projects for effective vaccine 
development and aggressively push the vaccination programme in terms of granting approval to 
more vaccines, ramping up vaccines‘ production, enhancing delivery capacity and increasing the 
vaccination rate. 
1.3 Pandemic Covid -19 altered the socio -politico economic world order thereby 
necessitating the Committee to continue to have critical assessment of the Pandemic  Covid-19 
beyond the ambit and scope of the Committee's 123 rd Report on , "The Outbreak of Pandemic 
COVID-19 and its Management" followed by the 130 th Report on, "The Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in its 123 rd Report" thereon, by 
undertaking detailed study on the subject, "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management 
and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID-19".   
OUTBREAK AND ORIGIN OF COVID -19 
1.4 According to WHO, the outbreak of febrile respiratory illness of unkno wn etiology in 
December, 2019 originated from Wuhan, Hubei province of China. The outbreak has been 
epidemiologically linked to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market involving sale of sea food 
and live animals in mid-December, 2019.  During the examination of the subject, ―The Outbreak 
of Pandemic COVID-19 and its Management‖, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had 
submitted that all available evidence for COVID -19 suggests that the causative virus (SARS -
CoV-2) has a zoonotic source. Many crucial epide miological parameters like extent and role 

2 
 
played by sub -clinical/asymptomatic infections, period of communicability etc. still remain 
under investigation. The infection is spread through droplets or prolonged contact with infected 
patients. 
1.5 The Committee is given to understand that, the World Health Assembly in May 2020 
had requested the Director -General of the World Health Organization (WHO) to continue its 
work to identify the zoonotic source of the corona virus and the route of introduction to the 
human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts. WHO worked closely with 
a multidisciplinary team of Chinese experts and examined four scenarios for introduction of the 
virus, namely, (i) direct zoonotic transmission to humans (spillover); (ii) introduction through an 
intermediate host followed by spillover; (iii) introduction through the (cold) food chain; and (iv) 
introduction through a laboratory incident. 
 
1.6 WHO in its Report released in March 2021 submitted that the joint team con ducted a 
qualitative risk assessment considering the available scientific evidence and findings for each of 
these possible pathways of emergence. The WHO joint team had considered the following 
ranking of potential introduction pathways, from very likely t o extremely unlikely: (the ranking 
of potential introduction pathways is from very likely to extremely unlikely) (1) through an 
intermediate host; (2) direct zoonotic introduction; (3) introduction through cold/ food chain; 
and (4) introduction resulting f rom a laboratory incident. In the Report, building from the 
evidence for the studies conducted so far, follow -up research studies were proposed for the first 
three options. The panel had further recommended for establishing a global expert  group to 
support joint traceability research on the suspected origin of the epidemic.  


3 
 
1.7 Attention of the Committee is also brought to the WHO‘s  Scientific Advisory Group 
for the Origins on Novel Pathogens (SAGO) that advises the  Secretariat on technical and 
scientific considerations regarding emerging and re -emerging pathogens.  Scientific Advisory 
Group for the Origins on Novel Pathogens ( SAGO) was formed in 13 th October, 2021 to study 
the emergence of future pathogens with pandemic potential and has been tasked with  advising 
studies that are necessary to gather evidence to better understand the origins of SARS-CoV-2.  
1.8 SAGO submitted its first preliminary Report in June 2022 that has pointed towards 
zoonotic origin as the most likely explanation for the origin of the novel coronavirus. However, 
the Report submitted that the original animal source, the intermediate host a s well as the 
moment the virus crossed over into humans could not be identified. The panel has also 
recommended that additional investigations should be carried out with the staff in the 
laboratories tasked with managing and implementing biosafety and bios ecurity at laboratories: 
(1) those in the proximity of the original COVID -19 outbreak working with SARS -like viruses 
in Wuhan, China and potentially with (2) those located worldwide where early COVID -19 cases 
have been retrospectively detected before 2020.  
1.9 The Committee observes that the origin of the virus still remains obscure and 
more studies need to be conducted to shed light on the origins of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.  
The Committee strongly believes that identification of the true source of the virus is 
crucial for establishment of new zoonotic reservoirs so that future reinfections and 
diseases in animals as well as humans are prevented. Moreover, the informat ion is crucial 
to reduce any future risks due to the emergence and transmission of the zoonotic diseases  
like the recent outbreak of Monkey pox.  The Committee is of the opinion that the large 
scale fatalities and the devastating impact of Covid -19 pandemic  necessitate the need of 
being better prepared for possible future outbreaks  viz the menace and management of 
Monkeypox. The Committee strongly believes that it is incumbent upon global scientists to 
accelerate its efforts in identifying novel pathogens an d establish a robust surveillance 
mechanism for faster detection of the pathogens. In this regard, it becomes all the more 
important to identify the origin of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and investigate its origin along 
all the possible pathway of emergence.  
1.10 The Committee takes into account that there is still lack of concrete evidence on 
whether the corona  virus reached humans via a laboratory incident. Nevertheless, the 
Committee understands that if the origin of corona virus is allowed to remain a mystery , it 
will have co lossal consequences over Bio -safety and Bio -security of the world. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government to reckon its diplom acy to 
appeal to the comity of n ations to conduct more studies to identify the origin of Co vid-19 
and penalize the culprits at  the International p latform. The Committee further feels  that 
the increasing number of emerging virus highlights the necessity of establishing a robust 
mechanism for systematic investigation of the origin and the route of  transmission of the 
pathogens. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to develop a healthcare 
framework in the country for investigating and managing future outbreaks more 
effectively. In this regard, the Committee strongly believes that the re cently constituted 
Task Force Team led by Dr. VK Paul will track the Monkeyp ox situation and provide 
guidance to the Government on the expansion of diagnostic facilities in the country and 
combat the menace of Monkeypox.  
 
 

4 
 
CONSULTATION PROCESS 
1.11 During the examination of the subject, the Committee heard the views of the 
Secretaries, Department of Health and Family Welfare and Department of Health Research in its 
meetings held on 12 th January 2021 and 10 th August, 2021, respectively. The Committee also 
heard the views of Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India and the Director, 
AIIMS in its meeting held on 22 nd January, 2021. With Omicron becoming the dominant Covid 
variant globally, the Committee in its meeting held on 9 th December, 2021 heard the views of 
Secretaries, Department of Health and Family Welfare and Department of Health Research on 
the ''Challenges posed by Omicron variant of Covid-19, the strategy adopted and measures taken 
to combat the same''.  Continuing with the examinati on of the subject, the Committee in its 
meeting held on 4 th April, 2022 heard the views of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, the Department of Biotechnology, SAMA- Resource Group for Women & Health 
and the National Institute of Public Finance an d Policy (NIPFP). The Committee in its meeting 
held on 5th April, 2022 heard the views of Dr. Gagandeep Kang, Virologist and Microbiologist, 
Jan Swasthya Abhiyan and the representatives of the State Government of Maharashtra, 
Karnataka and Kerala on the su bject "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and 
Mitigation of Pandemic COVID 19''.  
1.12 The Committee undertook study visits to (i) Srinagar and Chandigarh from 6 th to 9th  
September, 2021 and (ii)  Guwahati, Bengaluru and Mumbai from 25 th to 29th April, 2022, held 
deliberations with the representatives of the State Governments regarding the status of the 
vaccination drive in the respective States and the steps taken/being taken to mitigate the effects 
of the Covid-19 pandemic.   
 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT 
1.13 During the examination of the subject, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
informed the Committee that the following two committees were constituted by the Prime 
Minister to tackle the unprecedented Covid-19 situation in the country:- 
(a) Task Force on Encouraging Research and Development in Drugs, Pharmaceuticals and 
Vaccines headed by Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, Shri K Vijay 
Raghavan constituted in May, 2020 with the aim to encourage Research & Development  and 
manufacturing of vaccines in India; and 
 
(b) NEGVAC (National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration)  headed jointly by 
Member (Health), NITI Aay og Dr. V. K. Paul and Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare constituted in August 2020 with the  aim to form prioritization groups for vaccination 
and to work out other modalities in vaccine management and distribution. 
1.14 The Ministry further submitted that for appropriate management of suspect/confirmed 
COVID-19 cases, a three -tier arrangement of  health facilities, viz, (i) Dedicated COVID Care 
Center (DCCC) with isolation beds for mild or pre -symptomatic cases; (ii) Dedicated COVID 
Health Center (DCHC) oxygen supported isolation beds for moderate cases and (iii) Dedicated 
COVID Hospital (DCH) with ICU beds for severe cases, had been implemented in consultation 
with the State Governments. Tertiary care hospitals under ESIC, Defence, Railways, 
paramilitary forces, Steel Ministry etc. were also leveraged for case management.  
 

5 
 
RESURGENCE OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 
1.15     The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that India witnessed resurgence in 
COVID-19 cases in the first half of February 2021. The trajectory witnessed a steep rise in the 
months of April and May 2021. Evolution and spread of highly transmissible Delta variant of 
SARS-CoV-2, coupled with number of social factors including easing of lockdown,  a lack of 
community adherence to COVID Appropriate Behaviour (CAB) combined with pandemic 
fatigue can be attributed for the surge in Coron a-virus cases during th e said period. After 
reaching a peak on 7th May 2021, the trajectory of COVID-19 cases declined considerably.  
1.16 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the statistics put forward by the Our 
World in Data  where in daily new confirmed cases per million people have been plotted as 
follows: 
 
1.17     In response to the Committee's query, the Ministry submitted that while it might be 
difficult to comment if the surge could have been prevented, as many of the contributing factors 
to resurgence of pandemic Covid -19 cases were beyond public health interventions. It was 
maintained that Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare continued to monitor situation 
closely, provided required technical support and also sup ported the states through logistic and 
financial support to further strengthen the existing health infrastructure to tackle COVID -19 
pandemic.  
1.18     The Committee observes that India is one of the countries with the heaviest burden 
of Covid -19 cases in the world. The enormity of the population of the country posed a 
major challenge in the face of this unprecedented pandemic. With the fragile health 
infrastructure and the huge shortage of the healthcare workers, the country witnessed 
itself reel under tremendous pressure. The Committee notes that the Government could 
not accurately anticipate the gravity of the possible resurgence of pandemic and its 
subsequent waves. The Committee believes that even when the trajectory of COVID -19 
cases in the country registered a decline in the aftermath of first wave, the Government 
should have continued its efforts to monitor the resurgence of COVID -19 situation and i ts 
possible outrage in the country. The Committee notes that the Ministry has been 
cautioning States to maintain the vigil and chalk out situation and strategy & plan for any 
exigencies that may arise due to resurgence of COVID -19 in their respective State s, 


6 
 
however, the Committee is unhappy to note that many States were unable to cope up with 
the arising uncertainties and medical emergencies in the wake of the pandemic resurgence 
of Covid-19 during the second wave that caused more than 5 lakh registered deaths.   
 
WAVES OF PANDEMIC OF COVID-19 
1.19     The Committee is given to understand that viruses constantly change through mutation, 
and new variants of a virus are expected to occur over time. Till date, multiple COVID -19 
variants have been detected and are circulating globally. In December 2020, a new variant with 
an unusually large number of mutations named as the B.1.17 (Alpha) was reported in the UK, 
however, the exact origin of mutations is difficult to ascertain.  
 
1.20    Taking note of the changing scenario, the Committee in its meeting held on 22 nd January, 
2021, raised concerns regarding the detection of new kind of Covid variants. In the same 
meeting, the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India had submitted before the 
Committee that firstly a new variant could lead to an increase in the spread of the virus; 
secondly its impact could increase the incidence of the disease and thirdly it might lead to 
immune escape. He elaborated that immune escape variants could cause Covid -19 even among 
those people who have already been infected in the past or have been vaccinated. Though that is 
a low probability event, however if that occurs then the phenomenon could lead to an increase in 
transmission. Similar concerns were raised with the UK v ariant and South African variant. It 
was underlined that in such a scenario, as the transmission increases, the vaccine deployment 
must also be expedited. He further stated that as the virus changes, the vaccine could also be 
developed in a way so that it decreases the virulence of the virus. Under the stated situation, 
identification of the number of patients, sequencing of virus in a selected group, laboratory 
testing of the virus, impact on transmission etc were carried out. He also informed the 
Committee that CSIR, Department of Biotechnology and ICMR were working on this front. 
1.21  The Committee notes that WHO in collaboration with other institutes has been monitoring 
the evolution of SARS -CoV-2 since January  2020. WHO has been classifying the different 
variants of Covid as specific Variants of Interest (VOIs) and Variants of Concern (VOCs). 
WHO defined Variants of concern (VOC) as follows:  
 A SARS -CoV-2 variant that meets the defin ition of a Variants of Inte rest 
(VOI) and, through a comparative assessment, has been demonstrated to be associated with 
one or more of the following changes at a degree of global public health significance:  
a. Increase in transmissibility or detrimental change in COVID-19 epidemiology; OR 
b. Increase in virulence or change in clinical disease presentation; OR 
c. Decrease in effectiveness of public health and social measures or available diagnostics, 
vaccines, therapeutics. 
Previously circulating VOCs: 
WHO label Pango Lineage Earliest documented Samples 
Alpha B.1.1.7  United Kingdom,  Sep-2020 
Beta B.1.351 South Africa,  May-2020 
Gamma P.1  Brazil,  Nov-2020 
Delta B.1.617.2 India,  Oct-2020  
 

7 
 
Currently circulating variants of concern (VOCs): 
 
WHO label Pango  lineage• Earliest documented samples  
Omicron B.1.1.529 Multiple countries, Nov-2021 
 
1.22 WHO defines Variants of interest (VOI) as a SARS -CoV-2 variant (i) with genetic 
changes that are predicted or known to affect virus characteristics such as transmissibility, 
disease severity, immune escape, diagnostic or therapeutic escape; and (ii) identi fied to cause 
significant community transmission or multiple COVID -19 clusters, in multiple countries with 
increasing relative prevalence alongside increasing number of cases over time, or other apparent 
epidemiological impacts to suggest an emerging risk to global public health.   
 
Previously circulating VOIs: 
WHO label  Pango   
lineage* 
Earliest documented    
samples  
Epsilon B.1.427 
B.1.429 
United States of America, Mar-2020 
Zeta P.2 Brazil, Apr-2020 
Eta B.1.525 Multiple countries, Dec-2020 
Theta P.3 Philippines, Jan-2021 
Iota B.1.526 United States of America, Nov-2020 
Kappa B.1.617.1 India, Oct-2020 
Lambda C.37 Peru, Dec-2020 
Mu B.1.621 Colombia, Jan-2021 
 
There is no currently circulating variant of interest (VOI). 
Second wave of Covid-19 
1.23      The Committee notes that the newer variants of Covid -19, especially Delta variant was 
primarily responsible for the second wave in the country. The second wave of COVID -19 in 
India proved out to be more dangerous than the first wave and there was  a considerable increase 
in the number of Covid positive cases as well as deaths. In the Committee's meeting held on 10 th 
August, 2021, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as on 9 th 
August, 2021, the number of covid cases in India were 3.2 crore and active cases were 4.06 
lakhs. 4.28 lakhs deaths and 23,455 case per million had been reported till 9 th August, 2021 and 
47.8 crore tests was conducted. As per information submitted by the Ministry, Average daily 
New Cases during the second wave were as follows: 
 

8 
 
 
1.24     The Committee is of the view that the unprecedented rise in the number of Covid cases 
and deaths on such a large scale reveals absence of a coherent approach towards tackling the 
pandemic. The Committee in its 123rd Report had raised concerns about the subsequent Covid 
waves and recommended for better coordination between the Centre and the States. However, 
the second Covid wave saw exponential rise in Covid cases and crippling of the health 
infrastructure thereby unmasking the gaps in Government's Health policy.  
1.25     The Committee would like to recapitulate that during the first Covid wave, the country 
underwent a massive nationwide lockdown that was one of the driving factors behind the 
control in infection rate of the virus. A fatal upsurge in cases during the second wave highlights 
that the time gained during slowing down of the infection in the first phase could not be 
optimally utilized for better preparedness. Throughout the second Covid wave, lack of 
communication and coordination was evident amongst the health agencies and the whole 
medical governance system was disconnected and disjointed thus leaving the citizens hapless 
victims of the pandemic. The acute shortage of Oxygen in the hospitals and lack of O xygenated 
& ICU Beds added to the chaos leading to the loss of many lives.  
1.26     The Committee further notes that the share of Delta variant in all analyzed sequences 
was as low as 0.07% on 21 st December, 2020 which further increased to 5.33% by 4 th January, 
2021. By 22 nd February, 2021, 10.77% of the total sequences were reported to be of delta 
variant which increased to 27.63% by 5 th April, 2021. With the surge in cases and onset of the 
second wave of Covid-19, the share of Delta variant in all analyz ed sequences further increased 
to 82.69% by 3 rd May, 2021 and by 31 st May, 2021, the share had increased to 98.05%. On 13 th 
December, 2021, 95.49% of the analyzed sequences were of the delta variant which eventually 
lowered to 0.93% by 24 th January, 2022. The Share of delta variant in all analyzed sequences 
has been graphed as under (source: Our World in Data):   


9 
 
 
1.27     The Committee notes that India has sequenced a total number of 256,599 samples till 
date. As on 28th June 2021, INSACOG had processed o ver 45,000 samples and sequenced 
36,883 samples. The number of sequenced samples was  very low compared to the total number 
of cases during the second wave of the pandemic. Therefore, it is very difficult to get concrete 
data on the actual share of delta variants during the beginning of the second wave of Covid.  
1.28     The Department of Biotechnology, in its Background Note, submitted that  Indian 
SARS-CoV-2 Genomics Consortium (INSACOG) assess SARS -CoV-2 variants in India and is 
jointly managed by M inistry of H&FW, DBT, CSIR and ICMR. INSACOG also aims to 
correlate Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) data with clinical/epidemiological data for 
advance preparedness for public health interventions. INSACOG monitors the genomic 
variations on a regular basis t hrough the multi -laboratory network. INSACOG was initially 
established with 10 National laboratories and has expanded to 53 laboratories across the country 
in Hub and spoke model, where the 10 National laboratories act as mentor organizations for the 
other laboratories which has been added to the network, as part of infrastructure and genome 
sequencing capacity building efforts of the consortium. At present the consortium is a network 
of more than 300+ sentinel sites and 53 Central Govt/ State Govt./NGOs. 2  Private Genome 
Sequencing Laboratories have also connected with INSACOG Genome Sequencing 
Laboratories (IGSLs) and started working in the consortium.  
1.29     INSACOG closely monitors mutations and regularly reports to Government for 
appropriate public h ealth measures. Genomics data generated in INSACOG also has direct 
application such as public health intervention measures; develop diagnostics for specific SARS -
CoV-2 variant, support the development of therapies and vaccines for specific variant; evaluat e 
and improve understanding of re -infection cases and differentiate between prolonged infection 
and re-infection. 
1.30      The sequenced viral genomes analyzed by the respective sequencing laboratories are 
regularly shared with the Central Surveillance Un it (CSU) that works under Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Programme (IDSP) at the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC). The 
NCDC further correlates this data with the field data trends and establishes the associations (if 


10 
 
any) between the emerging SA RS-COV-2 variants and epidemiological drifts based on COVID 
data generated by State and District Surveillance Units of IDSP.  
1.31    The Committee takes into consideratio n the anticipation and conclusion  of 
virologists and microbiologists that virus will continue to evolve and possibly mutate into a 
more virulent and transmissible variant and so has been evident by the subsequent Covid 
waves across the world. The Committee, therefore, strongly advises the Government that 
there is an urgent need to expand the genome sequencing machinery in the country to keep 
a track of mutating variants.  
 
1.32    The Committee notes that Indian SARS -CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics 
(INSACOG) is a consortium of 38 laboratories which monitors the genomic variations in 
the SARS-CoV-2. INSACOG, in its Bulletin dated June 20, 2022 has submitted that the 
total number of samples sequenced is 256,599.  The Committee feels that considering the 
high number of total covid cases in the country, the number of samples sequenced is very 
low. The Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that genome sequencing is part of an 
effective virus containment strategy and facilitates better surveillance thereby entailing 
necessity for better policy formulation on Covid-19 management. Keeping into account the 
fact that India lags behind in genome sequencing and has sequenced very less number of 
samples when compared to other countries. The Committee strongly believes that there is 
a need to augment the genome sequencing facilities in the country. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to intensify its efforts with regard to genome 
sequencing of the SARS -CoV-2 genome and ensure that the mutating variants are 
monitored efficiently and regularly. This  is essential to understand the characteristics and 
complexity of the virus along with its ramifications and the conclusion so arrived must be 
scientifically utilized for vaccines development based on empirical facts and data with due 
clinical trials.   
 
1.33     The Committee, in its 123 rd Report, had analyzed the role of NCDC -IDSP and 
emphasized on the need to revitalize the enshrined role and responsibility of NCDC for 
effective control of the disease along with strengthening of the Central Surveillance Unit 
(CSU), State Surveillance Units (SSU) and District Surveillance Units (DSU). The 
Committee notes that NCDC -IDSP undertakes crucial tasks related to surveillance and 
conducts epidemiological investigation. The Committee strongly recommends that the 
sequenced data must be shared with the NCDC at the earliest. The Ministry must make 
efforts to strengthen the  Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) at the 
National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) so that the data provided by the sequencing 
laboratories are timely investigated and correlated with the field data trends 
 
1.34     On the infrastructural changes brought during the second wave of the pandemic with 
respect to testing facilities, laboratories, Oxygen cylinders, ICU beds etc., the Ministry 
submitted that the Union Government provided the required technical support and al so 
supported the States through logistic and financial support to further strengthen the existing 
health infrastructure to tackle COVID-19 pandemic.  
1.35 The Ministry also stated that with the intent to reduce the risk of cross infection to non -
COVID patients as well as to maintain continuity of non -COVID essential health services in the 
country, a three -tier arrangement of dedicated COVID -19 health facilities was implemented in 
the country. The Ministry further submitted that the isolation bed capacity and ICU bed capacity 
which was only 10,180 and 2,168 before the first lockdown (as on 23rd March 2020) was being 

11 
 
enhanced continuously and as on 13th August 2021, there were 18,03,266 isolation beds and 
1,24,598 ICU beds in the country.  
1.36 The Committee w as further informed that the availability of testing infrastructure and 
diagnostics was continuously being enhanced in the country. Starting with just one laboratory 
for testing of samples for COVID -19, the network of existing laboratories expanded vastly to 
test samples for COVID-19. The Ministry further submitted that as of 12th August 2021, a total 
of 2863 laboratories had been approved for COVID -19 Testing. Besides the Gold Standard RT -
PCR (in 1755 labs), TrueNat (in 958 labs), CBNAAT (in 131 labs) tech niques and other testing 
platform (in 19 labs) were also being used for testing. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
on 16th April 2021 issued a detailed SOP on COVID -19 Containment & Management in Peri -
urban, Rural & Tribal areas. The SOP (among other  recommendations) calls for training of 
CHOs and ANMs in performing Rapid Antigen Testing and provisioning of Rapid Antigen Test 
(RAT) kits in all public health facilities including sub -centres (SCs) / Health and Wellness 
Centres (HWCs) and Primary Health Centres (PHCs). 
1.37 The Committee appreciates Government‘s efforts that the Covid -19 testing 
infrastructure in the country has come a long way since the detection of the first Covid 
case in January, 2020. Initially the Covid testing facility was available  only at NIV Pune 
and gradually the testing facilities were expanded to other laboratories across the country. 
The Committee considers that the usage of highly specific molecular diagnostic tests is 
crucial for identifying the active cases and managing the  risk of contamination. The 
Committee, in this regard, commends ICMR's push for a variety of other tests such as 
TrueNAT and CBNAAT systems which were used for comprehensive screening and 
confirmation of COVID- 19 cases.  
1.38 The Committee takes into acco unt that earlier diagnosis of the virus followed by 
timely isolation of the infected persons is extremely important in the pandemic 
management. The Committee, however, strongly believes that providing large scale testing 
facilities with faster results that  correspond to the increased transmission rate of the virus 
should have been a crucial part of Covid management policy.  The Committee  observe s 
that owing to the initial delayed action in the aftermath of outbreak of Pandemic by the 
Healthcare system to a dapt to the rapidly increasing cases, there were considerable 
procrastination in getting the results of Covid Test and thereafter unbound spree of 
transmission went unchecked and uncontrolled. Incidents of results getting delayed by 
more than a week were a lso reported thereby leaving infected persons in lurch. The 
Committee observes that the people had to reluctantly approach private facilities for RT -
PCR Tests which charged heavily. The Committee is concerned to note that there existed a 
visible divide in the testing infrastructure in the rural and the urban areas, thereby forcing 
covid infected persons to run from pillar to posts.   
1.39 The Committee regrets the non -responsive attitude of the Government towards 
enhancing the health infrastructure in the a ftermath of the receding first Covid -19 wave. 
With trends of Pandemic Covid -19 witnessing a steady decrease, the Government laid its 
guard down and failed to maintain the momentum of Covid case management attained 
during the first wave. The Committee expre sses its disappointment over the lackadaisical 
approach of the Government machinery to testing of Covid cases with the fall in its trends 
and further ease in restrictions across the country. Both of these could be attributed to the 
tsunami of covid cases which was followed by enormous fatalities during the second wave 
and the Government agencies remained perplexed and witness to the deteriorating 
situation that went out of control. 

12 
 
MISMANAGEMENT OF OXYGEN SUPPLY DURING THE SECOND WAVE 
1.40 The Second Covid  wave was haunted by an acute shortage of Oxygen when the Indian 
health infrastructure crumbled under the high demand of Oxygen and hospital beds. Media 
reported traumatic experiences of patients and their families where desperate pleas were made 
across TV channels for Oxygen cylinders.  Many Hospitals across Delhi sent out desperate SOS 
calls to Government authorities through social media and TV channels. Media reported that 
Madhukar Rainbow Children's Hospital in Malviya Nagar, Delhi sounded an alarm abou t their 
depleting Oxygen stocks. The hospital further reported that it will not take any admission which 
requires oxygen or ventilation support "due to inconsistent liquid oxygen supply‖. Aakash 
Healthcare in Dwarka appealed to government authorities to sh ift patients to other facilities "so 
that they can be saved". Most of the Hospitals made desperate plea to the Government for 
replenishing their dwindling stocks.  As per Media Reports, many private hospitals also started 
installing their own oxygen plants to reduce dependence on suppliers amid the ongoing crisis.  
1.41 A petition was filed in the Supreme Court seeking a high -level inquiry by a commission 
into the alleged non -supply and non -availability of medical oxygen for COVID -19 patients 
during the second Covid wave. Media reported that shortage of Medical Oxygen had resulted in 
several untimely deaths in the country during the second wave of the pandemic.  
1.42 On a specific query regarding the shortage of Medical Oxygen in the country, the 
Ministry submitted that the daily liquid medical oxygen (LMO) supply was about 1292 MTs per 
day in February 2021 which was increased to 8593 MTs in April 2021. On 28th May 2021, a 
total of 10,250 MTs of LMO was allocated to the States. This was done by enhancement of  
LMO production in steel plants as well as in other LMO plants. Restrictions were also imposed 
on industrial use of oxygen.   
1.43 The Ministry further submitted that a dynamic and transparent framework for allocation 
of medical oxygen in consultation with  States/UTs and all the stakeholders such as relevant 
Ministries, manufacturers/suppliers of liquid oxygen etc. was prepared. Online digital solutions 
viz. Oxygen Demand Aggregation system (ODAS) and Oxygen Digital Tracking System 
(ODTS) were developed to ascertain the demand for medical oxygen from all medical facilities 
and to track their transportation.  
1.44 To avoid wastage of medical oxygen, guidelines on rational use of oxygen were issued 
on 25th September 2020, and further revised and disseminated t o States on 25 th April 2021. The 
Ministry further submitted that 1,02,400 oxygen cylinders were procured in April and May of 
2020 and distributed to States. Further orders for additional 1,27,000 cylinders were placed on 
21.04.2021 (54,000 jumbo cylinders (D type) and 73,000 regular cylinders (B type). Deliveries 
of the same had started and 73,352 (56,108 B -type and 14,244 D -type) cylinders had been 
delivered as on 3rd August 2021. 
1.45 The Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in reply to a question 
on 15 th March, 2022 in the 256 th  Session of the Rajya Sabha  stated that the Government of 
India sanctioned 1561 Pressure Swing Absorption (PSA) oxygen generation plants. These 
include 1225 PSA plants which have been installed and commis sioned under PMCARES Fund 
in every district of the country. Additionally 336 PSA Plants were set up by PSUs of Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Railways etc. A 
total of 1541 out of 1561 PSA plants were commissioned by that time. 
1.46 The Ministry also submitted that to generate oxygen at the health facility level, PSA 
plants were being established in each district hospitals, especially in far flung areas enabling the 

13 
 
hospitals to become self -sufficient in generation of oxygen for their needs and thereby, reduce 
the burden on the medical oxygen supply grid across the country. 
1.47 The Committee finds that with the increase in the number of covid positive cases in 
the country, there was a severe pressure on the health infrastructure from the smallest to 
the large private hospitals. There were several instances of families of patients pleading for 
oxygen and waiting in queues for o xygen cylinders. Media relayed stori es of hospitals 
running out of o xygen and ma king desperate appeals when hospitals were reported ly left 
with only few hours of o xygen supply. In April, 2021, the Delhi High court slammed the 
Delhi Government for alleged mismanagem ent in distribution of medical o xygen.  The 
High Court in May, 2021 als o asked the Central Government to divert the unutilized 
tankers of oxygen to Delhi from States where the Covid-19 situation was improving. 
1.48 The Committee reiterates its observations/recommendations made while examining 
the Covid situation in 2020. The Committee in its 123 rd Report had warned the 
Government of the possible shortage of the Oxygen Cylinders and supply of Oxygen in the 
hospitals. The Committee is disappointed to note that the Ministry in its submission in 
2020 had assured that the country i s self sufficient in Oxygen and Oxygen Cylinders; 
however, their hollow claim was brutally exposed during the second wave. The Committee 
recalls its recommendation made in the 123 rd Report where the Committee had strongly 
recommended the Government for enc ouraging adequate production of o xygen and 
ensuring its supply in the hospitals. Notwithstanding, the Government failed to m anage 
the even distribution of o xygen in the States and amidst the skyrocketing demand, the 
Government could  not maintain a steady f low of o xygen leading to an unprecedented 
medical crisis. The Committee notes that poor logistic management and failure of the 
Government in ensuring a quick response from the healthcare system speaks volume of 
the utter chaos in the Government machinery e specially during the second wave.  A poor 
monitoring of the oxygen generatio n capacity and availability of M edical Oxygen, 
Oxygenated and Ventilator beds in the hospitals further aggravated the situation.  
1.49 The Committee observes that in the Statement laid in the house in the 256 th Session 
of the Rajya Sabha, the Minister of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as on 4 th 
April, 2022, States/UTs reported a total of 5,21,358 deaths due to COVID -19 in the 
country. The Ministry submitted that the Govern ment of India maintains data of total 
cases and deaths due to COVID-19 reported and updated by States/UTs on a regular basis. 
The Committee wonders that in response to the Union Government's request to 
States/UTs to furnish the details of Covid deaths owin g to the lack of oxygen, 20 
States/UTs responded and none of these State/UTs have reported confirmed death due to 
oxygen shortage.   
1.50 The Committee is disturbed at the unfortunate denial of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare regarding Covid Deat hs due to Oxygen shortage in the country. The 
Committee takes into account the media reports that there were many deaths due to 
Oxygen shortage in the hospitals; however, the sheer negligence of the fact shows the 
absence of empathy in the Government parlance. The Committee notes that there were no 
definite guidelines for identifying the deaths due to inadequate supply of oxygen. Oxygen 
shortage is not noted as a cause of death in the medical rec ords and most of the deaths 
were attributed to co -morbidities. The Committee is disappointed at this utter ignorance 
by the Government and strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
to examine the number of deaths due to oxygen shortage especially during the second wave 
of Covid. The Ministry, in coordination with the States, must audit the deaths due to  
oxygen shortage and enable robust documentation of the covid deaths that will infact 

14 
 
generate the responsive and responsible sense of go vernment and cautious formulation of 
policy and combat situational health care emergency. The Committee further expects 
more transparency and more accountability from the Government agencies. The Ministry 
must meticulously examine the oxygen stricken Covid  deaths and ensure that proper 
compensation is accorded to the families of the victims.  
1.51 During its deliberations with the Ministry, the Committee noted that the PSA 
plants were being established in each district hospitals. The Committee observes that  
setting up Pressure Swing Adsorption  (PSA) and ensuring its proper operation and 
maintenance incurs high costs. The Committee is concerned that the plants may be left 
unused when the Oxygen demand is low. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government to ensure that the PSA set up is utilized optimally and any wastage of the 
resources is avoided. The Government must accordingly devise a system to make Oxygen 
readily available to the hospitals and strengthen the infrastructure for transporting 
oxygen to the Government and private Hospitals within the desirable span of time.  
1.52 The Committee is of the view that technical expertise is required for operation of 
PSA plants. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
required technical staff is available at the district hospitals and no unwarranted incident 
take place once the PSAs are installed in the hospitals. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that efficient Oxygen Management Protocols (OMP) 
are followed in all the hospitals and oxygen is scientifically administered and managed for 
optimum medical utilization in public and private hospitals.  
 
CHALLENGES AND LEARNINGS FROM THE SECOND WAVE OF THE 
PANDEMIC 
1.53 With regard to the challenges and learnings from the second wave of the pandemic and 
the preparation done by the Government to combat the possible third wave of the pandemic, the 
Ministry submitted the following information: 
i. Governance and building up a coordinated, collaborative response: Inter -sectoral 
coordination has been facilitated by establishment of suitable platforms including Group of 
Ministers, Empowered Groups to fast-track decision making. 
ii. Reliance on imported logistic: A public health response of this scale and magnitude could 
not have been possible without developing indigenous capacities in terms of essential 
logistic including personal protective equipment, diagnostics, ventilators and more recently 
in terms of vaccine manufacturing capacities.  
iii. Supporting States with adequate logistic: States are being supported in terms of supply of 
logistics 
iv. Black marketing of es sential drugs like Remdesivir: Due to reports of shortage of 
Remdesivir, export of the drug has been banned since 11 th April 2021 to improve local 
availability. All States/UTs and their Drug Controllers have been requested to verify stock 
of the drug and c heck malpractices and take other effective steps to curb hoarding and 
black marketing of Remdesivir. 
v. Sudden spurt in demand for medical oxygen: To generate Oxygen at the health facility 
level, PSA plants are being established in each district hospitals, es pecially in far flung 
areas enabling the hospitals to become self -sufficient in generation of oxygen for their 
needs and thereby, reduce the burden on the medical oxygen supply grid across the 
country.  

15 
 
vi. Need for large number of trained manpower: To build t he capacities of human resources 
including the medical manpower who help managing patients in hospitals; as well as non -
medical personnel, front line workers, who may be involved in non -medical duties such as 
logistics, surveillance etc., for COVID-19 management,  training resources for medical and 
non-medical personnel have been made available on the website of Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare . Online training and webinars for Physicians and Nursing personnel is 
being conducted by AIIMS. Modules have al so been made available on iGOT (online 
platform) by DOPT (https://igot.gov.in/igot/). The training modules have been translated to 
regional languages.  
vii. In view of resurgence of COVID -19 cases in the country and with a view to increase the 
availability of t rained human resources to tackle the Covid -19 pandemic situation, the 
States were advised to explore avenues for utilization of services of Medical Interns, Final 
Year MBBS students, Final Year PG Students (broad as well as super -specialities) as 
residents, B.Sc./GNM Qualified Nurses, Final Year GNM or B.Sc. (Nursing) students 
under appropriate guidance and services of Allied Health Care professionals based on their 
training and certification.  In addition, provisions have been made for States/UTs to decide  
on remuneration as in the NHM norms and suitable honorarium for distinguished Covid 
Services. Financial incentives/ remuneration were provided to persons who work for at 
least 100 days for Covid care. 
1.54 The Committee understands that the second wave of  Covid-19 put the Indian 
healthcare system and the diagnostic infrastructure under insurmountable pressure, 
thereby, emphasized on the need for strengthening mitigation strategies. The Committee 
appreciates that the Government has upgraded testing infrastr ucture in the country; 
however, the number of testing facilities still remains low in proportion to its population.  
1.55 The Second wave was undoubtedly marred by high cases, increased deaths, 
shortage of oxygen and beds in hospitals, reduced supplies of medicines and other 
important drugs, disruption of essential health care services, hoarding and black 
marketing of cylinders and medicines etc. The Committee is of the considered view that 
had the Government been successful in identification of the more virulent strain of virus in 
the population at an early stage and suitably implemented its containment strategy, the 
repercussions would have been less grave and many lives could have been saved.  
1.56 The Committee also takes note of the constant rise in cov id cases during the 
Kumbh Mela, Tablighi Jamaat in New Delhi and election campaigns in the West Bengal. 
The Committee notes that large gatherings with no social distancing are synonymous with 
hotspots of Covid. The Committee notes that managing a large cro wd along with following 
covid protocols poses a challenge to the administration. Such massive gatherings on 
several social, political and religious occasions were also a major causing factor for the 
second covid wave. With covid fatigue hitting in among th e citizens, the Government also 
raised celebratory flag and presumed that the whole situation was under control. 
However, a devastating second covid wave exposed all the false claims of the Government 
and resulted into large scale causalities. 
 
THIRD WAVE OF COVID-19 
1.57      The B.1.1.529 variant was first reported to WHO from South Africa on 24th November 
2021. WHO on 26th November 2021 declared Omicron, first detected earlier in the Gauteng 
province, Southern Africa, to be a variant of concern, on the a dvice of its Technical Advisory 
Group on Virus Evolution (TAG -VE). As on 6th December 2021, a total of 45 countries had 

16 
 
reported a total of confirmed 956 cases and 55,992 probable cases of the Omicron variant. Of 
this, 21 cases were confirmed in India (12 from Rajasthan, 7 from Maharashtra and 1 each from 
Delhi and Gujarat).  
 
1.58     The Committee notes that the share of Omicron variant in all analyzed sequences 
increased from 0.33% on 29 th November, 2021 to 3.75% on 13 th December, 2021. By 27 th 
December, 2021, the share of Omicron variant increased to 37.27% which further increased to 
87.35% by 10 th January, 2022. The Committee further notes that India has sequenced only a 
fraction of total cases, however, as on 11 th July, 2022; all the sequenced viruses are of the 
Omicron variant. Share of the Sars -Cov-2 sequences that are the omicron variant is graphed as 
under (source: Our world in Data) : 
 
 
1.59     As part of the examination of the subject and the rising concerns posed by the Omicron 
variant of Covid-19, the Committee heard the views of Secretaries, Department of Health and 
Family Welfare and Department of Health Research in its meeting held on 9 th December, 2021. 
The Secretary, DHR in the meeting submitted that the testing as well as the treatme nt protocol 
remained unchanged and ICMR NIV Pune was in the process of carrying out a study regarding 
the efficacy of the vaccines on the new variant.  
 
1.60     The Ministry in its written submission stated that the 6 Empowered Groups earlier 
constituted by Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, under extant provisions of 
Disaster Management Act, 2005 have been reconstituted in 10 Empowered Groups to fast -track 
decision making and facilitate inter -sectoral coordination. These 10 Empowered Groups were 
tasked with (i) Emergency Management Plan and Strategy, (ii) Emergency Response 
Capabilities, (iii) Augmenting Human Resources and Capacity Building, (iv) Oxygen, (v) 
Vaccination, (vi) Testing, (vii) Partnership, (viii) Information, Communication and Pu blic 
Engagement, (ix) Economic and Welfare Measures and (x) Pandemic Response and 
Coordination.  
 


17 
 
1.61 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in a statement laid in the Rajya Sabha in its 
256th Session stated that besides regular review meetings at the level of Union Health Minister 
with all relevant stakeholders including subject experts, review meetings with States/UTs 
through video conferencing were conducted regularly to review preparedness and response 
measures to address COVID -19 pandemic. States/UTs were advised to undertake the following 
activities: 
 
i. Strict monitoring of International travelers in the community. 
ii. Contact tracing of positive individuals & follow up for 14 days. 
iii. Genome sequencing of positive samples through INSACOG Labs in a prompt manner. 
iv. Continued monitoring of areas where cluster of positive cases emerge. 
v. Further strengthening of COVID -19 testing infrastructure and ensuring early 
identification of cases through adequate testing across the States. 
vi. Ensuring preparedness of health in frastructure (availability of ICU, oxygen supported 
beds, ventilators, etc.) and upgrading health infrastructure under ECRP -II including in 
rural areas and for pediatric cases. 
vii. Commissioning all PSA plants, ensuring sufficient logistics, drugs etc. 
viii. Ensuring COVID-19 vaccination for the eligible population including coverage among 
young adolescents (15 -18 years) and precaution dose for health care workers, frontline 
workers and elderly with co-morbidities. 
ix. Ensuring adherence to COVID Appropriate Behaviour. 
 
1.62 The Ministry further stated that it c ontinues to provide support to States/UTs to enhance 
preparedness and response capacities against COVID -19 and other public health emergencies. 
Funding support is also provided to States/UTs through National Health  Mission, State Disaster 
Response Funds (SDRF) and Emergency COVID -19 Response and Preparedness packages. 
Under ECRP Phase II, a package of Rs. 23,123 crore (with Rs. 15,000 Cr as Central 
Component) has been approved. Of this, as on 31st January 2022, fund s to the tune of Rs. 
7245.95 crore have been released to States/UTs as part of Central component to strengthen 
health infrastructure to manage any surge in cases. Omicron variant is the dominant variant in 
the country during the third wave. The current sur ge of COVID -19 cases in the country is 
showing a sustained declining trend since 21st January 2022. 
1.63 The Committee notes that the rate of spread of Omicron is higher than its previous 
delta variants. Omicron has led to a rise in the number of covid cas es in India particularly 
among the young population. However, the rate of hospitalization and the severity of 
infection remained low compared to second wave that was fuelled by the Delta variant.  
The Committee is of the opinion that since many cases were mild and asymptomatic, there 
are more chances of cases remaining undetected and not making it to the official registry. 
The Committee understands that the death rates have been lower in the third wave; 
however, the Government must continue taking effective measures for enforcing Covid -
Appropriate Behavior (CAB). The Co mmittee further feels that a strict testing regime in 
the airports for international flights should have been followed and patients testing 
positive should have been immediately isolated.  With the uncertainty brewing around 
newer and more virulent strains  of the virus, it is imperative to generate public awareness 
to wear a mask and follow all the covid protocols.  
 
 
 

18 
 
NEW WAVE OF COVID-19 IN THE FUTURE 
1.64 In response to a question raised in the 257 th Session of the Ra jya Sabha on whether 
the Government foresees any new wave or variant of COVID -19 in the coming future, the 
Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted  on 19 th July, 2021 
that given the emergence of variants of COVID-19 virus with variable transmissibility and other 
public health implications, Union Ministry of Health is closely following COVID -19 trajectory 
globally and in the country along with various Expert Committees. In addition, network of 
Indian SARS -CoV-2 Genomics Consortium (INSACOG) of laboratories is t aking whole 
genome sequencing of samples for detection of mutant variants of the virus. 
1.65 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 19 th July, 2022 submitted that India‘s 
Active Caseload currently stands at 1,43,654. Active cases now constitute 0.33%  of the 
country's total Positive Cases. The India's active cases trajectory has been graphed as  under: 
 
1.66 The Committee notes that although the Covid-19 cases have been on a slow rise,  
fear of transmission of a more virulent strain of Sars -Cov-2, still persists. The Committee 
notes that the recent surge in cases reveals that Covid is here to stay and will become 
endemic. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to take note of any fresh 
surge in the Covid cases and conduct sequencing of adeq uate number of samples so that 
new Variants of Interest (VoI) and Variants of Concern (VoC) can be identified at the 
earliest.  The Ministry must also ensure that adequate number of samples are tested so 
that Covid cases are well reported and documented. T he Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to be prepared for any eventualities of more virulent strain of Sars -Cov-2 virus 
and carry out mock drills to identify any gap in the covid containment policy of the 
Government. The Ministry must also explore optio ns to study sewage samples for early 
prediction of any possible outbreak of Covid waves in future and thereby formulate 
dynamic strategy to mitigate the resurgence.  
1.67 The Union Government must coordinate with the States and assess the requirement 
of me dicines, k its, oxygen etc so that shortage in supplies is averted in case of future 
outbreak. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry must closely monitor 
the trajectory of Covid in the country so that the system is better prepared to manage 
future resurgence of the virus, if any. 
  


19 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
VACCINE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
2.1 In the midst of an emergency situation, the world scientific community accelerated to 
come up with a vaccine for the SARS -CoV-2 virus. There is no doubt that decade s of previous 
scientific researches on different viruses helped the community in developing Covid -19 vaccine 
in such a shorter period of time. It is testament to the advancement in modern science that 
scientists were able to develop multiple vaccines for C ovid which would have generally taken 
many years to develop. However, vaccine development is a complex process and involves 
different phases of clinical trials and stages. Only after a vaccine passes through each stage and 
achieves the required regulatory approval, the vaccine can be marketed.  
2.2 Moderna, AstraZeneca, Pfizer etc were some of the first companies to begin human trials 
of the vaccines for Covid -19 and by July 2020, the work on experimental vaccines for Covid 
had started. Considering the urge nt need of the vaccines, the Committee discussed various 
issues regarding vaccine research and its status in the country. During the discussion, the 
Ministry stated that the approval of any new COVID -19 vaccine by the national regulator i.e. 
CDSCO will be dependent on the safety, immunogenicity and efficacy profile of vaccine 
generated through non -clinical and clinical trial data and as per the provisions of New Drugs 
and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the available 
regulatory guidelines.  
As per WHO the three approaches of designing vaccines are as follows:  
1. The whole-microbe approach 
Inactivated vaccine 
Under this approach, the disease -carrying virus or bacterium, or one very similar to it, is either 
inactivated or killed using chemicals, heat or radiation. This approach has been adopted in flu 
and polio vaccines. Under this  approach, the vaccines can be manufactured on a reasonable 
scale.  
Live-attenuated vaccine 
A live -attenuated vaccine uses a living but weakened version of the virus or one that‘s very 
similar. The measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine and the chickenpox and shingles 
vaccine are examples of this type of vaccine.  
Viral vector vaccine 
This type  of vaccine uses a safe virus to deliver specific sub -parts – called proteins – of the 
germ of interest so that it can trigger an immune response without causing disease. To do this, 
the instructions for making particular parts of the pathogen of interest are inserted into a safe 
virus. The safe virus then serves as a platform or vector to deliver the protein into the body.  The 
protein triggers the immune response. The Ebola vaccine is a viral vector vaccine and this type 
can be developed rapidly. 

20 
 
2. The subunit approach 
A subunit vaccine is the one that uses the very specific parts (the subunits) of a virus or 
bacterium that the immune system needs to recognize. It doesn't contain the whole microbe or 
use a safe virus as a vector. The subunits may be proteins or sugars.  
3. The genetic approach (nucleic acid vaccine) 
Unlike vaccine approaches that use either a weakened or dead whole microbe or parts of one, a 
nucleic acid vaccine just uses a section of genetic material that provides the instructions for 
specific proteins, not the whole microbe. A nucleic acid vaccine delivers a specific set of 
instructions to our cells, either as DNA or mRNA, for them to make the specific protein that we 
want our immune system to recognize and respond to.  
 The Committee notes tha t having a considerable number of vaccines in development 
increases the probability of a safe and efficacious vaccine. There are different approaches to 
designing a vaccine. As per WHO, the differences lie in whether the vaccines use a  whole virus 
or bacte rium; just the  parts of the germ that triggers the immune system; or just the  genetic 
material that provides the instructions for making specific proteins and not the whole virus. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for in-depth study of various approvals/platform for 
designing a vaccine and with due Research & Development activities followed by adequate 
clinical trial s, the scientists discover/innovate universal vaccine to combat s all form of 
influenza.  
Vaccine Research in India 
 
2.3 In the meeting held on 22 nd January, 2021, the Principal Scientific Advisor to the 
Government of India submitted that there were enormous challenges in early stage vaccine 
development which the country came across. He further submitted that there were three kinds of 
Committees, viz, (i) the Task Force on Focused Research on Corona Vaccine and other Science 
and Technology Issues, that is co -chaired by Dr. Vinod Paul and him self;  (ii) National Expert 
Group on Vaccine Administration for Covid -19, NEGVAC, chaired by Dr. Vinod Paul and co -
chaired by Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Health Secretary; and (iii) the National Technical Advisory 
Group on Immunization which evaluate vaccines and decide d whether or not to roll them into 
the immunization programme which was chaired by the Health Secretary and co -chaired by the 
Director-General of ICMR and the Department of Biotechnology.  
2.4 He further stated that discussions were also conducted with different companies such as 
Bharat Biotech, Serum Institute, Mynvax, Zydus Cadila, Biolog ical E, Gennova on their plans 
regarding the early stages of vaccine development. The task force had the job to provide help to 
these companies on the scientific side through the Government Departments and settle their 
other problems. He further submitted that under the Vaccine and R&D Task Force, there were 
three major issues; the first being  the vaccine development. He stated that the different kinds of 
platforms and different vaccine development agencies are first identified and then brought to the 
forefront.  Secondly, before vaccine deployment, information was required on two fronts, 
namely on the extent of the pandemic and the people for trials. Testing and diagnostics were 
needed for this. Vaccines were given only to healthy people who d id not have any problem and 
their safety was the utmost priority. He further submitted that ensuring the safety of vaccines 
was very important and the same was deliberated in the 14 meetings of the task force.  
2.5 In the Committee meeting, the Principal Scientific Advi sor to the Government of India 
also elaborated that as India did not conduct many Phase I, II and III trials, therefore, setting up 

21 
 
that whole sequence in the country was a challenge, in the midst of the pandemic, and  that was 
done successful . Identifying clinical trial sites and putting in place networks were very 
important, to get harmonized clinical trial protocols and to partner with medical colleges to get 
them implemented.  Therefore, the Department of Biotechnology and the Indian Cou ncil of 
Medical Research accorded the highest priority to this.  Similarly, the regulatory response had to 
be rapid. Taking into account all the challenges of the pandemic, the Drug Controller put in 
place mechanisms which allow rapid evaluation in the context of pandemic.  There were drug 
laboratories like those in Kasauli for testing and certification of vaccines before they were rolled 
out.     
2.6 The Committee emphasizes that the Government must incentivise multi -
disciplinary research and efforts towards enhancing the research infrastructure in the 
country. The Committee  recommends to promote collaborative studies among National 
and International Institutes and develop a roadmap for creating a vibrant research 
environment in the country.  
2.7 The Ministry submitted that the main objective of development of vaccine was to 
generate adequate data on quality, safety, immunogenicity and /or efficacy to support the 
application for manufacture or import of Vaccines in the country. The duration of the clin ical 
trials of COVID -19 vaccines were different and were based on the various parameters such as 
phases of clinical trial s, study objectives, endpoints, follow up period designed by the 
concerned sponsor or manufacturer or importer for assessment of Safety , Immunogenicity and 
Efficacy of vaccines.   
 
Emergency use authorization (EUA) 
 
2.8 The Ministry of Hea lth and Family Welfare defines E mergency Use Authorization 
(EUA) as a regulatory mechanism to allow the use of vaccines and medicines to prevent and/or 
reduce the impact of life -threatening diseases or conditions as caused by COVID -19. Safety is 
particularly critical aspect of this scrut iny and a risk -versus- benefit evaluation is done in the 
context of a public health emergency. Full licensure is obtained when the manufacturer submits 
the complete data. EUA by Indian regulators is aligned with global guidelines.  
2.9 The National Regulat or, Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), gave initial nod to 
market authorization of two COVID -19 vaccines, Covaxin and Covishield subject to certain 
conditions. The Subject Expert Committee (SEC) of the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization (CD SCO) had recommended for upgradation of status for the vaccines from 
restricted use in emergency situations to grant of new drug permission with conditions in the 
adult population on 19th January 2022. 
Emergency use authorization of Covishield and Covaxin 
 
2.10 The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare had submitted that as on 12 th 
January, 2021 two vaccines namely, Covishield and Covaxin were available in the country. He 
further submitted before the Committee that the research and development for Covishield had 
been done by Oxford University and it was being manufactured by Serum I nstitute of India and 
AstraZeneca.  Covaxin was a completely indigenous vaccine whose manufacturing, R&D and 
trials were being conducted in India by Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad.  The initial inactivated virus 
platform was provided by ICMR.   
2.11 The Committ ee was informed that under normal situation for final approval of any 
vaccine, non -clinical data as well as complete data of Phase I, II, and III clinical trials 

22 
 
demonstrating safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of the vaccine were required. However, in 
case of pandemic situation like COVID-19, when there was a strong and urgent need for vaccine 
to protect population from the pandemic, the accelerated approved processes were followed to 
consider its approval for use in emergency situation based on acceptabl e data of safety, 
immunogenicity and efficacy without waiting for completion of all phases of clinical trials 
which take long period of time. 
2.12 Regulatory provisions under Second Schedule of New Drugs & Clinical Trials Rules, 
2019 allow the above, for d rugs including vaccines intended to be used in life threatening or 
serious disease conditions or rare diseases and for drugs intended to be used in the diseases of 
special relevance to Indian scenario or unmet medical need in India, disaster or special def ence 
use e.g., haemostatic and quick wound healing, enhancing oxygen carrying capacity, radiation 
safety, drugs for combating chemical, nuclear, biological infliction etc. 
2.13 In case of COVISHIELD, the Subject Expert Committee (SEC) of CDSCO noted that 
the safety & immunogenicity data presented by the firm from the Indian phase II/III study was 
comparable with that of the overseas clinical trial data. Considering the serious nature of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and the emergency situation, there was an urgent need of vaccine in the 
country. Therefore, the Subject Expert Committee recommended for grant of permission for 
restricted emergency use of the vaccine subject to various regulatory provisions. Accordingly, 
the permission was granted to Covishield for restricted use in emergency situation with 
conditions. 
2.14 In case of COVAXIN, the SEC noted that Inactivated Whole Virion, Corona Virus 
Vaccine was having potential to target mutated corona virus strains. The data generated 
demonstrated a strong immune r esponse (both antibody as well as T cell) and in -vitro viral 
neutralization. The Ministry had submitted that the clinical trial is a large trial on 25800 Indian 
subjects in which already 22500 subjects have been enrolled including subjects with co -morbid 
conditions as well which has demonstrated safety till date. Moreover, the firm has presented the 
safety and efficacy data from Non -human primate challenge study where the vaccine has been 
found to be safe and effective. Therefore, the Subject Expert Committ ee recommended for grant 
of permission for restricted use in emergency situation in public interest as an abundant 
precaution, in clinical trial mode, to have more options for vaccinations, especially in case of 
infection by mutant strains with the condition that the firm shall continue the on -going Phase III 
clinical trial and submit data emerging from the trial as and when available. Accordingly, the 
permission was granted to M/s Bharat Biotech vaccine for restricted use in emergency situation 
in clinical trial mode with conditions.  
2.15 Once the applicant completes all the phases of clinical trials as per protocol and submits 
the requisite data, the vaccines approved for ―restricted use in emergency situation‖ will be 
considered for final marketing permission for free use. 
2.16 The Committee notes the Bharat Biotech Press Release on the final analysis for Covaxin 
which states that Covaxin has demonstrated an overall efficacy of 77.8% in phase 3 clinical 
trial. Covishield is backed by phase III data from studies in Brazil and the United Kingdom. The 
overall efficacy against symptomatic COVID -19 after more than 14 days after the 2 nd dose is 
reported to be 66.7%. 
2.17 The Committee observes that the provisions for emergency use authorisation is 
absent in New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 and under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940. It is regretful to note that the vaccines have been given EUA without any specific 
provision in the Indian drug rules and regulations. The laws in other countries are very 

23 
 
clearly defined which made the granting of approvals of vaccine and drugs during the 
pandemic very transparent. However in India, the information regarding the protocol 
followed and the clinical trial data of the vaccines remained shadowed for a long time.  
2.18 The Committee is of the firm opinion that the procedure followed behind granting 
emergency or restricted approvals to drugs and vaccines must be clearly defined in the 
laws. Ambiguity on the vaccines trials as well as the procedure followed for EUA refle cts 
greatly on the need of making amendments to the Indian Laws. The Committee 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to make specific provisions f or EUA in the Indian 
drug laws. The Committee also notes the lack of clarity  in the procedure followed for 
granting the approval for administering the booster dose s. The Committee would like to 
be apprised on the protocol followed and th e laws under which the approval was granted. 
The Committee feels that meticulous scientific findings must form the basis for any major 
changes in the course of the vaccination policy. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to carry out rigorous assessments of laboratory 
and clinical trial data before granting any future Emergency Use Authorization for 
vaccines.  The Ministry must also share the data on quality, safety, production of 
protective antibodies and efficacy of the vaccines in the public domain.  
 
Support for development of vaccines under DBT 
2.19 The Depa rtment of Biotechnology submitted that DBT adopted a multi -pronged 
approach and supported development of COVID -19 vaccines for proof of concept and pre -
clinical studies of nearly 14 vaccine candidates on diverse state -of-the-art scientific platforms. 
The list of vaccine candidates supported by DBT and BIRAC is as follows: 
List of COVID-19 Vaccine candidates supported by DBT and BIRAC as on 4th April, 2022 
S. 
No. 
COVID-19 Vaccine 
Developer / Manufacturer Vaccine Platform Stage of 
Development 
Vaccine candidates in clinical stage of development 
1.  Cadila Healthcare  
(ZydusCadila) 
DNA Vaccine  
(ZyCoV-D)  
Emergency Use 
Authorization 
(EUA) 
2.  Biological E/ Collaboration  Subunit (RBD219-N1-C1) 
BECOV-2 
EUA 
3.  Gennova and HDT Biotech 
Corporation  mRNA (HGCO19) Clinical (Phase III) 
4.  
Bharat Biotech 
&Washington University, 
USA 
Replication deficient 
adenovirus (intranasal) Clinical (Phase III) 
5.  Serum Institute of India Bacille Calmette-Guerin 
BCG vaccine  
Phase III trial (as 
repurposed vaccine)  
Industry-based vaccine candidates in pre- clinical stage of development 
6.  Genique Life Sciences Virus Like Particle (VLP) Advanced Pre-
Clinical 
7.  Aurobindo Pharma Limited 
with Auro Vaccines  
Attenuated rVSV-vectored 
Vaccine  Early Pre-clinical  
8.  Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Recombinant adeno-
associated virus [rAA V] Early Pre-clinical 

24 
 
based genetic vaccine  
9.  Seagull Bio Solutions 
Non-replicating measles 
virus vector in Active 
Virosome Platform  
Early Pre-clinical  
Vaccine candidates under development by academia 
10.  Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Mumbai 
Protein subunit Intranasal 
vaccine Early Stage 
11.  
National Institute of 
Biomedical Genomics 
(NIBMG) 
Baculovirus expressed Virus-
Like Particle (VLP) vaccine Early Stage 
12.  
Translational Health Science 
And Technology Institute 
(THSTI) 
Self-amplifying mRNA in a 
lipid nanoparticle Early Stage 
13.  
Centre for Stem Cell 
Research, Christian Medical 
College, Vellore 
Lipid encapsulated mRNA 
vaccine Early Stage 
14.  Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore  
Bacille Calmette -Guerin 
BCG vaccine (repurposing) 
Phase III validation 
study 
 
2.20 DBT further submitted that ‗Mission COVID Suraksha - The Indian COVID-19 Vaccine 
Development Mission‘ was launched under the AtmaNirbhar Bharat 3.0 package, for the 
development of a safe, efficacious and affordable vaccine for COVID -19, which demonstrated 
major achievements.  
 
2.21 Initial seed funding for candidate vaccine development of shortlisted projects of the 
‗COVID-19 Research Consortium‘ was provided under National Biopharma Mission and Ind -
CEPI Mission. As the candidates advanced through clinical development, support for scale -up 
and manufacture was provided under Mission COVID Suraksha. The Department further 
submitted that 02 vaccines, namely, ZyCoV -D, World‘s first COVID -19 DNA Vaccine, 
(developed by Zydus Cadila), CORBEVAX, India‘s first protein subunit vaccine (developed by 
Biological E), received Emergency Use Authorization (EUA), for use in adolescents and adults 
(12 years and above). Additionally, the mRNA -based vaccine candidate develo ped by Gennova 
Biopharmaceuticals Ltd. and the Intranasal Vaccine candidates (based on Replication Deficient 
Adenoviral Vector expressing a stabilized spike protein) developed by Bharat Biotech 
International Ltd. (BBIL), are in Phase III Clinical trials. 
2.22 The Department of Biotechnology further stated that the emergence of newer variants of 
SARS-CoV-2 over time, necessitated a focus on development of next generation vaccines based 
on novel platforms. The Translational Health Science and Technology Insti tute (THSTI), an 
Autonomous Institute of the Department of Biotechnology and Panacea Biotec, a research-based 
biopharmaceutical company and vaccine manufacturer, have come together to work on the 
development of broadly protective coronavirus vaccine, with support from the global initiative 
of Coalition of Epidemic Preparedness for Innovation (CEPI). 
2.23 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department of Health Research and 
the Department of Biotechnology that have been at the forefront of the vaccine research 
and development in the country. The Committee time and again has emphasized on the 
need for strengthening the research ecosystem in the country. The Committee further 
believes that both the Departments must also work towards strengthening the clinical 
trials ecosystem in the country along with data transparency. The Committee understands 

25 
 
that vaccine development faces a slew of challenges ranging from procuring the raw 
material to conducting human trials. However, the present situation necessitate  
development of effective interventions so that the future outbreaks as the like of Covid -19 
are mitigated.  The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to strengthen the end -
to-end vaccine development programme and extend support to vaccine candidates which 
are at different stages of development.  
2.24 The Committee also appreciates, "Mission COVID Suraksha- The Indian COVID-
19 Vaccine Development Mission" which was announced as part of the third stimulus 
package. The Committee recommends Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the 
Department of Biotechnology to continue work towards development of  vaccines and 
ensure that the vaccines are introduced in the market for free use.  
2.25 The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need to develop vaccines that 
are effective against all the variants of concerns that have been discovered so far a nd also 
the future newer  variants. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take initiatives to 
develop a universal covid vaccine that is effective against all the variants. The Ministry 
should encourage research collaboration between ICMR and other resear ch Institutes in 
the country.  
 
Vaccines being administered in the country 
2.26 In reply to a specific query, regarding the Covid vaccines administered in the country, 
the Department of Health Research submitted that as on June 2022, Five Covid -19 vaccines 
have been administered in India so far which are Covishield, Covaxin, Sputnik, ZyCov-D and 
Corbevax.  
2.27 The Committee is given to understand that the Platform Technology of the five covid 
vaccines being administered in the country is as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.28 As per a Public notice from CDSCO the following COVID 19 vaccines have been 
approved in India as of February 2022:  
S.No. Vaccine Candidate Platform Technology 
1 ChAdoX1 Oxford 
vaccine 
Chimpanzee adenovirus 
vectored recombinant 
vaccine expressing spike 
protein 
2 COVAXIN- 
Bharat Biotech 
Inactivated whole virion vaccine 
3 Gamaleya Research 
Institute (Sputnik V) 
Human adenovirus vectored 
recombinant vaccine 
expressing spike protein 
4 ZyCoV-D (Cadila) DNA vaccine 
5 Corbevax Protein subunit vaccine 

26 
 
 
 
  
2.29 The Committee observes that the country's first indigenous vaccine- Covaxin works 
on inactivated virus platform. With the constant mutation in the virus, there is an urgent 
need to evolve strategies for development of second -generation vaccines. The Commit tee, 


27 
 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to encourage vaccine development on other newer 
and more efficient platforms and also evaluate the efficacy of the existing Covid -19 
vaccines. The Ministry must make continuous efforts in developing vaccines that ar e 
variant neutral and whose efficacy remains unchanged against other strains of virus. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that all  the Ministries concerned must 
collaborate with other National and International Institutes on vaccine research and 
development front and benefit the nation with latest innovation.  
2.30 The Committee appreciates that the scientific community around the world sprung 
into action and developed Covid -19 vaccines in record time. It is a well established fact 
that the Indian pharmaceutical companies have a worldwide presence and have the ability 
to produce vaccines on a large scale. Taking into account that the company that produces 
the largest number of vaccines in the world is an Indian company, the Committee observes 
that I ndia has huge potential in supplying the global demand of vaccines, however, the 
Committee discovers that there is a gigantic scope for more innovation and research in the 
sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should loo k 
forward for strengthening the research ecosystem so that vaccines on newer and more 
scientific platforms are developed. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the 
Government to increase the budget of Health Research and ICMR so that newer 
innovations see the light of the day. India should not just focus on being a mass producer 
of vaccines but also aim at creating a niche space for the Indian Research fraternity in the 
vaccine and drugs development sector.    
 
Fund Allocation for Vaccines 
2.31 During the examination of the Demand for Grants of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, the Committee had examined the Budget allocated for Covid vaccination. During the 
detailed examination, the Ministry had submitted that in BE 2021 -22, Rs. 35,000 crore was 
budgeted for procurement of COVID -19 Vaccines under Covid -19 vaccination programme. As 
on 3rd February 2022, an expenditure of Rs. 27945.15 crore has been incurred against these 
allocations which have been utilized for procurement of COVID -19 vaccines for f ree of cost 
supply to States/UTs. All the payments have been made to M/S HLL (procurement agency) for 
procurement of COVID-19 Vaccines. 
India Covid-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Package 
2.32 In response to a Question regarding the Package in the 256th Session of Rajya Sabha, the 
Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that the Government 
of India provides the requisite technical and financial assistance to States/UTs to manage the 
COVID-19 pandemic. During 2019 -20, Rs. 1113.21 Crore were provided as an add itional 
support to States/UTs under National Health Mission for management of COVID-19.  
2.33 During the year 2020 -21, under the ―India COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health 
System Preparedness Package (ECRP - Phase I)‖, funds to the tune of Rs. 8473.73 Cr ore were 
released for States/UTs for health system strengthening. "India COVID -19 Emergency 
Response & Health System Preparedness Package: Phase -II‟ was approved by the Cabinet with 
Rs 23,123 crores (with Rs. 15,000 Cr as Central Component & Rs . 8,123 Cr a s State 
component) and implemented from 1st July 2021. The scheme aim ed to upgrade available 
health infrastructure through increase in isolation beds, ICU beds for adults as well as paediatric 
cases, drugs and diagnostic support, promotion of telemedicine with particular focus on peri -

28 
 
urban and rural areas. As on 8th March 2022, an amount of Rs. 9616.05 crore has been released 
(central share) to States/UTs.  
2.34 The Committee is of the view that the funds allocated for Covid -19 management 
should have been judiciously distributed among the States so that the financial burden of 
the poorer States is aptly managed. The Committee recommends the Government to 
ensure that adequate funds are reserved for purchasing and administering of vaccine 
doses. The Ministry may submit the expenditure profile of the Rs. 35,000 crore funds 
allocated for vaccination other emergency response and Health System preparedness 
packages and allocation from PM Covid Care Funds. The Committee again emphasizes 
that the Ministry must ensure equitable distribution of funds among the States.  
2.35 As per the information submitted by the Ministry, a large percentage of the fund 
has already been transferred to the States, however, the Committee is apprehensive about 
the utilization of the funds  under the Emergency Covid Response Package (Phase I & II). 
The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to monitor the utilization of the 
funds by the States and ensure that adequate infrastructure is available in the States. The 
Centre along with th e States must ensure that the allocated Covid fund is utilized for 
implementation of IT, training and capacity building of human resources besides vaccine 
administration.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to follow 
up with the Sta tes to ensure that the funds are optimally utilized by the States and seek 
utilization certificate from the States/UTs.  
2.36 The Committee during its study visit to Chandigarh was given to understand that the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had rele ased only a sum of Rs 13,75,840/ - for COVID 
Vaccination during January 2021 to the UT of Chandigarh. The UT further submitted that some 
more funds were released o n the last day of financial year 2021 -22 that could not be draw n due 
to time restrictions.  
 
2.37 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the practice of releasing grants on 
the last day of the financial year. The Committee has time and again recommended the 
Government to adopt financial prudence and avoid last minute disbursement of funds. 
However, such poor financial management speaks volume of the lack of communication 
between the Union Government and the UT. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
frame guidelines of financial prudence in consultations with the States and ensure that the 
guidelines are judiciously followed. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must act 
as a facilitator and guide the States to ensure optimum utilization of the funds.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to adopt prudent fiscal analysis an d 
devise a feasible roadmap so that such instances of poor financial mismanagement are not 
repeated.  
  

29 
 
CHAPTER III 
VACCINE PROCUREMENT AND DISTRIBUTION 
3.1 The vaccination drive in the country began with the vaccination to all Health Care 
Workers. Over the time different Phases of the vaccination program was expanded to include 
vaccination of Front Line Workers, citizens more than 60 years of age, citizens more than 45 
years old age, citizens more than 18 years of age and eventually children in the age g roup 15-17 
and then 12-14. 
Changes in the Vaccine Procurement Policy 
3.2 The Committee is given to understand that under the National COVID Vaccination 
Program, from 16th January to 30th April 2021, 100% of vaccine doses were procured by 
Government of India and provided free of cost to State Governments. State Governments in turn 
had to administer vaccination free of cost to defined priority groups. To increase the pace of 
vaccination, participation of private hospitals was also enlisted where individuals c ould also 
choose to get vaccinated at a prescribed rate. 
3.3 The Government of India revised the Guidelines as ‗Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated 
National Covid-19 Vaccination Strategy‘. Under the revised guidelines effective from 1st May, 
2021, Government of India was procuring 50% of the vaccine produced and was continuing to 
provide them to States free of cost for administering to priority groups. The State Government 
and private hospitals were also empowered to directly procure from the remaining 50% vaccine 
pool.  
3.4 The ‗Liberalised Pricing and Accelerated National Covid -19 Vaccination Strategy‘ was 
in effect from 1 st May 2021 to 20 th June 2021. The aforesaid strategy was implemented in 
response to the suggestions of many State Governments to be permitted the flexibility to procure 
vaccine directly and administer them as per their own prioritization based on local requirements. 
3.5 However, many States communicated that they were facing difficulties in managing the 
funding, procurement and logistics of vaccines, impacting the pace of the National COVID 
Vaccination Program.  It was also noted that smaller and remoter private hospitals we re also 
facing constraints. Keeping in view the aforesaid aspects, the experiences gained from 1st May 
2021 and the repeated requests received from States, the Guidelines for National COVID 
Vaccination Program were revised as ‗Revised Guidelines for implem entation of National 
COVID Vaccination Program‘ that came into effect from 21st June 2021. 
Revised Guidelines for implementation of National COVID Vaccination Program  
3.6 Under the Revised Guidelines for implementation of National COVID Vaccination 
Program, the Government of India procures 75% of the vaccines being produced by the 
manufacturers in the country for free supply to States/UTs. The price of vaccine for 
procurement by Government of India is negotiated by National Expert Group on Vaccine 
Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) and its subgroups involving detailed deliberations 
with the vaccine manufacturers.  
3.7 Vaccine doses provided free of cost by Government of India is allocated to States/UTs 
based on criteria such as population, disease burden and the progress of vaccination. Wastage of 
vaccine affect the allocation negatively. Further the Ministry submitted that the Revised 
Guidelines for implementation of National COVID Vaccination Program ensures free supply of 

30 
 
COVID-19 vaccines to all States /UTs and all citizens irrespective of their income status at 
Government CVCs.  
3.8 In a specific query regarding the split between public and private procurement of 
vaccines, the Ministry submitted that the quantity of vaccine available for procurement by 
Private hospitals was upto 25%. If the private hospitals were not able to procure the available 
quantity, then the same were being procured by Govt. of India for free of cost supply to 
States/UTs. 
3.9 On a specific query regarding whether the States could approach foreign companies for 
supply of foreign vaccines, the Ministry submitted that under the ‗Revised Guidelines for 
Implementation of National COVID Vaccination Program‘, effective from 21 st June 2021, 
Government of India was procuring 75% of the vacc ines being produced by the manufacturers 
in the country and was providing it free of cost to States/UTs. Hence, there was no need for any 
State/UT to approach any foreign company for supply of vaccines. 
3.10 The Committee notes that procurement and delivery of vaccines for catering to the 
targeted group of people requires huge amount of financial resources. The Committee 
observes that a robust assessment of the logistic requirements and streamlining of the 
procurement process is crucial in ensuring the supply chain of the vaccines in the country. 
As the beginning of the National Covid Vaccination Program, much confusion prevailed 
on the Government's vaccine procurement policy. The Committee takes into account t hat 
some States raised objection to the provision of Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated 
National Covid -19 Vaccination Strategy due to the financial constraints in the 
procurement of the vaccine that disturbed the vaccine demand supply continuum. States 
complained about acute shortage of vaccines in the third phase of vaccination, i.e. 18 -44 
age Group while vaccination was the only real wea pon or the last hope to combat C ovid-
19. The Committee is of the opinion that the Centre's erstwhile policy of not providing free 
vaccines to age group of 18-44 years was devoid of any justification and generated hue and 
cry amongst vaccine willing citizens.  
3.11 The Committee takes note that the Indian Government did not make any upfront 
payments or signed any prepurchas e agreement with the vaccine manufacturers during 
the developmental phase of vaccines. The need of such agreement was felt when the 
vaccine supply could not match the vaccine demand from the States. The Committee notes 
that as most of the vaccine centres u sed to get full to its capacity at quick pace, booking a 
slot on Cowin became herculean task at the early stage . The Committee is of the view that 
the Government should have taken steps to enhance vaccine capacity in the country  and 
procure additional vac cine doses. The Committee believes that a better assessment of the 
vaccine requirement in the country could have accelerated the vaccination drive. However, 
absence of a micro-level planning greatly impacted the supply chain of vaccines.  
3.12 The Committee further notes that the Procurement Policy was modified from time 
to time to overcome the limitation of each Procurement Process. However, the Committee 
is of the view that there exists a huge disparity between the States and many economically 
weaker States were incapable of managing such intricate vaccine logistic requirements on 
their own.  With the change in the guideline s of the procurement policy, the Central 
Government could negotiate with the vaccine manufacturers and settle on a fair and better 
price. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make elaborate arrangements for 
ensuring procurement in emergency situations.  

31 
 
3.13 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to seek technical as well as 
financial assistance so that procurement planning strategy can be further strengthened for 
future such emergencies. 
 Distribution Plan and its specific course of action for vaccination for COVID-19 
3.14 The Committee is given to understand that the existing immunization supply chain 
network and infrastructure under Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) was utilized for 
distribution of COVID -19 vaccine. The Ministry submitted that annually nearly 60 crore doses 
of vaccines were utilized under UIP which reach to the beneficiary in a temperature co ntrolled 
environment which was managed through a network of around 29 thousand Cold Chain Points 
comprising of Government Medical Supplies Depot (GMSD), State Vaccine Stores, Regional 
Vaccine Stores, District Vaccine Stores and Cold Chain Points at sub -district level. The storage 
of vaccines in above mentioned stores was done in Walk in Coolers, Walk in Freezers, Ice -lined 
Refrigerators and Deep Freezers. Transport of vaccines between these stores was done using 
insulated vaccine vans and passive cold chain equipment like Cold Boxes and Vaccine Carriers. 
3.15 The Handbook for Vaccine & Cold Chain Handlers defines the following five levels of 
vaccine stores:  
1. GMSD and State Vaccine Store (Primary Vaccine Stores): Any facility that receives 
vaccine from the  manufacturer is a Primary Store. Government Medical Store Depot 
(GMSD) and State Vaccine Stores (SVS) are Primary Stores and receive vaccine directly 
from manufacturers. The vaccine store in a state which receives vaccine either from a 
manufacturer or from a GMSD is a state vaccine store (SVS). A state may have multiple 
state vaccine stores which may be located beyond the state head quarter. The State 
Vaccine Store supplies vaccine to the Regional Vaccine Store and if there is no RVS the 
vaccine is supplied directly to DVS. 
2. Regional Vaccine Stores:  Any facility that receives vaccine from a State Vaccine 
Stores (SVS) and distributes to districts is a Regional Vaccine Store (RVS). The existing 
Divisional Vaccine Stores of the states (wherever applicable) which receive vaccine 
from the SVS and distribute to the districts (DVS) will fall under this category and 
should be considered as Regional Vaccine Stores. 
3. District Vaccine Stores: These are the stores at district level which receive vaccine 
from state/regional vaccine stores and distribute vaccines to CHC/ PHC/UHC/ last cold 
chain point etc. 
4. Block Vaccine Stores (CHC/PHC): These are facilities which receive vaccine from 
District Vaccine Stores and distribute to the last cold chain points. Any interme diary 
store between the district vaccine store and the last cold chain point fall in this category. 
5. Last Cold Chain Point: These are facilities which receive vaccines from District/Block 
level CHC/PHC Vaccine stores and distribute vaccines to the session sites on session 
days. In the immunization supply chain network this is the last point having vaccine 
storage facility and doesn‘t issue vaccine to any other vaccine store but only for the 
immunization sessions. 
 

32 
 
3.16 In some states certain sub-centers also function as last cold chain point in order to meet 
the ―time to care‖ approach after fulfilling the requisite criteria of serving as a cold chain point. 
 
3.17 In an earlier query regarding the supply of vaccines, the Ministry submitted that all the 
identified beneficiaries for COVID -19 vaccination was registered on Co -WIN software and on 
the basis of registered beneficiaries; the supplies of vaccine to the Cold Chain Points were 
made. Adequate buffer quantities were maintained at (Government Medi cal Supplies Depot) 
GMSDs for meeting any exigencies with respect to requirement of vaccines. 
3.18 The Committee notes that a robust cold chain infrastructure forms the crux of the 
National Vaccination Programme. Under the Universal Immunisation Programme,  the 
Government has been providing vaccination for other diseases to the citizens. However, 
considering the large scale of Covid vaccination program, there was an urgent need to 
provide adequate cold chain equipments to the States so that the vaccines were  smoothly 
distributed and rolled out upto the last corner of the country. The Committee is of the 
view that the vaccines need to be stored in refrigerated conditions and the temperature has 
to be monitored on a real time basis. Insulated vaccines vans are required for 
transportation of the vaccines across the country within stipulated timeframe. The 
Ministry, therefore, must assess the ground requirements of the cold chain supply and 
ensure that adequate number of insulated vans and cold chain equipments ar e available. 
The Committee points out that since adequate cold chain infrastructure is absent in many 
rural parts of the country, therefore, the Ministry must make concerted efforts to address 
future challenges arising from newer variants and newer disease s, keeping a vigil on 
assured adequate vaccine cold-chain supply. The Committee emphasizes that the Ministry 
must accordingly work towards establishing an efficient network of cold chain logistics for 
ensuring efficient last mile-delivery of the vaccines in required environment.  
3.19 The Committee also notes the five levels of vaccine stores and recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that vaccine store at each level fulfil the requisite criteria for adequate 
storage of vaccines. The Ministry along with the Stat es must ensure that the personnel are 
well trained to manage the vaccines at these cold chain points. Any damage to the vaccines 


33 
 
at any level must be taken very seriously and all efforts must be made to ensure that the 
vaccines are transported at desired temperature.  
3.20 The Secretary further submitted that steps had been taken to ensure sufficient number of 
cold chain points and also uninterrupted supply of syringes and other logistics in the country. 
The States were informed that once the Vaccines reach the State's vaccine store, and it was their 
responsibility to take the vaccine from the vaccine store to the vaccination point.  The States 
could make use of the refrigerated trucks.  Where the distance is less, States could make use of 
ice boxes where dr y ice is kept and the vaccine can be transported in these ice boxes.  The 
Ministry also submitted the list of State/UT wise Cold Chain Points (CCPs) and their capacity to 
store vaccines which is attached as Annexure 1. The capacity of the cold chain facilit ies at each 
level of storing vaccines i.e. State (SVS/RVS), District (DVS) or at the lowest facility (last 
CCP) were sufficient to handle the supply of COVID -19 vaccine under the National COVID -19 
vaccination programme. 
Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Netowrk- eVIN 
3.21 The Committee is given to understand that Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network 
(eVIN) is an innovative technological solution which is aimed at strengthening the vaccine 
supply chain systems across the country. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare introduced 
eVIN in 2015 to strengthen the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) under National 
Health Mission (NHM). eVIN is an indigenously developed technology system that aims to 
provide real-time information on vaccine stocks, flows and  storage temperatures of the vaccines 
across all cold chain points in the country. 
Vaccine distribution Management in States 
3.22 The Committee while examining the subject also noted the existing disparity in the cold 
chain infrastructure in the country. States like Maharashtra have a robust vaccine distribution 
Management system. The State Government of Maharashtra submitted that 24  WICs (walk-in-
coolers) and 4 WIFs (walk -in-freezers) were placed at State and Regional vaccine stores. 
Vaccines were stored in walk -in-coolers and frozen ice packs prepared in walk -in-freezers. 
There were more than 5000 ILRs (Ice -lined Refrigerators) and more than 4500 DFs (Deep 
Freezers) at district and peripheral cold chain points. The State Government submitted that for 
transportation of vaccines from State to Regional vaccine stores,  they had 3 refrigerated vaccine 
vans. For transportation of vaccines from Regional to District and from District to peripheral 
cold chain points, they had a 39 insulated vaccine vans. 
  

34 
 
Cold chain infrastructure: 
 
3.23 The State of Maharashtra further submitted that vaccines were transported in cold boxes 
with conditioned icepacks through insulated vaccine van from Regional to District and District 
to peripheral cold chain points. Vaccines were transported in vaccine carriers with conditioned 
ice packs from peripheral cold chain points to vaccination session sites 
3.24 The Committee also takes note of the submission of the State of Uttarakhand with regard 
to the ir cold chain infrastructure. The State of Uttarakhand submitted that a total of 22 well 
maintained and GPS system installed vaccine vans were running in the Stat e to make the 
vaccine available from SVS to RVS, RVS to DVS, DVS to BVS (Block Vaccine Store) and 
from there to the most remote Cold Chain Point (CCP). A total of 319 (including 1 SVS, 3 RVS, 
13 DVS, 26 BVs and 276 Peripheral CCP) well maintained and tempe rature logger equipped 
CCP were present in the State. State of the art equipment was utilized and routinely monitored 
by well trained staff to maintain and distribute Covid -19 vaccine by the State which includes 7 
walk in coolers (WIC), 4 walk in Freezers (WIF), 727 Ice Lined Refrigerators (ILR) and 618 
Deep Freezer(DF).   
3.25 The Committee notes that the use of modern cold chain equipments for storing and 
transportation of vaccines at the recommended temperature is the keystone for 
maintaining the quality  and efficacy of the vaccines, however, the Committee finds that 
there is huge scope for improvement in the cold chain equipments in the country. The 
Committee points out that there is a need to upgrade the cold chain equipments in many 
States and adopt mo dern refrigerant technology so that the vaccines can be better 
monitored. The Committee also notes that use of eVIN has facilitated real time monitoring 
of the vaccines in the States. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to make 
eVIN functional i n all the States and UTs and build technical capacities so that the cold 
chain handlers as well as the Programme Managers have a complete overview of the 
vaccine supply and consumption pattern. 
3.26 The Committee takes into account the fact that the lack of ultra cold chain vaccine 
infrastructure in the country has limited the choice of vaccines. The m-RNA vaccines from 
Moderna, Pfizer etc that need a temperature of -70 to -80 C for storage could not be 
explored as vaccine options in India when these were some of the first vaccines that were 
given EUA in the western countries. The Committee believes that a poor cold chain 

35 
 
infrastructure not only limits the choice of the vaccines but also increases the risk of 
vaccines wastage.  
3.27 The Committee also notes  that in regions with difficult geographical terrain and 
poor connectivity, digitization of vaccine stock inventory and its storage temperature may 
not be possible.  The Committee is concerned especially for States like Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Padesh and the North Eastern States where road as well as network connectivity 
is very poor. Ensuring a robust vaccine distribution mechanism and monitoring the 
temperature while ensuring last mile delivery of the vaccines may be a challenge in such 
areas. The Committee , accordingly, recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the 
States and encourage use of modern technologies, Drones, Helicopters for the robust 
distribution of the vaccines.  
 
Vaccine Pricing 
3.28 The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare su bmitted that Indian vaccines 
were more economical and affordable compared to foreign vaccines.  The price of Pfizer 
vaccine in USA was $19.50 or Rs. 1,431 and this vaccine ha d to be stored at - 70 degree 
temperature. According to him, Pfizer vaccine had two issues, firstly its price per dose was high 
and it need ed to be stored at a very low temperature. He also stated that the Moderna Vaccine 
price range in rupees was Rs. 2,348 to Rs. 2,715 per dose.  This could be stored between 2 to 8 
degree temperature. The cost of Sino Farm, a Chinese Vaccine was Rs. 5650 per doze and this 
could be stored at 2-8 degree temperature.  The cost of another Chinese vaccine, Sino Wake was 
Rs. 1027 per dose which could also be stored at 2 -8 degree.  The price of Novavax vacc ine was 
US $ 16 per dose or Rs. 1141 per dose.  The price of other vaccines, Sputnik V and Johnson & 
Johnson vaccine was Rs. 734 per dose.  
3.29 The Secretary further submitted that the price of vaccine manufactured by Serum 
Institute of India in collabora tion with Astrazeneca was quoted at Rs. 250 per dose.  However 
after protracted negotiations, the price was fixed at Rs. 200 per dose.  The price of Covaxin was 
initially quoted at Rs. 350 per dose.  However the final price was Rs. 295 per dose.  It was al so 
submitted that Bharat Biotech was giving 30 percent doses free of cost; therefore, the final price 
of Covaxin came out to be Rs. 206 per dose.  
3.30 The Secretary also submitted that the foreign vaccines were exorbitantly high priced 
whereas, Indian man ufacturing and Indian R&D established the fact that India would be 
bringing about a price disruption in the global vaccine market. 
3.31 The Committee is given to understand that the price of vaccine for procurement by 
Government of India is negotiated by N ational Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for 
COVID-19 (NEGVAC) and its subgroups involving detailed deliberations with the vaccine 
manufacturers. Under National COVID -19 Vaccination Programme, COVID -19 vaccine is 
available free of cost at Government COVID-19 Vaccination Centres (CVCs) to all eligible 
beneficiaries irrespective of their socio-economic status. The vaccine manufacturers were free to 
fix the price of vaccine for procurement by Private Hospitals in a transparent manner. However, 
Government of India fixed a maximum service charge of INR 150 per dose over and above the 
price of vaccine for vaccine administration at Private COVID -19 Vaccination Centres (CVCs). 
State Governments were advised to monitor the price charged at the private hospitals. 

36 
 
3.32 The Committee observes that the price of Indian vaccines compared to the foreign 
vaccines is less, however, the Committee observes that mRNA vaccines because of their 
high potency have been greatly explored over the conventional vaccine platforms su ch as 
subunit, killed and live attenuated virus etc. The Committee is given to understand that 
mRNA vaccines provide greater flexibility in comparison to other vaccine platforms. With 
the virus constantly mutating and increasing risk of vaccine escape, mRN A vaccines 
provide a better alternative and more flexibility. The potential for low cost manufacture of 
the mRNA vaccines is also a major advantage. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
the Ministry to explore such versatile vaccine platforms in the coun try and work towards 
producing cost effective indigenous mRNA vaccines. 
3.33 The Committee notes that the bargaining powers of the vaccine manufacturers are 
high due to the high demand of the vaccines, however, the Ministry through bulk 
negotiations have s ettled at a fair price for free administration of the vaccines in the 
Government facilities. The Committee further notes that the vaccine manufacturers fix the 
price of vaccine for procurement by Private Hospitals and these private hospitals 
subsequently c harge high price for administering the vaccines. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry and the States to strictly monitor the exorbitant rates being 
charged by the private hospitals. 
3.34 The Committee further notes that  with the in crease in the number of vaccine  
candidates in the market, the private hospitals as well as the Government will be at a 
better position to negotiate the price. The Ministry must accordingly ensure that the 
vaccines prices are negotiated on favourable terms and the demand supply gap is 
adequately abridged.  
Booster Doses 
3.35 In the meeting held on 5 th April, 2022 the representatives of the State Government of 
Kerala suggested that precaution dose ( 3 rd dose) should be made available (i) to the age group 
18 years and above travelling abroa d ( students, researchers, travellers) and carving out 
exceptions of time duration specification; (ii) eligible people with comorbidity; and (iii) 
Precaution dose for those who have taken 2 doses abroad should also be worked out.  
3.36 The State Government of Kerala submitted that vaccination has shown that it reduces the 
severity of infection. The data suggests that the mortality among elderly is high in the age group 
60 and above. The precautionary dose in the age group 60 to 70, 70 to 80 , 80 and above t o be 
done based on study by calibration of Antibody titre and duration for giving additional dose.  
3.37 The Committee notes that Booster or Precautionary doses commenced for all adults 
at Private vaccination Centres from April, 2022. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the evidence based research and the clinical trials conducted in the country that 
necessitated the administering of booster doses in the country. The Committee would like 
to be informed on the reasons for the change in the vaccination  policy of the Government 
and inoculating the citizens with the precautionary dose of the same vaccine. T he 
Committee also notes that some reports suggest that a booster dose of a vaccine of a 
different platform could be better than a vaccine of the same p latform. The Committee 
feels that such proposition requires deep research and any implementation of such 
suggestion must be substantiated by in -depth research data, scientific interpretations and 
clinical trials.  

37 
 
3.38 Attention of the Committee is also drawn to the study of CMC Vellore on the inter -
mixing of doses of Covishield and Covaxin which claims to provide better immunity. 
Media Reports have suggested that the CMC Vellore study reveals that heterologous 
immunisation provides better results than homologous vaccination. However, no official 
information or updates have been provided by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
in the public domain. The Committee would like to be apprised on the findings of the 
aforementioned research study. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
encourage such studies on the potency and efficacy of the vaccines and ensure that 
bureaucratic hurdle and inordinate delays do not stall the findings of the research.  
3.39 The Committee reiterates that research studies that provide data on the efficacy of 
vaccines must be encouraged. The results of such study can help the Government in 
developing a better containment strategy and effective vaccine administration policy. The 
Ministry must expedite the decisions on such studies and its vaccine policy must be guided 
by scientific evidence and amended accordingly.  The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to commission epidemiological and vaccine effectiveness studies so that strong  
evidence on the vaccines efficacy is generated and guaranteed so as to alley the 
apprehension and hesitancy against the booster dose. 
3.40 Attention of the Committee has also been brought to the concerns of few States that 
have sought the Union Government 's permission to use the available vaccines for booster 
doses for the 18 -59 age group. The Committee recommends the Ministry to address the 
concerns of the States and allow them to use the available doses for booster doses if full 
vaccine coverage in the a dult population has been achieved. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that any excess stock of vaccines is not wasted so that 
country achieves 100% vaccination of its citizens.  
  

38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
UNFOLDING OF THE NATIONAL COVID-19 VACCINATION PROGRAMME 
4.1 The Vaccination Programme of India against Covid -19 is the largest vaccination 
programme in the world. For a country with the second largest population, the mass vaccination 
drive seemed an uphill task. National Expert Group on Va ccine Administration for COVID -19 
(NEGVAC) provided guidance on all aspects of COVID -19 vaccination including prioritization 
of population groups, procurement and inventory management, vaccine selection, vaccine 
delivery and tracking mechanism etc. All the  recommendations made by NEGVAC were 
implemented under National COVID-19 Vaccination Programme.  
4.2 The Committee is given to understand that with the rapid increase in the number of 
Covid cases across the world, it was more than necessary to produce safe  and effective vaccines 
against the SARS -COV-19 virus. The main goal of the National Vaccination Strategy was to 
alleviate the severity of the pandemic, minimize deaths and the incidence of covid cases in the 
country. An effective vaccination strategy could go a long way in reducing the mortality and 
severe hospitalization rate.  The National Regulator, Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) 
initially gave nod to market authorization of two COVID19 vaccines, Covaxin and Covishield 
subject to certain condit ions. Sputnik V, Corbevax and Covovax were the other three vaccines 
that are being administered to the Indian population till date. With the virus continuously 
mutating and evolving into a more transmissible and virulent form, vaccination of the whole 
population forms the keystone in India's fight against the pandemic.  
Sequential roll out of Covid-19 vaccination 
4.3 In the Committee meeting held on 12 th January, 2021, the Secretary, Department of 
Health and Family Welfare submitted that there was a close collaboration with States/UTs for 
vaccine roll -out preparedness.  26 virtual trainings and meetings were held with the State 
Governments to discuss operational and communication guidelines.  More than 2300 master 
Trainers were trained to further train 61,000 individuals who were known as Program managers 
which include d District Immunization Officer, Block Immunization Officer, Medical Officer 
etc.  Two lakh vaccinators who would actually vaccinated people were to be trained and three 
lakh seventy thousand other vaccination team members were also trained.   
4.4 The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare submitted that the entire 
vaccination programme was based on the five principles which were as follows: 
(i) The first principle is, "Ensure People’s Participation" .  The duty of the 
Government is to provide vaccine, logistics, training, creating SOP etc; however, 
people should actively participate in the vaccination programme without any 
hesitation.  
(ii) The second principle is "Utilize ex perience of elections and universal 
immunization programme" . There is a need to learn from the experience of 
conducting elections. Under the Universal immunization programme, around 2 
crore 70 lakh children are annually vaccinated for 12 diseases.  Under t he same 
Programme, almost 3 crore mothers are also vaccinated. There is a need to learn 
from both the experiences.  
(iii) The third principle is 'No compromise of existing healthcare services, especially, 
national programmes and primary healthcare'.   There is a need to ensure that 
other primary healthcare services are not impacted due to the vaccination 
programme.  

39 
 
(iv) The fourth principle is 'No compromise on scientific and regulatory norms'.  
(v) The fifth principle is 'Orderly and smooth implementation driven by technology'.  
The Secretary further submitted that the vaccine roll out will be smooth, 
transparent as well as in orderly manner. 
4.5 The Committee is of the view that a robust implementation of the five principles 
will ensure the success of the National Vaccination Program. The Committee recommends 
the Ministry to ensure participation of the key officers from State to the Block level along 
with active participation of the masses. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
ensure that diversion of healthcare forces to manage Covid -related uncertainties must not 
cause any disruption in the delivery of primary health care services. The Committee 
further recommends that that past experiences of universal immunization and elections 
must be utilized in smooth implementation of the National Vaccination Program.  At the 
same time, every effort should be made so that there is no compromise on scientific and 
regulatory rules and norms.  
National Covid-19 Vaccination Programme 
 
4.6 In a specific query with  regard to the major recommendations made by NEGVAC for 
successful implementation of the vaccination programme, the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare submitted that the National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for Covid 
(NEGVAC) provide d guidance on all aspects of COVID -19 vaccination including 
prioritization of population groups, procurement and inventory management, vaccine selection, 
vaccine delivery and tracking mechanism etc. All the recommendations made by NEGVAC 
have been implemented under  National COVID -19 Vaccination Programme. Major 
recommendations made by NEGVAC were as follows: 
 Preparation of operational and communication guidelines for National Covid vaccination 
Program 
 Use of COVID -19 vaccines like Covishield, Covaxin & Sputnik V who  received EUA 
by DCGI in National Covid vaccination Program. 
 Prioritization of beneficiaries for Covid vaccination programme in a phased manner 
a. Health Care Workers – 16th January 2021 
b. Front Line Workers – 2nd February 2021 
c. Person aged ≥60 years and 45 – 59 years with identified 20 co -morbidities – 1st 
March 2021 
d.  All persons aged ≥ 45 years – 1st April 2021 
e. Persons aged 18 years & above – 1st May 2021 
 Revision in dose interval of Covishield Vaccine from 4-6 weeks to 12-16 weeks. 
 Work Place Vaccination for employees >45 years 
 Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated National COVID-19 vaccination Strategy 
 COVID-19 Vaccination recommended for all Lactating Women and pregnant women 
 COVID-19 vaccination of staff of Indian Mission posted abroad 
 Near to Home Vaccination (NHCVC) for Elderly and Differently Abled Citizens 
 For individual going abroad, relaxation allowed in administration of 2nd dose of 
Covishield vaccine prior to 12 weeks (may be 4 to 6 weeks) 
 Vaccination of foreign nationals, vaccination of persecuted Hind u & Sikhs refugees 
from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.  
 

40 
 
4.7 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also outlined a well -defined governance 
framework from national to block level for successful planning, implementation, and monitoring 
of the COVID -19 vaccination program. The Secretary further submitted that two C ommittees 
would be formed at the State level to supervise the entire programme. The State's Steering 
Committee, headed by the Chief Secretary of the State would look at coordination issues with 
other Departments within the States and logistical issues whic h require multi -stakeholder 
planning. The State Task Force, chaired by the Principal Secretary Health will look at actual 
administration related issues of the vaccination programme. He further submitted that there 
would be a District Task Force headed by t he District Collector that monitors the functioning of 
vaccination booths and availability of vaccines. The Block Task Force has also been formed that 
would be headed by Block Development Officer that would monitor the vaccination programme 
at the block level. 
 
 
 
Prioritized group of population and criterion of selection of priority group for vaccination 
4.8 In the Committee meeting held on 12 th January, 2021, the Secretary, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare submitted that in the first phase, almost one crore healthcare workers in the 
Public as well as Private Health facilities was to be vaccinated.  In the second phase, almost two 
crore front line workers that include the State and Central Police Person nel, armed forces 
personnel, home guards, civil defense and disaster management volunteers, municipal workers, 
prison staff as well as revenue workers involved in containment and surveillance was to be 
vaccinated. In the third phase, approx 27 crores in th e prioritized age -groups were to be 
vaccinated. In this category, there are sub -groups as well, initially people above 60 years of age 
would be vaccinated, then people falling in the age bracket of 50 -60 years would be vaccinated 
and then people below 50 y ears with co -morbidities would be vaccinated. The Secretary also 
stated that the cost of vaccination of healthcare workers and Front Line workers would be borne 
by the Central Government.     
4.9 The priority groups for COVID -19 vaccination along with the rationale for their 
inclusion are as tabulated below: 


41 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Prioritized group Rationale Includes 
1 Health Care 
Workers 
(HCWs) 
(approx. 1 crore) 
• High risk of exposure to 
COVID-19 Involved in 
management of health 
services 
• Regular contact with 
vulnerable population 
All workers in healthcare 
settings - both Government & 
Private 
2 Front Line 
Workers 
(FLWs) 
(approx. 2 crore) 
• High risk of exposure to 
COVID-19 
• Involved in management of 
essential services 
• State and Central Police 
personnel 
• Armed  Forces personnel 
• Home Guards, Civil Defense & 
Disaster Management 
V olunteers 
• Municipal Workers 
• Prison staff 
• Revenue workers involved in 
containment and surveillance 
3 Prioritized age-
groups 
(approx. 27 
crore) 
High risk of mortality due to 
COVID-19 
• Person above age of 50 years 
• Persons <50 years with 
associated comorbidities 
 
4.10 The Secretary further submitted that the Ministry ensured sufficient number of cold 
chain points and also uninterrupted supply of syringes and other logistics in the country. A 
24X7 helpline in two languages English and Hindi was also opened by the Central Government, 
similar help lines were to be opened by various State Governments in their respective local 
languages. 
4.11 The Committee takes note that undertaking covid vaccination drive at such a large 
scale requires huge capacity and financial resources which many States may lack. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that the Government should generously equip the 
State Government with technical import and financial assist ance.  In all circumstances, 
The Centre had to take a lead role in devising policies to substantially mitigate the impact 
of the pandemic. The Committee understands that mass vaccination for a country as vast 
and as diverse as India poses a big challenge. The Central Government adopted a targeted 
vaccination strategy by according the highest priority to the group at the highest risk. The 
Committee, in its 123rd Report, had pointed out that smart vaccination might be used as an 
immediate strategy so that the  whole population should be vaccinated. The Committee 
agrees that for a country as heterogeneous as India a smart vaccination strategy was the 
need of the hour. However, the Committee observes that the response of the Union 
Ministry of Health and Family We lfare on the vaccine front was delayed at the initial 
stage. In India, mass vaccination started in June, 2021 when vaccination was made free for 
persons aged 18 and above. The Committee notes that repercussions of the delay in the 
vaccination program were evident in the high fatality during the second wave.  
 
 

42 
 
Different Phases under the National Vaccination Program 
 
4.12 The National Vaccination Program began on 16 th January, 2021 in the country. The 
different phases under the Vaccination Program are indicated as under: 
 
Phase I 
 
Under Phase I, the free vaccination of health care workers was started from 16th January, 
2021. The free vaccination for Front Line Workers began from 2nd Feb 2021.  
 
Phase II 
 
Under Phase II from 1st March, 2021, free vaccination for persons above the age of 60 years 
and 45-59 years with co morbidities was started; the National vaccination Program was further 
expanded to persons above the age of 45 from 1st April, 2021. 
 
Phase III 
 
From 1st May, 2021, the vaccination drive was expanded to persons aged 18 years and above. 
Upto 50% of the vaccines were procured by the States and the private sector. 
 
Phase IV 
 
From 21 st June, 2021, vaccination  was made free at all Government Centers for all persons 
aged 18 years and above.  
 
Phase V 
 
The next phase of the vaccination programme commenced in January 2022. From 3 rd January, 
2022, 15 -18 year olds were included in the vaccination drive. From 10 th January, 2022, 
precautionary dose for Health care workers, Front line workers and persons aged 60 and above 
with specified co morbidities was also made available. 
 


43 
 
4.13  Under the next phases of the vaccination drive, the Government started COVID -19 
vaccination for the 12 -14 age groups from March 16, 2022. The vaccine to be administered 
would be Corbevax which is manufactured by Biological E. Limited, Hyderabad. 
 
4.14 The Committee is given to understand that the administration of the Booster or 
precautionary dose to adults above 18 years of age in the Private vaccination Centres began on 
10th April, 2022. The adults who had completed 9 months after the administration o f the second 
dose are eligible for the Booster dose. The booster dose was further opened for all in the 
Government centres.  
 
4.15 The Central Government announced that free Covid -19 precautionary doses will be 
administered to the 18-59 age group at Government Vaccination Centres under a 75 -day special 
drive starting from 15th July.  
Vaccination Trends in the country 
4.16 As per Government data, as on 1st May, 2022, the total vaccine coverage in the adult 
population is 95.83%, out of which 10.83 % have been vaccinated 1st dose and 84.5 % have 
been vaccinated 2nd dose. The same can be referenced under: 
 
4.17 As per the estimate s of the Government, as on 2 6th July, 2022, 2,02,73,81,972 doses 
have been administered across the country of which 99,16,07,756 doses have been administered 
to Males and 95,38,05,312 doses have been administered to Females.  
 
  


44 
 
                                                             as on 26th July, 2022 
Total vaccination doses 
administered 
2,02,73,81,972 
Dose 1 1,02,05,60,908 
Dose 2 93,05,93,651 
Precaution Dose 7,62,27,413 
 
 
 
 
4.18 The Committee notes that in countries  like the USA, mass vaccination started in 
December, 2020 whereas in India, the first phase of the vaccination drive started in 
January, 2021 with the healthcare workers getting the shot s. The beginning of the 
vaccination drive had been slow owing to the e xclusion of the other groups. Vaccination 
was made free at all Government Centers for people above 18 years from 21st June, 2021.  
 
4.19 As per the vaccination trend, the Committee observes that the vaccination rate has 
not been steady and the vaccination reached its peak in September 2021.  The Committee 
understands that although the one size fits all approach does not bear fruit and the 
situation in India cannot be compared to other countries considering the large scale of the 
vaccination drive, however, the Committee strongly believes that India has immense 
potential and is home to the best of the brains in the world. The country must emulate the 
best of the practices from the western world and be the harbinger of innovation not only in 
its public policies but also in its approach to ameliorate the health sector. The Committee 
emphasizes that, had the vaccination drive been carried out in full swing as was done in 
the western countries; the country would have been at a better position to face the 
subsequent Covid waves. However, the exclusion of a large population from the program 
during the initial period aggravated the health inequities. The Committee strongly believes 
that the vaccination has to be made free and universal. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Ministry to ensure adequate supply of vaccines so that the target of 
universal free covid vaccination is achieved.  
 
 
 


45 
 
CoWIN App 
 
4.20 The Secretary submitted that the Government developed a digital platform called 
CoWIN where all the data of vaccine, like vaccine movement information, storage information, 
dose information etc. could be recorded, monitored, updated. The platform track ed the recipient 
of the vaccination dose and inform them about the timings and place to get the second dose of 
vaccine which needed  to be taken after 28 days of taking the first dose. After the successful 
vaccination, the platform generated  an electronic certificate and sent it on the registered mobile 
number.   
4.21 The State of Kerala in its submission stated that the CoWIN software was used for the 
registration and for entering the Covid vaccination details. The eVIN software was being used 
for the vaccine stock entry and to assess the vaccine stock details. CoWIN, the digital platform 
for COVID vaccination program, turned out to be an  important software in the field of 
immunisation. It gave visibility about the program to the public as well as program mana gers at 
all levels. While beneficiaries were able to get a digital record of their vaccination, program 
managers were able to keep a track of the vaccination program in their region/ district/ State 
level.  
4.22 With regard  to the vaccination drive in the areas with poor connectivity, the State 
Government of Maharashtra submitted that in the areas with limited internet connection, 
particularly in tribal Districts, State Government followed the physical format to collect the 
individual data for the vaccinati on Programme and after coming within the network area after 
their field activity, field workers entered records into the online app. By following this strategy, 
records were reported same day or the next day. So there was no delay in process. However, 
such facility was also made available by Government of India in Cowin app to upload that data 
by next day till 5.00 PM and that feature was utilized by Health Care Workers as and when 
required during vaccination drive for smooth reporting and monitoring. 
4.23 Attention of the Committee has also been bought to the initiatives taken by the State of 
Karnataka to enable Cowin operational guidelines which are indicated as under: 
 To enable timely tracking of vaccine transporting vehicles and to avoid delay in vaccine  
supply to periphery "Vaccine vehicle live tracking app" has been developed by the State.  
 COWIN-KAR, a pilot project and a new initiative developed by Government of 
Karnataka, by using Application Programming Interface adopted by CoWIN Portal, to 
ease the process of COVID vaccination online registration to the public. 
 Government of  Karnataka initiated receipt of Indents from Private Hospital through 
KPME portal before the feature was enabled in CoWIN 
4.24 The Committee appreciates the Ministry's initiatives in developing a digital system, 
"CoWin" to monitor vaccine administration in the country. The Committee notes that a 
platform was crucial for rolling out of the country wide vaccination program and the Co -
WIN app formed the backbone of the country's vacc ination drive. However, some 
technical glitches were reported in the app and some issues were raised during beneficiary 
registration on the COWIN App. The Committee is of the view that enabling a strong IT 
framework through Cowin Platform and imparting nec essary training to all the 
stakeholders was crucial for success of the vaccination Program.  
 
4.25 The Committee observes that tracking of the vaccine transporting vehicles is 
crucial for ensuring the timely supply of the vaccines. The Committee appreciates the 
efforts of the Karnataka Government and recommends that all the States must also use 
such vaccine vehicle live tracking app for better vaccine management on a real time basis.  

46 
 
 
4.26 The Committee understands that there exists a huge digital divide between the 
rural and the urban population. With poor accessibility and connectivity, many areas of 
the country still remain disconnected from the digital ecosystem. The Committee notes 
that rural areas tend to be neglected as the level of awareness is very poor. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to take effective measures to ensure that the rural ar eas 
especially the tribal areas are also included in the vaccination drive. The Committee notes 
that in the absence of internet connectivity, entering data in the app is a challenge. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends the Ministry to ensure that the dat a collected in the 
physical form is uploaded in the Cowin app at the earliest. The Committee is of the view 
that the Ministry must aim towards an inclusive vaccination policy and the vaccination 
drive must include the marginalized and the vulnerable population of the country too.  
 
4.27 The Committee also notes that through CoWin the Ministry has been successful in 
administering 2 billion Covid doses and CoWin holds a huge repository of the vaccination 
data. However, various stakeholders during the discussi on highlighted the absence of any 
data on the efficacy of the vaccine. The Committee accordingly notes that even with an 
outstanding CoWin data system, the country has no extensive records of after 
immunisation effects in its population. The Committee stro ngly recommends the Ministry 
to facilitate linkages between CoWin and other data systems and share the data in the 
public domain. The Committee is of the opinion that building inter -operable data systems 
that ensure real time data exchange can provide a be tter assessment of the efficacy of the 
vaccines. The Committee further feels that this digital ecosystem can be aptly utilised for 
not only monitoring the vaccine supply chain but also promoting concrete research and 
formulating better policy decisions.  
  

47 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
VIEWS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS/  
THE DEPARTMENTS/MINISTRIES AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS 
 
5.1 The Committee, during the examination of the subject, "Vaccine Development, 
Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID 19'' heard the views of various 
Stakeholders and other Departments/Ministries. The Committee also sought views of the other 
Ministries and State Governments on the subject. Continuing with the examination of the 
subject, the Committee also undertook two study visits (i)  to Srina gar and Chandigarh from 6 th 
to 9th September, 2021 and (ii) to Guwahati, Bengaluru and Mumbai from 25 th  to 29th  April, 
2022. Some of the submissions from various stakeholders in brief are enumerated as under: 
 
ROLE OF OTHER MINISTRIES IN COVID-19 MITIGATION AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology 
 
5.2 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) informed that it had been identified as the 
nodal department for vaccine development and manufacturing  and was  involved in 
strengthening regional scientific cooperation with partnering nations and facilitating clinical 
trials of Indian COVID-19 vaccines in neighbouring countries. 
5.3 Based on the recommendations of National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration f or 
COVID-19  (NEGVAC), a summary of the actions taken by DBT was submitted as under :- 
(A) Partnerships for Accelerating Clinical Trials (PACT) initiative: 
The PACT (Partnerships for Accelerating Clinical Trials) programme was 
launched as a ‗Science Diplom acy‘ initiative for supporting COVID -19 vaccine 
development activities in partnering countries. The activities being undertaken under 
PACT include: 
i. Facilitation for Phase III clinical trials of Indian COVID vaccines in neighboring and 
friendly countries 
  
Discussions with representatives of partnering nations were being held for 
advancing development of Indian COVID Vaccines. Consultations were held with eight 
nations for Phase III clinical trials of COVAXIN. 
 
ii. Trainings for strengthening clinical trial research capacity in neighboring countries 
A series of online training courses were being organized by Biotechnology 
Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) and Clinical Development Services 
Agency (CDSA) under the aegis of the National Biopharma Mission and Ind -CEPI 
Mission of DBT.  
The first series was organized September, 2020 through December, 2020. Four 
modules encompassing sessions on Good Clinical Practice (GCP), Ethical 
Considerations in Clinical Research, Good Clinical Laboratory Practice (GCLP) and 
Large Vaccine Field Trials, have been conducted. 

48 
 
More than 100 participants from seven neighbouring /friendly countries – 
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Mauritius, Nepal and Sri Lanka  – have 
participated in the training series.  
(B) Implementation of Mission COVID Suraksha 
‗Mission COVID Suraksha - The Indian COVID -19 Vaccine Development 
Mission‘, launched by the Government of India (GOI) to accelerate indigenous COVID -
19 vaccine development efforts  
The Mission was announced under AtmaNirbhar 3.0 Package, with a provision of 
Rs. 900 Cr. to the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) for supporting the development 
of a comprehensive ecosystem for enabling the development of a safe, efficacious and 
affordable vaccine for COVID -19. The Mission was being led by DBT and was being 
implemented by Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), a 
Public Sector Undertaking of DBT.  
Three Requests for Expression of Interests (REOIs) for COVID -19 vaccine 
development and supporting ecosystem were issued by DBT -BIRAC focusing on (1) 
Development of COVID -19 Vaccine Candidates, (2) Enhancement of Capacity to 
support COVID -19 Vaccine development and (3) Enhancing capacity for conduct of 
Human clinical trial for COVID-19 Vaccine Candidates. 
(C) Upgradation of DBT laboratories at Pune and Hyder abad as Central Drug 
Laboratories (CDLs) 
Based on the recommendations of the NEGVAC and the Task Force for Focused 
Research on Corona Vaccines, and other S&T issues (Vaccine Task Force, or VTF), 
detailed proposals were submitted by two Autonomous Institute s of DBT, viz., National 
Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad and National Centre for Cell 
Science (NCCS), Pune, for the development of CDLs. In principle approval for the same 
accorded by the PMO.  
(D) Coordination with the COVID-19 Working Group: 
The Working Group (WG) on COVID -19 vaccines were established by the 
Standing Technical Sub -committee (STSC) of the National Technical Advisory Group 
on Immunization (NTAGI), co chaired by Secretary, DBT and Secretary, Department of 
Health Research (DHR) & Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research (DG, 
ICMR), to provide evidence -based recommendation on use of COVID -19 vaccines. The 
Department of Biotechnology worked closely with the COVID -19 WG on aspects 
related to introduction of validated assays for robust clinical development of COVID-19, 
it was also involved in deliberations on vaccine prioritization, delivery and other 
logistics  
(E) Other activities: 
Coordination was provided for the Development of the concept proposal on 
‗Vaccine Maitree‘, a mechanism for making available safe and efficacious COVID -19 
vaccines at affordable prices from India to partnering nations 
5.4 The Committee takes into account that DBT strengthened the Regional Scientific 
Co-operation and looked forward in taki ng a lead role in ensuring that the indigenous 
vaccines undergo rigorous clinical trials in the neighbouring countries. The Committee, in 

49 
 
this regard, recommends the Ministry to collaborate with research bodies and apex 
institutes of the neighbouring count ries so that regional cooperation is further 
strengthened and scientific fervour is promoted in India and the neighbouring countries. 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Health and Family and the Department 
of Biotechnology to work towards upgrad ing the clinical trials infrastructure in the 
country.  
5.5 The Committee appreciates the PACT (Partnerships for Accelerating Clinical 
Trials) programme and recommends the Department of Biotechnology and the 
Department of Health Research to launch various programs for studying other diseases 
alongwith their drug and vaccine development.  The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Health Research to 
collaborate on development of Indian Covid-19 vaccines.   
5.6 The Committee appreciates, "Mission Covid Suraksha -The Indian Covid -19 
Vaccine Development Mission" which is aimed at accelerating indigenous Covid 19 
vaccine development efforts. The Committee hopes that the Mission is successful in 
developing more indigenous vaccines that are affordable and easily accessible. The success 
of the Mission can break the barrier of shortage in vaccine supply, thus ensuring vaccines 
for all and promoting vaccine equity across the world. 
5.7 The Committee is of the firm opinion that India should ensure adequate availability 
of vaccines in the country alongwith expanding its collaboration with other countries 
under "Vaccine Maitree". The Committee believes that India's vaccine diplomacy would 
promote vaccine equity i.e. global equitable vaccine distribution among the less developed 
Asian, African and Latin American countries.  
Ministry of AYUSH 
 
(i) Ministry of AYUSH requested all States/UTs to provide pro -active support to the 
respective Health Department at the State and Distr ict for the following activities for mitigating 
the impact of this pandemic- 
(a) Identification of HQWC (Health Care Workers) with AYUSH. 
(b) Provide vaccinators, legally authorized to give injections and other team 
members. 
(c) Use their platforms for dissemination of IEC. 
 
(ii) It was suggested by the Ministry that trained AYUSH Health Workers should also be 
considered as vaccinators so that vaccination may be expeditiously implemented throughout the 
country. 
 
5.8 The Committee understands the piloted role of Ministry of Ayush in National 
Covid-19 vaccination programme as the Ministry provided pool of Heatlhcare workers as 
vaccinator.  The Committee recommends that the Ayush institutional structure must be 
massively utilised as platform for disseminatio n of IEC activities, thus enhancing public 
awareness for mitigation of Covid-19. 
 
 
 

50 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS, MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS  
 
5.9 The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals as a member of larger group of 
NEGVAC chairs the Sub Group-II with members from Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
which is mandated to look into the effective co -ordination of logistic aspects of COVID 
Vaccination. The sub -group provides support to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoHFW) to plan the logistics and distribution of the vaccine. The procurement of the vaccine, 
syringes and consumable, augmentation of cold chain  and implementation of the vaccination 
programme including distribution of vaccines  was being done by the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare. 
5.10 The Committee recommends the Government to lay special emphasis on the 
strengthening of the end -to-end vaccine supply chain and logistics systems. The 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in coordination with the States must ensure 
strengthening of the cold -chain infrastructure and fair distribution of the vaccines to 
all the States/UTs. 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
5.11 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been undertaking  various IEC activities by 
writing regular letters to States/UTs issuing several advisories and creating awareness to 
curb the spread of Corona virus. Ministry  issued letter along with a shareable Google 
Drive link containing IEC materials provided by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
for COVID-19 Vaccination Programme. 
 
5.12 Further, the Ministry undertook various other activities related to Covid -19 
mitigation including:- 
 
(i) circulation of the Google Drive link through WhatsApp Groups, 
(ii) sending Bulk SMSs to about 2.34 lakh Gram Panchayats registered on the 
GPDP portal of  the Ministry, 
(iii) allotting a dedicated section on the Website for all the Covid -19 related 
activities, 
(iv) creating awareness through Social Media. 
 
5.13 Taking into account the Urban-Rural vaccination gap, the Committee is of the view 
that the existing infrastructure of Panchayati Raj can be optimally reckoned for 
dissemination of IEC for creating public awareness regarding the benefits of vaccine. 
5.14 The Committee,  in this regard recommends that the Panchayati Raj 
Institutional arrangement and grass root local bodies must be massively utilized for 
mass rural vaccination. The Ministry must also utilize the State machinery to 
increase the uptake of the precautionary dose in the rural areas. 
 
  

51 
 
STUDY VISIT TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND CHANDIGARH 
 
Views received from UT of J&K 
 
5.15 The UT of J&K submitted that under National Health Mission, Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare, Government of India released Rs.230.11 crores for management of COVID-19 
during the financial year 2019-20 & 2020-21, which included Rs.5.84 crore for operation cost of 
COVID vaccination: 
 
(i) During the financial year 2019-20, COVID funds were released on the funding 
pattern of 90:10 ratio. 
(ii) During the financial year 2020 -21, Emergency COVID Response Plan (ECRP) 
part-1 was fully funded by MOHFW, Government of India (World Bank)  
 
5.16 The Government of UT of J&K was providing free vaccination to all people in age 
group of 18 and above. For thi s the Government ha d adopted the IEC mechanism through print 
and electronic media and use of influencers of the civil society.  Moreover, session sites were 
also being increased keeping in view the response of the people.  Also, the Directorate of 
Family Welfare, J&K vigorously conducted the special camps for vaccination of people who 
lacked ID cards, homeless people and those living in shelters, children in institutional care, 
prison/open jail/people under BPL and people with disabilities.  (Directorate of FW&I) 
 
5.17 No incidence of side -effects or acute illness among the vaccine receivers was reported 
after the vaccination shot  in the Union Territory .  A proper monitoring mechanism was 
functioning in the UT and as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Hea lth & Family Welfare, 
Government of India from time to time the J&K Government had constituted the Adverse 
Events Following Immunization (AEFI) Committees at the UT Level, District Level and Block 
Level for proper monitoring and management.  (Directorate of FW&I) 
 
5.18 1600 vaccination centers were established in the UT.  All these centers were equipped 
with the required technical staff and health care workers. The UT conducted special training 
program for the healthcare workers for conducting the vaccinati on drive.  No shortfall of 
healthcare workforce was faced. Outreach sessions were conducted by the UT for ensuring that 
the vaccination drive reached  the remotest parts of the UT. The efforts were ongoing in all the 
districts and helped achieve better coverage.  
 
5.19 The Committee hopes that the UT of J&K would achieve the set target under its 
vaccination drive through coveted IEC mechanism. The Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare must monitor and guide the UT for effective management of covid cases in the UT 
of J&K. 
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF HARYANA ON THE SUBJECT 
 
5.20 The State Government of Haryana submitted that as on 8 th September, 2021, the 
coverage of Vaccination was 182979 and th e cumulative coverage of Vaccination was 
17591336. The Vaccination Status as on 8th September, 2021 was as under:  
 
 
 
 

52 
 
                                                                                      (source-Co-WIN Portal) 
Category Dose 1st  Dose 2nd   Total (1 st & 2 nd 
Dose) 
HCW 251,288 232,260 483,548 
FLW 251,036 225,258 476,294 
60 years & above 2,232,018 1,306,669 3,538,687 
45≤ 60 years 2,913,115 1,418,237 4,331,352 
18-44 years 7,396,707 1,364,748 8,761,455 
Total Vaccination  13,044,164 4,547,172 17,591,336 
Total 17,591,336 
 
5.21 The State Government of Haryana further submitted that as on 8th September 2021, 
there were 68 Dedicated Covid Hospital (DCH), 579 Dedicated Covid Health Centre 
(DCHC), 505 Dedicated Covid  Care Centre (DCCC) leading to a total of 1152 Covid 
Facilities in the State. The total Covid Hospital and Beds at a Glance (upto 8th September, 
2021 )  Haryana was as under: 
COVID-19 Facility (data source-S3 portal) 
Availability of Beds (Data 
Source-NHM Portal)  
   
Type of Beds Total Occupied Available 
Non-Oxygen Beds 13668 17(0.12%) 13651(99.88%) 
Oxygen Beds (other than ICU) 13787 130(0.94%) 13657(99.06%) 
Oxygen Beds (ICU) 3571 261(7.31%) 3310(92.69%) 
Ventilators 1590 40(2.52%) 1550(97.48%) 
 
5.22 The State Government submitted that the Government of India had sanctioned an 
amount of Rs.304 cr. for COVID -19 vaccination for Health care workers and Front Line 
Workers.  This budget had been utilized by Districts and the State for COVID vaccination 
activities.  From 1 st May, 2021, under the Liberalized policy, the State Government had 
procured COVID vaccine for Rs.47.9 crore.  Later, GOI decided to provide vaccine free of 
cost to the State.  
 
5.23 Haryana had adopted all SOPs and guidelines given by Mini stry of Health & Family 
Welfare, Government of India from time to time to implement successful vaccination drive 
in the State.  Accountability and review mechanisms were established at all level s chaired 
by CS, ACS Health, MD NHM and DCs at district level.  Cascade training from program 
managers to vaccinators were conducted and regular orientations done from time to time.  
Dry runs were carried out across the state for smooth roll out of campaign. The State also 
submitted that initially vaccine hesitancy wa s encountered but was addressed through 
advocacy, IPC, IEC and involvement of different stakeholders. 
 

53 
 
5.24 The State Government further submitted that a total of 1058 Adverse Events 
Following Immunization (AEFIs) have been reported out of which 1021 are m inor events 
and only 15 were severe and 22 serious. The State revamped AEFI committees for 
investigations and classification of AEFIs related to COVID vaccination as per directions 
from Government of India. The State Government also submitted that every CV C is 
equipped with AEFI Kit to manage AEFI cases and were linked with AEFI management 
centers for further management.  All AEFIs were uploaded on SafeVac/CoWIN Portal. 
Total No of CVCs in Haryana (CoWIN)  was 9833.  The Centres where vaccination was 
being done were equipped with technical staff and  Health care workers, as per Government 
of India guidelines. Special training for COVID-19 vaccination had been given to all Health 
care workers in casecade manner as per training aids provided by Government of In dia.  
Line departments e.g. WCD/Education department/ PRI/SHG etc.  were looped in besides 
ASHAs and AWWs for support in vaccination drive.  
 
5.25 It was ensured that sessions were held aiming to cover all population groups and 
geographical areas.  Also special Near -to-Home sessions were being conducted in remote 
parts to reach all beneficiaries.  Special sessions were also planned to cover homeless 
population, prison inmates, speci ally-abled, etc. State was doing vaccination of vulnerable 
groups through conducting Near to Home CVCs.   
 
5.26 The State Government of Haryana further submitted that the funds received from 
Government of India were utilised for diagnostics, drugs &  supplies, temporary HR, 
mobility support, etc.  Sate would like to continue the assistance from Central Government. 
 
5.27 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
must ensure that appropriate accountability and review me chanisms are established 
in each State and adequate training is provided for ensuring smooth roll out of the 
vaccination drive. The Committee further recommends the use of Information 
Education and Communication (IEC), Interpersonal communication (IPC) str ategies 
to generate awareness among the community to counter vaccine hesitancy in the 
States.  
 
5.28 The Committee, in this regard, commends the role of Government of Haryana 
for conducting special sessions to cover homeless population, prison inmates, specially-
abled, etc. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that the vulnerable and 
marginalized groups are not excluded from the vaccination drive.  
 
View of the UT of Chandigarh: 
 
5.29 The UT of Chandigarh submitted that the Covid vaccination Centers in the UT of 
Chandigarh are as follows: 
 
S.No. Facility Type Number of vaccination 
Center 
1. Government  46 
2. Private 10 
3. Mobile Van *15 
 Total 71 
                    * 15 CVCs functional through mobile ambulances at different locations in the city. 
 

54 
 
5.30 4 Mobile CVCs established in A.C. CTU buses visiting all areas/sectors of UT 
Chandigarh along with provision of ambulances for safety, NGOs were also involved for 
funding the volunteers for Door to Door  Vaccination cum Survey.  
 
5.31 All residential welfare association, Market Committees, NGOs, Management 
committees of various Temples, Gurudwaras & Mosques were involved and the vaccination 
camps were conducted at their respective premises. 
  
5.32 The UT further submitted that all HWCs/Hospitals/other Govt. facilities were developed 
as COVID Vaccination centers. All members of Vaccination Teams trained and regular 
sensitization and updating of vaccination team members was done by WHO & UNDP as per 
GOI Guidelines and SOPs. Additional vaccinators/verifiers were also engaged on daily basis. 
 
5.33 Meetings were regularly held with Anganwadi Supervisors and workers to mobilize 
residents for Vaccination. COVID Vaccination for la ctating and pregnant women was being 
carried out. 
 
5.34 To make Vaccination Drive successful in the State, all CVCs were kept open even 
during Sundays and Gazette d Holidays. For door to door campaign, microplans were made by 
medical officer incharges and t eams were constituted for providing vaccination services on 
Pulse Polio Pattern with provision of  A/C Vaccination buses at their doorstep. Schools, 
Colleges, tourist places were also covered in coordiantion with their management by Mobile 
Vaccination Team s along with provision of ambulances for safety. Resident welfare 
associations, Market Committees, NGOs, Management committees of various Temples, 
Gurudwaras & Mosques involved  and the vaccination camps were conducted at their respective 
premises. Special  vaccination camps were arranged for disable d, elderly, bed ridden 
beneficiaries and people without I.D. proof. Arranged special COVID vaccination camp in 
Model Jail. Special Vaccination camps at SAMARTH, ASHRIYA, SOREM, Chandigarh Spinal 
Rehabilitation Center and Missionary of Charity were also organised. 
 
COVID Vaccination status as on 7th September, 2021 
 
Sr. No. Category Target 1st Dose (Actuals) 2nd Dose (Actuals) 
1 Above 18 years 7,29,822 8,35,465 (114.48%) 3,37,152 (46.20%) 
2 45 to 59 years 1,73,178 1,82,204 (105.21%) 1,07,936 (62.33%) 
3 Above 60 years 98,959 1,00,463 (101.52%) 74,896 (75.68%) 
4 HCWs 26,237 27,032(103.03%) 22,951 (87.48%) 
5 FLWs 22,428 48,350 (215.58%) 64,903 (289.38%) 
 
 Covishield Vaccine Wastage: (-2.22%) 
 
AEFI Cases Reported- COVID Vaccination as per CoWIN 
 
Total Vaccination Administered AEFI cases reported % AEFI cases reported 
11,72,616 217 0.018% 
COVISHIELD Vaccine Stock Details as on 7th September, 2021 
 
Sr. No. Covishield Vaccine Doses 
received till date 
Available stock 
Govt. Facilities 
Available stock 
Private  Facilities 
1 12,27,200 1,01,050 26,720 

55 
 
Schedule of vaccine supplies for September, 2021 
 
Date Covishield Doses 
16.09.2021 98600 
26.09.2021 98610 
Total 197210 
 
Allocation for September, 2021 
 
Facility Type Government  Private Total 
Allocated 295810 39440 335250 
Received  98600 0 98600                                                                 
 Remaining  197210 39440                                                                                                                                                     236650 
 
5.35 The Committee appreciates the involvement of residential welfare association, 
Market Committees, NGOs, Management committees of various Temples, 
Gurudwaras & Mosques in the National Covid -19 vaccination programme to ensure 
the success of the vaccination dr ive in the UT of Chandigarh. The Committee 
recommends the other State Governments to follow suite and also conduct special 
vaccination campaign for elderly, differently -abled persons, bed -ridden beneficiaries 
and people without any identification Card.  
 
STUDY VISIT TO GUWAHATI, BENGALURU AND MUMBAI 
 
Views of the State Government of Assam  
 
5.36 With regard to Covid -19 Vaccination, the State Government of Assam submitted that a 
total of 4,45,34,576 doses of Covid vaccinations were administered in the State till 24 th April, 
2022 with 2,38,67,271 1 st dose; 2,03,16,251 2 nd dose and 3,51,054 precaution dose with 
Government of India supply of vaccines. State Government also procured vaccines for Rs. 45.17 
Cr in the initial phase. A massive "Har Ghar Dastak" progr amme to achieve 100% vaccination 
was undertaken in the month of November/December, 2021, across the state. 
5.37 With regards to Covid -19 Management, the State Government submitted that u nder the 
continuous guidance of Government of India, Covid -19 was mana ged with 3Ts (Testing, 
Tracking and Treatment) and strict Covid appropriate behavior. A total of 2.83 Crore Covid 
tests had been done and 7,24,204 Covid positive cases had been recorded in the State till 24 th 
April, 2022.  7,16,212 patients had already rec overed/discharged showing recovery rate of 
98.90%. 
5.38 The State Government further submitted that infrastructure facilities including Oxygen 
supported beds increased tremendously with the help of 1000 PM Care Ventilators, 5145 
numbers of Oxygen Concentra tors and 7244 Oxygen Cylinders received from Government of 
India. Total 40 Oxygen Generation Plants sanctioned under PMCARES Fund have been 
commissioned with a total output of 63.40 MT/day. In addition, 47 CSR and government funded 
PSA plants were established in all Districts and Medical Colleges.  
5.39 The State Government further submitted that the production of Medical Oxygen was 
increased to 188.61 MT/day and storage capacity of liquid medical oxygen to 755.37 MT to 
meet the demand in case of fu ture waves. Covid Drug Kit containing basic drugs like 

56 
 
Paracetamol, Cough Syrup, Gurgle, Vit D3, Vit C, Zinc for home isolation patients were 
provided free of cost.  Remdesivir and Tocilizumab were made available even in private 
hospitals at subsidized pri ce. A total of 2726 numbers of families benefitted under CM's 
Prarthana, SishuSeva and Covid-19 Widow support, scheme initiated by Government of Assam. 
A total of 5734 no. of beneficiaries received assistance from Ex -Gratia Assistance Scheme 
Under State Disaster Relief fund (Rs. 50,000). 
5.40 The State Government further submitted that the Government of India provided financial 
assistance of Rs. 221 Cr. under ECRP -1 and Rs. 812 Cr. under ECRP -II for strengthening 
ICUs/Oxygen beds for Covid treatment, procurement of protective materials like PPE Kits, N95 
Masks, Hand sanitizers and essential medicines for Covid management. 
5.41 The Committee emphasizes on the need of expanding "Har Ghar Dastak" 
Programme across the country. The Committee further desires that other State 
Governments must follow the  Covid -19 mitigation strategy  of  the Government of Assam 
where funds raised under Corporate Social Responsibility have been utilized to strengthen 
the public health infrastructure in the State that is being optiona lly utilized in Vaccination 
drive in the State.   
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MANIPUR ON THE SUBJECT DURING 
THE STUDY VISIT OF COMMITTEE TO GUWAHATI 
5.42 The State Government of Manipur submitted that it was receiving Covid -19 vaccines 
such as Covishield, Covaxin and CorbeVax from Government of India through GMSD Kolkata.  
GMSD Kolkata issued Covid-19 vaccines to State Vaccine Store Imphal since the beginning of 
the Covid-19 vaccination drive in the State.  There was one State Vaccine Store (SVS) at s tate 
level, 16 District Vaccine Stores (DVS) at district level and 114 Cold Chain Point (DDP) below 
district level where vaccines were used to store at the recommended temperature (+2 C to +8 C) 
ensuring the safety of vaccines.  State Vaccine Store (SVS) i ssues Covid-19 vaccines to District 
level Stores (DVS) as per district requisition and indent they put up to SVS.  Further, DVS is 
issuing vaccines to the Cold Chain Points as per indent the In -charge of the health Facility/Cold 
Chain Point puts up to DVS.   In this way, Cold Chain Points distribute Covid -19 vaccines to all 
planned vaccination sites.  In brief, vaccine distribution system from State Vaccine Store to the 
last beneficiary was done in such a manner that there would be adequate availability of v accine 
stock, ensuring that there was no shortage of vaccine stock at all vaccine stores.  Vaccines 
received from GMSD Kolkata were being stored at State Vaccine Store (SVS). In brief, Covid -
19 vaccines distribution was done in the following manner: 
1- Vaccines were rationally distributed from SVS to the districts as per indent put by the 
DIO of the respective districts. 
2- It was further distributed from district level vaccine store 9DVS) to the respective 
district Cold Chain Points below the district level. 
3- From Vaccine Cold Chain Points, it was issued to the designated Covid -19 vaccination 
sites.  It might be at health facilities, community hall and any other out -reach session 
sites which were designated for the same. 
4- Maintaining vaccine cold chain system at al l level till the last beneficiary was the back 
bone of vaccine distribution system.  Vaccines were stored at the recommended 
temperature i.e. +2 C to +8 C at all vaccine stores ensuring the same till the last 
beneficiary in order to maintain the vaccine potency and its efficacy. 

57 
 
5- Vaccine distribution system/flow was from SVS to DVS, DVS to CCP, finally from 
CCP to the covid-19  vaccination sites. 
6- Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network (eVIN) rolled out in 2016 in the state, an 
initiative of MOHFW, Government of India on vaccine logistic management, has been a 
key role in vaccine distribution system, real time monitoring of vaccine flow, vaccine 
stock management, cold chain management and temperature of vaccine.  eVIN aims to 
support the Government of India's Universal Immunization Programme by providing 
real-time information on vaccine stocks and flows, and storage temperatures across all 
cold chain points in Manipur. 
5.43 The Committee appreciates the utilization of eVIN in the State of Manipur, 
however, the Committee notes that collection of real time information may be difficult in 
many geographically tough terrain of the State thereby necessitat ing further improvement 
in Vaccine logistic management.  The Committee, further recommends the State to ensure 
that vaccine centres and cold chain points are well integrated in the eVIN. 
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH ON THE 
SUBJECT DURING THE STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO GUWAHATI 
5.44 The State Government of Arunachal Pradesh submitted that the Covid -19 vaccine was 
transported from GMSD Kolkata to Lilabari Airport through air service.  Vaccine van collect ed 
the vaccine from the airport and it was transported to State Vaccine Store naharlagun by road.  
The vaccine from SVS was transported similarly through vaccine van in all district vaccine store 
(DVS) as per target beneficiary and consumption pattern.  Fina lly the vaccine was collected by 
each planning unit from DVs for administration at the COVID vaccination centres or CVC 
linked outreach session.  Throughout these processes, the vaccine was maintained at proper cold 
chain system (2 -8 degree Celsius).  The stock of Covid -19 vaccines is maintained online 
through eVIN (Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network) platform. Through this application, the 
vaccine stock and consumption could be checked on real time.   
5.45 The State Government further submitted that for CVC linked outreach session, Alternate 
Vaccine Delivery (AVD) mechanism was followed for transporting vaccine from cold chain 
point to session site.  Following completion of vaccination session, the vaccines were 
transported back to the cold chain point  through AVD mechanism.  The Covid vaccine was 
provided in 353 notified Covid vaccinations Centre (CVCs) in Arunachal Pradesh from Monday 
to Sunday. 
5.46 As per availability of Covid-19 vaccine at SVS and based on the requirement (calculated 
as per consumption pattern) at the district, the vaccine was allocated to the district periodically.  
A distribution plan for all districts was prepared, so that the districts were able to collect the 
vaccine in shortest possible time and route.  Concept of first expiry  first out (FEFO) was 
followed, wherein the vaccines vial with early expiry were used first, to avoid any wastage of 
vaccine due to expiry.  Also, since the Covid vaccine was a multi dose vial, in order to avoid 
vaccine wastage, the beneficiaries were mobilized for minimum usage of doses from each vial. 
In many instances inter -district and intra-district re-allocation of Covid -19 were done by which 
the vaccine from excess stock cold chain points were shifted to cold chain point having better 
consumption pattern.  
5.47 The State also submitted that the Covid -19 vaccine for Defence was also allocated to 
each district in a similar process as per the target beneficiaries shared by the Ministry.  The 

58 
 
Nodal Officer of AFMS in each district collected the vaccine from the DVS and the vaccine was 
administered to the beneficiaries at the respective Defence Health Unit premises. 
5.48 In times of excess stock  of vaccine with short expiry, the State intimated MoHFW, 
Government of India for shifting of vaccine to  neighbouring state also for early consumption. 
For maximum consumption of Covid -19 vaccine various strategies such as circle saturation 
strategy, Tika Mahotsav, Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, Har Ghar Dastak and Har School Dastak 
were opted and ongoing for augmenting the  1st dose and 2 nd dose coverage.  As on 24 th April, 
2022, the 1 st dose and 2 nd dose coverage of 18 years & above in Arunachal Pradesh was 83% 
and 71% respectively. 
5.49 The Committee takes note of the CVC linked outreach session, Alternate Vaccine 
Delivery mechanism being followed in the State of Arunachal Pradesh for transporting 
vaccine. The Committee strongly recommends the State Government to ensure the last 
mile delivery of vaccines especially in the remotest area of the State. The Committee 
appreciates the use of First Expiry First Out (FEFO) concept in the State where vaccine 
vials with early expiry are used first. However, the Committee recommends the State 
Government to ensure that the temperature of the vaccines are maintained accurately and 
avoid any wastage of vaccine. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure 
that FEFO is followed in all the States so that vaccine vials are not wasted due to expiry of 
the vaccines. 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA  
5.50 The State submitted  that Government of India ensures availability of COVID -19 
vaccines for the State. The State further bears the responsibility of distribution to be transparent 
& equitable. This process needs to be less time consuming i.e effective and efficient at the sam e 
time. There is also a need to ensure proper preparedness of the supply chain system to enable 
accurate estimations and calculations of storage space, ensuring functional status of all cold 
chain equipment's. 
Vaccine procurement policy 
i. Since the Governmen t of India launched COVID vaccination drive on Jan 16, 2021, all 
states including Karnataka were supplied vaccines (COVISHIELD and COVAX1N) free of 
cost for the vaccination of health care workers and followed by front line workers. 
ii. From 1st April 2021 started vaccination for all the beneficiaries above 45 years. Private 
facilities conducting vaccination were mandated to deposit Rs.150 per dose per person as 
vaccine cost to Government of India.  
iii. Till 1st May, 2021. Government of India was supplying vaccines to conduct vaccination for 
the beneficiaries above 45 years free of cost at Government CVCs and to private CVCs at 
Rs. 250/- (including services charges)  
iv. From 1 st May, 2021, Government of India opened up vaccination for 18 -44 years and 
changed the vaccina tion policy. As per this policy, the 25% of the manufactured vaccines 
were to be procured by State to vaccinate beneficiaries in the age group of 18 -44 years and 
25% to be procured by private institutions. 
v. However, Government of India continued to supply f ree vaccines to the States to vaccinate 
eligible beneficiaries above 45 years free of cost at Govt. CVCS. 
vi. Later, from 21st June, 2021 Government of India revised the vaccination policy, 75% of the 
produced vaccines would be supplied to State for the vaccin ation of all the eligible 
beneficiaries above 18 years free of cost at Government CVCS. However, Private CVCS 
would continue to procure 25% of the manufactured vaccines 

59 
 
vii. Government of India made provision to raise the indent on CoWIN portal, to be activated in 
due course. Payment would be done through NHA portal. Vaccines would be allocated to 
districts and districts would distribute the vaccines to private hospitals based on the indent 
raised. 
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA   
5.51 The State Government submitted that it implement ed the recommendations made by 
NEGVAC communicated by GOI for successful implementations of Vaccination Programme. 
For monitoring the implementation of vaccination programme as per Specific, Measureable, 
Achievable, Relevant and Time Bound (SMART) Principle objectively, various levels task force 
committees were formed at State, Region, District/City & Block level. Regular review by these 
committees was taken and also feedback and corrective measures were suggested for successful 
implementation and for improvement in the vaccination coverage. Microanalysis of vaccination 
data was done to identify areas of low coverage if any, reasons were identified and corrective 
steps taken 
5.52 The State of Maharashtra has one State Va ccine Store; 8 Regional Vaccine Store; 34 
District Vaccine Stores and 27 Corporation Vaccine Store & more than 3000 peripheral cold 
chain points. There were 24 Walk in coolers & more than 5000 Ice Lined Refrigerator in the 
States to store Covid vaccine & also there were 3 refrigerated vaccine vans, 44 insulated vans to 
transport vaccine from one store to another. Hence State ha d enough capacity to store vaccine at 
various levels. On the day of receipt of vaccine from GOI at State level, all regional level 
vaccine vans were called on the same day and time. Same protocol was used at district and 
regional level for faster transport of vaccines to all cold chain points. Additional fuel grants 
were distributed for transportation of Covid vaccines. 
5.53 State Gove rnment further submitted that it ha d imparted training to programme 
managers, District immunization officers through virtual training platform. Update on new 
knowledge were given on time to time as and when received from GOI also detailed written 
guidelines were given. For immediate implementation of programme guidelines and to achieve 
faster vaccination coverage immediate time bound training and feedback mechanism through 
review Video Conferencing / virtual online meeting was necessary. 
5.54 All Covid vaccination related trainings and updates were imparted to all programme 
managers in a time bound manner. Vaccine distribution was done through meticulous planning 
and prioritization of areas based on number of beneficiaries remaining for 1st & 2 nd dose, 
number of active Covid cases, balance stock available, special situations (floods, festivals etc.). 
All minor and major AEFIs were meticulously tracked and managed on time to gain public 
confidence in vaccination. Community awareness and demand ge neration was done through 
effective IEC, various social media platform and media briefing. To counteract various myths 
misconceptions & rumours spreading on WhatsApp, social media platforms were utilized in a 
big way. Vaccination coverage was monitored thr ough regular analysis of coverage data on 
coverage of 1 st  & 2 nd  dose, due beneficiaries etc. Accordingly based on analytical reports 
frequent review VCs were taken, feedback letters & telephonic follow up was done. Vaccine 
wastage based on COWIN Report was monitored similar to vaccination coverage. 
5.55 The Committee commends the role of the State Government of Maharashtra where 
the Pandemic Covd -19 has shown heinous expression resulting into large number of 
deaths, however, the SMART (Specific, Measureable, Achievable, Relevant and Time 
Bound) monitoring  of the implementation of vaccination programme led to effective 

60 
 
management of the Pandemic.  The Committee appreciates the vaccine distribution plan of 
Government of Maharashtra which was formulated through meticulous planning and 
prioritization of areas based on consideration of the number of active Covid cases and 
micro analysis of vaccination data.  The committee further applauds the specific strategy 
for Covid -19 Management in 'Dharavi' -Asia's largest slum area in Mumbai.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to undertake case study of 'Dharavi' Model of Covid 
Management to arrive at the managerial skill, planning & strategic course of action for 
combating any possible pandemic in the country.  
 
VIEWS OF THE OTHER STATES/UTS ON THE SUBJECT 
VIEWS OF THE UNION TERRITORY OF LADAKH  
5.56 Vaccination Distribution Management: In UT of Ladakh, Covid -19 vaccine distribution 
was done according to the SOP's conveyed by MOHFW. In UT of Ladakh, 216 covid 
vaccination centres were established. These centres were est ablished at all the block head 
quarter and sub-centres, as per requirement of local population which was scattered across vast 
geographical area. The block wise list of beneficiaries was submitted to Districts and based on 
these lists, the vaccines were re leased to the blocks for further distribution to the vaccination 
canters. The cold chain requirement and maintenance was strictly followed as per guidelines in 
this regard. It is pertinent to mention here that the wastage factor for Covid -19 vaccine was 
below 1% in UT of Ladakh. Also, UT of Ladakh never faced any shortage of vaccine doses 
since the launch of Covid-19 vaccination. 
5.57 In respect of strategy for Mitigation of Pandemic, following steps were taken by UT 
Administration:  
i).  Screening of trave llers at all entry points into Ladakh: UT Administration established 
Covid-19 check posts at all entry points, both for road and air travellers. The screening 
was done as per protocols published time to time by the State and District Disaster 
Management Authorities.  
ii).  Contact tracing & isolation of Covid -19 positive patients: The guidelines of ICMR for 
contact tracing were followed throughout the period of pandemic. The isolation of 
Covid-19 patients was done as per the guidelines issued from time to time.  
iii).  Establishment of PSA oxygen plants across different health institutions: UT 
Administration installed 13 new PSA Oxygen plants since the beginning of pandemic at 
10 different health institutions across Ladakh to tackle the pandemic. The details  of 
Health Centres where new PSA oxygen plants were installed:  
1. SNM Hospital, Leh = 2500LPM (03 PSA Plants).  
2. COVID Dedicated Kargil = 2000 LPM (02 new PSA Plants).  
3. PHC Tangsti= 350 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
4. CHC Disket Nubra = 350 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
5. PHC Nyoma = 120 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
6. CHC Padum Zanskar = 100LPM(new PSA Plant).  

61 
 
7. CHC Drass = 100 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
8. CHC Chicktan = 250 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
9. PHC Khaltsi = 250 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
10. Maha Bodhi Hospital Leh=80 LPM(new PSA Plant).  
iv).  Oxygen Cylinders and Concentrators: In addition, 634 numbers of Oxygen Concentrator 
and 2643 No. of mega oxygen cylinders were procured and distributed to various health 
institutes of the UT-Ladakh.  
v).  Establishment of additional ICU a nd Oxygen Beds in both District Hospitals: UT 
Administration established 90 bedded additional facilities in both District Hospitals. This 
additional facility included 10 bedded ICU for paediatric and 10 bedded lCU for Adults 
in each District hospitals. 
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MEGHALAYA  
5.58 The Government of Meghalaya along with the rest of lndia launched the Covid 
vaccination drive on the 16th of January 2021 in all the 11 districts simultaneously.  
5.59 Meghalaya was using Covishield vaccine which provided by Govt. of lndia free of cost. 
Vaccines reach the State Vaccine Store from the GMSD Kolkatta. From the SVS it is distributed 
to the various District Vaccine Stores following which it was distributed to the last Col d Chain 
Points. Distribution of the vaccines was based on the microplans and due list of the beneficiaries 
of each district. Electronic Vaccine lntelligence Network (eVlN) help ed in monitoring and 
planning for distribution to the districts 
5.60 The State t ook care for Maintainence of Covid A ppropriate Behaviours (CAB). It was 
mandatory to produce Final Vaccination Certificate or negative RTPCR Test Report within 72 
hrs for entry into the State . Vaccination of eligible beneficiaries commenced since 16 th January 
2021 and it was ongoing . Vaccination Status of the shopkeepers and their staff displayed in all 
the shops.  
5.61 The State had 1084 total Covid beds out of that beds with oxygen were 942, ICU beds 
were 142 and there were 14 Orygen Plants. Awarene ss activities on Covid -19, Covid 
appropriate behaviours (CAB) and vaccination were also going on through various Platform. 
5.62 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the State Government of Meghalaya 
for ensuring the vaccination Status of the shopke epers and their staff that are being 
displayed in all the shops. The Committee further recommends the State to ensure that the 
information regarding vaccine availability and other logistics are reflected on a real time 
basis for better vaccine distribution and management in the State.  
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL 
5.63 The State of West Bengal successfully implement ed the Covid vaccination programme 
from the initiation of vaccination drive on 16 th Jan, 2021. Since inception of the COVID 
vaccination programme, the State focussed on the timely receipt, distribution, security and 
optimal utilization of the vaccine. State also laid guidelines for successfully managing all the 

62 
 
Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFls). Detailed planning, stro ng cold chain system 
and robust security measures have led to the successful and unhindered supply of vaccines and 
eventual vaccination in the remotest parts of the State.  
5.64 Regarding 'vaccine development, distribution management and mitigation of pandemic 
Covid-19', the State felt that Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should ensure timely supply 
of vaccine to have full vaccinations of all. While distributing the supply, a buffer stock should 
be maintained for each state so that pace of vaccinations could be maintained.  
5.65 There were many instances where the State or districts had sufficient vaccine stocks but 
syringes were in short supply. So, the allocations of vaccines  and syringes should be duly 
harmonised for running a successful vaccination programme. COVID 19 pandemic has shown 
the importance of creating Public Health Infrastructure especially at PHC/HWC level. Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare should ensure enoug h financial support both for physical 
infrastructure as well as human resource deployment. 
5.66 The Committee notes the submission of the State Government of West Bengal 
where instances of shortage in supply of syringes have been reported. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry of H&FW to work in tandem with the State 
Government and ensure that such instances are avoided for making the vaccination drive 
a success in the State. The Committee strongly recommends the State Government to 
manage the logistics of the vaccine distribution system and in case of shortage in supply of 
any related equipment timely communicat ion to the Union Government  should be 
ensured.  
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU 
5.67 As per the instruction and Guidelines of Government of India, the Covid -19 Vaccination 
drive was initiated in the state of Tamil Nad u from 16.01.2021 and continues  till now.  Until 
24.11.2021, 7,52,91,000 doses vaccine were received from Government of India and 
6,74,66,158 beneficiaries vaccinated with both Covishield and Covaxin. 
5.68 In the State of Tamil Nadu, one State vaccine Store, 10 Regional vaccine Stores, 46 
District vaccine Stores and 2685 Cold Chain Points were available for storing and distribution 
of vaccine including Covid vacc ines.  The Government of India has also supplied 3,17,39,900 
Auto-Disable (AD) Syringes to the State of Tamil Nadu and 3,18,60,900 AD Syringes were 
procured through Tamil Nadu Medical Service Corporation Limited (TNMSC), Chennai.  The 
Covid vaccines and AD  Syringes were received in State Vaccine Stores.  From the State 
Vaccine Store, the vaccines and Syringes were distributed to Regional Vaccine Stores.  From 
Regional vaccine Stores, the vaccines and Syringes were distributed to District Vaccine Store.  
The District Vaccine Store distributed  vaccines to the cold chain points through the Vaccine 
Carrier Vehicles on the next day morning for administering the same to the beneficiaries in the 
concerned districts immediately without any delay, so as to cover the eligible population as per 
Government of India guidelines. 
VIEWS OF UT OF ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR  
5.69 The UT submitted that vaccine helped in reducing the Covid cases and its fatality as also 
reduced the prognosis of diseases which lead to lower the number o f bed occupancy in the 
hospital due to Covid.  UT of A&N Islands saw 4994 number of positive cases and 62 deaths 
(data as on 16.11.2021).  However, this UT did not report a single death due to Covid -19 who 

63 
 
were fully vaccinated against the virus.  This shows the efficacy of the vaccine in mitigating the 
Covid-19 pandemic. 
5.70 The supply chain of Covid-19 vaccine was also efficient by using Routine Immunization 
(RI) logistic management.  Due to difficult topogra phy of these Island, RI vaccine were sent to 
hard and remote areas to reach in advance and transportation support was taken from Civil 
Aviation Department, Department of Shipping and Defence, the same was adopted for Covid 
vaccine and logistic across these  Islands. Accordingly to the UT, t he present process of vaccine 
distribution and management was an infallible one and with introduction of IT based solutions 
like e-VIN and Co-WIN, information were received quickly by the decision makers for vaccine 
and vaccination management. 
5.71 As the far flung and remote islands of this UT have poor network connectivity, live data 
entry was not possible and hence the UT requested that back log entry option or off -line mode 
of entry be permitted on the actual data of ad ministration, so that the extent of vaccination 
coverage could be properly captured. 
5.72 As on 21st November, 2021 of the 2.86 lakh eligible target beneficiaries in A&N Islands, 
2.38 lakh beneficiaries accounting for 83.2% of target beneficiaries were administered with 2 nd 
dose of Covid vaccine/fully immunized. This UT achieved 100% coverage of 1 st dose of Covid-
19 vaccination of eligible target beneficiaries on 19.09.2021. 
5.73 The Committee understands that far flung and remote islands of the UT of 
Andaman & Nicobar have poor network connectivity and live data entry may be a 
herculean task. The Committee recommends the UT to ensure that the entries are logged 
as soon as the network connectivity is restored so that national data on the vaccination is 
compiled without delay.  
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MADHYA PRADESH 
5.74 The State of Madhya Pradesh's vaccine storage and supply status up to last mile with HR 
involvement is given below: 
 Infrastructure:- The state has 4 State vaccine store and 3 Regional Vaccine store from 
which vaccine and syringes transfer to 51 district and then at 1244 Cold Chain Points to 
session site with proper monitoring and during the transportation no single vial was 
broken. 
 Monitoring Software:- The State has three software for monitoring for Cold chain and 
Covid-19 vaccination namely NCCMIS, Evinae and Cowin application. 
 Storage and maintenance: - State has 15 Walk in Cooler & 09 Walk in freezer at 4 SVS 
and 3RVS. 2,680 Ice Line d Refrigerator, 2,328 deep freezer, 95,860 Vaccine carrier and 
5,617 cold boxes with CCP for the maintenance of these cold chain equipment's there is 
51 cold chain technicians and daily follow-up taken by state team. 
 Transportation:- In state there are 91 Vaccine van for transportation of vaccine and 
syringes timely at session site. 
 Distribution:- MP state has 4 State vaccine store namely Bhopal, Indore, Gwalior & 
Jabalpur where vaccine were received from Government of India through d irect supply 
from supplier or from GMSD and Distribution to 3 Regional Vaccine store namely, 
Sagar, Ujjain & Rewa. With proper monitoring, during the transportation of 8.5 crore 
doses of vaccine not a single vial was broken. 

64 
 
5.75   The State submitted that  it followed the structure of STD (i.e. Storage, Distribution 
and Transportation) for smooth functioning of the vaccination programme. Best Practices in 
MP for Cold Chain and Vaccine management were as under:- 
 Proper allocation of vaccine and syringes prov ided to the districts as per respective 
targets and monitoring from the State. 
 Stock register, Cold Chain Equipment's register, Vaccine Arrival Report etc. maintained 
properly and up to date. 
 All protocol displayed very well in all session site to motivate  people for Covid -19 
vaccination. 
 On daily basis feedback was taken by the State controlling authority from district 
through Regional Joint Director and District Immunization Officer and if reported it 
would be resolved as soon as possible. 
 Cold chain equipment have dedicated thermometers and have dedicated temperature log 
books which were updated. Monitoring of temperature from state level done through 
Temperature logger on daily basis. 
 Ice Lined Refrigerator and deep freezer were placed as per specified g uidelines of 
minimum gap of 10 cm and were also kept on the stands. 
 Contingency storage plan was displayed in all stores. 
 Dedicated stabilizers for Cold Chain Equipment's were placed at all stores. 
 A chart showing vaccine stock positions of all vaccines was displayed in all stores. 
 Before Covid-19 some district Cold Chain Technician post were vacant, these posts were 
also filled for on time and good maintenance of Cold Chain Equipment's. 
 Office in charge system was introduced at State level for smooth monit oring of 
vaccination programme of every district of state. 
(Date Source:- NCCMIS, EVINae & Cowin application as of 17th Nov, 21.) 
5.76 The Committee takes notes of the best practices adopted while implementing 
national Vaccination Programme in Madhya Pradesh especially for Cold Chain and 
vaccine management.  The Committee recommends the adoption of the best practices 
during execution of Vaccination drive by other States too.  
VIEWS OF THE UT OF DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI AND DAMAN & DIU 
5.77 With reference to the subject, the UT Administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu submitted that it adopted all the measures in line with the  guidelines of the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, due to which, a sustained decline in the number of Covid 
cases was witnessed.  Moreover, the UT achieved 6.63 lakh out of a total population of 5.88 
Lakh which was 112% of the beneficiaries eligible f or 1 st dose, through robust screening of  
households by the Health staff. 
5.78 Vaccination was being done through development of volunteers in addition to the Health 
Staff for a comprehensive coverage at all the Covid Vaccination Centres.  In addition, Covid 
vaccination was done through 'Har Ghar Dastak campaign'  through House hold visits and 
Mobile Vaccination Vans in line with the guidelines laid down by the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare.  The UT received  vaccine stock through GMSD Mumbai, with adequate and 
fast supply and no shortage. 
5.79 UT Administration informed that there was mismatch in the population data of the 
Ministry, electoral data and UT survey data that were eligible for 1st dose.  The resolution of the 

65 
 
said issue would be very helpful for UT Administration in reflecting the actual achievement 
figures of Vaccination Coverage in the UT. 
5.80 The Committee applauds the role of UT Government of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
for vaccinating all eligible beneficiaries for 1 st dose. However, the Committee recommends 
the Central Government to address the concerns of the UT of Dadra and Nagar  Haveli 
and Daman & Diu by rectifying the total population of UT.   
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF TELANGANA 
5.81 The State submitted that as a part of prevention and control of the Covid -19 containment 
frame work and five - fold strategy of Test -Track-Vaccinate and adherence to Covid 
Appropriate  Behaviour was being followed across the state as stated below: 
 Testing: Covid -19 tests through 30 Government RTPCR testing centres and 1,231 
Government Rapid antigen testing centres.  In addition to government  infrastructure 76 
private RTPCR testing centres were also conducting Covid testing. 
 Treatment: a dedicated 55,442 beds were allotted for treatment of the Covid -19 cases in 
Govt. and Pvt. Health facilities.  Based on the estimation that Pediatric age group  would 
be more susceptible to anticipated third wave, steps were taken to create 6000 Pediatric 
Covid Beds out of which 1,875 are ICU Beds, along with all the infrastructure and 
equipment required to manage the cases and reduce the case fatality to the max imum 
extent possible by providing timely and tertiary care treatment.  All the infrastructure 
like portable ECG machines, infusion pump, syringe pumps, bubble CPAP machines, 
HFNC machine, portable USG with 3 probes including ECHO probes, paediatric High 
Frequency Oscillatory ventilators, paediatric ventilators with NIV mode with 
compressor, Oxygen Hoods, Open Radiant Warmers, Phototherapy Units, Air 
mattresses, Infrared Vein Finders, BIPAP Machines, 3 Para Multichannel monitors, 5 
Para Multichannel monitors , Infrared Thermometers were made available in all the 
Hospitals. Essential drugs were kept with the hospitals and central medical stores of that 
particular districts like Steroids in injection and Tablet form, Inj. Remedesivir, Inj. 
Kiposomal Amphotericin, Tab. Posaconozole, Inj. Tocilizumab, Inj. Casirivimab and 
Imdevimab (Cocktail) treat ment, Tab. Paracetamol, Tab. Vitamin C, Tab. Zinc, Tab. 
Vitamin D3, Tab Multivitamine.t.c. 
 Screening: a special state initiative screening of the OPD at public health facilities for 
fever initiated on 6th May 2021 and distributed fever treatment kits with advise for  home 
isolation.  And also daily screening at schools and colleges was being conducted. 
 Establishment of oxygen cylinders: 82 PSA plants were being established in the state of 
Telangana. 50 PSA plants were sanctioned under PM CARES and 32 under CSR 
donations.   
 Training: Medical and Para -Medical staff of the designated hospitals were trained 
regarding management protocols of Covid cases.  Online training was conducted to all 
the Covid hospital staff both (Doctors and paramedical) on the managemen t of Pediatric 
Covid cases as a measure to minimize the morbidity and mortality if there was a surge in 
pediatric cases. 
5.82 They further submitted that as a part of intervention based preventive measure, Covid -19 
Vaccines - Covishield and Covaxin, approv ed by the CDSCO (Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation) was initiated across the State. 

66 
 
5.83 During the 2 nd wave of Covid -19, considering the rise of the positive cases, population 
mobility and the availability of the vaccine, the state identified 44  vulnerable groups of people 
who were super spreaders and more susceptible to infection and vaccinated them in phased 
manner, resulted in coping up with the spread of virus in the areas of Greater Hyderabad 
Municipality Corporation, Urban local bodies and in Rural areas across the state. 
5.84 Covid -19 vaccination was ramped up in the state to maximize vaccination in all the 
villages and wards by establishing sub centre level vaccination teams.  Over all 7920 teams 
were formed in the state to cover all the eligible beneficiaries at every village/ward area to boost 
100% vaccination coverage.  Vaccination was made available at every door step for the 
feasibility of the beneficiary.  Teams visit every house to ensure all the eligible beneficiaries 
were vaccinated and there were no one left unvaccinated in the household. 
5.85 Under the leadership of the District Collectors, coordination teams were formed with the 
line departments to monitor and mobilize the beneficiaries for getting vaccinated.  Mobilization 
teams formed specially to mobilize the beneficiaries and to guide them to CVC for Vaccination. 
The CVC staff were trained to curb and manage and AEFIs at the session sites.  
CASE STUDY OF THE STATE OF KERALA 
5.86 The Committee, in its meeting held on 5th April , 2022, heard the views of the 
representatives of Kerala Government. The Committee was given to understand that the 
experience of Nipah outbreak in 2018 and 2019 helped the Kerala Government in taking all the 
prevention activities against the Covid -19 pandemic. It was further brought to the notice of the 
Committee that at no point the health infrastructure was overwhelmed in Kerala. Managerial, 
Public Health and Clinical interventions were planned at the outset of the pandemic itself. PPE 
procurement was ordered in Sept 2019 and the guidelines were published and all activities were 
started in the 3rd week of Jan 2020. Subject specific Management units with specific roles and 
responsibilities were established. The State further submitted that the Principle ad apted by the 
State Government was to flatten the curve and delay the peak. 
 


67 
 
5.87 The representatives of the State Government further stated that irrespective of adverse 
situation, namely (i) Epidemiological vulnerability (high proportion morbidity due to NCD); (ii) 
Demographic vulnerability (proportion of elderly is double of national average) and (iii) High 
population density and urbanization (Population density is very high and is distributed all over 
the State), the State has been able to manage the pan demic. It was further submitted that there 
had been low transmission, high case detection, high testing rate (tests per million) and the 
mortality ha d been low (Case fatality rate 1.04%) in Kerala. Regarding the novel strategies 
adopted by the Government o f Kerala to contain the impact of the pandemic, the State 
Government submitted that it followed the Hub and Spoke Model of Oxygen Management.  
Hub and Spoke Model of Oxygen Management 
i. Oxygen audit was also done daily to monitor the Oxygen generation capaci ty and 
Oxygen consumption in the COVID hospitals. 
ii. All the hospitals under the Government and Private hospitals are mapped under a 
software. 
iii. Mapping includes the available storage capacity, inventory of oxygen available on a 
daily basis and daily consumption. 
iv. All the Liquid Medical Oxygen vendors and their daily production capacity and delivery 
is mapped in the same software. 
v. All dealers and sub dealers of oxygen cylinders were mapped with the hospital under the 
same portal. 
vi. The software also has provision to calculate the estimated requirement of oxygen based 
on the patients on oxygen support and ventilators. 
vii. Oxygen Monitoring team and war room constituted in the districts and also in the state 
level. 
viii. The oxygen cylinder and LMO demand of all the hospitals to be raised through the 
software were analysed with estimated projection arrived by the software by the district 
team and sanction were issued to the concerned oxygen distributors and dealers mapped 
against the hospital. 
ix. The LMO requirement of distributor s were raised in the same software which would be 
sanctioned by the state level team to the manufacturer. 
 
5.88 The representative further submitted that the State never had any shortage of hospital 
beds, oxygen, or essential medicines. In fact, the State shared some of the surplus oxygen with 
other states in need. This was due to meticulous planning in expanding the infrastructure 
facilities over the past year. 
5.89 The Committee applauds the proactive response of the State Government of Kerala 
in covid ca se management. The State was very efficient in minimizing the impact of the 
first wave of the pandemic and the State Health machinery was never stretched to its 
limits. Various State interventions were planned at the outset of the pandemic itself which 
helped the State to manage the pandemic efficiently. The robust Institutional arrangement 
and timely & effective measures further helped in delaying the peak.  
5.90 The Committee appreciates the novel approaches adopted by the State Government 
of Kerala to manage the pandemic. The State Healthcare system did a commendable job to 
ensure that the covid cases are timely tracked and contained. The Committee takes notes 
that the State of Kerala had a robust monitoring system and a well planned infrastructure 
in the form of Domiciliary Care Centre, Covid first line treatment Centre, Covid second 
line treatment centre and Covid hospital. The Committee strongly feels that a strong 

68 
 
primary health care network along with trained grass root healthcare workers was crucial 
for containing the pandemic. The containment strategies and efficient planning adopted by 
the State helped the State in averting the medical emergency due to shortage of medical 
oxygen and beds in the hospitals. The Committee further acknowledges the hub a nd spoke 
model adopted by the State for efficient management of Oxygen in the State. The 
Committee notes that timely mapping of hospitals through software as done by the State of 
Kerala should have been adopted by the other States for better management of Oxygen 
across hospitals.  
5.91 The Committee feels that the pandemic has given us the opportunity to plug the 
loopholes of the Indian Healthcare System and shifted the focus on the need of ushering 
change in the healthcare sector. The Committee observes th at the State Government of 
Kerala adopted many novel approaches in its fight against the pandemic. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to study the Kerala 
Model and other novel approaches adopted by other States. The  Committee recommends 
that the Ministry must co -ordinate and play pivotal role in exchanging of new ideas and 
new learning during the pandemic and related strategic management and ensure 
implementation of the successful models viz. the Kerala Model in othe r States and 
strengthen healthcare delivery system to meet any future medical emergency.  
 
VIEWS OF VARIOUS STAKEHOLDERS ON THE SUBJECT 
Ms.  Gangadeep Kang  
5.92 About v accine development , she stated that India‘s vaccine manufacturing companies 
started early to build collaborations and initiate planning for manufacturing vaccine. 
Notification in April/May 2020 stated that companies could manufacture vaccine as a critical 
first step in assuring companies that there was governmental urgen cy. The Government of India 
supported vaccine companies directly or indirectly (e.g. strain sharing by ICMR, facilitation of 
clinical trials by DBT/BIRAC and ICMR). Scale -up of manufacturing was more challenging 
than was anticipated, leading to shortages b ecause of rapid expansion of eligibility for vaccine 
in the first half of 2021.  
5.93 With regard to d istribution management, she stated that t he roll out of India‘s first wide 
age range vaccination campaign was generally done well, given the challenges. Initial mis-steps 
included rapid expansion of age ranges (should have covered a substantial proportion of the first 
target groups before expansion to younger age groups —specifically moving below 60 years 
should have been after at least half of more than 60 years had been covered). From over -
reporting adverse events following immunization, moved rapidly to under -reporting and poor 
quality data collection, which persists. Pregnant women were not included in risk groups at an 
early stage, partially leading to establishment of vaccine hesitancy. Impact of COVID19 vaccine 
roll-out on other healthcare is needed for future planning 
5.94 Regarding Mitigation of COVID -19, Ms. Kang stated that s hortages of personal 
protective equipment, diagnostic testing, drugs, vacci nes and oxygen and documented-solutions 
were ultimately found, but some delays/shortages were avoidable. Lack of any data on 
effectiveness of any intervention (e.g. lock down, drugs such as hydroxychloroquine, level of 
permissible crowding indoors and outd oors could have been generated) so several interventions 
were either inappropriate or prolonged beyond utlity. Cowin was not linked to testing database 
despite advice from beginning of roll out, which led to lack of data on need for boosters 

69 
 
5.95 She stated that India was in a good position at present, but future variants are inevitable 
and unpredictable. Preparedness of vaccination strategies requires much more clinical research 
than is currently being done, as well as a focus on new vaccine candidate deve lopment and 
evaluation. Distribution management (if not impacting other existing activities) has the potential 
to deliver other future health related programmes at scale (e.g. screening, other vaccines). 
COVID-19 mitigation is not over, revision of surveil lance, and rapid response care strategies is 
needed as well as building inter-operable data systems.  
Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (JSA) 
• JSA submitted that as of January 30, 2022, India reported at least 70,102 cases of 
Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFI) , and 1,013 fatalities following 
COVID-19 vaccination , as per information given by Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare to the Parliament. However details of these deaths and adverse events were not 
being released to scientific and medical community.  
• Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Delhi reported seven cases of Vaccine Induced Thrombotic 
Thrombocytopenia (VITT) from different hospitals in the country since June 2021. This 
well known often fatal adverse event of Astra Zeneca COVID vaccine (same as 
Covishield) has been reported from European countries. 
• According to Jan Swasthya Abhiyan, India need ed to operationalise an effective, 
functional, transparent and accountable system for reporting severe adverse events 
following COVID vaccine  
• Like 19 other developed countr ies, ―no fault compensation‖ should be provided to 
persons who develop ed specified severe events related to COVID vaccination,  
including deaths which were observed during Phase IV.  
Jan Swasthya Abhiyan suggested some urgently required health system reforms: 
• Ensure affordable medicines: During COVID period, unilateral decisions have been 
taken by NPPA by removing many drugs from price control. Government should avoid 
further hike in medicine prices, instead introduce comprehensive drug price control 
mechanisms to cover all essential medicines, including all equivalents.  
• Revive and ensure non-COVID health services – during the COVID epidemic, routine 
public health services including deliveries, TB and HIV care, dialysis, mental health etc. 
have been severely affected, need to be brought back on track and streamlined  
• Strengthen public health services and health humanpower - regular recruitment of 
staff instead of contracts, filling all vacant posts, upgrading honorarium and working 
conditions of ASHAs and frontline health workers.  Expanding capacity of 
public health services in rural and urban areas through adequate, massive increase 
in central government expenditure on health (achieve at least NHP target of 2.5% 
of GDP now) 
• Regulate private hospitals  through full operationalisation  of CEA 2010 in 11 states, 
promote similar healthcare regulatory legislations in other states. MOHFW should revive 
rate standardisation, notify standards, State governments must cap fees for services by 
private hospitals. Governments must urgently curb irrational prescriptions. 

70 
 
• Reject healthcare privatisation - Central government and State governments must 
reject all policy proposals for further privatisation of Healthcare, including recent 
recommendations provided by NITI Aayog 
• Privatisation oriented commercial health insurance schemes and Digital health 
cards should not substitute for robust, comprehensive, responsive public health 
care services. 
• Promote public system – people partnerships in rural and urban areas, learnin g from 
positive examples during COVID. Need to involve Panchayats, civil society 
organisations and community groups, by including them in multi -stakeholder 
committees and forums from community to state levels.  
• Democratise public health governance: Need fo r transparency, openness and 
participation at all levels while implementing India‘s COVID recovery plan. Move away 
from ‗Militarised‘ health responses and securitization of health systems.  
• Expand democracy to promote people‘s health - including equitable centre-state 
relations, transparency in decision making and data management, participatory oversight 
and planning at all levels, special measures to address gender and social inequities, 
involving diverse civil society organisations instead of constriction  of funds and 
activities. 
5.96 The Committee finds that Jan Swasthay Abhiyan (JSA) has suggested useful course 
of action for strategic management of Pandemic Covid -19 that inter-alia include report of 
Serious Adverse Events (SAE) following Covid vaccine, a ssurance of affordable Medicine, 
Strengthening of public health sector & health manpower and promotion of PPP Model in 
health reforms. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may examine the suggestion s 
at length for better health management in the country. 
  

71 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
CHALLENGES IN COVID-19 MITIGATION AND MANAGEMENT  
6.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the pandemic caused an 
unprecedented crisis and the Indian health infrastructure struggled to handle the emergency of 
such high proportions. The Committee in its deliberations with the various 
Departments/Ministries and other stakeholders has identified many problems/challenges faced 
during the smooth implementation of the National Vaccination Policy. Some of the challenges 
and other related issues are enumerated as under: 
Poor government expenditure on Health 
6.2 During the examination of the Demand for Grants of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare, the Ministry had submitted that as per the WHO's Global Health Expenditure  
Database 2018, the Government Health Expenditure  (GHE) as percentage of Current Health 
Expenditure (CHE) is only 27% and the Out of Pocket Expenditure (OPE) as percentage of the 
Current Health Expenditure is 62.7%. India ranks 158 out of 196 countries in G HE as 
percentage of CHE and 176 out of 196 countries in OPE as % of CHE. The GHE and OOPE as 
% of CHE of different countries are indicated as under: 
 
6.3 Attention of the Committee is also drawn to the latest National Health Accounts 
Estimates for India 2017-18 which was released in 2021. The trend of Total Government Health 
Expenditure comprising of both current and capital expenditure is as under: 
 


72 
 
6.4 The Committee is disappointed to note that the Government Health Expenditure as 
a percentage of Curre nt Health Expenditure is only 27% and the Out of Pocket 
Expenditure as percentage of the Current Health Expenditure is 62.7%. The Committee 
while examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry has repeatedly recommended for 
increase in Public investments in the health sector.  
6.5 The Committee in its 134 th Report on the Demand for Grants of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare had noted that BE of 2022 -23 was just a 0.2% increase over 
RE 2021 -22. The Committee had noted that despite the pandemic necessitating high 
investments in health sector, the Government had failed to increase the Health Budget.  As 
per National Health Accounts Data 2017 -18, the Government Health Expenditure as 
percentage of GDP is 1.35%. The Committee further recalls that under National Health 
Policy, the GHE was targeted to increase to 2.5% of GDP by 2025.  
6.6 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government must increase 
its investment in public health systems and public health research. Indian States like 
Kerala that have a robust healthcare infrastructure were at a far better position to 
anticipate the uncertainties of the pandemic. The quick response strategy of the State 
reflected the advantages of a strong public healthcare infrastructure. The Committee in its 
126th Report on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 had ex plicitly recommended the 
Government for increasing its health expenditure to 2.5 % of GDP in the next two years 
and to 5% by 2025. The Committee accordingly reiterates its recommendation that the 
Ministry must set higher targets and ensure that the Governm ent Health Expenditure is 
increased to 5% of GDP . The Committee further recommends the Ministry to nudge the 
States with Health Budget less than 8% of the State's GDP to increase the State 
Government's investment in the health sector.  
Gender Gap in Vaccination 
6.7 Sama Resource Group for Women submitted that gender inequity that is  ingrained in 
the health system exposed the harsh realities of gender inequities during the pandemic in the 
context of access to health care technologies and vaccination rollout , which has only worsened 
with Covid-19. 
6.8 Although vaccination rollout prioritized frontline health workers, who were largely 
women, when the vaccination drive opened for the larger public, data revealed that women 
seemed to be lagging far behind in comparison to men. In July 2021, Co-WIN data revealed that 
only 867 women were vaccinated as compared to 1000 men . Out of the 309 million Covid -19 
vaccines delivered since January 2021, only 143 million were given to women as compared to 
167 million given to men. This gender gap was worrying as it was far greater than 6%. 
6.9 This gender gap in vaccinations is not only attributed to the skewed sex ratio in the 
country but also to several  underlying gender inequality -related issues such as,  limited 
mobility to reach health facilities or vaccination sites,  restricted decision -making power in 
health seeking, limited access to and control over resources needed for advancing their health, 
including access to smartphones, internet for information about vaccines and vaccine safety 
,rumours and misconceptions abo ut vaccine safety  and lack of clinical trial data on pregnant 
and lactating women. 
6.10 Further, the digital divide and the requirement of registering on the CoWIN platform 
also makes it difficult for women to access vaccinations. Vaccine hesitancy is hig her among 
women than men. Rumours like women should not take Covid -19 vaccines during menstruation 

73 
 
or that vaccines will affect fertility might have also deterred women from coming forward to 
take vaccines. 
6.11 The Committee regrets that women remain the most affected group in any  
calamity. Women have long been  denied basic rights and gender inequities are very high, 
especially in economically weaker and poorly accessible regions. The Committee notes that 
as per the Government official data a total of 1.99  billion doses have been administered in 
the country till mid July, 2022. Out of the total doses, 988 million doses have been given to 
Males and 950 million doses to women leading to a difference of over 38 million doses. 
6.12 The Committee notes the succe ss of vaccination drive is correlated to registration 
on Cowin and easy access to the health care centre for vaccination. However, with women 
having no access to internet or any digital tool and her high dependence on the male 
member of the family for any information further widens the gender gap in vaccination. 
The Committee further notes that rumours, such as the impact of vaccination on 
menstruation etc further leads to lower willingness to be vaccinated. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to  conduct more awareness campaigns especially in 
region with poor rate of vaccination among women. The Ministry must make all out 
efforts to bridge this gender gap in vaccination. 
 
RURAL-URBAN VACCINE DISPARITY 
 
6.13  The Committee observes that the vaccina tion rate was very poor in the rural areas 
in the beginning of the vaccination drive. Internet connection and a mobile phone was the 
foremost requirement for registering oneself in the Cowin App and walk -in Covid 
vaccination had not yet started. Rural areas with poor digital literacy did not see an uptake 
in the vaccination drive. The Committee further notes that many villages across India do 
not have access to pucca roads, electricity and drinking water. These regions are rendered 
inaccessible either due to their rough geographical terrain or precarious security situation. 
With regions devoid of electricity, maintaining the temperature of the vaccines especially 
in inhospitable terrain is a difficult challenge.  
 
6.14  The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to open more vaccination 
centres in the rural areas. The Ministry must also explore use of newer refrigeration 
technology, such as "solar direct drive" that resolves the battery powered vaccine 
refrigerator problems and ensure that vaccines are made available in such remote areas. 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must use modern 
technology and equipments to expedite the delivery of vaccines. The use of drone by the 
State Government of Maharashtra for delivering vaccines is a good example of making 
vaccines easily available in difficult terrains. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
deploy helicopters, boats, motor bikes and every possible means of transport to achieve 
last mile delivery of vaccines.  
 
VACCINE HESITANCY 
6.15 Sama Resource Group for Women in its written submission stated that vaccine 
hesitancy became evident when vaccination opened for the adult population, i.e., those aged 
above 18 years were eligible for immuni zation yet people were reluctant to get inoculated. An 
underlying reason being people were not aware about the working of the vaccines, its benefits 
and side-effects. Vaccine hesitancy should not have come as a surprise as over the years, there 
have been s eldom vaccines launched for adult population with the exception of mothers for 

74 
 
Tetanus (TT vaccine). A vaccine needed to be taken for preventing a disease was deemed an 
unusual notion across several rural parts of the country. Lack of efforts to provide people with 
clear information about its adverse effects and establishing a chain of referral in case of 
adverse event, has led to a sense of fear, mistrust in people. 
6.16 The Committee agrees that a lot of misconceptions about the vaccines have given 
rise t o vaccine hesitancy in the Indian population. With Covid vaccines getting the 
Emergency use authorization amidst the lack of information in the public domain, a 
certain sense of doubt prevailed in the people‘s mind. The Committee also notes that 
several instances of vials of vaccines getting wasted due to people not turning up to the 
vaccination centres have been reported. The vaccines have to be maintained at the 
recommended temperature and the vials of vaccin es have to be used and discarded 
within hours of being opened. 
6.17 Vaccine hesitancy has also been recognised as one of the reason behind low 
vaccine coverage in certain areas leading to regional disparities in Vaccine Distribution 
Plan. The Committee the refore believes that there is an urgent need to provide correct 
information on vaccines and address the issue of vaccine hesitancy.   The Committee 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to feature strong community engagement 
strategies in the vaccination Pro gramme along with social media engagement. The 
Ministry must also explore involving celebrities and influential community voices for 
increasing the outreach of the vaccination programme.  
6.18 The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to disseminate inform ation and 
spread public awareness regarding the safety and efficacy of the vaccines. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry to continue conducting various 
Communication strategy activities especially in rural areas and areas with poor 
accessibility. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to conduct at -home 
inoculations especially for the aged and people with special need.  
VACCINE EQUITY 
6.19 A robust supply of vaccines is necessary for ensuring vaccine equity across the globe 
and within the coun try. The Committee notes that the developed nations are better adapted to 
face the economic as well as the scientific challenges in the wake of a pandemic. However a 
shortage in supply of vaccines across any region of the world jeopardises the mitigation e fforts 
against the pandemic and is a threat to global safety.  
Shortage in vaccines in India and other Developing Nations of the world 
6.20 The Committee was given to understand that the Indian Government had targeted 
vaccination for the entire adult popul ation by December, 2021, however, the Government 
failed to achieve its targets set for the total vaccination drive. Attention of the Committee 
has also been brought to instances of vaccine shortage in few States, thereafter, the States 
were forced to diver t stock meant for the 18 -44 age group to the 45 plus group for their 
second dose. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government to refresh 
its target of 100% vaccination of the Indian population along with booster doses and make 
concerted efforts to achieve the targets.   
6.21 The Committee further notes that there exists a huge economic divide in the world 
and the pandemic has further widened the divide between the rich and the poor countries. 
With the development of vaccines, the western countries started stockpiling of the vaccines 
and were the first to provide booster doses to its citizens while the low and middle income 

75 
 
countries struggled to administer even the first dose of the vaccine. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Governmen t to revisit its vaccine diplomacy and take a lead 
role at international for a to ensure that the third world countries get adequate doses of 
vaccines. The Committee believes that global vaccination is very crucial for minimizing the 
possibility of any futu re outbreaks of pandemic due to resurgence of mutated virus in any 
other country . The Committee, in this regard  strongly advocates equitable global 
distribution of vaccines. 
6.22 Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (JSA) in its written submission has stated that to overc ome 
supply side constraint, the government should have employed compulsory licensing provision to 
allow manufacture of Covid vaccines in the already existing vaccine manufacturing units in the 
public sector. These plants have been the main source of high q uality vaccines at very low 
prices for 40 years after independence for the national vaccination programme.  
6.23 JSA further submitted that the scientists of the ICMR were able to produce a good 
Covid-19 vaccine within a year is a matter of great pride. It  would have been quite logical for 
the government to allocate to the existing public sector vaccine manufacturing units to produce 
this vaccine. But due to the continued policy of privatization even during this national health 
emergency, the manufacturing of Covid-19 vaccine has remained entirely in the private sector. 
6.24 As informed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the price of vaccine 
manufactured by Serum Institute of India in collaboration with Astrazeneca was initially quoted 
at Rs. 250 per dose.  However after protracted negotiations, the price was fixed at Rs. 200 per 
dose.  The price of Covaxin was initially quoted at Rs. 350 per dose and later the final price was 
fixed at Rs. 295 per dose. 
6.25 The Committee agrees that the Government  should have employed a better pricing 
mechanism for controlling the price of the vaccines. The prices of the vaccines in the 
Private Hospitals and vaccination centres were very high allowing high profiteering by the 
vaccine manufacturing firms and the Private hospitals.  
6.26 The Committee further notes that the vaccine manufacturing firms slashed the 
prices of vaccines for private hospitals to Rs 225 per dose in April, 2022. During the peak 
of the pandemic, the Covid vaccines were being administered at Rs . 900 -1400 in the 
Private hospitals. The Committee understands the demand -supply economics and believes 
that private firms have to be allowed to make some profit so that investment can be made 
in research & development and increasing the production capacit y. However, the 
Committee fails to understand such high fluctuations in the prices of the vaccine that leave 
enormous space for vaccine manufacturing firms to earn exorbitant profits on the 
production of vaccines.  
Waiver of Intellectual Property Protectio n for Covid Vaccines and other Covid -19 
Diagnostics and Therapeutics 
6.27 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the proposal of temporary 
waiver of Intellectual property protection for covid vaccines and other COVID -19 
diagnostics and therapeutics at WTO. The Committee believes that exclusive control over 
vaccines via patents can pose a hurdle in ensuring vaccine access to countries that lack the 
vaccine manufacturing capacity. The looming fear of future resurgence and more virulent 
viruses persists and global eradication of the Covid is crucial for halting this pandemic. 
The Committee, therefore, believes that transfer of technology and waiver will 
significantly bridge the large demand supply gap as the vaccines will be produced without 
authorization from the patent holder. The Committee strongly believes that for ensuring 

76 
 
vaccine equity, there is a need to expand the vaccine manufacturing capacity across the 
globe and waive the Intellectual Property Protection (IPP) for Covid-19 vaccines. This can 
help countries in scaling up the production of vaccines and make vaccines more affordable 
and accessible to everyone. The Committee, however, also believes that special emphasis 
will have to be laid on ensuring safety and quality standard for mass vacci ne 
manufacturing. The Committee further notes that the move to waive Intellectual Property 
Protections (IPP) must not disincentivize the Pharmaceutical companies to invest on 
vaccine research rather the Industry and the countries across the world must unite and 
work together to expand the global vaccine manufacturing  capacity.    
6.28 The Committee accordingly urges the Government to continue making efforts for 
waiver of  IP P rotection for Covid vaccines and other COVID -19 diagnostics and 
therapeutics so that the vaccines are produced on a large scale and 100% vaccination of 
the world population is achieved.  
REVAMPING OF PUBLIC SECTOR VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS 
6.29 The Committee notes that Serum Institute of India (SII) and Bharat Biotech were the two 
main private vaccine manufacturing units that were responsible for ensuring the adequate supply 
of vaccines in the country. The Committee is given to understand that  presently there are seven 
public sector vaccine manufacturing units, namely, Central Research Institute (CRI) in 
Himachal Pradesh; BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Pasteur Institute of India (PII) and 
HLL Biotech in Tamil Nadu; Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited, 
Uttar Pradesh; Haffkine Bio -Pharmaceutical Corporation Limited, Maharashtra; and Human 
Biologicals Institute, Telangana.  
6.30 The Committee understands that ensuring a consistent supply of vaccine during the 
pandemic Covid-19 posed a major challenge, thereby, arising an urgent need to accelerate 
the Covid -19 vaccination drive. However, the Committee laments that the public sector 
vaccine units were not reckoned to service  in times of crisis and their contribution to the 
Covid-19 vaccine production remained negligible in the fight against the pandemic Covid -
19.  
6.31 The Committee has been given to understand that in 2008, the vaccine production 
in CRI, PII and the BCG Vacc ine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai were halted for non -
compliance with Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). The Committee observes that 
although the licenses were restored in 2010; however these vaccine units continued to 
remain underutilised. The Committee st rongly believes that revival of these units is 
imperative to bridge the gap between vaccine demand and supply and to make vaccines 
more affordable and accessible. The Committee further notes that the Madras High Court 
in May 2021 had asked the Central Gove rnment as to what steps were being taken to 
revive the existing Vaccine Institutes owned by the Government. The Supreme Court in 
December, 2021 had also sought the response of the Central Government on its policy to 
revamp public sector vaccine manufacturi ng units.  The Committee, accordingly, strongly 
recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to revive the existing vaccine 
manufacturing units and issue production licences to the GMP compliant vaccine 
manufacturing units.   
6.32 The Committee, in  this regard, would like  to be apprised of the total number of 
Public Sector Vaccines Units that are owned by the Central Government and the State 
Governments. The Committee must also be informed about the financial status and the 
annual Budget that has been allocated to these Public Sector Manufacturing Units over the 

77 
 
past four years. The Committee recommends the Ministry to monitor the revival of these 
units and henceforth, furnish quarterly Reports to the Committee. The Committee desires 
that the Ministr y of Health and Family Welfare must forward the revival plan alongwith 
financial requirement to the Ministry of Finance for approval at the earliest.  
6.33 The Committee further notes that India has been advocating the waiver of 
Intellectual Property rights of Covid vaccines at  the global level, however, the Committee 
is perplexed to note that the Government has taken no major initiative to waive the 
Intellectual Property Rights for  the indigenous vaccine Covaxin  which was developed in 
collaboration with ICMR. The Committee strongly recommends to examine the possibility 
of technology transfer of Covaxin to the Public Sector Units and start its production in 
these Units. 
6.34 The Committee is given to understand that two key policy initiatives namely (i) Nat ional 
Disaster Management Guidelines—Management of Biological Disasters issued in July 2008 and 
(ii) The National Vaccine Policy, 2011 are very much relevant to the current COVID pandemic. 
The National Disaster Management Guidelines Management of Biologica l Disasters, which was 
issued in 2008 aimed to develop a holistic, coordinated, proactive and technology driven 
strategy for management of biological disasters, through a culture of prevention, mitigation and 
preparedness to generate a prompt and effective  response in the event of an emergency. The 
National Vaccine Policy document addresses broad issues of strengthening the institutional 
framework, processes, evidence base and framework required for decision making for 
strengthening Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) in India and to streamline the decision 
making process on new and underutilized vaccine introduction.  
6.35 The Committee notes that the National Disaster Management Guidelines , 
Management of Biological Disasters contained comprehensive guid elines for undertaking 
biosafety and biosecurity measures. It aimed to strengthen the existing regulatory 
framework so that the country adopts a resilient response strategy in the wake of any 
imminent biological disaster. The Committee believes that had th e Ministry implemented 
the guidelines and addressed the gap that was highlighted in the Report , the country 
would have been better prepared to tackle the pandemic. The Committee further notes 
that if the Government had implemented the National Vaccine Poli cy, 2011 in letter and 
spirit, the issues of vaccine -security, management, regulatory guidelines, vaccine research 
& development and product development could have been dealt in a better manner.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to assess the functional status of National Disaster 
Management Guidelines, 2008 and National Vaccine Policy, 2011 and apprise the 
Committee of the initiatives being taken for implementation of these policies at the gr ound 
level to achieve the set objectives in these guidelines/policy.  
6.36 Attention of the Committee is also brought to the estimates of the Government where the 
Vaccine Effectiveness in Preventing Mortality by 1 st Dose is 99.0% and Vaccine Effectiveness 
in Preventing Mortality by 2nd Doses is 99.4%. The Vaccine Effectiveness on Mortality (Person-
Time Analysis) has been graphed as under: 

78 
 
 
6.37 The Committee observes that vaccination has caused a phenomenal mitigating 
impact on the continuum of the pandemic Covid-19. The Committee notes that the vaccine 
effectiveness in Preventing Mortality is very high and the death among the non- vaccinated 
has been the highest during the second and the third wave. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Governm ent to continue with National Covid -19 control Plan 
through massive vaccination drive so as to mitigate the causation factor of mutating 
variants of Covid-19. 
6.38 The Committee further points out the unrealistic target set by the Government for 
completion of the vaccination drive in the country by December 2021. Various studies 
have been conducted across the world on the additional deaths that would have been 
averted had the vaccination coverage targets been achieved by the country. With the 
waning of vacc ine efficacy in the population and the risk of emerging mutated variants 
across the world, the success of the vaccination Program is a keystone of the Covid 
mitigation policy. The Committee, therefore, accordingly recommends the Ministry to 
focus not only on the vaccine supply side barrier but also on the demand side barriers so 
that vaccination targets are achieved. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
take necessary measure s to increase the uptake of precautionary doses so that the 
mortality rate  is lowered given the rise in fresh infections. The Committee cautions the 
Government against mutating variants of Covid -19 and strongly recommends to have the 
vigil for total elimination of virus through resilient mitigation policy and effective mass 
vaccination Program.  
6.39 The Committee further notes that geographically tough terrain with poor 
connectivity may not permit live data entry of vaccination, hence back log entry option or 
off line mode of entry must be permitted so that the extent of actual vaccination coverage 
can be observed and any possible gap for vaccination is abridged.  
 
NEED OF STRONG PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN THE HEALTH SECTOR 
6.40 The Committee understands that the Government with its limited resources, faces a 
far big challenge to bring in structural changes in the Public Health System. It is a well 
established fact that there is an urgent need to augment and develop the health ecosystem 
in the country to keep the health index of the whole population to  global standard. The 


79 
 
Committee believes that Public Private Partnership in the Health Sector can facilitate 
bridging of the gaps in the healthcare infrastructure and ensure an efficient delivery of 
healthcare services upto lower rungs of the society. The Committee, taking a clue from the 
success of the PPP model in various sectors such as infrastructure, tourism, education 
recommends the Government to adopt a similar model in the health sector. The 
Committee finds that the Public Private Partnership in Health Sector is still an unexplored 
area and therefore, can prove momentous in increasing the reach of healthcare facilities. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to 
collaborate with the Private Sector on novel Pro jects related to the Health. The Business 
Houses and Companies must be encouraged to devote a substantial part of their CSR 
funding in the Health Sector to build necessary health infrastructure.  
6.41 The Committee also recommends the Government to launch new Schemes and 
initiatives that incentivises the Private Sector to bring in the funding and the expertise in 
the health sector. The Government must leverage the key resources of the Private sector 
and take full advantage of the expertise, finances, techno logy and human resource that the 
PPP model offers in combating National emergency situation in health sector like the 
pandemic Covid-19.  
 
NEED OF CHANGE IN VACCINATION POLICY 
 
6.42 The Committee is of the opinion that the effectiveness studies of the vacc ines on the 
newer variants of the virus should have been conducted by the research bodies in India 
along with the beginning of the vaccination drive.  Countries like US and UK started 
conducting various studies to determine the proportion of people who wer e vaccinated but 
still either got severely ill or died due to the covid.  The Committee further notes the 
research studies that recommended delay in the second dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine 
beyond the earlier recommended 4 weeks.  This was also endorsed by the WHO Strategic 
Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) Committee. In May, 2021, the 
COVID Working Group chaired by Dr N K Arora also recommended extension of the gap 
between the first and second doses of COVISHIELD vaccine to 12 -16 weeks. Th e earlier 
gap between the two doses of COVISHIELD vaccine was 6 -8 weeks. The Committee, in 
this regard, recommends the Government to find out scientifically, the reasonable gap 
between the two doses of the vaccine on the gap between the 2 nd and precautionary booster 
dose in the interest of public health otherwise common masses apprehend that 
Government is allowing adjustment of time gap between two doses of vaccine to clear the 
stock of vaccine manufacturers.  
 
6.43 The Committee feels that with the huge re pository of vaccination data in the 
country, India should have been at the forefront of conducting better assessment of the 
vaccine efficacy in its population. The Committee believes that any change in the national 
vaccination policy should have been subst antiated by real -life evidences and concrete 
research in the country itself. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
conduct more research on optimising the dosage interval and accordingly approach its 
vaccination policy.  
 
6.44 The Committee f urther recommends that there is a need to develop a mechanism 
that in case of future outbreaks of the pandemic, the research infrastructure is put into 
action and the vaccine policy is accordingly modified for better results. The Committee 

80 
 
again emphasizes  that the preparedness of vaccination strategies requires much more 
clinical research so that the rapid response care strategies are adopted.   
 
NEED OF CHANGE IN VIALS SIZE 
6.45 The Committee has also been apprised by the State Governments that due to the 
bigger size of 20 doses in the Corbevax vaccine, it is becoming difficult for the vaccination 
Centres to use them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vaccines should b e 
made available in smaller packs of 5 doses each to ensure the best usage of vaccine and 
prevent wastage.  
 
ENHANCEMENT IN THE HONORARIUM OF AWWS/AWHS AND ASHAS 
 
6.46 The Ministry of Women and Child Development submitted that   AWWs/AWHs being 
honorary workers are paid a monthly honorarium as decided by the Government from time to 
time.  Government of India with effect from 01.10.2018 has enhanced the honorarium of 
AWWS at main AWCs from Rs. 3000/ - to Rs. 4500/ - per month; AWWs at mini AWCs from 
Rs. 2250/- to 3500/- per month; AWHs from Rs. 1500/- to Rs. 2250/- per month; and introduced 
performance linked incentive of Rs. 250/ - per month AWHs. Further, modified guidelines have 
been issued for performance linked incentive @Rs. 500/ - per month to Anaganwadi W orkers 
with effect from 01.05.2021.  In addition, States/UTs are also paying additional monetary 
incentives/honorarium to these functionaries from their own resources.  
 
6.47 The Committee in its 126 th Report on the Demand for Grants on the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare applauded ASHA and other frontline health workers for their role as 
foot soldiers in India's fight against the pandemic. The Committee has noted that the ASHA 
workers have proved pivotal in connecting the weaker and marginalized co mmunity to a host of 
health services.  
 
6.48 The Committee notes that the country‘s frontline health workers ASHAs were one of the 
six recipients of WHO‘s Global Health Leaders Award -2022 that recognises leadership, 
contributions to advancing global health  and commitment to regional health issues. As per 
WHO, ASHAs were conferred the honour for their crucial role in linking the community with 
the health system, to ensure those living in rural poverty can access primary health care services, 
as shown throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
6.49 The Committee applauds the Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), Anganwadi Helpers 
(AWHs) and Accredited Social Health Activist  (ASHAs) who were  extensively involved in 
COVID-19 awareness drive in the community. The Committee notes th at ASHAs, AWWs 
and AWHs acted as the frontline workers during the pandemic and were responsible for 
spreading awareness about Covid -19 and safety protocols. The ASHAs were also tasked 
with identifying as well as tracking COVID -19 positive cases and carryin g out vaccination 
drive. ASHAs, AWWs and AWHs have played an important role in community 
surveillance as has also been applauded by WHO , however, these frontline workers 
remain unrewarded. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and the Ministry of Women and Child Development to ensure timely 
payment of wages along with other social security benefits. The Committee further 
recommends the Government to consider incentives and financial protection for the 
ASHAs, AWWs and AWHs workers under different financial packages. 
  

81 
 
COMPLACENCY IN ADMINISTRATION OF BOOSTER DOSES 
6.50 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the fact that there has been a 
considerable increase in the administration of the booster doses since the dose was made free.  
As per the estimates of the Government, the 7 day rolling average of booster dose 
administration increased from 0.14 million in April 16 to 2.20 million on 23rd July, 2022. The 
same is graphed as under: 
 
 
6.51 Attention of the Com mittee is also drawn to fewer vaccination sites for administrating 
booster doses.  The same has been graphed as under: 
 
6.52 Attention of the Committee is also drawn to the fact that there has been complacency 
about taking the booster dose in the public. The Committee is given to understand that even 
among the health care worker s almost 37.3% have missed their  shots at a six month gap. The 
absolute number of healthcare workers who are late for boosters is 2.97 million. 24.6% of 
eligible frontline workers a re late for boosters by more than nine months. The same is graphed 
as under: 


82 
 
 
 
6.53 The Committee notes that administration of free booster doses has enhanced the 
booster dose uptake. However, the Committee notes that this free precautionary dose 
window is only for 75 days. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to extend 
the 75 days window and make the precautionary dose free for all so that complete 
vaccination of all can be ensured.  
6.54 The Committee further notes that the ease of access to vaccination site also has a 
major role to play in increase in vaccination rate. The Committee strongly recommends 
the Ministry to increase the Government Covid Vaccination centres across all the 
States/UTs. The Committee is also concerned at the general prevalence of complacency in 
the healthcare workers as well as the public towards booster doses. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to work towards increasing awareness regarding the 
precautionary dose among the public, particularly among the immune -compromised and 
people with co morbidities.  
 
ADVERSE EVENT FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI) 
 
6.55 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as per the AEFI Surveillance 
Operational Guidelines and the Operational Guidelines for COVID 19 vaccinations, all 
suspected minor, severe and serious AEFI cases reported following administration of all 
vaccines (including routine immunization and COVID 19 vaccines) should be reported to the 
health system. Adverse events (minor, severe and serious) following COVID 19 vaccinations 
can be reported by the vaccinator and the District Immunization Officer through the COWIN 
portal. It is important to note that all reported events may not be caused due to  the vaccine. The 
severe and serious AEFIs cases which are reported in COWIN are further investigated by the 
district AEFI committee through the District Immunization Officer. 
 
6.56 As per the data furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, th e total 
number of Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) is graphed as under: 


83 
 
 
 
6.57 The Committee notes that on 19 th July, 2022, a total of 28 AEFI were reported 
across the country and total AEFI is reported to be 0.006% of the total cases. The 
Committee observes that under -reporting and poor quality data collection may be the 
reason behind reporting of such less number  of AEFI. However, the Committee takes note 
of the unusual peak in AEFI on 10 th July, 2022 where 743 AEFI cases were reported. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reason behind this sudden rise in the cases and 
the vaccines that caused the adverse reaction.  
 
6.58 The Committee notes that mild side effects after administering of the vaccines are 
usually reported as the body requires time to adjust to the vaccination dose. However, the 
Committee feels that the Ministry must ensure that possible ad verse effects are 
communicated to the people followed by timely treatment. Attention of the Committee is 
also brought to the death of a patient post covid -19 vaccination. The Committee notes that 
in the concerned case, the AEFI Committee released its asses sment Report after almost 
seven months. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to ensure that 
appropriate investigation must be done and AEFI Committee must expedite its 
examination of each adverse cases.  
 
6.59 The Committee also notes that COVID -19 vaccination is voluntary and presently 
there is no mechanism of compensation to beneficiaries or liability of vaccine 
manufacturer in case of any Adverse Event Following Immunization. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to create a clear framework of vaccine 
liability for manufacturer in case of AEFI so that adequate compensation can be provided 
to the aggrieved individuals.  
 
6.60 The Committee also notes the findings of various research studies that have 
indicated the prevalence of long Covid among individuals infected with Covid. Even after 
the infection has passed, individuals have been reported to experience lingering symptoms. 
The Committee observes that there is a need to monitor and conduct surveillance of post 
covid complications. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to frame a treatment protocol and make specific guidelines for managing 
post Covid complications and related health problems arsing due to the initial infection. 
The Ministry must also work towards sensitizing the Indian Health Public System to deal 
with such cases of long Covid. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure 
medical support for Long COVID sufferers and train the healthcare workers for 
managing patients with Long COVID. 
 


84 
 
NEED OF AN ENHANCED ROLE OF AYUSH IN THE MITIGATION OF THE 
PANDEMIC COVID-19 
6.61 The Committee is given to understand that AYUSH can play an important role in 
realizing the dream of ‗New India‘ by providing quality healthcare and medical care for its 
citizens. With the fear of subsequent waves still looming around, there is a strong ne ed to 
promote the traditional system of medicines and Yoga as a way of life. Ayush with its 
preventive and promotive aspects can go a long way in preparing the individuals for future 
health uncertainties,  
6.62 While examining the Demand for Grants 2022 -23 of the Ministry of Ayush, the 
Committee noted that the Ministry had conducted clinical studies on AYUSH -64 in the 
management of asymptomatic and mild to moderate cases of COVID -19 involving 500 
participants. The outcomes of these studies demonstrated earl y clinical recovery and reduced 
duration of hospital stay without any progression of the disease to severe or critical stage of 
COVID-19. Also, there was improvement in Quality of life (QoL) parameters. AYUSH -64 was 
found to be well tolerated and safe. A m olecular docking study conducted at ICMR National 
Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad demonstrated its anti-viral activity against SARSCoV-2. 
 
6.63 The Committee in its 136 th Report had appreciated the efforts of the Research 
Councils in development of new drugs especially repurposed Ayush 64 in management of 
Covid-19. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that AYUSH must continue 
emphasis on evidence based scientific research and drug development process entailing 
pre clinical as well as clinical tria ls. The Committee further recommends the Ministry of 
Ayush to work towards building inter -ministerial linkages and collaborate with other 
Departments for undertaking clinical studies on newer drugs.  
6.64 The Committee believes that in the wake of global h ealth crisis and the threat of 
emerging viruses, Ayush system can be utilized as an effective means to tackle the 
challenges associated with health sector. The Committee strongly recommends the 
adoption of an inclusive and integrated health care policy. Th e Committee accordingly 
urges the Government to continue making efforts in integrating Ayush in the health 
sector. 


85 
 
6.65 The Committee recognizes the services of AYUSH doctors in providing the first line 
of treatment especially in the rural areas. The Commi ttee further commends the 
contribution of AYUSH manpower in offering their services during the pandemic.  
INCLUSION OF MARGINALIZED SECTION IN THE VACCINATION DRIVE 
6.66 The Committee notes the economic impact of the pandemic and the mass migration 
of the workforce from the cities to the villages. The Committee notes that the migrant 
workers due to the nature of their jobs that demand rapid movement may have been 
excluded from the vaccination drive. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare to ensure that the migrant workforce is administered both 
the doses of the vaccine along with the precautionary doses. The Committee also urges the 
Ministry to ensure that the poor vulnerable section of the society, due to the absence of 
relevant identification cards or documents does not remain neglected. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to ensure free a nd 
universal vaccination for all.    
 
  

86 
 
CHAPTER VII 
PANDEMIC IS FAR FROM OVER 
7.1 As per the estimates of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, India's daily new 
Covid-19 cases stand at 16,935 (as on 18 th July, 2022). The Committee notes that the 
hospitalization rate has been low and the Omicron sub -variant BA.2 is the dominant variant in 
the country. As per the Ministry the trend in new cases between 4 th June and 18th July, 2022 has 
been as follows:  
 
7.2 The Committee notes that the present trend of  Covid-19 reflects the need for 
adopting a new approach to the pandemic for its total eradication. With waning immunity 
in the population, the susceptibility to the infection is bound to increase. The Committee is 
at distress to observe the lack of Covid A ppropriate Behaviour (CAB) in the general 
public. People have stopped wearing masks and social gathering have also increased. The 
Committee further notes that though the cases are comparatively less than the earlier 
Covid waves but the fear of subsequent w aves still persists if the CAB is not adhered to.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to promote better 
communication in driving the benefits of vaccines to the general public as vaccine is the 
only last hope to mitigate the pandemic Covid-19.  
7.3 The Committee further believes that any increase in the Covid cases must not be 
ignored and the public must not let the guard down against the pandemic. Over the past 
two years, the Ministry has been following, "Tracing, Tracking, Testing, Treating and 
Technology (5Ts)" to contain the pandemic. However, with the mutating Covid -19 
variants, the Ministry must adopt newer strategies against the evolving virus. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to revise the indicator to track th e 
Covid-19 situation in the country. The Ministry must closely monitor clusters where any 
Covid incidence cases are reported. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
expand the genomic surveillance facilities in the country upto far flung areas so th at the 
emergence of any new variant is tracked faster. The Ministry should strengthen the 


87 
 
network of labs under NCDC -IDSP upto the rural areas so that any newer clinical 
outcomes are translated to better covid management policies.   
7.4 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to conduct studies on whether there 
is a need to administer Covid vaccine yearly. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to undertake in depth R&D project to explore the possibility of manufacturing 
one-time single dose vacci ne for all variants of corona virus. Moreover, the Committee 
emphasizes that R&D activities under PPP model should also be carried out to explore 
drugs development to treat Covid Patients with due clinical trials keeping in view the 
health safety of the patients. The Ministry must adopt a scientific view backed by research 
evidence to address major issues regarding Vaccine distribution. The Committee believes 
that the Ministry must be very pragmatic and strategic in administrating the 
precautionary dose of vaccines. However, the Ministry must continue accelerating its 
efforts towards administrating booster doses specifically to the high -risk population 
groups. The Committee believes that booster dose is essential to provide additional 
protection particularly  to those with comorbidities. The Committee also believes that 
research outcomes with respect to efficacy of booster doses must be shared with the 
scientific community as well as the general public.  
7.5 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to a study that suggests Hybrid 
immunity has been associated with higher levels of neutralising antibodies and greater 
protection against infection than vaccines. The Committee strongly recommends the 
Ministry to adopt a dynamic response strategy keeping in view the results of such studies.  
ESTABLISHING A ROBUST RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE COUNTRY 
7.6 The Committee in its 135 th Report on the Demands for Grants 2022 -23 (Demand 
No. 47) of the Department of Health Research had examined the Schemes of the 
Department, particularly, "Establishment of Viral Diagnostic & Research Laboratories 
(VRDL) to manage epidemics and national cala mities". The Committee had emphasized 
on the need of establishing VRDLs across States and strengthen the bio -safety network to 
tackle any future outbreaks. The Committee accordingly reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministry must continue its efforts towards expansion of testing labs network in the 
country. The Ministry must aim towards -"One VRDL in each District" by 2026 and 
ensure that trained manpower is available in these laboratories. 
7.7 The Committee in its 135th Report had also strongly advocated for the need of BSL-
3 and BSL -4 labs in the country. The Committee notes that a strong network of modern 
high tech labs with sophisticated diagnostic techniques is crucial to strengthen the bio -
safety ecosystem in the wake of emerging new virus. Lack o f adequate BSL Labs in the 
country increases the risk of such viral outbreaks. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Ministry to establish one BSL -IV lab in each of the four zones. The 
Committee further believes that for regular and effective surveillan ce of any kind of 
infections or disease in the country, the Ministry must establish establish BSL -II facilities 
in different regions of the country. The Ministry must also start new mobile BSL -III labs 
in the country and ensure that all the zones of the country have a well established network.  
7.8 The Committee further notes that under the PM -ABHIM Scheme, existing 5 
VRDLs are being upgraded to BSL -III labs.  The Committee would like to be  apprised of 
the status of these labs and the Ministry must accelerate its efforts and ensure that the labs 
are upgraded within the set timeline. The need of the hour is to focus and emphasize on 
the state of the art laboratory infrastructure and have a robust research environment in 

88 
 
order to understand the various kinds of infections/ viruses and also to ensure bio security 
of the country.  
 
75 days – ‗COVID Vaccination Amrit Mahotsava 
7.9 On 13th July, 2022, the Government of India announced a 75 day window starting from 
15th July, 2022 wherein all the adults can get free booster doses at all Government Vaccination 
Centres. This special vaccination drive is a part of the celebration for Azadi ka Amrit Mahots av 
and free booster doses to all citizens above 18+ will be provided.  
7.10 The Committee appreciates the Government's move for linking Azadi ka Amrit 
Mahotsav with vaccine drive, thereby, announcing a 75 day window starting from 15th 
July, 2022 wherein al l the adults will get free booster doses at all Government Covid 
Vaccination Centres. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Government 
apparatus/NGO/Civil Society to associate with vaccination drive on auspicious occasion of 
Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav and achieve the intended targets. The Committee hopes that 
this Vaccination Amrit Mission leads to mass mobilization and mass vaccination among 
the eligible beneficiaries.  
Need of restoring Ecological Balance in the world 
7.11 The Committee observes that the pandemic through the devastating impact it 
ravaged across the rungs of the society, shed light on the importance of ecological balance 
in the world. The Committee notes that in this age of globalization and rapid urbanisatio n, 
humans are becoming more detached from their environment. Nature is the essence of 
human life and human-nature relationship does have an impact on human's health.  
7.12 The Committee notes that the increase in anthropogenic activities and augmented 
human interventions in the ecosystem has had an adverse impact on the environment. The 
impact of Global warming and Climate Change are visible throughout the world, 
especially in developing countries. Pollution in all form -air, water, noise etc have become 
quite common. The Committee believes that there is a need to restore the ecological 
balance and let nature take its course. The Committee therefore, strongly emphasizes on 
the need to adapt a living and lifestyle which is in harmony with nature so that humanity is 
better prepared for dealing with any uncertainties in the future.  
7.13 The Committee notes that the former President of India, Shri Ram Nath Kovind, 
has also highlig hted the importance of economical balance in the world. The former 
President of India's in his Speech in the farewell function on 23rd July, 2022 stated the 
following:  
"In the year 2020, in a matter of few days, our world changed like never before. 
After nearly hundred years, a pandemic jolted the entire humanity. It has been an 
unprecedented tragedy in our times, and the whole world is still struggling with it. 
At this stage, one can only hope that the world will draw the right lessons from it. 
The chief lesson is that we human beings have forgotten that we are part of 
nature. The reality is that we are neither separate from nature, nor we are above 
it. The outbreak of the pandemic was partly linked with the disruption in 
ecological balance. The last two years have also reminded us that we are after all 
one human family and our survival depends on mutual cooperation. India's efforts 
in combating COVID have been appreciated worldwide. With everyone's efforts, 

89 
 
we have achieved the target of 200 crore vaccinat ions in just 18 months. During 
the Corona period, we had provided free ration to 80 crore people." 
7.14 The Committee notes that India's response strategy against the pandemic had 
many shortfalls and the country struggled to minimize the impact of the pand emic Covid-
19. Many experts have opined that the Covid situation and its subsequent waves could 
have been handled in a better way. However, there is no denying the fact that India despite 
its large population and fragile healthcare infrastructure was succe ssful in adapting to the 
uncertainties that the pandemic ravaged. The Committee appreciates the up scaling of the 
testing infrastructure in record time and notes that India has huge potential to deliver 
healthcare services to the last mile. India must cont inue its journey towards ushering new 
reforms in its health sector through its exemplary inclusive schemes and initiatives and 
expansion in the health Budget. Hon'ble President Smt. Droupadi Murmu in her Speech 
on her assumption of office as President of I ndia on 25 th  July, 2022 also commended the 
capability India showed during the pandemic which is quoted as under:  
 
"The kind of capability that India has shown in combating the global crisis 
of Corona pandemic has enhanced India's credibility all over the world. We 
Indians not only faced this global challenge with our efforts but also set 
new standards for the world. Ju st a few days ago, India has set a record of 
administering 200 crore doses of corona vaccine. The patience, courage 
and cooperation shown by the people of India in this entire battle is a 
symbol of our growing strength and sensitivity as a society.  India not only 
took care of itself in these difficult situations but also helped the world. In 
the atmosphere created by the Corona pandemic, today the world is looking 
at India with a new confidence. The international community has high 
hopes from India for ensu ring global economic stability, ease of supply 
chain and peace." 
 
CONCLUSION 
7.15 The Committee notes that the pandemic has brought in open the need of scaling up 
the vaccine manufacturing ecosystem in the country and investing in the research and 
development infrastructure in the country. With the future variants being inevitable, the 
country must prepare better vaccination strategies. The Committee further believes that a 
resilient vaccination strategy will require concrete clinical research which is currently 
being carried out in the country. The Ministry must also focus on developmen t of newer 
vaccine candidates and develop rapid response care strategies for better mitigation of the 
future uncertainties.  
7.16 The Committee further feels that there is a need to learn from Covi d experience 
and implement the h ealth system reforms in the  country. The Committee further 
reemphasizes that India must operationalize an effective, functional, transparent and 
accountable system for reporting severe adverse events.  
7.17 The Committee also believes that there is a need to expand democracy to prom ote 
people‘s health and include equitable centre -state relations and ensure more transparency 
in decision making and data management. The Committee further recommends that the 
Government must ensure robust planning at all levels along with taking special m easures 
to address gender and social inequities.  

90 
 
7.18 The Committee notes that during the pandemic, Covid related drugs were in short 
supply and rampant black -marketing led to selling of drugs at exorbitant prices. The 
Committee further notes the disrupti on of essential health care services during the 
pandemic. The Committee strongly recommends that the Government must take special 
initiatives to introduce comprehensive drug price control mechanisms to cover all essential 
medicines and ensure that such hik e in the medicine prices especially at the time of a 
medical crisis is strictly monitored. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
streamline the routine public health care services and ensure non -Covid health services 
are restored to pre-pandemic level.  
7.19 The Committee also notes the shortfall of healthcare workforce in India and 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that regular recruitment is carried out to fill all the 
vacant posts in the Medical Colleges and Hospitals. The Committee also recom mends the 
Ministry to continue its efforts to expand the capacity of public  health services in rural 
and urban areas through adequate, massive increase in central government expenditure 
on health. 
7.20 The Committee in its Report has extensively examined t he subject, "Vaccine 
Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID -19" and 
identified various issues and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee 
emphasizes the Ministry to ensure that the set targets of complete vaccination are achieved 
and any existing disparity in vaccine distribution is addressed at the earliest. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry sees Covid -19 as an opportunity to revamp the public 
healthcare infrastructure in the country and usher in new reforms . The Committee 
strongly advocates the imperative essentiality of increasing Government health 
expenditure and investments in research and development. The Ministry must also work 
towards forging better public  private partnerships for ensuring last mile de livery of 
healthcare services.  
  

91 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
RESURGENCE OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 
 
 The Committee observes that the origin of the virus still remains obscure and 
more studies need to be conducted to shed light on the origins of the SARS -CoV-2 virus.  
The Committee strongly believes that identification of the true source of the virus is 
crucial for establishment of new zoonotic reservoirs so that future reinfections and 
diseases in animals as well as humans are prevented. Moreover, the information is crucial 
to reduce any future risks due to the emergence and transmission of the zoonotic di seases 
like the recent outbreak of Monkeypox.  The Committee is of the opinion that the large 
scale fatalities and the devastating impact of Covid -19 pandemic necessitate the need of 
being better prepared for possible future outbreaks viz the menace and ma nagement of 
Monkeypox. The Committee strongly believes that it is incumbent upon global scientists to 
accelerate its efforts in identifying novel pathogens and establish a robust surveillance 
mechanism for faster detection of the pathogens. In this regard,  it becomes all the more 
important to identify the origin of the SARS -CoV-2 virus and investigate its origin along 
all the possible pathway of emergence.  
(Para 1.9) 
  The Committee takes into account that there is still lack of concrete evidence on 
whether the corona virus reached humans via a laboratory incident. Nevertheless, the 
Committee understands that if the origin of corona virus is allowed to remain a mystery, it 
will have colossal consequences over Bio -safety and Bio -security of the world. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government to reckon its diplomacy to 
appeal to the comity of nations to conduct more studies to identify the origin of Covid -19 
and penalize the culprits at the International platform. The Committee further feel s that 
the increasing number of emerging virus highlights the necessity of establishing a robust 
mechanism for systematic investigation of the origin and the route of transmission of the 
pathogens. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to devel op a healthcare 
framework in the country for investigating and managing future outbreaks more 
effectively. In this regard, the Committee strongly believes that the recently constituted 
Task Force Team led by Dr. VK Paul will track the Monkeypox situation a nd provide 
guidance to the Government on the expansion of diagnostic facilities in the country and 
combat the menace of Monkeypox.  
(Para 1.10) 
RESURGENCE OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 
      The Committee observes that India is one of the countries with the heaviest burden of 
Covid-19 cases in the world. The enormity of the population of the country posed a major 
challenge in the face of this unprecedented pandemic. With the fragile healt h 
infrastructure and the huge shortage of the healthcare workers, the country witnessed 
itself reel under tremendous pressure. The Committee notes that the Government could 
not accurately anticipate the gravity of the possible resurgence of pandemic and it s 
subsequent waves. The Committee believes that even when the trajectory of COVID -19 
cases in the country registered a decline in the aftermath of first wave, the Government 
should have continued its efforts to monitor the resurgence of COVID -19 situation and its 
possible outrage in the country. The Committee notes that the Ministry has been 

92 
 
cautioning States to maintain the vigil and chalk out situation and strategy & plan for any 
exigencies that may arise due to resurgence of COVID -19 in their respective States, 
however, the Committee is unhappy to note that many States were unable to cope up with 
the arising uncertainties and medical emergencies in the wake of the pandemic resurgence 
of Covid-19 during the second wave that caused more than 5 lakh registered deaths.   
(Para 1.18) 
WAVES OF PANDEMIC OF COVID-19 
    The Committee takes into consideration the anticipation and conclusion of virologists 
and microbiologists that virus will continue to evolve and possibly mutate into a more 
virulent and transmissible variant and so has been evident by the subsequent Covid waves 
across the world. The Committee, therefore, strongly advises the Government that there is 
an urgent need to expand the genome sequencing machinery in the country to keep a track 
of mutating variants.  
(Para 1.31) 
     The Committee notes that Indian SARS -CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics (INSACOG) 
is a consortium of 38 laboratories which monitors the genomic variations in the SARS -
CoV-2. INSACOG, in its Bulletin dated June 20, 2022 has submitted th at the total number 
of samples sequenced is 256,599.  The Committee feels that considering the high number of 
total covid cases in the country, the number of samples sequenced is very low. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that genome sequencin g is part of an effective 
virus containment strategy and facilitates better surveillance thereby entailing necessity 
for better policy formulation on Covid-19 management. Keeping into account the fact that 
India lags behind in genome sequencing and has seq uenced very less number of samples 
when compared to other countries. The Committee strongly believes that there is a need to 
augment the genome sequencing facilities in the country. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to intensify its effor ts with regard to genome sequencing of the 
SARS-CoV-2 genome and ensure that the mutating variants are monitored efficiently and 
regularly. This is essential to understand the characteristics and complexity of the virus 
along with its ramifications and the conclusion so arrived must be scientifically utilized for 
vaccines development based on empirical facts and data with due clinical trials.   
(Para 1.32) 
     The Committee, in its 123 rd Report, had analyzed the role of NCDC -IDSP and 
emphasized on the need  to revitalize the enshrined role and responsibility of NCDC for 
effective control of the disease along with strengthening of the Central Surveillance Unit 
(CSU), State Surveillance Units (SSU) and District Surveillance Units (DSU). The 
Committee notes tha t NCDC -IDSP undertakes crucial tasks related to surveillance and 
conducts epidemiological investigation. The Committee strongly recommends that the 
sequenced data must be shared with the NCDC at the earliest. The Ministry must make 
efforts to strengthen th e  Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) at the 
National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) so that the data provided by the sequencing 
laboratories are timely investigated and correlated with the field data trends. 
(Para 1.33) 
 The Committee app reciates Government‘s efforts that the Covid -19 testing 
infrastructure in the country has come a long way since the detection of the first Covid 
case in January, 2020. Initially the Covid testing facility was available only at NIV Pune 
and gradually the testing facilities were expanded to other laboratories across the country. 

93 
 
The Committee considers that the usage of highly specific molecular diagnostic tests is 
crucial for identifying the active cases and managing the risk of contamination. The 
Committee, in this regard, commends ICMR's push for a variety of other tests such as 
TrueNAT and CBNAAT systems which were used for comprehensive screening and 
confirmation of COVID- 19 cases.  
(Para 1.37) 
 The Committee takes into account that earlier diagnosis of the virus followed by 
timely isolation of the infected persons is extremely important in the pandemic 
management. The Committee, however, strongly believes that providing large scale testing 
facilities with faster results that correspond to the increased t ransmission rate of the virus 
should have been a crucial part of Covid management policy.  The Committee  observe s 
that owing to the initial delayed action in the aftermath of outbreak of Pandemic by the 
Healthcare system to adapt to the rapidly increasing  cases, there were considerable 
procrastination in getting the results of Covid Test and thereafter unbound spree of 
transmission went unchecked and uncontrolled. Incidents of results getting delayed by 
more than a week were also reported thereby leaving i nfected persons in lurch. The 
Committee observes that the people had to reluctantly approach private facilities for RT -
PCR Tests which charged heavily. The Committee is concerned to note that there existed a 
visible divide in the testing infrastructure in the rural and the urban areas, thereby forcing 
covid infected persons to run from pillar to posts.   
(Para 1.38) 
    The Committee regrets the non -responsive attitude of the Government towards 
enhancing the health infrastructure in the aftermath of the rec eding first Covid -19 wave. 
With trends of Pandemic Covid -19 witnessing a steady decrease, the Government laid its 
guard down and failed to maintain the momentum of Covid case management attained 
during the first wave. The Committee expresses its disappoint ment over the lackadaisical 
approach of the Government machinery to testing of Covid cases with the fall in its trends 
and further ease in restrictions across the country. Both of these could be attributed to the 
tsunami of covid cases which was followed b y enormous fatalities during the second wave 
and the Government agencies remained perplexed and witness to the deteriorating 
situation that went out of control. 
(Para 1.39) 
MISMANAGEMENT OF OXYGEN SUPPLY DURING THE SECOND WAVE 
 The Committee finds that with the increase in the number of covid positive cases in 
the country, there was a severe pressure on the health infrastructure from the smallest to 
the large private hospitals. There were several instances of families of patients pleading for 
oxygen and wai ting in queues for oxygen cylinders. Media relayed stories of hospitals 
running out of oxygen and making desperate appeals when hospitals were reportedly left 
with only few hours of oxygen supply. In April, 2021, the Delhi High court slammed the 
Delhi Gove rnment for alleged mismanagement in distribution of medical oxygen.  The 
High Court in May, 2021 also asked the Central Government to divert the unutilized 
tankers of oxygen to Delhi from States where the Covid-19 situation was improving. 
(Para 1.47) 

94 
 
 The Committee reiterates its observations/recommendations made while examining 
the Covid situation in 2020. The Committee in its 123 rd Report had warned the 
Government of the possible shortage of the Oxygen Cylinders and supply of Oxygen in the 
hospitals. The Committee is disappointed to note that the Ministry in its submission in 
2020 had assured that the country is self sufficient in Oxygen and Oxygen Cylinders; 
however, their hollow claim was brutally exposed during the second wave. The Committee 
recalls its recommendation made in the 123 rd Report where the Committee had strongly 
recommended the Government for encouraging adequate production of oxygen and 
ensuring its supply in the hospitals. Notwithstanding, the Government failed to manage 
the even distribution of oxygen in the States and amidst the skyrocketing demand, the 
Government could n ot maintain a steady flow of oxygen leading to an unprecedented 
medical crisis. The Committee notes that poor logistic management and failure of the 
Government in ensuring a quick response from the healthcare system speaks volume of 
the utter chaos in the Government machinery especially during the second wave.  A poor 
monitoring of the oxygen generation capacity and availability of Medical Oxygen, 
Oxygenated and Ventilator beds in the hospitals further aggravated the situation.  
(Para 1.48) 
 The Committee observes that in the Statement laid in the house in the 256 th Session 
of the Rajya Sabha, the Minister of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as on 4 th 
April, 2022, States/UTs reported a total of 5,21,358 deaths due to COVID -19 in the 
country. The Mini stry submitted that the Government of India maintains data of total 
cases and deaths due to COVID-19 reported and updated by States/UTs on a regular basis. 
The Committee wonders that in response to the Union Government's request to 
States/UTs to furnish th e details of Covid deaths owing to the lack of oxygen, 20 
States/UTs responded and none of these State/UTs have reported confirmed death due to 
oxygen shortage.   
(Para 1.49) 
 The Committee is disturbed at the unfortunate denial of the Ministry of Health a nd 
Family Welfare regarding Covid Deaths due to Oxygen shortage in the country. The 
Committee takes into account the media reports that there were many deaths due to 
Oxygen shortage in the hospitals; however, the sheer negligence of the fact shows the 
absence of empathy in the Government parlance. The Committee notes that there were no 
definite guidelines for identifying the deaths due to inadequate supply of oxygen. Oxygen 
shortage is not noted as a cause of death in the medical records and most of the dea ths 
were attributed to co -morbidities. The Committee is disappointed at this utter ignorance 
by the Government and strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
to examine the number of deaths due to oxygen shortage especially during the second wave 
of Covid. The Ministry, in coordination with the States, must audit the deaths due to 
oxygen shortage and enable robust documentation of the covid deaths that will infact 
generate the responsive and responsible sense of government and cautious fo rmulation of 
policy and combat situational health care emergency. The Committee further expects 
more transparency and more accountability from the Government agencies. The Ministry 
must meticulously examine the oxygen stricken Covid deaths and ensure that proper 
compensation is accorded to the families of the victims.  
(Para 1.50) 

95 
 
 During its deliberations with the Ministry, the Committee noted that the PSA 
plants were being established in each district hospitals. The Committee observes that 
setting up Pressure Swing Adsorption  (PSA) and ensuring its proper operation and 
maintenance incurs high costs. The Committee is concerned that the plants may be left 
unused when the Oxygen demand is low. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government to ensure that  the PSA set up is utilized optimally and any wastage of the 
resources is avoided. The Government must accordingly devise a system to make Oxygen 
readily available to the hospitals and strengthen the infrastructure for transporting 
oxygen to the Government and private Hospitals within the desirable span of time.  
(Para 1.51) 
 The Committee is of the view that technical expertise is required for operation of 
PSA plants. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
required technical s taff is available at the district hospitals and no unwarranted incident 
take place once the PSAs are installed in the hospitals. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that efficient Oxygen Management Protocols (OMP) 
are followed in all th e hospitals and oxygen is scientifically administered and managed for 
optimum medical utilization in public and private hospitals.  
(Para 1.52) 
CHALLENGES AND LEARNINGS FROM THE SECOND WAVE OF THE 
PANDEMIC 
 The Committee understands that the second wave of  Covid-19 put the Indian 
healthcare system and the diagnostic infrastructure under insurmountable pressure, 
thereby, emphasized on the need for strengthening mitigation strategies. The Committee 
appreciates that the Government has upgraded testing infrastr ucture in the country; 
however, the number of testing facilities still remains low in proportion to its population.  
(Para 1.54) 
 The Second wave was undoubtedly marred by high cases, increased deaths, 
shortage of oxygen and beds in hospitals, reduced supp lies of medicines and other 
important drugs, disruption of essential health care services, hoarding and black 
marketing of cylinders and medicines etc. The Committee is of the considered view that 
had the Government been successful in identification of the more virulent strain of virus in 
the population at an early stage and suitably implemented its containment strategy, the 
repercussions would have been less grave and many lives could have been saved.  
(Para 1.55) 
 The Committee also takes note of the cons tant rise in covid cases during the 
Kumbh Mela, Tablighi Jamaat in New Delhi and election campaigns in the West Bengal. 
The Committee notes that large gatherings with no social distancing are synonymous with 
hotspots of Covid. The Committee notes that managing a large crowd along with following 
covid protocols poses a challenge to the administration. Such massive gatherings on 
several social, political and religious occasions were also a major causing factor for the 
second covid wave. With covid fatigue hit ting in among the citizens, the Government also 
raised celebratory flag and presumed that the whole situation was under control. 

96 
 
However, a devastating second covid wave exposed all the false claims of the Government 
and resulted into large scale causalities. 
(Para 1.56) 
THIRD WAVE OF COVID-19 
 The Committee notes that the rate of spread of Omicron is higher than its previous 
delta variants. Omicron has led to a rise in the number of covid cases in India particularly 
among the young population. However, the rate of hospitalization and the severit y of 
infection remained low compared to second wave that was fuelled by the Delta variant.  
The Committee is of the opinion that since many cases were mild and asymptomatic, there 
are more chances of cases remaining undetected and not making it to the offi cial registry. 
The Committee understands that the death rates have been lower in the third wave; 
however, the Government must continue taking effective measures for enforcing Covid -
Appropriate Behavior (CAB). The Committee further feels that a strict testi ng regime in 
the airports for international flights should have been followed and patients testing 
positive should have been immediately isolated.  With the uncertainty brewing around 
newer and more virulent strains of the virus, it is imperative to genera te public awareness 
to wear a mask and follow all the covid protocols.  
(Para 1.63) 
NEW WAVE OF COVID-19 IN THE FUTURE 
 The Committee notes that although the Covid -19 cases have been on a slow rise, 
fear of transmission of a more virulent strain of Sars -Cov-2, still persists. The Committee 
notes that the recent surge in cases reveals that Covid is here to stay and will become 
endemic. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to take note of any fresh 
surge in the Covid cases and conduct sequencing of adequate number of samples so that 
new Variants of Interest (VoI) and Variants of Concern (VoC) can be identified at the 
earliest.  The Ministry must also ensure that adequate number of samples are tested so 
that Covid cases are well reported and documente d. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to be prepared for any eventualities of more virulent strain of Sars -Cov-2 virus 
and carry out mock drills to identify any gap in the covid containment policy of the 
Government. The Ministry must also explore o ptions to study sewage samples for early 
prediction of any possible outbreak of Covid waves in future and thereby formulate 
dynamic strategy to mitigate the resurgence.  
(Para 1.66) 
 The Union Government must coordinate with the States and assess the requirement 
of medicines, kits, oxygen etc so that shortage in supplies is averted in case of future 
outbreak. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry must closely monitor 
the trajectory of Covid in the country so that the system is better prepared to manage 
future resurgence of the virus, if any. 
(Para 1.67) 
VACCINE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
 The Committee emphasizes that the Government must incentivise multi -
disciplinary research and efforts towards enhancing the research infrastructure in the 
country. The Committee recommends to promote collaborative studies among National 

97 
 
and International Institutes and develop a roadmap for creating a vibrant research 
environment in the country.  
(Para 2.6) 
 The Committee observes that the provisions for emergen cy use authorisation is 
absent in New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 and under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940. It is regretful to note that the vaccines have been given EUA without any specific 
provision in the Indian drug rules and regulations. The laws in other countries are very 
clearly defined which made the granting of approvals of vaccine and drugs during the 
pandemic very transparent. However in India, the information regarding the protocol 
followed and the clinical trial data of the vaccines remained shadowed for a long time.  
(Para 2.17) 
 The Committee is of the firm opinion that the procedure followed behind granting 
emergency or restricted approvals to drugs and vaccines must be clearly defined in the 
laws. Ambiguity on the vaccines trials a s well as the procedure followed for EUA reflects 
greatly on the need of making amendments to the Indian Laws. The Committee 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to make specific provisions for EUA in the Indian 
drug laws. The Committee also notes the lack of clarity in the procedure followed for 
granting the approval for administering the booster doses. The Committee would like to 
be apprised on the protocol followed and the laws under which the approval was granted. 
The Committee feels that meticulous scientific findings must form the basis for any major 
changes in the course of the vaccination policy. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to carry out rigorous assessments of laboratory 
and clinical trial data before granting any future Emergency Use Authorization for 
vaccines.  The Ministry must also share the data on quality, safety, production of 
protective antibodies and efficacy of the vaccines in the public domain.  
(Para 2.18) 
 The Committee apprecia tes the efforts of the Department of Health Research and 
the Department of Biotechnology that have been at the forefront of the vaccine research 
and development in the country. The Committee time and again has emphasized on the 
need for strengthening the r esearch ecosystem in the country. The Committee further 
believes that both the Departments must also work towards strengthening the clinical 
trials ecosystem in the country along with data transparency. The Committee understands 
that vaccine development fa ces a slew of challenges ranging from procuring the raw 
material to conducting human trials. However, the present situation necessitate 
development of effective interventions so that the future outbreaks as the like of Covid -19 
are mitigated.  The Committe e strongly recommends the Ministry to strengthen the end -
to-end vaccine development programme and extend support to vaccine candidates which 
are at different stages of development.  
(Para 2.23) 
 The Committee also appreciates, "Mission COVID Suraksha - The Indian COVID-
19 Vaccine Development Mission" which was announced as part of the third stimulus 
package. The Committee recommends Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the 
Department of Biotec hnology to continue work towards development of vaccines and 
ensure that the vaccines are introduced in the market for free use.  
(Para 2.24) 

98 
 
 The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need to develop vaccines that 
are effective against all the variants of concerns that have been discovered so far and also 
the future newer  variants. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take initiatives to 
develop a universal covid vaccine that is effective against all the variants. The Ministry 
should encourage research collaboration between ICMR and other research Institutes in 
the country.  
(Para 2.25) 
VACCINES BEING ADMINISTERED IN THE COUNTRY 
 The Committee observes that the country's first indigenous vaccine- Covaxin works 
on inactivated virus platform. W ith the constant mutation in the virus, there is an urgent 
need to evolve strategies for development of second -generation vaccines. The Committee, 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to encourage vaccine development on other newer 
and more efficient platfo rms and also evaluate the efficacy of the existing Covid -19 
vaccines. The Ministry must make continuous efforts in developing vaccines that are 
variant neutral and whose efficacy remains unchanged against other strains of virus. The 
Committee reiterates it s recommendation that all the Ministries concerned must 
collaborate with other National and International Institutes on vaccine research and 
development front and benefit the nation with latest innovation.  
(Para 2.29) 
 The Committee appreciates that the scientific community around the world sprung 
into action and developed Covid -19 vaccines in record time. It is a well established fact 
that the Indian pharmaceutical companies have a worldwide presence and have the ability 
to produce vaccines on a large sc ale. Taking into account that the company that produces 
the largest number of vaccines in the world is an Indian company, the Committee observes 
that India has huge potential in supplying the global demand of vaccines, however, the 
Committee discovers that there is a gigantic scope for more innovation and research in the 
sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should look 
forward for strengthening the research ecosystem so that vaccines on newer and more 
scientific platform s are developed. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the 
Government to increase the budget of Health Research and ICMR so that newer 
innovations see the light of the day. India should not just focus on being a mass producer 
of vaccines but also aim at c reating a niche space for the Indian Research fraternity in the 
vaccine and drugs development sector. 
(Para 2.30) 
INDIA COVID -19 EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND HEALTH SYSTEM 
PREPAREDNESS PACKAGE 
 The Committee is of the view that the funds allocated for Covid -19 m anagement 
should have been judiciously distributed among the States so that the financial burden of 
the poorer States is aptly managed. The Committee recommends the Government to 
ensure that adequate funds are reserved for purchasing and administering of v accine 
doses. The Ministry may submit the expenditure profile of the Rs. 35,000 crore funds 
allocated for vaccination other emergency response and Health System preparedness 
packages and allocation from PM Covid Care Funds. The Committee again emphasizes 
that the Ministry must ensure equitable distribution of funds among the States.  
(Para 2.34) 

99 
 
 As per the information submitted by the Ministry, a large percentage of the fund 
has already been transferred to the States, however, the Committee is apprehensive  about 
the utilization of the funds under the Emergency Covid Response Package (Phase I & II). 
The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to monitor the utilization of the 
funds by the States and ensure that adequate infrastructure is available in t he States. The 
Centre along with the States must ensure that the allocated Covid fund is utilized for 
implementation of IT, training and capacity building of human resources besides vaccine 
administration.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the  Ministry to follow 
up with the States to ensure that the funds are optimally utilized by the States and seek 
utilization certificate from the States/UTs.  
(Para 2.35) 
 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the practice of releasing grants on 
the last day of the financial year. The Committee has time and again recommended the 
Government to adopt financial prudence and avoid last minute disbursement of funds. 
However, such poor financial management speaks volume of the lack of communication 
between the Union Government and the UT. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
frame guidelines of financial prudence in consultations with the States and ensure that the 
guidelines are judiciously followed. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must act 
as a facilitator and guide the States to ensure optimum utilization of the funds.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to adopt prudent fiscal analysis and 
devise a feasible roadmap so that such instances of poor financial mismanagement are not 
repeated.  
(Para 2.37) 
VACCINE PROCUREMENT AND DISTRIBUTION 
 The Committee notes that procurement and delivery of vaccines for catering to the 
targeted group of people requires huge amount of financial resources. The Committee 
observes that a robust assessment of the logistic requirements and streamlining of the 
procurement process is crucial in ensuring the supply chain of the vaccines in the country. 
As the beginning of the National Covid Vaccination Program, much confusion prevailed 
on the Government's vaccine procurement policy. The Committee takes into account t hat 
some States raised objection to the provision of Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated 
National Covid -19 Vaccination Strategy due to the financial constraints in the 
procurement of the vaccine that disturbed the vaccine demand supply continuum. States 
complained about acute shortage of vaccines in the third phase of vaccination, i.e. 18 -44 
age Group while vaccination was the only real weapon or the last hope to combat Covid -
19. The Committee is of the opinion that the Centre's erstwhile policy of not providing free 
vaccines to age group of 18-44 years was devoid of any justification and generated hue and 
cry amongst vaccine willing citizens.  
(Para 3.10) 
 The Committee takes note that the Indian Government did not make any upfront 
payments or signed any pr epurchase agreement with the vaccine manufacturers during 
the developmental phase of vaccines. The need of such agreement was felt when the 
vaccine supply could not match the vaccine demand from the States. The Committee notes 
that as most of the vaccine c entres used to get full to its capacity at quick pace, booking a 
slot on Cowin became herculean task at the early stage . The Committee is of the view that 
the Government should have taken steps to enhance vaccine capacity in the country and 

100 
 
procure additional vaccine doses. The Committee believes that a better assessment of the 
vaccine requirement in the country could have accelerated the vaccination drive. However, 
absence of a micro-level planning greatly impacted the supply chain of vaccines.  
(Para 3.11) 
 The Committee further notes that the Procurement Policy was modified from time 
to time to overcome the limitation of each Procurement Process. However, the Committee 
is of the view that there exists a huge disparity between the States and many economic ally 
weaker States were incapable of managing such intricate vaccine logistic requirements on 
their own.  With the change in the guidelines of the procurement policy, the Central 
Government could negotiate with the vaccine manufacturers and settle on a fair and better 
price. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make elaborate arrangements for 
ensuring procurement in emergency situations.  
(Para 3.12) 
 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to seek technical as well as 
financial assistance so that procurement planning strategy can be further strengthened for 
future such emergencies. 
(Para 3.13) 
 
DISTRIBUTION PLAN AND ITS SPECIFIC COURSE OF ACTION FOR 
VACCINATION FOR COVID-19 
 The Committee notes that a robust cold chain infrastructure forms the crux of the 
National Vaccination Programme. Under the Universal Immunisation Programme, the 
Government has been providing vaccination for other diseases to the citizens. However, 
considering the large scale of Covid vaccination program, there was an urgent need to 
provide adequate cold chain equipments to the States so that the vaccines were smoothly 
distributed and rolled out upto the last corner of the country. The Committee is of the 
view that the vaccines need to be stored in refrigerated conditions and the temperature has 
to be monitored on a real time basis. Insulated vaccines vans are required for 
transportation of the vaccines across the country within stipulated timeframe. The 
Ministry, therefore, must assess the ground requirements of the cold chain supply and 
ensure that adequate number of insulated vans and cold chain equipments are available. 
The Committee points out that since adequate cold chain infrastructure is absent in ma ny 
rural parts of the country, therefore, the Ministry must make concerted efforts to address 
future challenges arising from newer variants and newer diseases, keeping a vigil on 
assured adequate vaccine cold-chain supply. The Committee emphasizes that the  Ministry 
must accordingly work towards establishing an efficient network of cold chain logistics for 
ensuring efficient last mile-delivery of the vaccines in required environment.  
(Para 3.18) 
 The Committee also notes the five levels of vaccine stores an d recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that vaccine store at each level fulfil the requisite criteria for adequate 
storage of vaccines. The Ministry along with the States must ensure that the personnel are 
well trained to manage the vaccines at these cold cha in points. Any damage to the vaccines 

101 
 
at any level must be taken very seriously and all efforts must be made to ensure that the 
vaccines are transported at desired temperature.  
(Para 3.19) 
 The Committee notes that the use of modern cold chain equipments for storing and 
transportation of vaccines at the recommended temperature is the keystone for 
maintaining the quality and efficacy of the vaccines, however, the Committee finds that 
there is huge scope for improvement in the cold chain equipments in the co untry. The 
Committee points out that there is a need to upgrade the cold chain equipments in many 
States and adopt modern refrigerant technology so that the vaccines can be better 
monitored. The Committee also notes that use of eVIN has facilitated real ti me monitoring 
of the vaccines in the States. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to make 
eVIN functional in all the States and UTs and build technical capacities so that the cold 
chain handlers as well as the Programme Managers have a complete o verview of the 
vaccine supply and consumption pattern. 
(Para 3.25) 
 The Committee takes into account the fact that the lack of ultra cold chain vaccine 
infrastructure in the country has limited the choice of vaccines. The m -RNA vaccines from 
Moderna, Pfize r etc that need a temperature of -70 to -80 C for storage could not be 
explored as vaccine options in India when these were some of the first vaccines that were 
given EUA in the western countries. The Committee believes that a poor cold chain 
infrastructure not only limits the choice of the vaccines but also increases the risk of 
vaccines wastage.  
(Para 3.26) 
 The Committee also notes that in regions with difficult geographical terrain and 
poor connectivity, digitization of vaccine stock inventory and its storage temperature may 
not be possible.  The Committee is concerned especially for States like Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Padesh and the North Eastern States where road as well as network connectivity 
is very poor. Ensuring a robust vaccine distribution mechan ism and monitoring the 
temperature while ensuring last mile delivery of the vaccines may be a challenge in such 
areas. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the 
States and encourage use of modern technologies, Drones, Helic opters for the robust 
distribution of the vaccines.  
(Para 3.27) 
  
The Committee observes that the price of Indian vaccines compared to the foreign 
vaccines is less, however, the Committee observes that mRNA vaccines because of their 
high potency have been greatly explored over the conventional vaccine platforms such as 
subunit, killed and live attenuated virus etc. The Committee is given to understand that 
mRNA vaccines provide greater flexibility in comparison to other vaccine platforms. With 
the virus constantly mutating and increasing risk of vaccine escape, mRNA vacci nes 
provide a better alternative and more flexibility. The potential for low cost manufacture of 
the mRNA vaccines is also a major advantage. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 

102 
 
the Ministry to explore such versatile vaccine platforms in the country and  work towards 
producing cost effective indigenous mRNA vaccines. 
(Para 3.32) 
 The Committee notes that the bargaining powers of the vaccine manufacturers are 
high due to the high demand of the vaccines, however, the Ministry through bulk 
negotiations have settled at a fair price for free administration of the vaccines in the 
Government facilities. The Committee further notes that the vaccine manufacturers fix the 
price of vaccine for procurement by Private Hospitals and these private hospitals 
subsequently charge high price for administering the vaccines. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry and the States to strictly monitor the exorbitant rates being 
charged by the private hospitals. 
(Para 3.33) 
The Committee further notes that  with the increase  in the number of vaccine 
candidates in the market, the private hospitals as well as the Government will be at a 
better position to negotiate the price. The Ministry must accordingly ensure that the 
vaccines prices are negotiated on favourable terms and th e demand supply gap is 
adequately abridged.  
(Para 3.34) 
BOOSTER DOSES 
 The Committee notes that Booster or Precautionary doses commenced for all adults 
at Private vaccination Centres from April, 2022. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the evidenc e based research and the clinical trials conducted in the country that 
necessitated the administering of booster doses in the country. The Committee would like 
to be informed on the reasons for the change in the vaccination policy of the Government 
and ino culating the citizens with the precautionary dose of the same vaccine. The 
Committee also notes that some reports suggest that a booster dose of a vaccine of a 
different platform could be better than a vaccine of the same platform. The Committee 
feels that  such proposition requires deep research and any implementation of such 
suggestion must be substantiated by in -depth research data, scientific interpretations and 
clinical trials.  
(Para 3.37) 
 Attention of the Committee is also drawn to the study of CMC V ellore on the inter-
mixing of doses of Covishield and Covaxin which claims to provide better immunity. 
Media Reports have suggested that the CMC Vellore study reveals that heterologous 
immunisation provides better results than homologous vaccination. Howev er, no official 
information or updates have been provided by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
in the public domain. The Committee would like to be apprised on the findings of the 
aforementioned research study. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
encourage such studies on the potency and efficacy of the vaccines and ensure that 
bureaucratic hurdle and inordinate delays do not stall the findings of the research.  
(Para 3.38) 

103 
 
 The Committee reiterates that research studies that provide data on the efficacy of 
vaccines must be encouraged. The results of such study can help the Government in 
developing a better containment strategy and effective vaccine administration policy. The 
Ministry must expedite the decisions on such studies and its  vaccine policy must be guided 
by scientific evidence and amended accordingly.  The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to commission epidemiological and vaccine effectiveness studies so that strong 
evidence on the vaccines efficacy is generated and guaranteed so as to alley the 
apprehension and hesitancy against the booster dose. 
(Para 3.39) 
 Attention of the Committee has also been brought to the concerns of few States that 
have sought the Union Government's permission to use the available vaccines for booster 
doses for the 18 -59 age group. The Committee recommends the Ministry to address the 
concerns of the States and allow them to use the available doses for booster doses if full 
vaccine coverage in the adult population has been achieved. The Commi ttee further 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that any excess stock of vaccines is not wasted so that 
country achieves 100% vaccination of its citizens.  
(Para 3.40) 
 
UNFOLDING OF THE NATIONAL COVID-19 VACCINATION PROGRAMME 
 The Committee is of the view that a robust implementation of the five principles 
will ensure the success of the National Vaccination Program. The Committee recommends 
the Ministry to ensure participation of the key officers from State to the Block level al ong 
with active participation of the masses. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
ensure that diversion of healthcare forces to manage Covid -related uncertainties must not 
cause any disruption in the delivery of primary health care services. The C ommittee 
further recommends that that past experiences of universal immunization and elections 
must be utilized in smooth implementation of the National Vaccination Program.  At the 
same time, every effort should be made so that there is no compromise on s cientific and 
regulatory rules and norms.  
(Para 4.5) 
 The Committee takes note that undertaking covid vaccination drive at such a large 
scale requires huge capacity and financial resources which many States may lack. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that the Government should generously equip the 
State Government with technical import and financial assistance.  In all circumstances, 
The Centre had to take a lead role in devising policies to substantially mitigate the impact 
of the pandemic. Th e Committee understands that mass vaccination for a country as vast 
and as diverse as India poses a big challenge. The Central Government adopted a targeted 
vaccination strategy by according the highest priority to the group at the highest risk. The 
Committee, in its 123rd Report, had pointed out that smart vaccination might be used as an 
immediate strategy so that the whole population should be vaccinated. The Committee 
agrees that for a country as heterogeneous as India a smart vaccination strategy was th e 
need of the hour. However, the Committee observes that the response of the Union 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the vaccine front was delayed at the initial 
stage. In India, mass vaccination started in June, 2021 when vaccination was made free for 

104 
 
persons aged 18 and above. The Committee notes that repercussions of the delay in the 
vaccination program were evident in the high fatality during the second wave.  
(Para 4.11) 
 The Committee notes that in countries like the USA, mass vaccination start ed in 
December, 2020 whereas in India, the first phase of the vaccination drive started in 
January, 2021 with the healthcare workers getting the shots. The beginning of the 
vaccination drive had been slow owing to the exclusion of the other groups. Vaccina tion 
was made free at all Government Centers for people above 18 years from 21st June, 2021.  
 
(Para 4.18) 
 As per the vaccination trend, the Committee observes that the vaccination rate has 
not been steady and the vaccination reached its peak in September  2021.  The Committee 
understands that although the one size fits all approach does not bear fruit and the 
situation in India cannot be compared to other countries considering the large scale of the 
vaccination drive, however, the Committee strongly believ es that India has immense 
potential and is home to the best of the brains in the world. The country must emulate the 
best of the practices from the western world and be the harbinger of innovation not only in 
its public policies but also in its approach to  ameliorate the health sector. The Committee 
emphasizes that, had the vaccination drive been carried out in full swing as was done in 
the western countries; the country would have been at a better position to face the 
subsequent Covid waves. However, the e xclusion of a large population from the program 
during the initial period aggravated the health inequities. The Committee strongly believes 
that the vaccination has to be made free and universal. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Ministry to ensure adequate supply of vaccines so that the target of 
universal free covid vaccination is achieved.  
(Para 4.19) 
CoWIN App 
 
 The Committee appreciates the Ministry's initiatives in developing a digital system, 
"CoWin" to monitor vaccine administration in the c ountry. The Committee notes that a 
platform was crucial for rolling out of the country wide vaccination program and the Co -
WIN app formed the backbone of the country's vaccination drive. However, some 
technical glitches were reported in the app and some is sues were raised during beneficiary 
registration on the COWIN App. The Committee is of the view that enabling a strong IT 
framework through Cowin Platform and imparting necessary training to all the 
stakeholders was crucial for success of the vaccination Program.  
(Para 4.24) 
 The Committee observes that tracking of the vaccine transporting vehicles is 
crucial for ensuring the timely supply of the vaccines. The Committee appreciates the 
efforts of the Karnataka Government and recommends that all the States must also use 
such vaccine vehicle live tracking app for better vaccine management on a real time basis.  
 
(Para 4.25) 
 The Committee understands that there exists a huge digital divide between the 
rural and the urban population. With poor accessibility an d connectivity, many areas of 

105 
 
the country still remain disconnected from the digital ecosystem. The Committee notes 
that rural areas tend to be neglected as the level of awareness is very poor. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to take effective measur es to ensure that the rural areas 
especially the tribal areas are also included in the vaccination drive. The Committee notes 
that in the absence of internet connectivity, entering data in the app is a challenge. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends the M inistry to ensure that the data collected in the 
physical form is uploaded in the Cowin app at the earliest. The Committee is of the view 
that the Ministry must aim towards an inclusive vaccination policy and the vaccination 
drive must include the marginalized and the vulnerable population of the country too.  
(Para 4.26) 
 The Committee also notes that through CoWin the Ministry has been successful in 
administering 2 billion Covid doses and CoWin holds a huge repository of the vaccination 
data. However, various stakeholders during the discussion highlighted the absence of an y 
data on the efficacy of the vaccine. The Committee accordingly notes that even with an 
outstanding CoWin data system, the country has no extensive records of after 
immunisation effects in its population. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry 
to facilitate linkages between CoWin and other data systems and share the data in the 
public domain. The Committee is of the opinion that building inter -operable data systems 
that ensure real time data exchange can provide a better assessment of the efficacy of the 
vaccines. The Committee further feels that this digital ecosystem can be aptly utilised for 
not only monitoring the vaccine supply chain but also promoting concrete research and 
formulating better policy decisions.  
(Para 4.27) 
VIEWS OF STATE GOVERN MENTS/ THE DEPARTMENTS/MINISTRIES AND 
OTHER STAKEHOLDERS 
 
 The Committee takes into account that DBT strengthened the Regional Scientific 
Co-operation and looked forward in taking a lead role in ensuring that the indigenous 
vaccines undergo rigorous clinical trials in the neighbouring countries. The Committee, in 
this regard, recommends the Ministry to collaborate with research bodies and apex 
institutes of the neighbouring countries so that regional cooperation is further 
strengthened and scientific fervour is promoted in India and the neighbouring countries. 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Health and Family and the Department 
of Biotechnology to work towards upgrading the clinical trials infrastructure in the 
country.  
(Para 5.4) 
 The Committee appreciates the PACT (Partnerships for Accelerating Clin ical 
Trials) programme and recommends the Department of Biotechnology and the 
Department of Health Research to launch various programs for studying other diseases 
alongwith their drug and vaccine development.  The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Health Research to 
collaborate on development of Indian Covid-19 vaccines.   
(Para 5.5) 
 The Committee appreciates, "Mission Covid Suraksha -The Indian Covid -19 
Vaccine Development Mission" which is aimed at a ccelerating indigenous Covid 19 
vaccine development efforts. The Committee hopes that the Mission is successful in 

106 
 
developing more indigenous vaccines that are affordable and easily accessible. The success 
of the Mission can break the barrier of shortage i n vaccine supply, thus ensuring vaccines 
for all and promoting vaccine equity across the world. 
(Para 5.6) 
 The Committee is of the firm opinion that India should ensure adequate availability 
of vaccines in the country alongwith expanding its collaboration  with other countries 
under "Vaccine Maitree". The Committee believes that India's vaccine diplomacy would 
promote vaccine equity i.e. global equitable vaccine distribution among the less developed 
Asian, African and Latin American countries.  
(Para 5.7) 
Ministry of AYUSH 
 The Committee understands the piloted role of Ministry of Ayush in National 
Covid-19 vaccination programme as the Ministry provided pool of Heatlhcare workers as 
vaccinator.  The Committee recommends that the Ayush institutional structure  must be 
massively utilised as platform for dissemination of IEC activities, thus enhancing public 
awareness for mitigation of Covid-19. 
(Para 5.8) 
DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS, MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS  
 
 The Committee recommends the Government to lay special emphasis on the 
strengthening of the end -to-end vaccine supply chain and logistics systems. The 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in coordination with the States must ensure 
strengthening of the cold -chain infrastructure and f air distribution of the vaccines to 
all the States/UTs. 
(Para 5.10) 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 Taking into account the Urban-Rural vaccination gap, the Committee is of the view 
that the existing infrastructure of Panchayati Raj can be optimally reckoned for 
dissemination of IEC for creating public awareness regarding the benefits of vaccine. 
(Para 5.13) 
 The Committee, in this regard recommends that the Panchayati Raj 
Institutional arrangement and grass root local bodies must be massively utilized for 
mass rural vaccination. The Ministry must also utilize the State machinery to 
increase the uptake of the precautionary dose in the rural areas. 
(Para 5.14) 
 
STUDY VISIT TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND CHANDIGARH 
 
 The Committee hopes that the UT of J&K would achieve  the set target under its 
vaccination drive through coveted IEC mechanism. The Ministry of Health and Family 

107 
 
Welfare must monitor and guide the UT for effective management of covid cases in the UT 
of J&K. 
(Para 5.19) 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF HARYANA ON THE SUBJECT 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
must ensure that appropriate accountability and review mechanisms are established 
in each State and adequate training is provided for ensuring smooth roll out of the 
vaccination drive. The Committee further recommends the use of Information 
Education and Communication (IEC), Interpersonal communication (IPC) strategies 
to generate awareness among the community to counter vaccine hesitancy in the 
States.  
(Para 5.27) 
 The Committee, in this regard, commends the role of Government of Haryana 
for conducting special sessions to cover homeless population, prison inmates, specially -
abled, etc. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that the vulnerable and 
marginalized groups are not excluded from the vaccination drive.  
(Para 5.28) 
VIEW OF THE UT OF CHANDIGARH 
 
 The Committee appreciates the involvement of residential welfare association, 
Market Committees, NGOs, Management committees of various Temples, 
Gurudwaras & Mosques in the National Covid -19 vaccination programme to ensure 
the success of the vaccination drive in the UT of Chandigarh. The Committee 
recommends the other State Governments to follow suite and also conduct special 
vaccination campaign for  elderly, differently-abled persons, bed -ridden beneficiaries 
and people without any identification Card.  
(Para 5.35) 
STUDY VISIT TO GUWAHATI, BENGALURU AND MUMBAI 
 
. The Committee emphasizes on the need of expanding "Har Ghar Dastak" 
Programme across the country. The Committee further desires that other State 
Governments must follow the  Covid -19 mitigation strategy  of  the Government of Assam 
where funds raised under Corporate Social Responsibility have been utilized to strengthen 
the public health infrastructure in the State that is being optionally utilized in Vaccination 
drive in the State.   
(Para 5.41) 
 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MANIPUR ON THE SUBJECT DURI NG 
THE STUDY VISIT OF COMMITTEE TO GUWAHATI 
 The Committee appreciates the utilization of eVIN in the State of Manipur, 
however, the Committee notes that collection of real time information may be difficult in 
many geographically tough terrain of the State  thereby necessitating further improvement 

108 
 
in Vaccine logistic management.  The Committee, further recommends the State to ensure 
that vaccine centres and cold chain points are well integrated in the eVIN. 
(Para 5.43) 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF ARUNA CHAL PRADESH ON THE 
SUBJECT DURING THE STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO GUWAHATI 
 The Committee takes note of the CVC linked outreach session, Alternate Vaccine 
Delivery mechanism being followed in the State of Arunachal Pradesh for transporting 
vaccine. Th e Committee strongly recommends the State Government to ensure the last 
mile delivery of vaccines especially in the remotest area of the State. The Committee 
appreciates the use of First Expiry First Out (FEFO) concept in the State where vaccine 
vials with  early expiry are used first. However, the Committee recommends the State 
Government to ensure that the temperature of the vaccines are maintained accurately and 
avoid any wastage of vaccine. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure 
that FEFO is followed in all the States so that vaccine vials are not wasted due to expiry of 
the vaccines. 
(Para 5.49) 
VIEWS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA   
 The Committee commends the role of the State Government of Maharashtra where 
the Pandemic Covd -19 has shown heinous expression resulting into large number of 
deaths, however, the SMART (Specific, Measureable, Achievable, Relevant and Time 
Bound) monitoring of the implementation of vaccination programme led to effective 
management of the Pandemic.  The Committee appreciates the vaccine distribution plan of 
Government of Maharashtra which was formulated through meticulous planning and 
prioritization of areas based on consideration of the number of active Covid cases and 
micro analysis of vaccination dat a.  The committee further applauds the specific strategy 
for Covid -19 Management in 'Dharavi' -Asia's largest slum area in Mumbai.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to undertake case study of 'Dharavi' Model of Covid 
Management to arrive at the manage rial skill, planning & strategic course of action for 
combating any possible pandemic in the country.  
(Para 5.55) 
VIEWS OF THE OTHER STATES/UTS ON THE SUBJECT 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the State Government of Meghalaya 
for ensuring the  vaccination Status of the shopkeepers and their staff that are being 
displayed in all the shops. The Committee further recommends the State to ensure that the 
information regarding vaccine availability and other logistics are reflected on a real time 
basis for better vaccine distribution and management in the State.  
(Para 5.62) 
 The Committee notes the submission of the State Government of West Bengal 
where instances of shortage in supply of syringes have been reported. The Committee, 
accordingly, recomme nds the Ministry of H&FW to work in tandem with the State 
Government and ensure that such instances are avoided for making the vaccination drive 
a success in the State. The Committee strongly recommends the State Government to 

109 
 
manage the logistics of the v accine distribution system and in case of shortage in supply of 
any related equipment timely communication to the Union Government should be 
ensured.  
(Para 5.66) 
 The Committee understands that far flung and remote islands of the UT of 
Andaman & Nicobar h ave poor network connectivity and live data entry may be a 
herculean task. The Committee recommends the UT to ensure that the entries are logged 
as soon as the network connectivity is restored so that national data on the vaccination is 
compiled without delay.  
(Para 5.73) 
 The Committee takes notes of the best practices adopted while implementing 
national Vaccination Programme in Madhya Pradesh especially for Cold Chain and 
vaccine management.  The Committee recommends the adoption of the best practices 
during execution of Vaccination drive by other States too.  
(Para 5.76) 
 The Committee applauds the role of UT Government of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
for vaccinating all eligible beneficiaries for 1 st dose. However, the Committee recommends 
the Central Government to address the concerns of the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu by rectifying the total population of UT.   
(Para 5.80) 
 The Committee applauds the proactive response of the State Government of Kerala 
in covid case management. The State was very efficient in minimizing the impact of the 
first wave of the pandemic and the State Health machinery was never stretched to its 
limits. Various State interventions were planned at the outset of the pandemic itself which 
helped the State to manage the pandemic efficiently. The robust Institutional arrangement 
and timely & effective measures further helped in delaying the peak.  
(Para 5.89) 
 The Committee appreciates the novel approaches adopted by the State Government 
of Kerala to manage the pandemic. The State Healthcare system did a commendable job to 
ensure that the covid cases are timely tracked and contained. The Committee takes notes 
that the State of Kerala had a robust monitoring system and a well planned infrastructure 
in the form of Domiciliary Care Centre, Covid first line treatment Centre, Covid second 
line treatment centre and Covid hospital. The Committee strongly feels that a st rong 
primary health care network along with trained grass root healthcare workers was crucial 
for containing the pandemic. The containment strategies and efficient planning adopted by 
the State helped the State in averting the medical emergency due to shor tage of medical 
oxygen and beds in the hospitals. The Committee further acknowledges the hub and spoke 
model adopted by the State for efficient management of Oxygen in the State. The 
Committee notes that timely mapping of hospitals through software as done by the State of 
Kerala should have been adopted by the other States for better management of Oxygen 
across hospitals.  
(Para 5.90) 

110 
 
 The Committee feels that the pandemic has given us the opportunity to plug the 
loopholes of the Indian Healthcare System an d shifted the focus on the need of ushering 
change in the healthcare sector. The Committee observes that the State Government of 
Kerala adopted many novel approaches in its fight against the pandemic. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare to study the Kerala 
Model and other novel approaches adopted by other States. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry must co -ordinate and play pivotal role in exchanging of new ideas and 
new learning during the pandemic and related  strategic management and ensure 
implementation of the successful models viz. the Kerala Model in other States and 
strengthen healthcare delivery system to meet any future medical emergency.  
(Para 5.91) 
VIEWS OF VARIOUS STAKEHOLDERS ON THE SUBJECT 
 The Committee finds that Jan Swasthay Abhiyan (JSA) has suggested useful course 
of action for strategic management of Pandemic Covid -19 that inter-alia include report of 
Serious Adverse Events (SAE) following Covid vaccine, assurance of affordable Medicine, 
Strengthening of public health sector & health manpower and promotion of PPP Model in 
health reforms. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may examine the suggestions 
at length for better health management in the country. 
(Para 5.96) 
CHALLENGES IN COVID-19 MITIGATION AND MANAGEMENT  
 The Committee is disappointed to note that the Government Health Expenditure as 
a percentage of Current Health Expenditure is only 27% and the Out of Pocket 
Expenditure as percentage of the Current Health Expenditure is 62.7%.  The Committee 
while examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry has repeatedly recommended for 
increase in Public investments in the health sector.  
(Para 6.4) 
 The Committee in its 134 th Report on the Demand for Grants of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare had noted that BE of 2022 -23 was just a 0.2% increase over 
RE 2021 -22. The Committee had noted that despite the pandemic necessitating high 
investments in health sector, the Government had failed to increase the Health Budget.  As 
per Nati onal Health Accounts Data 2017 -18, the Government Health Expenditure as 
percentage of GDP is 1.35%. The Committee further recalls that under National Health 
Policy, the GHE was targeted to increase to 2.5% of GDP by 2025.  
(Para 6.5) 
 The Committee reitera tes its recommendation that the Government must increase 
its investment in public health systems and public health research. Indian States like 
Kerala that have a robust healthcare infrastructure were at a far better position to 
anticipate the uncertaintie s of the pandemic. The quick response strategy of the State 
reflected the advantages of a strong public healthcare infrastructure. The Committee in its 
126th Report on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 had explicitly recommended the 
Government for increasing its health expenditure to 2.5 % of GDP in the next two years 
and to 5% by 2025. The Committee accordingly reiterates its recommendation that the 
Ministry must set higher targets and ensure that the Government Health Expenditure is 

111 
 
increased to 5% of GDP. The C ommittee further recommends the Ministry to nudge the 
States with Health Budget less than 8% of the State's GDP to increase the State 
Government's investment in the health sector.  
(Para 6.6) 
Gender Gap in Vaccination 
 The Committee regrets that women remain the most affected group in any 
calamity. Women have long been denied basic rights and gender inequities are very high, 
especially in economically weaker and poorly accessible regions. The Committee notes that 
as per the Government official data a to tal of 1.99 billion doses have been administered in 
the country till mid July, 2022. Out of the total doses, 988 million doses have been given to 
Males and 950 million doses to women leading to a difference of over 38 million doses. 
(Para 6.11) 
 The Committee notes the success of vaccination drive is correlated to registration 
on Cowin and easy access to the health care centre for vaccination. However, with women 
having no access to internet or any digital tool and her high dependence on the male 
member of the family for any information further widens the gender gap in vaccination. 
The Committee further notes that rumours, such as the impact of vaccination on 
menstruation etc further leads to lower willingness to be vaccinated. The Committee 
strongly recomme nds the Ministry to conduct more awareness campaigns especially in 
region with poor rate of vaccination among women. The Ministry must make all out 
efforts to bridge this gender gap in vaccination. 
(Para 6.12) 
RURAL-URBAN VACCINE DISPARITY 
 
  The Committee observes that the vaccination rate was very poor in the rural areas 
in the beginning of the vaccination drive. Internet connection and a mobile phone was the 
foremost requirement for registering oneself in the Cowin App and walk -in Covid 
vaccination had not yet started. Rural areas with poor digital literacy did not see an uptake 
in the vaccination drive. The Committee further notes that many villages across India do 
not have access to pucca roads, electricity and drinking water. These regions  are rendered 
inaccessible either due to their rough geographical terrain or precarious security situation. 
With regions devoid of electricity, maintaining the temperature of the vaccines especially 
in inhospitable terrain is a difficult challenge.  
(Para 6.13) 
  The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to open more vaccination 
centres in the rural areas. The Ministry must also explore use of newer refrigeration 
technology, such as "solar direct drive" that resolves the battery powered vaccine 
refrigerator problems and ensure that vaccines are made available in such remote areas. 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must use modern 
technology and equipments to expedite the delivery of vaccines. The use of drone by the 
State Government of Maharashtra for delivering vaccines is a good example of making 
vaccines easily available in difficult terrains. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 

112 
 
deploy helicopters, boats, motor bikes and every possible means of transport to achieve 
last mile delivery of vaccines. 
(Para 6.14) 
 VACCINE HESITANCY 
 The Committee agrees that a lot of misconceptions about the vaccines have given 
rise to vaccine hesitancy in the Indian population. With Covid vaccines getting the 
Emergency use authorization amidst the lack of information in the public domain, a 
certain sense of doubt prevailed in the people‘s mind. The Committee also notes that 
several instances of vials of vaccines getting wasted due to people not turning up to the 
vaccination centres have b een reported. The vaccines have to be maintained at the 
recommended temperature and the vials of vaccines have to be used and discarded 
within hours of being opened. 
(Para 6.16) 
 Vaccine hesitancy has also been recognised as one of the reason behind low 
vaccine coverage in certain areas leading to regional disparities in Vaccine Distribution 
Plan. The Committee therefore believes that there is an urgent need to provide correct 
information on vaccines and address the issue of vaccine hesitancy.   The Committ ee 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to feature strong community engagement 
strategies in the vaccination Programme along with social media engagement. The 
Ministry must also explore involving celebrities and influential community voices for 
increasing the outreach of the vaccination programme.  
(Para 6.17) 
 The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to disseminate information and 
spread public awareness regarding the safety and efficacy of the vaccines. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry to con tinue conducting various 
Communication strategy activities especially in rural areas and areas with poor 
accessibility. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to conduct at -home 
inoculations especially for the aged and people with special need. 
(Para 6.18) 
 VACCINE EQUITY 
 The Committee was given to understand that the Indian Government had targeted 
vaccination for the entire adult population by December, 2021, however, the Government 
failed to achieve its targets set for the total vaccination drive. At tention of the Committee 
has also been brought to instances of vaccine shortage in few States, thereafter, the States 
were forced to divert stock meant for the 18 -44 age group to the 45 plus group for their 
second dose. The Committee, therefore, strongly r ecommends the Government to refresh 
its target of 100% vaccination of the Indian population along with booster doses and make 
concerted efforts to achieve the targets.  
(Para 6.20) 
  The Committee further notes that there exists a huge economic divide in the world 
and the pandemic has further widened the divide between the rich and the poor countries. 

113 
 
With the development of vaccines, the western countries started stockpiling of the va ccines 
and were the first to provide booster doses to its citizens while the low and middle income 
countries struggled to administer even the first dose of the vaccine. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Government to revisit its vaccine diplomacy an d take a lead 
role at international fora to ensure that the third world countries get adequate doses of 
vaccines. The Committee believes that global vaccination is very crucial for minimizing the 
possibility of any future outbreaks of pandemic due to resur gence of mutated virus in any 
other country. The Committee, in this regard strongly advocates equitable global 
distribution of vaccines. 
(Para 6.21) 
 The Committee agrees that the Government should have employed a better pricing 
mechanism for controlling t he price of the vaccines. The prices of the vaccines in the 
Private Hospitals and vaccination centres were very high allowing high profiteering by the 
vaccine manufacturing firms and the Private hospitals.  
(Para 6.25) 
 The Committee further notes that the  vaccine manufacturing firms slashed the 
prices of vaccines for private hospitals to Rs 225 per dose in April, 2022. During the peak 
of the pandemic, the Covid vaccines were being administered at Rs. 900 -1400 in the 
Private hospitals. The Committee underst ands the demand-supply economics and believes 
that private firms have to be allowed to make some profit so that investment can be made 
in research & development and increasing the production capacity. However, the 
Committee fails to understand such high fluctuations in the prices of the vaccine that leave 
enormous space for vaccine manufacturing firms to earn exorbitant profits on the 
production of vaccines.  
(Para 6.26) 
 
WAIVER OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION FOR COVID VACCINES 
AND OTHER COVID-19 DIAGNOSTICS AND THERAPEUTICS 
 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the proposal of temporary 
waiver of Intellectual property protection for covid vaccines and other COVID -19 
diagnostics and therapeutics at WTO. The Committee believes that exclusive  control over 
vaccines via patents can pose a hurdle in ensuring vaccine access to countries that lack the 
vaccine manufacturing capacity. The looming fear of future resurgence and more virulent 
viruses persists and global eradication of the Covid is cruci al for halting this pandemic. 
The Committee, therefore, believes that transfer of technology and waiver will 
significantly bridge the large demand supply gap as the vaccines will be produced without 
authorization from the patent holder. The Committee stron gly believes that for ensuring 
vaccine equity, there is a need to expand the vaccine manufacturing capacity across the 
globe and waive the Intellectual Property Protection (IPP) for Covid -19 vaccines. This can 
help countries in scaling up the production of vaccines and make vaccines more affordable 
and accessible to everyone. The Committee, however, also believes that special emphasis 
will have to be laid on ensuring safety and quality standard for mass vaccine 
manufacturing. The Committee further notes tha t the move to waive Intellectual Property 
Protections (IPP) must not disincentivize the Pharmaceutical companies to invest on 

114 
 
vaccine research rather the Industry and the countries across the world must unite and 
work together to expand the global vaccine manufacturing  capacity.    
(Para 6.27) 
 The Committee accordingly urges the Government to continue making efforts for 
waiver of IP Protection for Covid vaccines and other COVID -19 diagnostics and 
therapeutics so that the vaccines are produced on a large s cale and 100% vaccination of 
the world population is achieved.  
(Para 6.28) 
REVAMPING OF PUBLIC SECTOR VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS 
 The Committee understands that ensuring a consistent supply of vaccine during the 
pandemic Covid-19 posed a major challenge, thereby, arising an urgent need to accelerate 
the Covid -19 vaccination drive. However, the Committee laments that the public sector  
vaccine units were not reckoned to service in times of crisis and their contribution to the 
Covid-19 vaccine production remained negligible in the fight against the pandemic Covid -
19.  
(Para 6.30) 
 The Committee has been given to understand that in 2008, the vaccine production 
in CRI, PII and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai were halted for non -
compliance with Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). The Committee observes that 
although the licenses were restored in 2010; however these vaccine units continued to 
remain underutilised. The Committee strongly believes that revival of these units is 
imperative to bridge the gap between vaccine demand and supply and to make vaccines 
more affordable and accessible. The Committee further notes that the Madra s High Court 
in May 2021 had asked the Central Government as to what steps were being taken to 
revive the existing Vaccine Institutes owned by the Government. The Supreme Court in 
December, 2021 had also sought the response of the Central Government on its  policy to 
revamp public sector vaccine manufacturing units.  The Committee, accordingly, strongly 
recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to revive the existing vaccine 
manufacturing units and issue production licences to the GMP compliant va ccine 
manufacturing units.   
(Para 6.31) 
 The Committee, in this regard, would like to be apprised of the total number of 
Public Sector Vaccines Units that are owned by the Central Government and the State 
Governments. The Committee must also be informed a bout the financial status and the 
annual Budget that has been allocated to these Public Sector Manufacturing Units over the 
past four years. The Committee recommends the Ministry to monitor the revival of these 
units and henceforth, furnish quarterly Repor ts to the Committee. The Committee desires 
that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must forward the revival plan alongwith 
financial requirement to the Ministry of Finance for approval at the earliest.  
(Para 6.32) 
 The Committee further notes that India has been advocating the waiver of 
Intellectual Property rights of Covid vaccines at  the global level, however, the Committee 

115 
 
is perplexed to note that the Government has taken no major initiative to waive the 
Intellectual Property Rights for the ind igenous vaccine Covaxin which was developed in 
collaboration with ICMR. The Committee strongly recommends to examine the possibility 
of technology transfer of Covaxin to the Public Sector Units and start its production in 
these Units. 
(Para 6.33) 
 The Comm ittee notes that the National Disaster Management Guidelines, 
Management of Biological Disasters contained comprehensive guidelines for undertaking 
biosafety and biosecurity measures. It aimed to strengthen the existing regulatory 
framework so that the cou ntry adopts a resilient response strategy in the wake of any 
imminent biological disaster. The Committee believes that had the Ministry implemented 
the guidelines and addressed the gap that was highlighted in the Report, the country 
would have been better prepared to tackle the pandemic. The Committee further notes 
that if the Government had implemented the National Vaccine Policy, 2011 in letter and 
spirit, the issues of vaccine -security, management, regulatory guidelines, vaccine research 
& development an d product development could have been dealt in a better manner.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to assess the functional status of National Disaster 
Management Guidelines, 2008 and National Vaccine Policy, 2011 and apprise the 
Committee of the initiatives being taken for implementation of these policies at the ground 
level to achieve the set objectives in these guidelines/policy.  
(Para 6.35) 
 The Committee observes that vaccination has caused a phenomenal mitigating 
impact on the continuum of the pandemic Covid-19. The Committee notes that the vaccine 
effectiveness in Preventing Mortality is very high and the death among the non- vaccinated 
has been the highest during the second and the third wave. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Gov ernment to continue with National Covid -19 control Plan 
through massive vaccination drive so as to mitigate the causation factor of mutating 
variants of Covid-19. 
(Para 6.37) 
 The Committee further points out the unrealistic target set by the Government for 
completion of the vaccination drive in the country by December 2021. Various studies 
have been conducted across the world on the additional deaths that would have been 
averted had the vaccination coverage targets been achieved by the country. With the 
waning of vaccine efficacy in the population and the risk of emerging mutated variants 
across the world, the success of the vaccination Program is a keystone of the Covid 
mitigation policy. The Committee, therefore, accordingly recommends the Ministry to 
focus not only on the vaccine supply side barrier but also on the demand side barriers so 
that vaccination targets are achieved. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
take necessary measures to increase the uptake of precautionary doses so that the 
mortality rate is lowered given the rise in fresh infections. The Committee cautions the 
Government against mutating variants of Covid -19 and strongly recommends to have the 
vigil for total elimination of virus through resilient mitigation policy and effective mass 
vaccination Program.  
(Para 6.38) 

116 
 
 The Committee further notes that geographically tough terrain with poor 
connectivity may not permit live data entry of vaccination, h ence back log entry option or 
off line mode of entry must be permitted so that the extent of actual vaccination coverage 
can be observed and any possible gap for vaccination is abridged.  
(Para 6.39) 
NEED OF STRONG PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN THE HEALTH SECTOR 
 The Committee understands that the Government with its limited resources, faces a 
far big challenge to bring in structural changes in the Public Health System. It is a well 
established fact that there is an urgent need to augment and develop the he alth ecosystem 
in the country to keep the health index of the whole population to global standard. The 
Committee believes that Public Private Partnership in the Health Sector can facilitate 
bridging of the gaps in the healthcare infrastructure and ensure a n efficient delivery of 
healthcare services upto lower rungs of the society. The Committee, taking a clue from the 
success of the PPP model in various sectors such as infrastructure, tourism, education 
recommends the Government to adopt a similar model in the health sector. The 
Committee finds that the Public Private Partnership in Health Sector is still an unexplored 
area and therefore, can prove momentous in increasing the reach of healthcare facilities. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare to 
collaborate with the Private Sector on novel Projects related to the Health. The Business 
Houses and Companies must be encouraged to devote a substantial part of their CSR 
funding in the Health Sector to build necessary health infrastructure.  
(Para 6.40) 
 The Committee also recommends the Government to launch new Schemes and 
initiatives that incentivises the Private Sector to bring in the funding and the expertise in 
the health sector. The Government must leverage the key r esources of the Private sector 
and take full advantage of the expertise, finances, technology and human resource that the 
PPP model offers in combating National emergency situation in health sector like the 
pandemic Covid-19. 
(Para 6.41) 
 NEED OF CHANGE IN VACCINATION POLICY 
 
 The Committee is of the opinion that the effectiveness studies of the vaccines on the 
newer variants of the virus should have been conducted by the research bodies in India 
along with the beginning of the vaccination drive.  Countries  like US and UK started 
conducting various studies to determine the proportion of people who were vaccinated but 
still either got severely ill or died due to the covid.  The Committee further notes the 
research studies that recommended delay in the second dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine 
beyond the earlier recommended 4 weeks.  This was also endorsed by the WHO Strategic 
Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) Committee. In May, 2021, the 
COVID Working Group chaired by Dr N K Arora also recommended extension of the gap 
between the first and second doses of COVISHIELD vaccine to 12 -16 weeks. The earlier 
gap between the two doses of COVISHIELD vaccine was 6 -8 weeks. The Committee, in 
this regard, recommends the Government to find out scientifically, th e reasonable gap 
between the two doses of the vaccine on the gap between the 2 nd and precautionary booster 

117 
 
dose in the interest of public health otherwise common masses apprehend that 
Government is allowing adjustment of time gap between two doses of vacci ne to clear the 
stock of vaccine manufacturers. 
(Para 6.42) 
  The Committee feels that with the huge repository of vaccination data in the 
country, India should have been at the forefront of conducting better assessment of the 
vaccine efficacy in its popul ation. The Committee believes that any change in the national 
vaccination policy should have been substantiated by real -life evidences and concrete 
research in the country itself. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
conduct more research on  optimising the dosage interval and accordingly approach its 
vaccination policy.  
(Para 6.43) 
 The Committee further recommends that there is a need to develop a mechanism 
that in case of future outbreaks of the pandemic, the research infrastructure is put into 
action and the vaccine policy is accordingly modified for better results. The Committee 
again emphasizes that the preparedness of vaccination strategies requires much more 
clinical research so that the rapid response care strategies are adopted.   
(Para 6.44) 
NEED OF CHANGE IN VIALS SIZE 
 The Committee has also been apprised by the State Gover nments that due to the 
bigger size of 20 doses in the Corbevax vaccine, it is becoming difficult for the vaccination 
Centres to use them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vaccines should be 
made available in smaller packs of 5 doses each to en sure the best usage of vaccine and 
prevent wastage.  
(Para 6.45) 
ENHANCEMENT IN THE HONORARIUM OF AWWS/AWHS AND ASHAS 
 
 The Committee applauds the Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), Anganwadi Helpers 
(AWHs) and Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHAs) who were  ex tensively involved in 
COVID-19 awareness drive in the community. The Committee notes that ASHAs, AWWs 
and AWHs acted as the frontline workers during the pandemic and were responsible for 
spreading awareness about Covid -19 and safety protocols. The ASHAs we re also tasked 
with identifying as well as tracking COVID -19 positive cases and carrying out vaccination 
drive. ASHAs, AWWs and AWHs have played an important role in community 
surveillance as has also been applauded by WHO, however, these frontline workers  
remain unrewarded. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and the Ministry of Women and Child Development to ensure timely 
payment of wages along with other social security benefits. The Committee further 
recommends the Government to consider incentives and financial protection for the 
ASHAs, AWWs and AWHs workers under different financial packages. 
(Para 6.49) 
COMPLACENCY IN ADMINISTRATION OF BOOSTER DOSES 
 The Committee notes that administration of free booster doses has enhanced the 
booster dose uptake. However, the Committee notes that this free precautionary dose 
window is only for 75 days. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to extend 

118 
 
the 75 d ays window and make the precautionary dose free for all so that complete 
vaccination of all can be ensured.  
(Para 6.53) 
 The Committee further notes that the ease of access to vaccination site also has a 
major role to play in increase in vaccination rate.  The Committee strongly recommends 
the Ministry to increase the Government Covid Vaccination centres across all the 
States/UTs. The Committee is also concerned at the general prevalence of complacency in 
the healthcare workers as well as the public towards  booster doses. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to work towards increasing awareness regarding the 
precautionary dose among the public, particularly among the immune -compromised and 
people with co morbidities.  
(Para 6.54) 
ADVERSE EVENT FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI) 
 
 
 The Committee notes that on 19 th July, 2022, a total of 28 AEFI were reported 
across the country and total AEFI is reported to be 0.006% of the total cases. The 
Committee observes that under -reporting and poor quality data collection may be the 
reason behind reporting of such less number  of AEFI. However, the Committee takes note 
of the unusual peak in AEFI on 10 th July, 2022 where 743 AEFI cases were reported. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reason behind this sudden rise in the cases and 
the vaccines that caused the adverse reaction.  
(Para 6.57) 
 The Committee notes that mild side effects after administering of the vaccines are 
usually reported as the body requires time to adjust to the vaccination dose. However, the 
Committee feels that the Ministry must ensure that poss ible adverse effects are 
communicated to the people followed by timely treatment. Attention of the Committee is 
also brought to the death of a patient post covid -19 vaccination. The Committee notes that 
in the concerned case, the AEFI Committee released it s assessment Report after almost 
seven months. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to ensure that 
appropriate investigation must be done and AEFI Committee must expedite its 
examination of each adverse cases.  
(Para 6.58) 
 The Committee also not es that COVID -19 vaccination is voluntary and presently 
there is no mechanism of compensation to beneficiaries or liability of vaccine 
manufacturer in case of any Adverse Event Following Immunization. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Minis try to create a clear framework of vaccine 
liability for manufacturer in case of AEFI so that adequate compensation can be provided 
to the aggrieved individuals.  
(Para 6.59) 
 The Committee also notes the findings of various research studies that have 
indicated the prevalence of long Covid among individuals infected with Covid. Even after 
the infection has passed, individuals have been reported to experience lingering symptoms. 
The Committee observes that there is a need to monitor and conduct surveillance of post 
covid complications. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and 

119 
 
Family Welfare to frame a treatment protocol and make specific guidelines for managing 
post Covid complications and related health problems arsing due to the ini tial infection. 
The Ministry must also work towards sensitizing the Indian Health Public System to deal 
with such cases of long Covid. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure 
medical support for Long COVID sufferers and train the healthcare  workers for 
managing patients with Long COVID. 
(Para 6.60) 
NEED OF AN ENHANCED ROLE OF AYUSH IN THE MITIGATION OF THE 
PANDEMIC COVID-19 
 The Committee in its 136 th Report had appreciated the efforts of the Research 
Councils in development of new drugs esp ecially repurposed Ayush 64 in management of 
Covid-19. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that AYUSH must continue 
emphasis on evidence based scientific research and drug development process entailing 
pre clinical as well as clinical trials. The C ommittee further recommends the Ministry of 
Ayush to work towards building inter -ministerial linkages and collaborate with other 
Departments for undertaking clinical studies on newer drugs.  
(Para 6.63) 
 The Committee believes that in the wake of global he alth crisis and the threat of 
emerging viruses, Ayush system can be utilized as an effective means to tackle the 
challenges associated with health sector. The Committee strongly recommends the 
adoption of an inclusive and integrated health care policy. The  Committee accordingly 
urges the Government to continue making efforts in integrating Ayush in the health 
sector. 
(Para 6.64) 
 The Committee recognizes the services of AYUSH doctors in providing the first line 
of treatment especially in the rural areas. Th e Committee further commends the 
contribution of AYUSH manpower in offering their services during the pandemic.  
(Para 6.65) 
INCLUSION OF MARGINALIZED SECTION IN THE VACCINATION DRIVE 
 The Committee notes the economic impact of the pandemic and the mass migration 
of the workforce from the cities to the villages. The Committee notes that the migrant 
workers due to the nature of their jobs that demand rapid movement may have been 
excluded from the vaccination drive. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare to ensure that the migrant workforce is administered both 
the doses of the vaccine along with the precautionary doses. The Committee also urges the 
Ministry to ensure that the poor vulnerable section of the society, due to the absence of 
relevant identification cards or documents does not remain neglected. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to ensure free a nd 
universal vaccination for all.    
(Para 6.66) 
 

120 
 
 
PANDEMIC IS FAR FROM OVER 
 The Committee notes that the present trend of Covid -19 reflects the need for 
adopting a new approach to the pandemic for its total eradication. With waning immunity 
in the population, the susceptibility to the infection is bound to increase. The Committee is 
at distress to observe the lack of Covid Appropriate Behaviour (CAB) in the general 
public. People have stopped wearing masks and social gathering have also increased. The 
Committee further notes that though the cases are comparatively less than the earlier 
Covid waves but the fear of subsequent waves still persists if the CAB is not adhered to.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to promote better 
communication in driving the benefits of vaccines to the general public as vaccine is the 
only last hope to mitigate the pandemic Covid-19.  
(Para 7.2) 
 The Committee further believes that any increase in the Covid cases must not be 
ignored and the public must not let the guard down against the pandemic. Over the past 
two years, the Ministry has been following, "Tracing, Tracking, Testing, Treating and 
Technology (5Ts)" to contain the pandemic. However, with the mutating Covid -19 
variants, the Ministry must adopt newer strategies against the evolving virus. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to revise the indicator to track the 
Covid-19 situation in the country. The Ministry must closely monitor clusters where any 
Covid incidence cases are reported. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
expand the genomic surveillance facilities in the country upto far flung areas so that the 
emergence of any new variant is tracked faster. The Ministry should strengthen the 
network of labs under NCDC -IDSP upto the rural areas so that any newer clinical 
outcomes are translated to better covid management policies.   
(Para 7.3) 
 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to conduct studies on whether there 
is a need to administer Covid vaccine yearly. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to undertake in depth R&D project to explore the possibility of manufacturing 
one-time single dose vaccine for a ll variants of corona virus. Moreover, the Committee 
emphasizes that R&D activities under PPP model should also be carried out to explore 
drugs development to treat Covid Patients with due clinical trials keeping in view the 
health safety of the patients. The Ministry must adopt a scientific view backed by research 
evidence to address major issues regarding Vaccine distribution. The Committee believes 
that the Ministry must be very pragmatic and strategic in administrating the 
precautionary dose of vaccines . However, the Ministry must continue accelerating its 
efforts towards administrating booster doses specifically to the high -risk population 
groups. The Committee believes that booster dose is essential to provide additional 
protection particularly to thos e with comorbidities. The Committee also believes that 
research outcomes with respect to efficacy of booster doses must be shared with the 
scientific community as well as the general public.  
(Para 7.4) 
 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to a study that suggests Hybrid 
immunity has been associated with higher levels of neutralising antibodies and greater 

121 
 
protection against infection than vaccines. The Committee strongly recommends the 
Ministry to adopt a dynamic response strategy keeping in view the results of such studies.  
(Para 7.5) 
ESTABLISHING A ROBUST RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE COUNTRY 
 
 The Committee in its 135 th Report on the Demands for Grants 2022 -23 (Demand 
No. 47) of the Department of Health Research had examined the Schemes of the 
Department, particularly, "Establishment of Viral Diagnostic & Research Laboratories 
(VRDL) to manage epidemics and national cala mities". The Committee had emphasized 
on the need of establishing VRDLs across States and strengthen the bio -safety network to 
tackle any future outbreaks. The Committee accordingly reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministry must continue its efforts towards expansion of testing labs network in the 
country. The Ministry must aim towards -"One VRDL in each District" by 2026 and 
ensure that trained manpower is available in these laboratories. 
(Para 7.6) 
 The Committee in its 135th Report had also strongly advocated for the need of BSL-
3 and BSL -4 labs in the country. The Committee notes that a strong network of modern 
high tech labs with sophisticated diagnostic techniques is crucial to strengthen the bio -
safety ecosystem in the wake of emerging new virus . Lack of adequate BSL Labs in the 
country increases the risk of such viral outbreaks. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Ministry to establish one BSL -IV lab in each of the four zones. The 
Committee further believes that for regular and effective su rveillance of any kind of 
infections or disease in the country, the Ministry must establish establish BSL -II facilities 
in different regions of the country. The Ministry must also start new mobile BSL -III labs 
in the country and ensure that all the zones of the country have a well established network.  
(Para 7.7) 
 The Committee further notes that under the PM -ABHIM Scheme, existing 5 
VRDLs are being upgraded to BSL -III labs.  The Committee would like to be  apprised of 
the status of these labs and the Ministry must accelerate its efforts and ensure that the labs 
are upgraded within the set timeline. The need of the hour is to focus and emphasize on 
the state of the art laboratory infrastructure and have a robust research environment in 
order to understand the various kinds of infections/ viruses and also to ensure bio security 
of the country. 
(Para 7.8) 
 
 75 DAYS – ‗COVID VACCINATION AMRIT MAHOTSAVA 
 The Committee appreciates the Government's move for linking Azadi ka Amrit 
Mahotsav with vaccine drive, thereby, announcing a 75 day window starting from 15th 
July, 2022 wherein all the adults will get free booster doses at all Government Covid 
Vaccination Centres. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Government 
apparatus/NGO/Civil Society to associate with vaccination drive on auspicious occasion of 
Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav and achieve the intended targets. The Committee hopes that 

122 
 
this Vaccination Amrit Mission leads to mass mobilization and mass vaccination among 
the eligible beneficiaries.  
(Para 7.10) 
NEED OF RESTORING ECOLOGICAL BALANCE IN THE WORLD 
 The Committee observes that the pandemic through the devastating impact it 
ravaged across the rungs of the society, shed light on the importance of ecological balance 
in the world. The Committee notes that in this age of globalization and rapid urbanisation, 
humans are becoming more detached from their environment. Nature is the essence of 
human life and human-nature relationship does have an impact on human's health. 
(Para 7.11) 
  The Committee notes that the increase in anthropogenic activities and augmented 
human interventions in the ecosystem has had an adverse impact on the environment. The 
impact of Global warming and Climate Change are visible throughout the world, 
especially in developing countries. Pollution in all form -air, water, noise etc have become 
quite common. The Committee believes that there is a need to restore the ecological 
balance and let nature take its course. The Committee therefore, strongly emphasizes on 
the need to adapt a living and lifestyle which is in harmony with nature so that humanity is 
better prepared for dealing with any uncertainties in the future.  
(Para 7.12) 
 The Committee notes that the former President of India, Shri Ram Nath Kovind, 
has also highlighted the importance of economical balance in the world. The former 
President of India's in his Speech in the farewell function on 23rd July, 2022 stated the 
following:  
"In the year 2020, in a matter of few days, our world changed like never before. 
After nearly hundred years, a pandemic jolted the entire humanity. It has been 
an unprecedented tragedy in our times, and the whole world is still struggling 
with it. A t this stage, one can only hope that the world will draw the right 
lessons from it. The chief lesson is that we human beings have forgotten that we 
are part of nature. The reality is that we are neither separate from nature, nor 
we are above it. The outbre ak of the pandemic was partly linked with the 
disruption in ecological balance. The last two years have also reminded us that 
we are after all one human family and our survival depends on mutual 
cooperation. India's efforts in combating COVID have been app reciated 
worldwide. With everyone's efforts, we have achieved the target of 200 crore 
vaccinations in just 18 months. During the Corona period, we had provided free 
ration to 80 crore people." 
(Para 7.13) 
 The Committee notes that India's response strategy against the pandemic had 
many shortfalls and the country struggled to minimize the impact of the pandemic Covid -
19. Many experts have opined that the Covid situation and its subsequent waves could 
have been handled in a better way. However, there is no denying the fact that India despite 
its large population and fragile healthcare infrastructure was successful in adapting to the 
uncertainties that the pandemic ravaged. The Committee appreciates the up scali ng of the 

123 
 
testing infrastructure in record time and notes that India has huge potential to deliver 
healthcare services to the last mile. India must continue its journey towards ushering new 
reforms in its health sector through its exemplary inclusive schem es and initiatives and 
expansion in the health Budget. Hon'ble President Smt. Droupadi Murmu in her Speech 
on her assumption of office as President of India on 25 th  July, 2022 also commended the 
capability India showed during the pandemic which is quoted as under:  
 
"The kind of capability that India has shown in combating the global 
crisis of Corona pandemic has enhanced India's credibility all over the 
world. We Indians not only faced this global challenge with our efforts 
but also set new standards for the world. Just a few days ago, India has 
set a record of administering 200 crore doses of corona vaccine. The 
patience, courage and cooperation shown by the people of India in this 
entire battle is a symbol of our growing strength and sensitivity as a 
society. India not only took care of itself in these difficult situations but 
also helped the world. In the atmosphere created by the Corona pandemic, 
today the world is looking at India with a new confidence. The 
international community has high hopes from I ndia for ensuring global 
economic stability, ease of supply chain and peace." 
(Para 7.14) 
CONCLUSION 
 The Committee notes that the pandemic has brought in open the need of scaling up 
the vaccine manufacturing ecosystem in the country and investing in the research and 
development infrastructure in the country. With the future variants being inevitable, the 
country must prepare better vaccination strategies. The Committee further believes that a 
resilient vaccination strategy will require concrete clinical research which is currently 
being carried out in the country. The Ministry must also focus on developmen t of newer 
vaccine candidates and develop rapid response care strategies for better mitigation of the 
future uncertainties.  
(Para 7.15) 
 The Committee further feels that there is a need to learn from Covid experience 
and implement the health system reform s in the country. The Committee further 
reemphasizes that India must operationalize an effective, functional, transparent and 
accountable system for reporting severe adverse events.  
(Para 7.16) 
 The Committee also believes that there is a need to expand d emocracy to promote 
people‘s health and include equitable centre -state relations and ensure more transparency 
in decision making and data management. The Committee further recommends that the 
Government must ensure robust planning at all levels along with taking special measures 
to address gender and social inequities.  
(Para 7.17) 
 The Committee notes that during the pandemic, Covid related drugs were in short 
supply and rampant black -marketing led to selling of drugs at exorbitant prices. The 
Committee fu rther notes the disruption of essential health care services during the 

124 
 
pandemic. The Committee strongly recommends that the Government must take special 
initiatives to introduce comprehensive drug price control mechanisms to cover all essential 
medicines and ensure that such hike in the medicine prices especially at the time of a 
medical crisis is strictly monitored. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
streamline the routine public health care services and ensure non -Covid health services 
are restored to pre-pandemic level.  
(Para 7.18) 
 
 The Committee also notes the shortfall of healthcare workforce in India and 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that regular recruitment is carried out to fill all the 
vacant posts in the Medical Colleges and Ho spitals. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to continue its efforts to expand the capacity of public  health services in rural 
and urban areas through adequate, massive increase in central government expenditure 
on health. 
(Para 7.19) 
 The Committee  in its Report has extensively examined the subject, "Vaccine 
Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID -19" and 
identified various issues and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee 
emphasizes the Ministry to ensure that the set targets of complete vaccination are achieved 
and any existing disparity in vaccine distribution is addressed at the earliest. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry sees Covid -19 as an opportunity to revamp the public 
healthcare infrastructur e in the country and usher in new reforms. The Committee 
strongly advocates the imperative essentiality of increasing Government health 
expenditure and investments in research and development. The Ministry must also work 
towards forging better public priva te partnerships for ensuring last mile delivery of 
healthcare services.  
(Para 7.20) 
 
  

125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

126 
 
VI 
 
SIXTH MEETING 
 
           The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday the 12th January, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shri K. Somaprasad 
4. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
7. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
8. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjapara 
9. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
11. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
12.       Shri K. Navaskani 
13.       Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
14.       Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
15.       Dr. D.N.V. Senthilkumar S. 
16.       Shri Anurag Sharma 
17.       Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
 Representatives of Department of Health & Family Welfare  
 
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary 
2. Shri Manjohar Agnani, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of Department of Health Research  
 
Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, DHR cum DG, ICMR 

127 
 
Representative of Drug Controller General of India 
 
Dr. V.G. Somani, DCGI 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e hearing the Health Secretary on the Subject "Vaccine 
Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid -19. He pointed out 
that considering the much needed vaccination drive, the Committee may examine the 
distribution plan of vaccine across the country; methods/modalities of vaccination; network of 
physical distribution of vaccine; the efficacy of vaccine in controlling the new strain of Corona 
Virus. To examine all the aspects of Vaccine Development, Distribution Plan and Mitigation 
Management of Covid -19, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and 
Secretary, Department of Health Research were to apprise the Committee on the subject.  
Oral evidence of stakeholders on the "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management 
and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid-19": 
3. The Committee, at first, heard the views of Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary, Department 
of Health and Family Welfare. He made a presentation which inter alia included the following 
points:- 
(i) Out of 9 crore Covid -19 cases world over, India accounts for 1.05 crore cases 
and USA has 2.13 crore cases. While out of 19.40 lakh  death globally, India 
accounts for 1.51 lakh people who lost their lives due to Covid. Globally, the recovery 
rate is 71% and for India, the corresponding figure stands at 96%.  
(ii) As on 11 th January, 2021, total number of Covid -19 cases in India was 1.05 
crores and the total number o f active cases was 2.23 lakh and the total number of tests 
conducted was 18.2 crores. Only two States in India - Kerala and Maharashtra have 
active Corona cases of over 50,000. 
(iii)  Constitution of two Committees by the Prime Minister to tackle the 
unprecedented Covid -19 situation in the country; (a) Task Force on Encouraging 
Research and Development in Drugs, Pharmaceuticals and Vaccines headed by Principal 
Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, Shri K Vijay Raghavan  constituted in 
May, 2020 with the aim to encourage Research and Development and manufacturing of 
vaccines in India, (b) NEGVAC (National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration) 
headed jointly by Member (Health), NITI Aayog Dr. V. K. Paul and Secretary MH&FW 
constituted in August 2020 with the aim to form prioritization groups for vaccination and 
to work out other modalities in vaccine management and distribution. 
(iv) Two vaccines developed in the country namely - Covishield (developed by 
Oxford and manufactured by Serum Institute of Ind ia) and Covaxin which is a 
completely indigenous vaccine developed by Bharat Biotech. Both these vaccines have 
been granted emergency use authorization. Safety and Immunogenicity of both the 
vaccines are established. 
(v) Four more vaccines in the pipeline in the country viz.; Vaccine by the company 
Zydus Cadila ; Vaccine by Biological.E Company ; Vaccine developed by Pune based 
company Gennova and Russian vaccine Sputnik-V, (In India, it would be manufactured 
by Dr. Reddy's Labs).  

128 
 
(vi) Indian vaccines are mo re economical and affordable compared to foreign 
vaccines. Close collaboration with States/UTs for vaccine roll -out preparedness. 26 
virtual trainings and meetings have been done with the State Governments to discuss 
operational and communication guideline s. A total of 2,360 Master Trainers have been 
trained who further are training 61,000 individuals who are known as Program 
Managers. Two lakh vaccinators who will actually vaccinate people have been trained 
and 70 thousand other vaccination team members ha ve been trained. The entire 
vaccination programmes will be based on the five principles namely;  Ensure People's 
Participation; experience of elections and universal immunization programme; no 
compromise of existing healthcare services, especially, national  programs and primary 
healthcare; no compromise on scientific and regulatory norms; orderly and smooth 
implementation driven by technology.  
(vii) Sequential rollout of  Covid -19 vaccine: - In the first phase, healthcare workers 
of both the private and pub lic healthcare facilities would be vaccinated. Healthcare 
workers not only include doctors and nurses but also sanitation workers, technicians, 
DEOs, ambulance drivers, clerks, assistants and every individual associated with 
healthcare facilities. Total fi gure of healthcare workers in the country is almost 1 crore. 
After this, frontline workers i.e. State Police, Central Police, Armed Forces, Civil 
Defence, Disaster management employees would be vaccinated. In the third phase, 
people above the age of 50 yea rs would be vaccinated. In this category, there are sub -
groups as well; initially people above 60 years of age would be vaccinated, then people 
falling in the age bracket of 50 -60 years would be vaccinated and then people below 50 
years of age who are havi ng co -morbidities would be vaccinated. A total of 3 crore 
people who fall into those categories would be vaccinated in the first two phases and the 
entire cost of vaccinating these people would be borne by the Central Government.  
(viii) Development of digital platform called CoWIN by the Government using which 
data of vaccine like vaccine movement information, storage information, dose 
information etc. can be recorded, monitored, updated. The platform will also track the 
recipient of the vaccination dose a nd inform them about the timings and place to get the 
second dose of vaccine which needs to be taken after  28 days of taking the first dose. 
After the successful vaccination, the platform will also generate an electronic certificate 
and send it on the registered mobile number.   
(ix) Two Committees to be formed; to supervise the entire programme at the State 
level, namely: State's Steering Committee , chaired by Chief Secretary of the State to 
monitor coordination issues with other Departments of the State.   State Task Force,  
chaired by Principal Secretary Health, will look at actual administration related issues of 
the vaccination programme. Apart from this, there will be a District Task Force headed 
by the District Collector with the aim to monitor functio ning of vaccination booths and 
availability of vaccines. Also, Block Task Force has also been formed headed by Block 
Development Officer with the aim to monitor the vaccination programme at the block 
level.  
(x)  Ensuring sufficient number of cold chain points and also uninterrupted supply of 
syringes and other logistics in the country. A 24X7 helpline in two languages English 
and Hindi has been opened by the Central Government, similar help lines have also been 
opened by various State Governments in their respective local languages. 
 

129 
 
4.  The Members of the Committee raised following issues:- 
(i) Concerns over hurried clearance for the "Covishield" vaccine; 
(ii) Covaxin vaccine given approval before the completion of Phase III trials; 
(iii) Time required to vaccinate at least, 50 per cent of the Indian population, if 
not the entire population; 
(iv) Tracking of effect of the vaccine on the person on whom the vaccination has 
been jabbed; effectiveness of the vaccine against the new strains of the virus; 
side-effects of the vaccine known or not; effect on the vaccine if kept in the 
deep freezer which generally has temperatures below 2 degree Celsius; 
duration of the effectiveness of the vaccines; 
(v) Liability of the vaccine manufacturer in case the recipient of the vaccine 
develops certain health complications; 
(vi) Mechanism for administering the vaccine to the physically handicapped 
people; 
(vii) Variation in the price of vaccines; price of vaccines for the people not 
belonging to any of the prioritized groups; 
(viii) Vaccination centers should have ICU facilities and the provision of 
stabilizers to address any untoward incident due to the side-effects; 
(ix) Government studies on the impact of vaccines being administered in foreign 
countries like United States and United Kingdom; 
(x) Easy availability of these vaccines to the rural population;  
(xi) Mechanism for distribution and administration of vaccines to the poor and 
the deprived sections of the society free of cost or at a very nominal rate; 
(xii) Choice between different vaccines available or not; 
(xiii) T-cell and B-cell assessment post vaccination; 
(xiv) Safety measures to be taken while vaccinating pregnant women;   
(xv) Prioritization of Covid-19 hotspots States like Kerala in vaccine distribution; 
(xvi) Exemption of vaccines from GST; 
(xvii) Stock of vaccines to supply without any interruption to all the States; 
(xviii) Decision on giving approval foreign vaccines like Pfizer; 
(xix) Measures taken to rein in the fake apps or fake versions of CoWIN; 
(xx) Exploring the research to improve the curative technology to cure already 
infected people; 
(xxi) Monitoring of  post-covid complications being seen in various Covid 
recovered people; 
(xxii) Authority of State Governments to choose the vaccine whichever they feel 
right to administer their population; 
(xxiii) Inclusion of private hospitals in the vaccination programme; 
(xxiv) Number of patients infected with the new strains of the Corona virus; 
(xxv) Vaccination of MPs; and 
(xxvi) Vaccination mandatory or voluntary. 
5.  The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare replied to the queries of the 
members. He submitted that the Covaxin vaccine was given accelerated approval as per the New 
Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules, 2019. Based on such approvals, WHO pre -qualified drugs can 
be used by countries which do not have regulatory frameworks. He further informed that no 
vaccine in India is available o r would be available in private market in the coming months. All 
these vaccines have only been given emergency use authorization and market authorization 
would be given at the later stage. He further said the vaccination is not mandatory and is 
completely voluntary. As regards price of the vaccine, he  informed the Committee that the price 

130 
 
of vaccine for the remaining population would be decided once 60-70% people are vaccinated in 
the first and second phase. Also, CoWIN platform would send SMS in 12 differ ent languages to 
inform the people about their vaccination schedule for both the doses. It would also send a 
reminder to the individual before the second dose. After successful vaccination, it would also 
generate and send a certificate. If the person is no t in possession of a smart phone, then the 
responsibility to intimate the individual is upon the Medical Officer in the Block Development 
Office. 
6.  Responding to the queries of the Committee, Shri V.G. Somani, DCGI informed the 
Committee that Covaxin und erwent pre-clinical studies on mice, rats and rabbits. Moreover, it 
also went through Challenge Studies on two animal species, that is, hamster and rhesus 
macaques. Phase -I trial of Covaxin was done on 375 people, none of them reported any 
complications. Phase II trials were conducted on 380 people. 22,500 people were given the first 
dose of the vaccine in Phase III. The solicited reaction of Covaxin is only 15% which is 
significantly lower than the solicited reactions of Pfizer and Moderna which are 75% an d 65%. 
He further informed the Committee that Covaxin has seen 8 folds rise in neutralising anti 
bodies. Its neutralising anti bodies were tested for three elements namely; spike protein, receptor 
binding domain and Nucleocapsid protein. 
7.  The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, 
Department of Health and Research. He submitted that the data regarding the versatility i.e. the 
effectiveness on the mutation strain of the said vaccines is not available. He further informed the 
Committee that the Covaxin is being tested for its effectiveness on the newly discovered strain 
in the UK. The total number of people infected with the UK strain is 96 (as on January, 12) and 
every person coming from UK is being monito red and tested. Also, genome sequencing of the 
positive cases is being done. The decision to give the second dose after 28 days is backed by the 
available data. He further submitted that if a woman gets pregnant after the first dose, she would 
be kept under close watch. As regards effectiveness of the vaccine, he informed the Committee 
that as per the data available, the vaccines would be equally effective if it is stored below 2 
degree Celsius.He also admitted before the Committee that some people have exp erienced post 
Covid weakness and complications. People who experience rise in serum ferritin or  D-Dimer 
are given anti -coagulation. He further apprised the Committee that in the clinical trials of 
Covishield which were done on mice in UK, no Pneumonia case s were reported and high 
immunogenicity was recorded. Phase -I were trails were done on 1077 people, Phase -II people 
were done on 560  people  and finally Phase -III trials were done on 11,636 people in UK and 
Brazil. To establish vaccine's equivalency, Phase-III trials were done on 1,600 people in India.  
8.  The Chairman thanked the witnesses for clarifying various doubts and issues raised by 
the members of the Committee.  
9.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 1:15 p.m. 
 
 
  

131 
 
XIII 
 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Tuesday the 10 th August, 2021 in Committee 
Room-A, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.     Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Shri AK. Antony 
3.      Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4.      Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
6.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
7.      Ms. Ramya Haridas 
8.      Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9.      Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
10.      Arjunlal Meena 
11.      Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
12.      Shri K. Navaskani 
13.      Adv. Adoor Prakash 
14.      Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
15.      Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
16.      Dr. DNV Senthilkumar. S 
17.      Shri Anurag Sharma 
18.      Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
19.      Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
20.      Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Puneet Kumar       Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
(i) Department of Health and Family Welfare  
 
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary (Health) 
2. Smt. Arti Ahuja, Addl. Secretary 
3. Ms. Anu Nagar, Joint Secretary 

132 
 
 
(ii) Department of Health Research (DHR)/ Indian Council of Medical Research, 
New Delhi 
 
1. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary (DHR)  
2. Dr. Samiran Panda, Scientist 'G', ICMR 
3. Dr. Nivedita Gupta, Scientist 'F', ICMR 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee 
and informed them that the Committee would hear the views of Secretaries, Department of 
Health and Family Welfar e and Department of Health Research on the challenges faced during 
the Second Wave of Covid-19, preparedness to combat and handle the impact of predicted Third 
Wave of Covid -19 and progress made under vaccination drive in the country' as part of the 
consideration of the subject ―Vaccine Development, Distribution Plan and Mitigation of 
Pandemic Covid -19‖. Welcoming the witnesses, thereafter, he asked them to  apprise the 
Committee about the challenges posed by the second wave of COVID -19, the lessons learnt b y 
the Government in the aftermath of the second wave, the status of vaccination drive in the 
country and the strategy chalked out to contain the possible threat of third wave, the status of 
development of other vaccine candidates, etc. He also asked them t o explain as to what were the 
factors that caused second wave; whether the second wave could have been avoided with 
prompt and timely action on the part of the Government; the reasons for the severity of the 
second wave as compared to the first wave, etc.  
3. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare sought the permission of the 
Chairman of the Committee to make a power points presentation containing 30 slides, however, 
the Chairman refused the permission by saying that discussion on important bill was going on in 
the House and therefore Members would ask questions/seek clarifications based on the hard 
copy of the presentation which was already with them.  Thereafter, members asked questions 
one by one which were as follows:- 
(i) The reasons for  the number of new cases stagnating at around 40 thousand per 
day and not going down further and also for Kerala, despite being the most 
literate State, having over 40 percent of the total Covid infections; 
(ii) Expressing apprehensions on the authenticity  of figures about the testing and 
positive cases as given in the power point presentation, it was enquired whether 
there was any method to verify these figures; 
(iii)  Probable causes for the high number of cases in the State of Kerala which 
otherwise has a sound healthcare infrastructure at the village, taluka  and district 
level; whether necessary arrangements would be made to provide enough 
vaccines to Kerala; 
(iv) Whether the number of deaths caused due to Covid has been accounted for 
properly by all the States and if not, what is the number of actual deaths; whether 
Government would provide compensation to the families of those who lost their 
lives due to Covid notwithstanding the fact that their death is recorded or not; the 
arrangements of health infrastructure, if any, made in the wake of the third wave; 
(v) The reasons why movement of people from States with high infection rate to 
States with low infection rate is not being checked so as to  contain the spread of 

133 
 
infection; cases of overcharging of f ees by private hospitals from Covid patients 
need to be investigated; 
(vi)  Need to ramp up vaccination but allotting more vaccines particularly to States 
experiencing high numbers of cases like Kerala and Maharashtra,  also timeline 
for availability of va ccines in the open market, the requirement of third dose to 
further boost the immune response and steps taken to prevent vaccine wastage;  
(vii) Unreliability of RT -PCR report in declaring deaths owing to Covid -19 as RT -
PCR report is generally negative after one week of infection and hence deaths are 
not counted as Covid -19 deaths; problems encountered in receiving death 
certificate due to Covid which makes it impossible to receive compensation 
under various schemes for family/children of the deceased; 
(viii)  Differing opinions of experts regarding the effectiveness and suitability of 
different vaccines; 
(ix)  Establishing labs at district and block level for better testing to get more accurate 
picture of positive cases and thus limit the number of deaths; 
(x)  Disproportionately high prices of ICU beds and other medical equipments listed 
in the GEM portal and the need to regulate the pricing mechanism;  
(xi)  Whether any study is being done to find out the reasons as to why Mucormycosis 
infection occurred a s several reasons are being discussed; the need to involve 
MPs (Members of Parliament) in the vaccination programme; 
(xii)  Concern regarding children as the probable third wave is expected to be more 
severe on them; confusion/concern regarding opening of educational institutes; 
(xiii)  Testing of newly established Pressurized Swing Adsorption (PSAs) for 
malfunctions under prolonged use  and issues like fall in pressure and purity of 
oxygen in PSA Oxygen Generation Plants particularly when more patients on 
ventilators are added to it; whether integration of liquid oxygen tank with the 
PSA plant can be done; 
(xiv)  Delay in installation of Pressure Swing Absorption Oxygen Plants in Jayanagar, 
West Bengal which was to be installed by National Highway Authority of India; 
(xv)  Importance of sero -survey and genome sequencing in combating the future 
waves of pandemic Covid-19; 
(xvi)  Moratorium on loan amount and a special loan scheme with low interest rate to 
support pandemic affected families and small -scale industries/businesses should 
be considered;  
(xvii)  Timeline for vaccination trials and subsequent availability of vaccines for 
children; 
(xviii)  Effectiveness of drugs like Remdesivir in combating multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in children where all the children tested were RTPCR negative but 
their Covid antibodies were positive; affordability and availability of alternative 
drug IV Immunoglobulin for  treatment of Covid amongst children; 

134 
 
(xix)  Confusion amongst people regarding changing interval between  two doses of 
vaccines; 
(xx)  Lack of skilled and trained manpower to operate newly established oxygen 
plants, ventilators etc;  
(xxi)  Promotion to research regarding treatment of Covid-19 not only in Allopathy but 
also in Ayurveda and Homeopathy as adjuvant therapy and  
(xxii)  Steps taken to combat misinformation about efficacy of vaccines and to address 
vaccine hesitancy; etc. 
4.  The Chairman then asked the Secretary to submit a written response to the queries 
raised/ clarifications sought by Members within a week.  
 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
6.  ***  
7.  The Committee then adjourned at   4:35 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 
 
 

135 
 
VII 
 
SEVENTH MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Friday the 22 nd January, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.     Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shri K. Somaprasad 
4. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
7. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
8. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjapara 
9. Shrimati Pramita Mondal 
10. Dr. Subhas Sarkar  
11. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
12.      Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Team of Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India  
 
1. Prof. K. Vijay Raghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor  to the Government of India 
2. Dr. Arabinda Mitra, Scientific Secretary, Government of India 
3. Dr. Shailja V. Gupta, Senior Adviser/ Scientist 'H, Government of India 
 
Team of All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), New Delhi 
 
1. Dr. Randeep Gulleria, Director, AIIMS, New Delhi 
2. Shri Subhasish Panda, Deputy Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting 
and recapitulated that the Committee had undertaken the Subject "Vaccine Development, 

136 
 
Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid -19" for examination and Report. 
He informed members that in the previous meeting the Committee had heard the views of the 
Secretaries of Department of Health and Family Welfare and Department of Health Research 
on the subject and deliberated on the production, app roval, methods and modalities of 
distribution plan of the vaccine, network of physical distribution of vaccine, efficacy of vaccine 
in controlling the new strain of Corona virus, etc. He further informed the members that 
continuing with its deliberations, the Committee would hear the views of Principal Scientific 
Advisor to the Government of India and Director, AIIMS (New Delhi) on the subject. 
 
Oral evidence of stakeholders on the "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management 
and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid-19": 
3. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Principal Scientific Adviser and his team and also 
Director AIIMS to the meeting of the Committee and asked them to apprise the Committee of 
the stages of development of the vaccine, challenges faced in its in novation, the methods of its 
scientific validation etc. He asked Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India to 
make his presentation first after introducing his team of officials. During his presentation to the 
Committee he highlighted the following points:- 
i. The PMO constituted a Vaccine Task Force consisting of Secretary (Health), Secretary 
(Biotechnology), ICMR, CSIR, Department of IT, Department of Telecom, Drug 
Controller and Director General Health Services for focused research and deve lopment 
of CORONA vaccine and other science and technology related issues on April 14, 2020 
co-chaired by Dr. VK Paul and Prof. K. Vijay Raghavan.  A total of 14 meetings of this 
Task Force were held.  The idea behind this task force was to get all the views on 
scientific aspects to these people, so that they can use this advice in their own specific 
roles, in a way they saw appropriate, as they were heads of their departments. Coming to 
the vaccine development initiatives The Bharat Biotech International‘s Covaxin has been 
developed indigenously using a virus strain, isolated by the Indian Council for Medical 
Research at the National Institute of Virology. Its clinical trials are ongoing at phase III.  
An emergency use authorization of it has been grante d. The Serum Institute of India 
developed ―Covishield‖ in partnership with Oxford University AstraZeneca. And for this 
vaccine candidate, the emergency use authorization was granted on the basis of 
international trial data and bridging trial data in India. There are other vaccine candidates 
in development by these companies. There are also other companies which were 
working on vaccine development. 
ii. Underlining the challenges in development of the vaccine he pointed out that India had 
not done many phase 1,11 and Phase 111 clinical trials and hence setting up the whole 
sequence, in the midst of the pandemic was a challenge. Identifying clinical trial sites, 
putting in place networks to get harmonized clinical trials protocols and to partner with 
medical co lleges for trials were some of the key challenges. We had only one drug 
testing and certification laboratory at Kasauli but now its number was being increased. 
Access to resources was also a major challenge because vaccine development was very  
expensive. E xplaining the trial stage he stated that during trials, the vaccine is 
administered to healthy people and thus safety of such people is of key concern. To 
establish safety in phase -I clinical trials, immune response is monitored in monkeys or 
ferrets after administering them with vaccine. 

137 
iii.  Another Pharma company Zydus Cadila has got permission to conduct its phase III 
trials. They have a DNA vaccine candidate that has completed phase II trial s.   
Hyderabad based Biological -e has tied up with Johnson & Johnson to manufacture a 
single-dose vaccine.  The company is collaborating with other companies to make other 
vaccines against the receptor binding domain of the virus.  Dr. Reddy's has tied up with 
Sputnik Vaccine on phase II.  Genevo Pharmaceuticals is another pharma company 
which has collaborated with a USA company to develop an mRNA vaccine.  And, there 
are many other smaller companies engaged in vaccine development candidates. India, 
that has got a great reputation for a vaccine manufacturing hub is embarked on vaccine 
development.   
iv.  Generally, it takes about four -five years for developing a vaccine. But in view of the 
urgency that arose due to the pandemic the parallel processes involve d in vaccine 
development and other regulatory processes have been ramped up. He further said that 
unlike other vaccines which are manufactured using a part (RNA or DNA) of the virus, 
the Covaxin is manufactured using complete inactivated virus. Therefore, Covaxin 
theoretically is better placed in raising immunity against various variants of the Corona 
virus. 
v. Another important part of testing is the Genome Sequencing. CSIR‘s Institute of 
Genomics and Integrative Biology along with National Institute of Bi omedical 
Genomics, Department of Biotechnology and Center for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology have done a wonderful job in sequencing genes of the virus. 
4. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Randeep Gulleria, Director, AIIMS, New 
Delhi. He submitted  that the Phase -III trials of the Covaxin vaccine are still not complete but 
the limited data suggests that the vaccine is safe. It is efficacious and has been tried out mainly 
on Indians.  On the other hand the trials of Covishield were mainly done in the  UK and Brazil 
population and for determining its efficacy on Indians, only the bridging studies were 
conducted. He further informed the Committee that as far as the vaccine distribution is 
concerned, that decision is taken by the respective State Governme nts. The State Government 
decides which vaccine would be sent to which hospital. 
5. During the course of the meeting, the members raised certain queries which are as 
follows:- 
i. Guidelines or protocols to be followed after taking the first shot of the vaccine or in 
the event of any adverse reaction; 
ii. Measures taken by the Government to avoid wastage of the doses; 
iii. Monitoring and maintenance of various States Government‘s cold chain systems; 
iv. Period for which the vaccine would be effective; 
v. Measures taken t o address apprehensions and hesitancy of people  regarding 
vaccines and tackling misinformation and fake news regarding vaccine; 
vi. Chances of adverse side effects of vaccines and provisions for compensation to the 
victim in case of adverse side-effects; 
vii. Emergency authorization given to Covishield which is a foreign vaccine; 
viii. Trials of intra-nasal vaccines and its basic formation; 
ix. Tackling misinformation and fake news regarding vaccine; 
x. Availability of vaccines to economically weaker sections free of cost; 
xi. New strategies and initiatives for vaccination and immunization in light of the 
current pandemic; 

138 
xii. Making retired sportspersons and actors brand ambassadors of the vaccination 
drive to instill confidence amongst the masses with respect to the vaccines; 
xiii. Establishment of public sector vaccine manufacturers and research units; and 
xiv. Need of two doses in the current vaccination drive and duration between  the doses 
& the quantity of the second dose. 
6. Responding to the queries raised by the members, Prof. K. Vijay  Raghavan informed 
the Committee that regarding guidelines for vaccination, vaccine manufacturing companies 
have come up with detailed fact sheets of Do‘s and Don'ts in case of adverse reactions. He 
further informed the Committee that the immunity after the vaccination would at least last for 8 
months.  On nasal vaccines he said that the dose quantity and effect of such vaccines are 
difficult to quantify because there is a lot of variability associated with nasal vaccines. 
However research is being done on such vaccines and Bharat Biotech is developing a nasal 
vaccine. He further informed the Committee that an Indian Startup is developing a room 
temperature storable vaccine.  Vaccines like the Nasal vaccines are easy to administer, can be 
bought and administered by the person himself possibly at room temperature. 
7. On preparedness for future health emergencies, Prof. K. Vijay Raghavan submitted 
that next pandemic might happen with equal probability or low probability.  With vagaries of 
climate change and oth er kinds of human -animal contact, the chances are only increasing.  He 
said that India has learnt a lot both from the domestic experience and from the rest of the 
world. On the issue of requirement of two doses of vaccine, he informed that this is due to 
population effect and an individual effect.  A doze gives an individual a certain immune 
response.  And, in a population, there can be some which have a very low immune response 
while others might have a modest immune response. So, the second dose takes car e of those 
people and protects them. But, the second dose also increases the first response substantially.  
So, if population level immunity is desired, which is what the purpose of the vaccination drive 
is, two doses are needed. He further informed the Co mmittee that the companies which are 
making vaccine are responsible for providing indemnity care to recipients of their vaccine.  
8. On chances of contracting virus even after vaccination, Prof. K. Vijay Raghavan 
submitted that once  a person gets vaccinate d, he is not immune to infection; however, the 
progression of the disease would be mitigated enormously.  So, if people are tested after 
vaccination, virus could still be found in his body.  Some vaccines are very good; not only do 
they stop the progression of the disease but they also greatly lower transmission.  So, suppose, 
if someone gets infected and they are vaccinated, the disease would not progress but they might 
transmit.  But some vaccines would mitigate the replication of the virus if the transmi ssion is 
low.  
9. Regarding a specific query on whether the people who are on blood thinners must get 
vaccinated, Dr. Randeep Guleria clarified that ecosprin, clopidogrel are classified as anti -
platelets and warfarin, heparin as anti -coagulants. People who  take anti -platelets can be 
vaccinated; however, people who take anti-coagulants need to be careful.    
10. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for clarifying various doubts and issues raised by 
the members of the Committee.  
11.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12.  The Committee then adjourned at 4:45 p.m. 
 

139 
III 
 
THIRD MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 9 th December, 2021 in Room No.-63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3.      Shri Suresh Prabhu 
4.      Shri A.D. Singh 
5.      Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
6.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
7.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 LOK SABHA 
8.      Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
9.      Ms. Ramya Haridas 
10.      Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
11.      Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
12.      Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
13.      Shri K. Navaskani 
14.      Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
15.      Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
16.      Dr. DNV Senthilkumar. S 
17.      Shri Anurag Sharma 
18.      Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary  
2.      Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3.      Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
4.      Smt. Harshita Shankar   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary (Health) 
2. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary (DHR)  
3. Shri Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. Samiran Panda, Additional DG (ICMR) 
 

140 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Com mittee and apprised 
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to examine "Challenges posed by Omicron variant of 
Covid-19, the strategy adopted and measures taken to combat the same" as part of the 
examination of the subject "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of 
Pandemic COVID -19. He further informed the Committee that on 26 th November, WHO's 
Technical Advisory Group on SARS -CoV-2 Virus Evolution designated the new variant of 
Coronavirus 'Omicron', first reported by South Africa, a s a variant of concern. The Omicron 
now had gained a foothold in Asia, Africa, the Americas, the West Asia and Europe. Several 
cases of the new variant had been reported in India as well. In view of this, the Secretary, 
Department of Health and Family Welfare and Secretary, Department of Health Research were 
invited to apprise the Committee on the subject. 
3. The Committee, at first, heard the views of Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary, 
Department of Health and Family Welfare. He made a presentation which inte r alia included 
the following points:- 
i. According to WHO, the Covid -19 was a cause of concern with daily incidence of more 
than 6 lakh cases. Several countries like UK, France and Italy had faced multiple Covid 
surges and were witnessing high number of d aily Covid cases due to laxity in public 
health and social measures; 
ii. The situation in India was significantly better with less than 10 thousand daily cases. 
Kerala was the only State in India to have more than ten thousand active cases and 
accounted for almost 44% of active cases in the country. There were ten States having 
active cases between 1-10,000; 
iii. More than 130 crore Covid vaccine doses had been administered thus far and almost 
53% of the adult population have received both the doses of the vaccine; nation-wide 
Covid-19 vaccination campaign " हर घर दस्तक" has been launched to boost awareness, 
mobilization and vaccination of all eligible beneficiaries with first dose and all due 
beneficiaries with second dose off Covid-19 vaccines through House to House visit; 
iv. 108 countries had entered into agreement with India for mutual recognition of 
vaccination certificates; 
v. The Omicron variant was first reported in Gauteng, South Africa on November 24 and 
on 26th November the WHO declared it variant of concern; as of 08 December, 2021, 
57 countries were infected with Omicron and there were 2,303 Omicron cases 
worldwide; 
vi. On 28th November, India released an International travel advisory (w.e.f 01 December, 
2021) for travelers coming to India. Travel ers coming from Countries 'at risk' to follow 
additional measures, including post -arrival RT-PCR test. In India, there were 23 cases 
of Omicron and the first case was reported in Karnataka; 
vii.  Omicron had close to 50 mutations with 26-32 mutations happening only in the spike. It 
is not yet clear whether Omicron was more transmissible compared to other variants 
and whether infection with Omicron caused more severe disease; 
viii. Current Public Health Measures such as masks, hand hygiene, physical distanci ng, 
improving ventilation of indoor spaces, avoiding crowding spaces and getting 
vaccinated remain effective against all variants of concerns; 

141 
ix.  PCR diagnostics continue to detect COVID -19 infection, including Omicron infection 
and clinical management f or patients with severe COVID -19 remains unchanged. 
Impact of vaccines on Omicron was not yet known as evidence was still evolving. 
4. Thereafter, Secretary, Department of Health Research apprised the Committee on the 
subject and highlighted that testing p rotocol for Omicron remained unchanged and all the 
current tests that were being used for other variants of Covid -19 would be working for 
identifying the patients with Omicron. The treatment protocol and the medications that are 
already approved by the Nat ional Task Force, the Joint Monitoring Group, Ministry of Health, 
too remains unchanged and the same medicines will be used for treating Omicron cases as 
well. He also added that  ICMR was taking up a research to ascertain the efficacy of current 
vaccines that are being administered in the country against the Omicron, for this ICMR needed 
to grow the virus in the culture medium. Typically, it would take about five to seven days to 
grow the virus.  If it was successful, then, using blood from people who had been vaccinated, 
the efficacy of vaccines against Omicron would be determined. 
5. Thereafter, the Chairman and the members of the Committee raised certain 
issues/queries on the subject which are as follows:- 
i. Effectiveness of vaccines against deaths; need for booster shot; time frame within 
which the Government intended to finish first and second dose of vaccination to the 
entire eligible adult population; requirement of vaccination for children, vulnerability of 
the below 18 population with respect to  Omicron and confusion among the public with 
regards to the gap between the first and second dose of the vaccine; 
ii. Reasons behind higher Covid cases in relatively better educated regions in the country; 
iii. Need to check the 14 days travel history of t ravelers coming to India and steps taken to 
monitor people who are home quarantined;  
iv. Veracity of the vaccination data with respect to the State of Bihar; 
v. Effect on death rate as the number of cases were rising worldwide and whether any 
change observed in the delta variant; 
vi. Effectiveness of conventional RT -PCR compared to the rapid RT -PCR; high cost of 
RT-PCR testing and inadequate arrangements at the airports; 
vii. Possibility of relation between Omicron and biological warfare; 
viii. Preparation for worst case scenarios; 
ix. Independent assessment by bodies like ICMR on evasion of vaccines by Omicron; 
identification of onummi-elpoep desimorpmoc; 
x. Alternate seating in flights which are coming from at-risk countries; 
xi. Study to ascertain reason s behind developing of high positivity rate clusters in several 
States; 
xii. Need to have a proactive strategy to deal with newer variants of Covid-19; 
xiii. Initiatives to stop spread of misinformation and fear amongst masses with regards to 
Omicron; 
xiv. Avoiding of imposition of lockdown to counter the spread of Omicron, considering 
poor financial health of certain sections of the society and overall economic cost 
involved; and  

142 
xv. Adequacy of testing and tracking infrastructure and need to maintain and  boost it in 
light of the higher transmissibility associated with the Omicron. 
6. The Secretary Department of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Health 
Research and Additional DG (ICMR) thereafter, responded to some of the queries of the 
Chairman and the members as enumerated below: 
i. Regarding the effectiveness of RT -PCR and rapid RT -PCR test, Secretary DHR stated 
that rapid RT -PCR machines like TrueNAT can take limited number of samples but 
they give the results in 90 -minutes.  He said that RTPCR a nd rapid RT -PCR both are 
identical and there was no difference in results. In terms of percentage positivity and 
percentage sensitivity, they were perfect. He further stated that Rapid Antigen Test 
gives faster results and takes only 15-minutes to test, but it only gives positive results; 
ii. Answering the query regarding the need for booster doses, Secretary DHR elaborated 
that the seniccav that were being administered  weesaesid er-seniccav gniyfidom. T yeh
would esaesid tneverp ton , but severity would be  low. Also, t  erehwa  ot atad ssel s
 troppusthe claim for  ereht esuaceb tnemom eht ta esod lanoitiddawer morf selpmaxe e
ah elpoep erehw learsId  esod driht a deviecer but detcefni tog llits. Regarding giving 
additional dose to immuno -compromised people, he informed the Committee that the 
vaccination involved  not only  esnopser ydobitna ,  but also esnopser ralullec, T- llec
esnopser lasocum dna esnopser and these things derusaem eb tonnac. However, the 
issue was being discussed ht nie National Technical Advisory  Group on Immunization 
in India (IGATN),  onummi rehtehw -  eb dluohs elpoep desimorpmocor should not be 
esod lanoitidda na nevig. Replying to the query regarding confusion among the public 
w.r.t the gap between the first and second dose of the vaccine, he informed the 
Committee that the gap between the two doses of Covaxin remained the same i.e. 28 
days.  However, in respect of Covishield, as per the current data, interval between the 
two doses was of 12 weeks; 
iii. Adding to the query of booster shots for immuno-compromised people, the Secretary 
Department of Health and Family Welfare informed the Committee that the Department 
did not have a list of immuno -compromised people. Nowhere in the country such  a list 
is maintained. 
iv. Replying on devising a proa ctive strategy to counter new variants of Covid -19, 
Secretary Department of Health and Family Welfare stated that, there were two ways of 
doing it.  First to do testing which was higher than the threshold prescribed by the 
WHO, so that very quickly, one ca n come to know when the cases are flaring up.  
Second the INSACOG (Indian SARS -CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics or Indian 
SARS-CoV-2 Genetics Consortium) network which indicated whether the virus was 
mutating.  Once it was known that the virus had mutated, and , the particular region 
where the mutation occurred, that geographical area can be focused upon.  So, more 
testing and genome sequencing can be the two parts of a proactive strategy. 
v. Answering to the query on probable variation in the Delta variant, Add itional DG 
(ICMR) said that the predominant circulating strain in India, as yet, was Delta. 
Regarding increased chance of children getting infected with Omicron, he informed the 
Committee that this was determined by the contact metrics in any population gr oup, be 
it adult, adolescent or children. So, children do not have any excess possibility or 
increased chance of getting infected with Omicron.  
vi. Responding to the query on Kerala's paradox of high Covid cases, Additional DG 
(ICMR)  said that hypothetically, it could be related to the reverse behaviour. It may be 

143 
case that those who are doubly -vaccinated think that as they are protected, they can let 
the guard down and since these vaccines did not prevent acquisition of infection, this 
trend was being se en.  He further stated that viruses try to escape the immune pressure 
but at the same time, they become more transmissible.   If any transmissible variant -- 
for example, omicron -- kills its host, it cannot remain transmissible.  So, increased 
transmissibility does not go hand in hand with fatality. 
7. The Chairman then directed the Department to send written replies to the queries raised 
by the Members within a week.  
 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4:15 p.m.  
 
 
  

144 
VII 
 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee m et at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 4th April, 2022 in Committee Room -A, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA      
2. Dr. L Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
4. Dr. Santanu Sen 
5. Shri A.D. Singh 
6. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
7. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
9. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
10. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
11. Shri K. Navaskani 
12. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
13. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
14. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
15. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
16. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar   Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy  Secretary 
 
WITNESSES: 
SAMA - Resource Group for Women and Health 
1. Dr. Sarojini Nadimpally, Executive Director 
2. Ms. Priyam Lizmary Cherian 
3. Ms. Neelanjana Das 
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) 
1. Dr. Mita Choudhury, Associate Professor, National Institute of Public Finance and 
Policy (NIPFP), New Delhi  

145 
Ministry of Women and Child Development  
1. Ms. Preeti Pant, Joint Secretary 
2. Capt. Prabhanshu Srivastav, Deputy Secretary 
Department of Biotechnology 
1. Dr. Rajesh S. Gokhale, Secretary 
2. Dr. Alka Sharma, Scientist-H 
3. Dr. Onkar Tiwari, Scientist-E 
4. Dr. Kamakshi Chaithri, Scientist-C 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to examine various aspects of changing landscape of 
Covid-19 in India and the world, vaccination of children in 12 -14 age group, issues associated 
with vaccination of lactating and pregnant women, challenges being faced at the ground level 
during vaccination, need for the third dose/booster dose and other related aspects as part of 
examination of the subject "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of 
Vaccine Pandemic Covid -19". In this regard, the Chairman informed the memb ers that the 
Committee would be hearing the views of Ministry of Women & Child Development and 
Department of Biotechnology and two other organizations on the said subject.  
3. The Committee, at first, heard the views of Executive Director, SAMA-Resource Group 
of Women. The deposition to the Committee included following points:- 
i. Covid-19 had a debilitating impact on the health and lives of the people, particularly, on 
the marginalised communities; additionally many people were still suffering with post -
COVID complications, with an estimation that over one crore COVID survivors in 
India might have long COVID, accordingly healthcare workers and the doctors should 
be trained to deal with it; 
ii. Lack of regulation of rates for medicines, hospitalization, testing, me dical devices and 
vaccine in private sector created inequities in access to healthcare services resulting in 
marginalized sections of the society bearing the brunt of Covid -19 pandemic, therefore, 
prices should be regulated even in the private sector; 
iii. Insufficient allocation of budget for health in the Union Budget 2022 -23; significant 
decline in provision for insurance under Pradhan Mantri Gareeb Kalyan scheme; 
similarly inadequate financing of ICMR in the Union Budget 2022-23; 
iv. Stressed on participation an d contribution of public sector units for the manufacturing 
of vaccines not just for Covid-19 but also for other illnesses; 
v. Waiver of certain intellectual property provisions in the Trade -Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement fo r easy access to  patented 
technologies by Indian companies for vaccine and medicine production; 
vi. Lack of information, clarity and transparency on the process of collection of data 
regarding Adverse Events Following Immunization, (AEFI); provision of compensation 
for both long and short term adverse effect post vaccination; 
vii. Vaccination for children should have been rolled out only after complete risk -benefit 
analysis; 
viii. Gender gap in vaccination due to underlined gender inequality, difference in access and 
control over resources and access to smart phones and internet; 
ix. Lack of clinical research and clinical trials regarding vaccination of lactating and 
pregnant women; 

146 
x. Adequate remuneration for front line workers including ASHAs also compensating 
them for their extra efforts during Covid-19 pandemic; 
xi. Effect of Covid -19 on the maternal health due to disruption in access to abortion 
services contraceptives and also menstrual and sanitary products during pandemic;  
xii. Increase in violence against women, girls and also on other gender minorities during 
Covid-19; 
4. Thereafter, Associate Professor, National Institute of Public Finance and Policy 
(NIPFP) presented her views on the subject and inter-alia highlighted the following key points: 
i. Relatively low  health spending i n India as a proportion to GDP when compared to 
major countries of the world; two-thirds of the health spending in the country is done by 
the State Governments rest one-third is done by the Central Government; wide variation 
within States regarding health spending with poorer States having weaker healthcare 
infrastructure resulting in sluggish testing and vaccination drive; 
ii. Increase in healthcare spending by certain States post Covid-19; 
iii. Covid virus has been mutating continuously thus making existing vaccin es less 
effective;  
5. During the course of the meeting, members raised the following queries:- 
a) Role of environment in human health as most of the new challenges in healthcare are 
having their  genesis in environment for example rise in zoonotic diseases; 
b) Inability of large proportion of India's population in affording healthcare services; need 
for promoting health insurance; 
c) Swiftness in vaccine production to limit the spread of pandemic; taking adequate steps to 
achieve the vaccination targets regarding f irst dose, both doses and boosters shots, why 
has the vaccine not been made free all over India when Covid-19 is a notifiable disease?   
d) Considering to implement successful models like Kerala model in other States for 
mitigating Covid-19; 
e) Access to healthcare facilities in private hospitals by the poor populace; 
f) Need for more research on new and upcoming variants of Covid -19 and development of 
effective vaccines; 
g) Post-Covid complications faced by people suffering from long Covid and exploring 
healthcare system resilient enough to address these complications and adherence to best 
practices followed world-wide to fight long Covid complications; 
h) Slow pace of vaccination in the states like Manipur and need to  push the same; 
i) Need to significantly boost public healthcare spending;  
j) Regulation of prices of vaccines administered by private hospitals/organizations; 
increasing government run vaccination centres; 
k) Lack of awareness regarding vaccines and the need to address vaccine hesitancy;  
6.  The Chairman then aske d the representatives of both the organistions to submit written 
responses to the questions asked by the Members within seven days. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
7.  The Committee thereafter heard the oral evidences of Secretary Department of 
Biotechnology and representatives of Ministry of Women and Child Development on vaccine 
development, efficacy and safety of vaccines, vaccination of pregnant and lactating women, 
issues involved and likely side -effects. The Chairman asked the Department of Biotechnology 
to apprise the Committee about the steps taken by the Department to increase investments in 

147 
research & development and manufacturing of COVID -19 Vaccines; details o f "Mission 
COVID Suraksha Programme", its aim and objective; initiatives taken by the Department to 
make the vaccines accessible and affordable. The Chairman further asked the representatives of 
Ministry of Women and Child Development to explain their role  in the vaccination  
programme; steps taken to boost vaccination coverage with respect to women, teenage girls 
and children, role of Anganwadi workers or helpers in the vaccination drive and challenges 
faced at the ground level and areas of concern. 
 
8.  The Secretary, Department of Biotechnology then made a presentation that inter -alia 
included the following important points:- 
 
i. The Department set up a DBT -BIRAC (Department of Biotechnology -Biotechnology 
Industry Research Assistance Council) research consor tium to counter Covid -19 that 
focused on Diagnostics, Vaccines, Therapeutics and Other Interventions like ways to 
scale up manufacturing of PPE kits, ventilators etc; 
ii. The Department developed a Hub and Spoke Model through which testing activities 
were conducted in more than 30 centres across the country; mobile vans to facilitate 
testing in rural India; 
iii. Accelerating Indian Covid-19 vaccine development through "Mission Covid Suraksha"; 
the aim being the development of 5 -6 Covid -19 vaccine candidates for licensure, 
introduction in the market; 
iv. Developing a network of GCP (Good Clinical Practice) Compliant Clinical trial sites; 
v. To enable accelerated Covid -19 related  research and innovation, DBT developed 
Covid-19  bio-repositories; 
vi. Launched India -PACT (Part nerships for Accelerating Clinical Trials) programme for 
strengthening clinical trial research capacity in 14 neighboring and friendly countries; 
vii. Jointly established INSACOG (Indian Sars -Cov-2 Genomics Consortium) platform 
with MoF&HW, CSIR and ICMR to assess Sars-Cov-2 variants from Indian patients; 
 
9. Thereafter, the Joint -Secretary of the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
presented views of the Ministry which included the following major points:- 
 
i. Timely and periodic, clear and detailed guidelines  were issued by the Ministry for 
Anganwadi workers during the pandemic Covid -19 with an aim to mobilze and create 
awareness amongst workers; 
ii. The Ministry also ensured that children  in child care institutions were vaccinated and 
were taken care of during the times of pandemic; 
10. During the course of the meeting, the members raised the following queries:- 
a. Need for better coordination with the Anganwadi workers to make the vaccination 
programme a success; providing special incentives to the Anganwadi workers for their 
work during Covid-19; 
b. Reason for gender gap in vaccination inspite of Anganwadi workers playing a major 
role in vaccination drive; using different media channels like radio, TV, print to create 
awareness amongst women regarding vaccination; 
c. High vaccine hesitancy in rural areas;  
d. Steps taken by DBT to improve deficiency of funds due to which lab faced problems in 
genome sequencing essential for identifying mutation of COVID-19; 
e. Need to develop healthcare systems and models which focuses on reduc ing Out of 
pocket expenditure and; 
f. Need for booster doses. 

148 
11. The Chairman then asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries 
raised by the Members within seven days. 
 
12.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.02 p.m. to meet again at 3.00.m. on 05 th April, 
2022. 
 
  

149 
VIII 
 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee me t at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 5th April, 2022 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA      
2. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
3. Dr. Santanu Sen 
4. Shri A.D. Singh 
5. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
7. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
8. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
9. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
10. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
11. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
13. Shri K. Navaskani 
14. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
15. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
16. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
17. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar   Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy  Secretary 
 
WITNESSES: 
Government of Maharashtra 
1. Shri Manu Kumar Srivastava, Chief Secretary 
2. Dr. Pradeep Vyas, Additional Chief Secretary 
3. Shri Saurabh Vijay, Secretary, Medical Education and Drugs Department 
Government of Karnataka 
1. Shri Ravi Kumar P., Chief Secretary 
2. Dr. Arundhathi Chandrasekhar, Mission Director, NHM 

150 
Government of Kerala 
1. Dr. Rajan N. Khobragade, Principal Secretary (D/o Health and Family Welfare) 
Jan Swasthya Abhiyan 
1. Dr. Abhay Shukla, National Co-Convener, Pune 
2. Dr. Vandana Prasad  
3. Dr. Gagandeep Kang, Virologist and Microbiologist, Christian Medical College, 
Vellore 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them the agenda of the meeting i.e. continuing to examine various aspects of changing 
landscape of Covid-19 in India vis -à-vis the disease ridden countries of the world; vaccination 
of children in 12 -14 ag e group; issues associated with vaccination of lactating and pregnant 
women; challenges faced at the ground level during first and second wave of pandemic and the 
vaccination drive; need for the third dose/booster dose and other related aspects as part of 
examination of the subject "Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of 
Pandemic Covid -19". The Chairman informed the members that the Committee would be 
hearing the views of State Governments of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala and als o gets 
the opinion of domain experts - Dr. Gagandeep Kang, Virologist and Microbiologist, Christian 
Medical College, Vellore  and Dr. Abhay Shukla, National Co -Convener of Jan Swasthya 
Abhiyan. 
3. The Committee, at first, heard the views of the representativ es of Government of 
Maharashtra. The Chief Secretary informed the Committee that the Additional Chief Secretary, 
Government of Maharashtra, handled the pandemic in Maharashtra during previous two years, 
and hence he would be making a brief presentation bef ore the Committee . The submission to 
the Committee included following points:- 
i. As on 05 th April, 2022, there were only 866 active cases of Covid -19 that are 
concentrated in ten Districts, and the weekly positivity rate was 0.4 per cent; 
ii. Impending threat o f fourth wave or surge because of South -East Asian countries, 
however, in case of incidence of fourth wave of Covid -19, Maharashtra is capable of 
combating the same; 
iii. The State Government partnered with CSIR - Institute of Genomics and Integrative 
Biology for genome sequencing and was closely monitoring the situation for any newer 
variant; 
iv. With regard to vaccination of 18 plus population, the first dose coverage was 92.07 per 
cent and the fully vaccinated population is 74 per cent; in 15 -18 year category, mo re 
than 60 per cent population was covered and in case of 12 -14 year population, about 40 
per cent population had been covered; 
v. Absence of vaccine vial monitor in the recently -introduced vaccine, Corbevax of 
Biological Evans company, gave a window of only four hours for the usage of 20 doses 
of vaccine, that often resulted in vaccine wastage; 
vi. The State Government is running Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Jan Arogya Yojana , under 
which the beneficiaries are decided based on the ration card colours and every resident 
of the State is eligible for it; also all the non -covid treatment was covered under this 
scheme during the pandemic times; 
vii. Certain category of health workers like private doctors and private health professionals 
who are not covered under the Pradhan Mantri  Garib Kalyan Package,  should be 
covered under this scheme; 

151 
viii. Ensuring that home based testing results and their positivity are also taken into official 
count; and 
ix. Need for consensus and uniformity in certain policy decisions applicable for the entire 
country like application of lockdown, opening of schools and colleges and conduct of 
examinations. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Chief Secretary, Government of 
Karnataka whose deposition to the Committee included the following important points:- 
i. As on 04 th April, 2022, the State of Karnataka  had 1,500 active cases, out of these, 
about 1,369 cases were in Bengaluru city alone; 
ii. During the third wave due to Omicron variant, the State registered largest number of 
cases, but still the third wave was  easiest to handle due to less virulence of  the variant; 
however, the delta variant, which led the second wave, was very difficult to handle ; 
one major problem was lack of Oxygen cylinders due to which many people lost their 
lives; 
iii. Another challenge the State faced during the second wave was - Mucormycosis and 
there was no medicine for it in the country thus the medicine was imported and the 
State Government provided it for free to the patients; 
iv. The State needs to find ways to utilise infrastructure and h ealthcare facilities like ICU, 
oxygenated beds, ventilators that was created during second wave; 
v. State Government gave an insurance of Rs. 30 lakh even to the private doctors in case 
of Covid-related deaths;  
vi. The State set up 5 labs for Genome Sequencing;  
vii. With regard to vaccination, 98 per cent of the 18+ population is covered, 80 per cent of 
the population of 15-18 year age group has been covered; and 
viii. 51% of vaccination for the population of 12 -14 year age group was complete; on spot 
vaccination were bein g done, but still there was lot of hesitancy and people were not 
coming forward. 
5. The Committee then heard the views of  Principal Secretary, Department of  Health and 
Family Welfare, Government of Kerala who gave a presentation before the Committee whic h 
included the following important points:- 
i. The impact of first wave of Covid-19 was minimal in Kerala; 
ii. During the Delta wave, the Oxygen  management was done properly and at no point 
health infrastructure was overwhelmed as managerial, public health and c linical 
interventions were planned at the outset of pandemic itself; 
iii. The State was witnessing very low transmission rate, high case detection, high testing 
rate and low mortality rate; 
iv. The strategies to combat Covid -19 included Genome sequencing for surveillance, 
cluster identification under mobility monitoring, free treatment under universal health 
coverage and respiratory rehab unit for post Covid management; 
v. As on 31 st March 2022, 100% first dose vaccination of front line workers and 60+ age 
group population; more than 90% second dose vaccination of these two categories; high 
vaccination rates in 45-59 and 18-44 age group population; 
vi. The State Government launched DISHA -24*7 multipurpose communication network 
for effective knowledge sharing for empow ering the public during the pandemic times; 
daily bulletins and regular Chief Minister's media briefing were also conducted; 

152 
vii. The Government of India should allow precautionary dose for the 18+ population 
including people with co morbidities; similarly prec autionary dose for those who have 
taken 2 doses abroad should also be allowed; 
viii. Vaccines that protect against all the variant of concern should be developed by bodies 
like ICMR;  
ix. Research whether Covid -19 vaccine should be administered yearly should be 
prioritized; if so covid -19 vaccination should be included in the Universal 
Immunization Programme; and  
x. Cowin Data should be shared with States and UTs through APIs (Application 
Programming Interface).  
6. Thereafter, the members raised certain queries which are as follows:- 
i. Maintenance of cold-chain for transportation of vaccines and how the hilly States could 
work on optimisation and maintenance of cold chains?; 
ii. Responsibilities should be assigned and deaths during the second wave should be 
accounted; 
iii. Vaccination drives involving public representatives in places of public gatherings like 
schools, colleges etc to reduce vaccine wastage; increasing vaccination may reduce the  
fatality rate; 
iv. Steps taken to maintain and better utilise the health infrastructure cr eated during the 
second wave; 
v. Ensuring medicines and other life saving drugs are available at the earliest in case of 
fourth wave of Covid-19; 
vi. Steps taken to contain the spread of Covid-19 in densely populated areas like Dharavi; 
vii. Providing insurance cover under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana to the  doctors 
and medical staff of private hospitals; 
viii. Need to conduct research on delayed effects of Covid-19 on recovered patients and 
ix. More than establishing physical health infrastructure, there is need to devel op more 
number of trained and skilled manpower resources as ultimately, human resource is the 
most important resource to fight any medical emergency. 
7. Thereafter, National Co -Convener, Jan Swasthya Abhiyan gave a presentation in front 
of the Committee. His presentation included following major points:- 
i. Government must ensure transparent and effective monitoring of serious adverse events 
following Covid vaccination and a comprehensive mechanism for management of post -
covid complications must be formulated; 
ii. Profiteering by private vaccine manufacturers must be curbed and manufacturing of  
vaccines by public sector units should be revived and encouraged; 
iii. Law for regulation of private hospitals during health emergencies should be formulated; 
iv. Adequate remuneration and support for ASHA and other frontline health workers; 
v. Urgent need to strengthen public health infrastructure and expanding human resource 
engaged in healthcare by increasing seats in medical institutions; attracting more youth 
to pursue career in medical sciences by making medical education more accessible and 
affordable and 
vi. The Government must significantly increase public health expenditure and provide 
affordable Universal Health coverage to the entire eligible population. 
8. Finally, the Committee heard the views of Dr. Gagandeep Kang who  highlighted the 
following key points on the subject: 

153 
i. India must develop a strategy to build a vaccine eco system to develop completely 
indigenous vaccines; 
ii. Lack of efforts in sharing and making Covid data  public; the CoWIN platform does not 
link to any other data system, which is why despite administering 1.6 billion doses of 
Covishield, India still lacks data on the effectiveness of the vaccine and 
iii. Approvals and licensing to use drugs for clinical researc h and undertaking studies 
should be fast tracked during health emergencies. 
9.  The Chairman then asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries 
raised by the Members within seven days. 
 
10.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.51 p.m. 
  

154 
XV 
 
FIFTEENTH  MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 8 th August, 2022 in Committee Room-
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Santanu Sen 
3. Shri A. D. Singh      
 
LOK SABHA 
 
4. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
5. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
6. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
7. Shri K. Navaskani 
8. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
9. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
10. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
11. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
12. Shri Anurag Sharma 
13. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
14. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
15. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director  
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar   Additional Director 
3. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt draft 137th Report on the subject 
"Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid-19"   and 
***.   
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft 137 th and *** of the 
Committee. The Chairman informed the Committee that a  total of 140 
observations/recommendations were there in the draft 137 th Report and ***.  He invited 
views/suggestions/modifications, if  any, from the Members in the draft reports. During the 
brief deliberation, ***.  After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted both reports with some 
modifications. 
 
* Pertains to other matter 

155 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the aforementioned two Reports may be 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 
Wednesday, the 10th August, 2022. The Committee authorized its Chairman Prof. Ram Gopal 
Yadav, MP, Rajya Sabha  and in his absence Dr. Anil Agrawal , MP, Rajya Sabha  and in the 
absence of both members, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. 
The Committee also authorized Dr. Rajdeep Roy, MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence Dr. 
Sanghamitra Maurya MP, Lok Sabha to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.  
 
5. The Committee further decided that in case the Parliament gets adjounrned sine die, the 
reports would be presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the inter -session 
period.  
 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3:18 p.m.  
  

156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
  

157 
Annexure -1 
State/UT-wise details of Cold Chain Points and their storage capacity 
 
S. No.   State   No. of 
CCP  
 SVS/RVS level   DVS level   Last CCP level  
 Available 
space (in 
ltr)  
 No. of doses 
can be 
stored*  
 Available 
space (in 
ltr)  
 No. of doses 
can be 
stored*  
 Available 
space (in 
ltr)  
 No. of doses 
can be 
stored*  
1  A&N Islands  40 6,321 22,57,418 741 2,64,561 1,731 6,18,132 
2  Andhra Pradesh  1,646 68,234 2,43,69,354 47,029 1,67,96,140 1,97,661 7,05,93,351 
3  Arunachal Pradesh  196 10,401 37,14,589 8,404 30,01,374 8,332 29,75,660 
4  Assam  799 34,659 1,23,78,235 21,325 76,16,099 93,605 3,34,30,384 
5  Bihar  684 1,80,373 6,44,19,014 71,269 2,54,53,300 94,773 3,38,47,585 
6  Chandigarh  53 4,842 17,29,371 1,664 5,94,150 3,638 12,99,371 
7  Chhattisgarh  750 32,944 1,17,65,552 18,603 66,43,766 55,436 1,97,98,409 
8  Dadra & Nagar Haveli  19 380 1,35,738 4,896 17,48,584 1,495 5,33,953 
9  Daman & Diu  2 576 2,05,575 1,365 4,87,360 534 1,90,645 
10  Delhi  631 6,724 24,01,392 13,417 47,91,749 64,940 2,31,92,821 
11  Goa  41 4,542 16,22,282 2,189 7,81,677 3,930 14,03,711 
12  Gujarat  2,295 54,806 1,95,73,637 40,939 1,46,21,137 1,66,576 5,94,91,494 
13  Haryana  688 30,319 1,08,28,104 17,267 61,66,675 55,580 1,98,49,890 
14  Himachal Pradesh  416 20,688 73,88,588 6,710 23,96,445 33,081 1,18,14,660 
15  J&K (including Ladakh)  681 19,724 70,44,366 12,354 44,12,221 63,231 2,25,82,578 
16  Jharkhand  281 55,909 1,99,67,331 20,091 71,75,188 31,735 1,13,33,759 
17  Karnataka  2,900 56,104 2,00,36,990 40,933 1,46,18,776 3,05,681 10,91,71,633 
18  Kerala  1,265 56,983 2,03,51,107 24,592 87,82,892 1,36,871 4,88,82,535 
19  Lakshadweep  5 393 1,40,318 597 2,13,135 952 3,39,921 
20  Madhya Pradesh  1,240 96,329 3,44,03,168 68,484 2,44,58,526 1,13,864 4,06,65,668 
21  Maharashtra  3,318 1,54,044 5,50,15,828 75,416 2,69,34,399 2,90,851 10,38,75,471 
22  Manipur  123 8,531 30,46,940 1,642 5,86,583 3,757 13,41,940 
23  Meghalaya  189 12,043 43,00,972 7,106 25,37,757 8,658 30,92,043 
24  Mizoram  85 6,304 22,51,542 2,147 7,66,899 4,851 17,32,613 
25  Nagaland  123 4,473 15,97,348 1,690 6,03,420 7,504 26,79,848 
26  Odisha  1,250 87,547 3,12,66,714 65,379 2,33,49,571 1,15,997 4,14,27,428 
27  Puducherry  56 1,984 7,08,734 1,328 4,74,254 3,751 13,39,611 
28  Punjab  753 31,473 1,12,40,226 21,599 77,14,042 59,522 2,12,57,726 
29  Rajasthan  2,564 69,199 2,47,13,965 79,628 2,84,38,607 1,79,933 6,42,61,822 
30  Sikkim  36 1,335 4,76,678 1,186 4,23,463 3,843 13,72,392 
31  Tamil Nadu   2,600 88,414 3,15,76,440 51,017 1,82,20,369 1,82,842 6,53,00,726 
32  Telangana  906 43,441 1,55,14,535 43,080 1,53,85,606 1,02,801 3,67,14,535 
33  Tripura  162 8,617 30,77,533 3,173 11,33,247 12,981 46,36,104 
34  Uttar Pradesh  1,309 1,65,112 5,89,68,586 1,46,518 5,23,27,872 1,93,344 6,90,51,443 
35  Uttarakhand  373 11,580 41,35,682 12,709 45,38,896 58,712 2,09,68,539 
36  West Bengal  947 1,93,715 6,91,84,023 97,230 3,47,25,095 1,50,237 5,36,56,166 
37  TOTAL  29,426 9,29,062 58,18,07,874 3,33,715 36,91,83,835 21,13,229 1,00,47,24,568 
***** 