 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
159 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
151ST REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT  
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
PARLIAMENT OF 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NI
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS
151ST REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20
(Laid on the Table
 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024
Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 202
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
FAMILY WELFARE 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
December, 2024) 
, 2025) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii) - (iv) 
4. REPORT (v) 
 Chapter–I  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 1 - 24 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government 
25 – 33 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
34 - 46 
 Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 47 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 48-50 
6. ANNEXURE 52-54 
7. MINUTES* -- 
 To be appended at a later stage

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
3. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
4. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Rameswar Teli 
10. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri  
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
5. Shri Roshan Lal Assistant Committee Officer 
6. Shri Jagannath Sahoo Secretariat Assistant 
 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this 159th Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 151st Report on Implementation of 
Ayushman Bharat.  
2. The 151 st Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023 and laid on the Table 
of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report was received from the Department in the 
month of August 2024.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 45 recommendations/observations in the 151st Report, out 
of which 25 recommendations/observations have been accepted by the Government and have 
been categorized under Chapter I. There are 11 recommendations/observations that the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies that have been 
categorized under Chapter II. There are 9 recommendations/observations, in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and the Committee has 
made further recommendations thereon and has been categorized under Chapter III. While NIL 
recommendation/observation in respect of which final reply of the Government has not been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter- IV.  
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on 18th December, 2024, considered the draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                        PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
December, 2024                                           CHAIRMAN 
Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
                  Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AAM   Ayushman Aarogya Mandir 
AB PM-JAY  Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri-Jan Arogya Yojana 
ABDM   Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
ABHA  Ayushman Bharat Health Account   
AI   Artificial Intelligence 
AIR   All India Radio  
APL   Above Poverty Line  
ASHAs  Accredited Social Health Activists 
AWHs   Anganwadi Helpers  
AWWs   Anganwadi Workers  
BIS   Beneficiary Identification System   
CPD   Claims Panel Doctor  
CSR   Corporate Social Responsibility  
CSS   Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
DISM  District Information System Manager  
DIU  District Implementation Unit  
DoHFW  Department of Health & Family Welfare   
DOM  District Operations Manager  
FLWs   Field Level Workers  
FPS   Fair Price Shop  
GCP   Green Channel Payments   
HBP   Health Benefit Packages  
HDM   Health Data Management  
HFR   Health Facility Registry 
HPR   Healthcare Professionals Registry 
IEC  Information, Education and Communication 
IRDAI   Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority  
ISA  Implementation Support Agencies 
LMIC   Lower and Middle-Income Countries  
LMS  Learning Management System 
ML   Machine Learning 
MoSJE   Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  
NAFU  National Anti-Fraud Unit  
NDHE   National Digital Health Ecosystem  
NGNO   National Grievance Nodal Officer 
NHA   National Health Authority 
NHM   National Health Mission 
NHP  National Health Policy 
NHPR   National Healthcare Provider Registry  
NIHFW  National Institute of Health and Family Welfare 
NMC   National Medical Commission 
PGMEB  Post-Graduate Medical Education Board  

iv 
 
PGMER Post Graduate Medical Education Regulations  
PII  Personal Identifiable Information  
PM-ABHIM  PM-Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission  
PM-JAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
PMSSY Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana  
PPP  Public-Private Partnerships  
RAN   Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi  
RDBMS Relational Database Management System 
SAFUs  State Anti-Fraud Units 
SECC  Socio-economic Caste Census  
SGNO   State Grievance Nodal Officer  
SHAs  State Health Agencies  
SOC  Security Operation Center  
STGs  Standard Treatment Guidelines  
TCIL  Telecom Consultants of India Limited  
TMS  Transaction Management System 
TPAs  Third Party Administrators  
UTs  Union Territories  
VBSY  Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 151st Report on Implementation of Ayushman 
Bharat, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in respect 
of the recommendations/observations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: Para 
number: 1.2.7, 2.3.8, 2.3.9, 2.3.10, 2.3.11, 2.4.4, 2.4.5, 2.5.8, 2.6.4, 2.7.4, 2.7.5, 2.7.6, 
2.7.7, 3.2.2, 3.2.3(i)(b), 3.2.3(i)(c), 3.2.3 (i)(d), 3.2.3(iii), 3.2.3(iv)(a), 3.2.3(iv)(b), 
3.2.3(v)(a), 3.2.3(v)(b), 3.2.3(vi), 3.2.3(vii) and 3.2.3(viii) of the Report. 
       Total –25 (Chapter I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: Para Number: 1.4.10, 1.4.11, 2.4.8, 2.5.11, 
3.1.2, 3.1.5, 3.1.6, 3.1.7, 3.2.3 (ii)(a), 3.2.3 (ii)(b) and 3.2.3(v)(c) of the Report. 
         Total – 11 (Chapter II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee: Para Number: 1.2.6, 2.3.6, 2.3.7, 2.5.7, 2.5.9, 2.5.10, 
3.1.8, 3.2.3(i)(a) and 3.2.3(v)(d) of the Report. 
       Total –9 (Chapter III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: Para Number: NIL 
Total –NIL (Chapter IV) 
 
3.   The details of the ATNs are discussed in respective Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
1.1 Healthcare Access and Affordability in India 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee is of the view that health insurance is a mechanism of pooling the high 
level of OOPE in India to provide greater financial protection against health shocks and improve 
efficiency in the organization and delivery of healthcare for better health outcomes. Increased 
health insurance coverage will reduce catastrophic and impoverishing health expenditures by 
imposing a ceiling on the maximum health expenditure incurred by an individual or household. 
The publicly funded health insurance schemes are envisaged as keystone to advance Universal 
Health Coverage. 
(Para 1.2.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 AB PM-JAY has efficiently delivered the healthcare services to the target population 
resulting in huge OOPE saving for the beneficiaries. It has strengthened India’s march towards 
Universal Health Coverage. 
1.1.3 The beneficiary base under AB PM-JAY has been increasing over the years. Initially, 
when the scheme was launched, 10.74 crore beneficiary families under AB PM-JAY were 
targeted which was increased to 12 crore families in January 2022. Further, over the years of 
scheme implementation, various other vulnerable groups identified by the Government like 
PVTG, ASHAs (ASHAs) / Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) / Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) have 
been included under the scheme. 
1.1.4 Further, it may kindly be noted that one of the core principles around which AB PM-JAY 
has been designed is to ensure appropriate convergence with the existing health 
insurance/protection schemes of various Central Ministries/Departments and State Governments. 
This ensures comprehensive coverage for catastrophic illness, establish national standards for 
health assurance systems and provide national portability of care. As on date, 24 States/UTs have 
converged their State schemes with AB PM-JAY. Further, central government schemes like those 
for transgenders and manual scavengers have also been converged with AB PM-JAY. Also, NHA 
has onboarded multiple schemes on its platform which include CGHS, Ayushman CAPF, ESIC, 
BoCW, RAN-HMDG, PM-CARES. Efforts are being made for convergence with more schemes.  
 
1.2 Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 

2 
 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee believes that the Ministry and NHA, along with implementing States/UTs, 
need to undertake a country-wide drive to scrutinise and validate the BIS database. Validation 
checks should be in place to increase the accuracy and reliability of the data. The inconsistencies 
in the database may be removed at the earliest. The appropriate mechanism may be devised to 
ensure weeding out of ineligible beneficiaries and identification of eligible beneficiaries in a 
planned, coordinated and time-bound manner. States/UTs need to be impressed upon to map 
their own database with the SECC database to avoid duplication. The process for approval or 
rejection of ineligible beneficiaries and registration of eligible beneficiaries needs to be made 
simple and less time-consuming to avoid delay beyond the prescribed time. 
(Para 2.3.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 Initially when the scheme was started, it intended to cover 10.74 crore families identified 
from the Socio-economic Caste Census (SECC) of 2011. Further, the Cabinet of Government of 
India, in 2022, approved a revision in beneficiary base under AB PM-JAY from 10.74 crore to 12 
crore families considering India’s decadal population growth of 11.7 % over 2011 population. 
Many States and UTs have further expanded the beneficiary base with 13 States/UTs adopting 
Universal Health Coverage. To ensure that eligible beneficiaries get covered under the scheme, 
States/UTs have been provided the flexibility to choose other non-SECC beneficiary database 
which matches the profile of the beneficiary with that of AB PM-JAY.  
1.2.3 Further, to ensure that eligible beneficiaries are identified and issued Ayushman card with 
certainty, NHA has adopted a 3-pronged strategy which is as follows: 
i. National Health Authority has issued guidelines to States/UTs to use suitable Aadhaar 
seeded digitized databases of beneficiaries of similar socio-economic profile as that of 
eligible SECC beneficiaries. 
ii. Aadhaar based de-duplication of the beneficiary databases have been undertaken at the time 
of ingestion. 
iii. Aadhaar based e-KYC has been mandated for all beneficiaries. 
1.2.4 The States have also been asked to ensure that their databases are updated to weed out any 
ineligible beneficiary. It is important to note that when these databases are ingested in the BIS, 
Aadhaar based mapping is undertaken to ensure data de-duplication. 
1.2.5 Along with this, it is pertinent to note that the beneficiary verification process has been 
simplified with the launch of new ‘Ayushman app’ with self-verification process where an 
individual can create an Ayushman card for himself/herself. Also, the new system is equipped 
with the latest technology like face-auth which mitigates the need for any external device at the 
time of bio-authentication. 

3 
 
Recommendation 
1.2.6 The Committee recommends that the NHA needs to develop an IT-based solution to 
educate and create awareness that a family is eligible for the scheme, and ways to rapidly 
identify the family if any member comes to an empanelled hospital for treatment. 
(Para 2.3.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.7 Under AB PM-JAY, various measures have been undertaken to raise awareness about the 
scheme among eligible beneficiaries. 
1.2.8 In this regard, it may kindly be noted that the beneficiary verification process has been 
simplified with the launch of new ‘Ayushman app’ which has a self-verification process, wherein 
any individual can create an Ayushman card for himself/herself. Also, the new system is 
equipped with the latest technology like face-auth which mitigates the need for any external 
device at the time of bio-authentication.  
1.2.9 In the current IT system (BIS 2.0), the beneficiary search has been enabled using 
Aadhaar, Family ID such as ration card, Name along with location/address. Further, the line 
listing of beneficiaries has been provided in the BIS along with the Status of beneficiary 
identification. 
Recommendation 
1.2.10 The Committee believes that the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
programs are significant to understanding the various target audiences for PMJAY, like their 
attitudes and perceptions towards the scheme, and to educate the target audience about the 
scheme driving changes in their attitudes and behaviour. The programs are necessary to 
maximise the reach, impact, and awareness of the scheme amongst targeted beneficiaries. NHA 
needs to set up designated IEC cells, make special efforts in a planned manner and sensitise the 
entitled beneficiaries to generate awareness about the scheme. NHA should coordinate with 
SHAs and NGOs to design a comprehensive IEC plan and undertake IEC campaigns in a 
planned manner. Such IEC efforts should be recorded, reviewed, and monitored regularly. 
(Para 2.3.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.11 Under AB PM-JAY, a separate IEC division is operational at NHA level for planning and 
executing all IEC related requirement of the scheme. Further, all States have been advised to 
setup separate IEC cell to undertake various IEC campaigns to increase beneficiary awareness 
about the scheme.  

4 
 
1.2.12 Under AB PM-JAY, a comprehensive media and outreach strategy to spread awareness 
and empowering the beneficiaries about their entitlements and rights under the scheme has been 
followed. This included the use of media vehicles such as outdoor media, digital display 
announcements at major bus stations, national and regional press coverage, op-eds and 
advertorials in print media, radio campaign, telecast of beneficiary testimonials via Doordarshan, 
mass messaging. Further, NHA collaborated with Indian Railways for beneficiary awareness 
through public announcements at various railway stations. Also, train wrapping with scheme 
related information has been undertaken to spread awareness among beneficiaries.  
1.2.13 Further, a comprehensive media plan prepared by experts has been implemented during 
FY 2023-24. Also, NHA has issued a detailed IEC guideline which is available on the website 
(https://pmjay.gov.in/resources/iec).  
1.3 Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee notes that the flexibility has been given to the States/UTs to choose the 
remaining beneficiaries from any digital database that the State/UT has if the broad nature of 
these new people matches with the beneficiary nature of PMJAY. The Committee is of the view 
that under that dispensation, States/UTs may be asked to include senior citizens, particularly 
those residing in old age homes or any other place by revising the Deprivation Criteria, as 
beneficiaries of the scheme. Many senior citizens residing in places like shelter homes and old 
age homes do not fall under the Below Poverty Line and face financial problems while availing 
treatments. Their inclusion in the scheme would help them access affordable and quality 
treatment. 
(Para 2.3.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 Initially, 10.74 crore beneficiary families under AB PM-JAY were targeted based on the 
Socio-economic Caste Census (SECC) of 2011 using select deprivation and occupational criteria 
across rural and urban areas respectively to identify the families. Further, in January 2022, the 
Cabinet of the Government of India, revised the beneficiary base to 12 crore families and decided 
to give flexibility to use other digitized databases of similar socio-economic profile for 
identification of beneficiaries under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY. Accordingly, States/UTs have 
been given flexibility to use suitable databases for beneficiary identification. This is aimed to 
ensure that all eligible beneficiaries are provided free healthcare. In addition, many States/UTs 
implementing AB PM-JAY have expanded the beneficiary base under the scheme, at their own 
cost. 
1.3.3 Further, since all members of an eligible family are entitled for healthcare coverage under 
AB PM-JAY, senior citizens in such eligible families are also covered under the scheme. 

5 
 
1.3.4 The suggestion regarding inclusion of old aged persons as a separate category has been 
noted.  
1.4 Implementation Process- PMJAY 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee observes that there is a trend amongst the States to prefer the trust model 
and is of the view that the States opt for this model owing to their experience of working with the 
insurance companies. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to explore 
provisions to modify and improve the modalities related to the insurance mode to make it 
simpler, transparent, and attractive to the States. This will provide more options for the States to 
implement the scheme according to their regional demography and needs. The outgo of funds is 
immediate in insurance mode. The Committee suggests that the Government should push for 
payment of premium of insurance in instalments, preferably monthly/quarterly instalments.  
(Para 2.4.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY is being implemented in 33 States and Union Territories 
(UTs). Various States / UTs are at different levels of preparedness and have varying capacity to 
manage the scheme. Accordingly, under PM-JAY they have been provided with the flexibility to 
implement the scheme through trust, insurance or mixed model (combination of trust and 
insurance). 
1.4.3 Further, NHA shares the feedback on the performance of the scheme with the States 
highlighting deficiencies, if any, on the part of insurance companies.   
1.4.4 In this regard, it may kindly be noted that at the time of launch of the scheme, many 
States/UTs did not have experience of implementing cashless health assurance scheme, therefore, 
SHAs opted for insurance or mixed mode of implementation. However, as the scheme progressed 
and the States/UTs gained experience of running the scheme and therefore, migrated to trust 
mode of implementation.   
1.4.5 Regarding, payment of premium in instalments, it may be noted that States have defined 
different payment terms to insurance companies. Accordingly, few States release premium on a 
quarterly basis, others in three instalments of 45:45:10 etc.  
Recommendation 
1.4.6 The Committee further believes that the Government should evaluate the performance of 
insurance companies. The Government should explore a robust monitoring mechanism to keep a 
check on any unjustified profit-making and any unethical linkage between the insurance 
companies and hospitals. Necessary mechanisms should be in place to ensure that the insurance 
companies are working as per the objectives and norms of the scheme. 

6 
 
(Para 2.4.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
1.4.7 The performance of Insurance companies is monitored by Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority (IRDAI). The engagement of Insurance companies under AB PM-JAY is 
monitored as per the contract signed between State Health Agencies and the Insurance 
Companies. NHA constantly shares feedback on the scheme implementation with the SHA. 
There is a dedicated dashboard for monitoring different parameters of scheme implementation 
related to insurance company.  
1.4.8 For mitigating the scope of unjustified profit making by the Insurance companies, 
provision has been made, where, in case the Insurer's average Claim Ratio falls below certain 
threshold, the insurance company is required to refund the premium paid after deducting the 
claims reimbursement amount and defined administrative expenditure. 
1.4.9 It is pertinent to note that the National Health Authority has set up a National Anti-Fraud 
Unit (NAFU) as the Anti-Fraud Cell at National and State level with the primary responsibility of 
prevention, detection and deterrence of fraud and abuse under PM JAY. In addition, all 
States/UTs except Lakshadweep have set up State Anti-Fraud Units (SAFUs) at the State level to 
instrumentalize anti-fraud and abuse control activities at the ground level. The systems 
established by NAFU runs different kind of triggers to examine possible nexus between 
stakeholders to defraud the system facilitating timely action to prevent/deter the occurrence or 
penalise the defaulter. 
 
1.5 Empanelment of Hospitals and Management  
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee also noticed that the availability of EHCPs is not uniform across the 
country, and it is very low in some of the States. The Ministry, in coordination with State 
authorities, should make concerted efforts to encourage more private hospitals to get empanelled 
under the scheme in all the districts, particularly in regions with low density of EHCPs, and to 
eradicate disparities in the availability of EHCPs per lakh beneficiaries across various regions 
of the country. The IEC activities may be utilised robustly in efforts to empanel more hospitals. 
This would make affordable and quality treatment accessible to poor and vulnerable populations 
uniformly across the country, particularly in rural and remote areas, removing any regional 
disparity. 
(Para 2.5.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 

7 
 
1.5.2 As on 14.05.2024, a total of 29,387 hospitals including 12,464 private hospitals have been 
empanelled under the scheme, out of which more than 28,300 hospitals have been empanelled 
under AB PM-JAY in tier-2 and tier-3 cities. Further, as on date, over 2,950 hospitals have been 
empanelled in the aspirational districts under the scheme. This has been done with the objective 
to ensure better accessibility to healthcare in the close vicinity of the beneficiaries’ residence.  
1.5.3 As on 01.05.2024, approximately 6.96 crore hospital admissions worth over ₹ 94,225 
crore have been authorised under the scheme. The percentage of hospital admissions authorised 
in the private sector by count and amount are 55% and 67% respectively. In view of the above, it 
can clearly be seen that the participation of private hospitals under PM-JAY is healthy. 
1.5.4 With regards to empanelling new hospitals, it may kindly be noted that NHA has 
developed guidelines for empanelment of hospitals under AB PM-JAY wherein hospitals are 
empanelled post physical verification and subject to fulfilment of certain minimum criteria. 
However, SHAs have been provided flexibility regarding the empanelment criteria due to varying 
situation of demand and supply, and unique geographical situations in different States. The 
process of hospital empanelment is overseen by the respective State Health Agencies.  
1.5.5 It is a matter of record that there is a disparity among the States regarding the availability 
of healthcare services. Though PM-JAY aims at catalysing the private investment in healthcare 
facilities, its mandate is limited to empanelling available hospitals. However, at the same time, 
NHA has been constantly encouraging States / UTs to empanel more hospitals under the scheme 
to ensure access to quality healthcare to all eligible beneficiaries. To further improve their 
participation, a two-pronged strategy has been adopted by NHA: 
1   Expanding the network of hospitals empanelled under PM-JAY: 
1.5.6 Public health and hospitals being a State subject, State Health Agencies (SHAs) are 
mandated with the responsibility of empanelling hospitals under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY.  
1.5.7 In this context, NHA has also been continuously following up with prominent corporate 
hospital chains for empanelment under the scheme. Along with this, NHA has consulted various 
private medical associations including IMA in order to understand the challenges of the hospitals 
and solicit their participation under the scheme. Similar efforts have also been put by States / UTs 
as well. As a result, several top corporate hospitals have been empanelled under the PM-JAY 
scheme.  
2 Improving the participation of already empanelled hospitals 
1.5.8 In order to improve the participation of already empanelled hospitals, the following steps 
have been undertaken: 
a. Package rates have been revised under HBP 2022 in which package rates have increased 
for 350 packages and new packages have been added. 

8 
 
b. Claim settlement is being monitored at highest level and it is being ensured that claim is 
settled within defined turnaround time. 
c. Virtual and physical capacity building of hospitals are being undertaken. 
d. NHA has introduced a hospital-specific toll-free number (14413) to address the concerns 
of hospitals on a real-time basis. 
e. NHA have issued instructions to SHAs that DIUs should regularly visit empanelled 
hospitals to understand their concern and review their participation under the scheme.  
 
1.6  Convergence of PM-JAY with Schemes of States  
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee observes that the PM-JAY scheme is running either after merging or in 
parallel with the State Government schemes. There are concerns that at the time of 
implementation, PMJAY, which is the major funding agency, may get the back seat in 
comparison to State schemes. The Government is taking steps like co-branding of Ayushman 
Bharat cards, kiosks, etc. The Committee believes that the Central Government should make 
efforts in right earnest for the convergence of State schemes with Ayushman Bharat and to give 
prominence to PMJAY.   
(Para 2.6.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 One of the core principles around which AB PM-JAY has been designed is to ensure 
appropriate convergence and uniformity of healthcare schemes in the country. This ensures 
comprehensive coverage for catastrophic illness, establish national standards for health assurance 
systems and provide national portability of the care.  
1.6.3 Over the years of implementation, 24 States/UTs have converged their State schemes with 
Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY. However, in few smaller States, the State specific scheme has not 
been converged with PM-JAY. Efforts are being made to achieve the convergence of such 
schemes with PM-JAY. 
1.6.4 Further, many of these States have also agreed to issue co-branded Ayushman cards to all 
eligible beneficiaries (including State scheme beneficiaries). Also, uniform Hospital 
kiosk/Helpdesk are being setup in all hospitals empanelled under AB PM-JAY. These hospital 
kiosks have been designed and branded as per the IEC guidelines of NHA. The objective is to 
provide assistance to AB PM-JAY beneficiaries in beneficiary verification and issuance of 
Ayushman Card, availing treatment or any other support required by the beneficiaries. As on 
date, more than 9,500 Kiosks have been deployed. 
1.6.5 This has helped AB PM-JAY to be identified as a national scheme aimed at achieving the 
vision of free access to quality healthcare services to all. 

9 
 
1.7 Monitoring, Fraud Control and Grievance Redressal 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 The Committee appreciates the fact that during the study of this subject, about 98 percent 
of the total grievances registered were resolved and the implementation of PM-JAY is being 
continuously monitored and evaluated at NHA. The Committee endorses the need for a robust 
data collection and analysis system for a mega scheme. Further, fraudulent practices, such as 
overbilling and unnecessary procedures, can strain the program's finances and undermine its 
goals. Preventing and detecting fraud is a significant concern. In view of these facts, the 
Committee is of the opinion that technology is crucial for monitoring and fraud prevention, as all 
the processes and data are in electronic form. To enhance the evaluation and analysis of 
available data in PMJAY, the Committee recommends establishing a dedicated and skilled IT 
research team, to develop and monitor the technical aspects of IT applications for effective 
dissemination of information and data analysis. Additionally, regular upgrades and 
improvements to PM-JAY portals and modules are essential. Capacity-building programs in IT 
and data processing should be organised for officials and stakeholders, including hospital staff, 
at various levels.  
(Para 2.7.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 AB PM-JAY is implemented through an end-to-end IT enabled system. All the relevant 
data related to Ayushman card creation, hospital admission, claim processing, hospital 
empanelment, etc. are captured on a real time basis.  This helps in ensuring efficiency, 
transparency and accountability into the system. 
1.7.3 Along with this, it may kindly be noted that a dedicated monitoring & research team has 
been put in place which helps develop various types of analytical dashboards which monitor the 
status of the implementation of AB PM-JAY based on Key Performance Indicators and generate 
reports for the same. Analytical reports help identify trends with respect to beneficiary 
identification and claim management. Along with this, the team works on various working papers 
and policy briefs that pave way for evidence-based decision making under AB PM-JAY.   
1.7.4 National Health Authority has setup a National Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) with the primary 
responsibility of prevention, detection and deterrence of fraud and abuse under PM-JAY. Further, 
all States/UTs have set up State Anti-Fraud Units (SAFUs) at the State level to instrumentalize 
anti-fraud and abuse control activities at the ground level.  
 1.7.5 With respect to the upgrades in the system, it may kindly be noted that NHA has been 
using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) technologies to detect suspicious 
transactions / potential frauds in AB PM-JAY. Technologies deployed include rule-based triggers 
and Machine Learning algorithms, fuzzy logic, image classification and de-duplication, etc.  
NHA is also using fraud analytics services.  

10 
 
1.7.6  Further, NHA has collaborated with Insurance Institute of India for Joint Certification 
Course and training modules to enhance technical skills of Medical Auditors / Field Investigators. 
State wise Annual Training Calendar have been finalised and due training including training of 
trainers (ToTs) are given to the stakeholders as per their requirement. 
1.7.7  Some of the key initiatives undertaken by NHA for capacity building is as follows:  
● The Capacity Building division has meticulously mapped stakeholders to thematic areas, 
analysing the specific knowledge levels required by each stakeholder group. 
● An Annual Training Calendar has been prepared for the States and NHA based on the 
different stakeholders and inputs received from 33 States and UTs. 
● National Health Authority has designed a Learning Management System (LMS) known as 
Arogya Shiksha, which serves as a platform for managing, documenting, tracking, 
reporting, and delivering training sessions related to PM-JAY. This initiative intends to 
help NHA to scale up knowledge dissemination to a large audience through various 
online modules.  
● A Cascade model of training has been formed where 92 Master Trainers have been 
trained on the different thematic areas for PMAMs, Claim Adjudication, and NAFU. 
● In addition to physical workshops, the division conducts around 15 virtual sessions every 
month on different thematic areas to offer ongoing support to the physical workshops and 
furnish stakeholders with updated information. 
 
Recommendation 
1.7.8 The Committee believes that the instances of fraud activities should be recorded and 
shared with all SHAs. Artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies should be used 
intensively in data scrutiny, analysis, and monitoring. Further, instead of taking only reactive 
actions to the malpractices, the Government must set up mechanisms through scrutiny of 
electronic data and field inspection to anticipate and take proactive actions to prevent fraudulent 
practices. 
(Para 2.7.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.9 NHA has also made improvement in the existing Beneficiary Identification System (BIS) 
and Transaction management System (TMS) platform. The newly launched BIS 2.0 platform 
makes it convenient for scheme’s beneficiaries to generate Ayushman cards. Under BIS 2.0, 
village wise access to the beneficiary database has been enabled for better mobilisation of the 
scheme’s beneficiaries. Further, the Transaction Management System (TMS 2.0) has been 
designed in a way to improve in-patient registration, pre-authorisation, admission, initial 
diagnosis, follow up, claims management and payments. NHA is working on a new HEM portal 

11 
 
which will streamline the process of hospital empanelment with auto-escalation feature, hospital 
inspection, etc.  
Recommendation 
1.7.10 The Committee feels that obtaining feedback, satisfaction level and suggestions from the 
patients/beneficiaries plays an inevitable role and provides important indicators to ensure that 
the EHCPs are providing quality healthcare services. This also helps in evaluating and 
monitoring the performance and role of other intermediaries/stakeholders like insurance 
companies, Implementation Support Agencies (ISA), Arogya Mitras, NHA & SHAs officials, etc.  
(Para 2.7.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.11 In the existing AB PM-JAY ecosystem, NHA has a robust system of collecting feedback 
from the beneficiaries at different stages. Personalised feedback collected from beneficiaries are 
as follows: 
● Outbound feedback calls to the beneficiaries are done on the second day of the discharge 
for assessing beneficiaries’ satisfaction level. 
● Health status calls are done on the 15th day after discharge to check the health status of the 
beneficiary. 
1.7.12 During the outbound call, feedback is collected regarding the support provided by the 
PMAM and other staff of the hospitals enabling the generation of information related to Arogya 
Mitra’s performance. Any complaint received during this process, is registered on the online 
grievance system and then tracked for resolution. 
1.7.13 Additionally, under PM-JAY a grievance redressal system has been designed where 
beneficiaries can easily register and track the grievances. The beneficiary may register their 
grievances through online/offline mode. Beneficiaries can register grievances online through the 
portal https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in or through Centralized Public Grievance Redressal and 
Monitoring System at (pgportal.gov.in). These grievances are forwarded to State Grievance 
Nodal Officer (SGNO) and further to National Grievance Nodal Officer (NGNO) for necessary 
action. The complainant can track the status of their grievances through the portal itself. For 
offline grievances, beneficiary can call on the helpline ‘14588’ where complaint is registered 
through call centre executives.  
 
 
Recommendation 

12 
 
1.7.14 The Committee has observed that some of the EHCPs, after performing 
treatment/surgery, say that they are empanelled, but the surgery performed is not covered under 
the PMJAY. The Committee believes that to prevent such instances, the Government must publish 
a list of empanelled healthcare providers with the procedures for which they are empanelled. 
Such a list must be made accessible to the illiterate people, tribal population and people living in 
remote areas through Arogya Mitras, ASHA workers, Community Service Centres, etc. Further, 
the Government must ensure that all hospitals place a board with a list of all empanelled 
procedures available in that hospital at the reception area and the kiosks installed there.  
(Para 2.7.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.15 The details of hospitals empanelled along with specialty is available in the public forum 
and can be accessed under: 
https://hospitals.pmjay.gov.inSearch/empnlWorkFlow.htm?actionFlag=ViewRegisteredHosptlsN
ew  
1.7.16 With respect to providing necessary information about the scheme to eligible 
beneficiaries, it may kindly be noted that there are AB PM-JAY representatives (Pradhan Mantri 
Arogya Mitra) in every PM-JAY empanelled hospitals who facilitate the beneficiary with all the 
necessary information / steps required for availing AB PM-JAY benefits. Along with this, a 
uniform help desk / kiosk is being set up across hospitals to provide necessary support to the 
beneficiaries. 
1.7.17 Further, hospitals have been asked to display the services for which they are empanelled 
under the scheme. https://nha.gov.in/img/resources/1623-NHA-IEC-Guidelines-3-01-21.pdf 
(Refer Para 9.1).  
1.8 Challenges and potential areas of improvement under PM-JAY  
Recommendation 
1.8.1 The Committee is of the considered view that to achieve Universal Health Coverage, 
untapped sections of community, regions and sections of the people must be covered under the 
scheme to increase the covered population axis. Providing preventive health and making the 
health benefit packages attractive would result in decrease in disease burden axis thereby 
reducing the implementation cost, the third axis of the Cube. Addressing these shortcomings 
requires a comprehensive approach, including strengthening healthcare infrastructure, 
improving administrative efficiency, enhancing awareness, and implementing robust monitoring 
mechanisms to ensure transparency and accountability.  
(Para 3.2.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 

13 
 
1.8.2 When Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri – Jan Arogya Yojana (AB PM-JAY) was 
launched in 2018, 10.74 crore beneficiary families were targeted based on the Socio-economic 
Caste Census (SECC) of 2011 using select deprivation and occupational criteria across rural and 
urban areas respectively to identify the families. Further, in January 2022, the Cabinet of the 
Government of India, revised the beneficiary base to 12 crore families. Many States/UTs 
implementing AB PM-JAY have further expanded the beneficiary base to approximately 18.4 
crore families, at their own cost. 
1.8.3 Further, the Government of India, in the interim budget for 2023-24, has announced the 
inclusion of about 37 lakh Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs), Anganwadi Workers 
(AWWs) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) across the country under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY.  
1.8.4 Ayushman Bharat adopts a continuum of care approach, comprising two inter-related 
components, which are – HWC & PM-JAY.  
1.8.5 Health and Wellness Centers (Ayushman Arogya Mandirs) are envisaged to deliver an 
expanded range of services to address the primary health care needs of the entire population in an 
area, expanding access, universality and equity close to the community. The emphasis of health 
promotion and prevention is designed to bring focus on keeping people healthy by engaging and 
empowering individuals and communities to choose healthy behaviours and make changes that 
reduce the risk of developing chronic diseases and morbidities. 
1.8.6 With respect to the rates and packages defined under PM-JAY, it is important to note that 
the Health Benefit packages used under AB PM-JAY have been revised and rationalized over the 
years. To begin with, AB PM-JAY initially had 1393 treatment packages. However, the fifth and 
the latest Health Benefit package - HBP 2022 was launched in April 2022 wherein a total of 365 
procedures have been added and rates have been revised upwards in case of 832 procedures. HBP 
2022 consists of 1949 procedures including 1 unspecified package across 27 specialities.  
 
1.9 Quality of Healthcare Services and health infrastructure  
Recommendation 
1.9.1 The Committee has been informed of the complaints regarding delays in settling claims 
and payments. This may be because schemes like PM-JAY deal in volume. The Government 
should address the issue by ensuring that the turnaround time of claim settlement and claim 
rejection ratio is reduced significantly. This may be done by implementing various provisions like 
the use of IT-based modules, regular interaction among SHAs, EHCPs, ISAs, insurance 
companies and other stakeholders, and capacity building of stakeholders involved in claim 
processing. These steps would increase the proportion of timely payments, which is the major 
concern of most hospitals and would attract major private hospitals for empanelment under PM-
JAY. 

14 
 
(Para 3.2.3(i) (b) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 Timely settlement of claims is one the key parameters against which scheme performance 
is measured. NHA has adopted multi-pronged strategy for timely settlement of claims which 
includes skill upgradation of adjudicators, process re-engineering, monitoring of fund release, etc. 
Some of the key initiatives include: 
1. NHA has collaborated with Insurance Institute of India for Joint Certification Course and 
training modules to enhance technical skills of Medical Auditors / Field Investigators.  
2. State wise Annual Training Calendar has been finalized and due training including 
training of trainers (ToTs) are given to the stakeholders as per their requirement. 
3. Discussions are held with States for timely release of State share of fund.  
4. Query process made more objective 
5. Clearly defined roles and responsibilities of claim adjudicators at different level 
6. NHA has launched another initiative called the Green Channel Payments (GCP) with the 
objective to ensure timely payment to the hospitals. Under GCP, partial payment of 50% 
of the claim amount is automatically released to the hospitals at the time of claim 
submission, while the balance is released after the normal claim adjudication process. 
7. NHA has also developed an analytical dashboard for more granular monitoring of claim 
adjudication under the scheme. 
 
Recommendation 
1.9.3 The Committee would also like to highlight that there are regional disparities in 
healthcare infrastructure and services between different states and regions, which lead to 
unequal access and outcomes. Moreover, most of the healthcare infrastructure is concentrated in 
cities and urban areas. It is also seen that the public healthcare facilities available in rural areas 
are flawed due to the shortage of well-equipped and staffed infrastructure, which limits the 
accessibility to care. The Committee believes that the Government should take steps to strengthen 
the healthcare infrastructure in rural and underserved areas to ensure accessibility to quality 
healthcare services 
(Para 3.2.3(i) (c) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.4 As of 14th May, 2024, a total of 29,387 hospitals including 12 464 private hospitals have 
been empanelled under the scheme across the country to provide healthcare benefits to scheme 
beneficiaries. Out of these, 1028 hospitals including 503 private hospitals have been empanelled 
in Tier – 1 cities, while the rest of the 28,339 hospitals including 11,952 private hospitals have 
been empanelled in the Tier – 2 & 3 cities and villages. 

15 
 
1.9.5 Further, Public health being a State subject, States are mandated with the responsibility of 
empanelling/strengthening hospitals. 
1.9.6 To reduce the urban-rural divide and the regional imbalance in presence of medical 
institutions, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare administers a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
(CSS) for ‘Establishment of new medical colleges attached with existing district/referral 
hospitals’ with preference to underserved areas and aspirational districts, where there is no 
existing Government or private medical college. The fund sharing pattern between the Centre and 
State Governments is in the ratio of 90:10 for Northeastern and Special Category States, and 
60:40 for others. A total of 157 medical colleges have been approved under the scheme, out of 
which, 108 have become operational. The list of the colleges approved under the scheme is at 
Annexure. 
1.9.7 Further, the Ministry is also administering the Centrally Sponsored Schemes for Up-
gradation of existing Government medical colleges to increase MBBS & PG seats, where-in 
support is provided for development of infrastructure and procurement of equipment for 
increasing MBBS & PG seats in Government Medical Colleges with a cost ceiling of ₹1.20 crore 
per seat with similar funding pattern between Central and State/UT Governments. Under these 
schemes, 4977 MBBS seats and 8058 PG seats have been approved across the country so far.  
 
1.10 Monitoring, Fraud Control and Grievance Redressal 
Recommendation 
1.10.1 The Committee would like to place an emphasis in applying behavioural science insights 
to increase the uptake of the PMJAY Scheme. Keeping in view some of the recent behavioural 
studies, the Committee suggests that PMJAY messaging to the targeted population can be revised 
by including the following behavioural insights: 
 Simplification: PMJAY messaging to contain short and simplified text with clear 
behavioural instruction to register with the Scheme. 
 Social norms: People simulate behaviour when they see that others are also doing it. 
PMJAY messaging can be designed in such a way that carries a strong message that 
others are doing it. Moreover, behavioural studies indicate that people are risk-seeking 
over losses but risk-averse over gains. Gain-framed PMJAY messaging will prove to be 
effective. 
(Para 3.2.3(i) (d) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.10.2 As on 01.05.2024, over 6.96 crore hospital admission worth over ₹ 94,225 crore have 
been authorized under the scheme out of which 1.98 crore hospital admission have been 

16 
 
authorized under the scheme during 2023-24. This clearly manifests that the scheme uptake has 
significantly increased over years with the increasing beneficiary awareness.   
1.10.3 In this regard, it is pertinent to note that NHA has a comprehensive media and outreach 
strategy to spread awareness and empowering the beneficiaries about their entitlements and rights 
under the scheme has been followed. This includes the use of media vehicles such as outdoor 
media, digital display at ticket counters across various railway stations, announcements at major 
bus stations, passenger train branding, national and regional press coverage, op-eds and 
advertorials in print media, radio campaign, telecast of beneficiary testimonials via Doordarshan, 
mass messaging, etc. Further, NHA is working on nudge messaging also for the eligible 
beneficiaries under the scheme. 
1.10.4 Along with this, NHA publishes success stories along with beneficiary testimonials who 
have availed benefits under the scheme on social media platforms and through other media 
vehicles.  
1.10.5  Messages are sent to beneficiaries at different stages of card creation and service delivery. 
The inputs of the Committee have been noted regarding behavioural change for necessary action.  
 
1.11 Importance to Medical Ethics 
Recommendation 
1.11.1 The Committee is of the opinion that maintaining medical ethics and avoiding 
unnecessary procedures, tests, and over-prescription is a concern, as it can lead to rising costs 
and potential harm to patients. The Government should give impetus to value education and 
ethics in medical curriculum and training workshops to sensitise the staff involved in the 
implementation of the scheme that maintaining small ethical standards would bring significant 
results. 
(Para 3.2.3(iii) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.11.2 For the treatments under PM-JAY, NHA has developed a total of 28 sets of 675 Standard 
Treatment Guidelines (STGs) in order to ensure appropriate healthcare delivery for specific 
clinical circumstances. STGs have been integrated in TMS for assisting adjudicators in 
processing of request for pre-authorizations and claims. 
1.11.3 Further, National Health Authority has setup a National Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) with the 
primary responsibility of prevention, detection and deterrence of fraud and abuse under PM-JAY. 
Further, all States/UTs have set up State Anti-Fraud Units (SAFUs) at the State level to 
instrumentalize anti-fraud and abuse control activities at the ground level. 

17 
 
1.11.4 With respect to the upgrades in the system, it may kindly be noted that NHA has been 
using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) technologies to detect suspicious 
transactions / potential frauds in AB PM-JAY. Technologies deployed include rule-based triggers 
and Machine Learning algorithms, fuzzy logic, image classification and de-duplication, etc. 
1.11.5 The Government has taken significant steps to incorporate value education into medical 
curriculum and training programs. Section 25 (1)(b) of NMC Act, 2019 provides that Post-
Graduate Medical Education Board (PGMEB) under NMC develop competency based dynamic 
curriculum at postgraduate level and super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations 
made under this Act, with a view to develop appropriate skill, knowledge, attitude, values and 
ethics among postgraduates and super-specialists to provide healthcare, impart medical education 
and conduct medical research. 
1.11.6 In response to above quoted section, NMC Post Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 
2023 or “PGMER-23” in its abbreviated form, provides that all postgraduate students shall 
complete course in ethics including Good Clinical Practices and Good Laboratory Practices, 
whichever is relevant to them, to be conducted by Institutions/Universities. The students are 
expected to complete the course in the first year. No post-graduate student shall be permitted to 
appear in the examination without the above certification. Further, it shall be the duty of all 
concerned universities with the medical institutions under them, to partner with the NMC to 
provide training in clinical and practical skills along with theoretical knowledge, laying emphasis 
upon attitude, ethics and communication skills to ensure imparting competency-based medical 
education. 
 
1.12 Technology and Data Security 
Recommendation  
 
1.12.1 The Committee has been informed that the personal details and medical history of the 
beneficiaries under PMJAY are maintained by the NHA through various modules of their IT 
platform. The beneficiaries may visit multiple doctors. The digital record would help the doctor 
to see the medical history of the beneficiary with his/her consent. The NHA has also maintained a 
standardised registry containing the list of all the hospitals, which is called the Healthcare 
Facility Registry, a list of all the healthcare professionals, doctors, nurses, a list of all labs, a list 
of all the drugs, etc. These initiatives are significant to make the PMJAY scheme cashless, 
paperless, portable, transparent, etc. However, the Committee would also like to highlight that 
safeguarding patient data and ensuring the security of health information systems are vital to 
prevent data breaches and misuse. The Government must ensure robust IT infrastructure with 
quality encryption and safeguards. 
(Para 3.2.3 (iv) (a) of the Report) 

18 
 
Action Taken 
1.12.2 The Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) aims to develop the backbone necessary 
to support the integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. It will bridge the existing gap 
amongst different stakeholders of healthcare ecosystem through digital highways. The Mission 
aims to create an integrated healthcare system that will link practitioners and patients digitally by 
giving them access to real-time health records. 
1.12.3 Under Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission different registries are being created. Under 
ABDM, Ayushman Bharat Health Account (ABHA) is being created for every citizen, which 
shall work like her digital health-records wallet. Similarly, Healthcare Professionals Registry 
(HPR), a comprehensive repository of all healthcare professionals involved in delivery of 
healthcare services across both modern and traditional systems of medicine is being created. 
Further, Health Facility Registry (HFR) is a comprehensive repository of health facilities of the 
nation across different systems of medicine. It includes both public and private health facilities 
including hospitals, clinics, diagnostic laboratories and imaging centres, pharmacies, etc. As on 
16/05/2024, 61.46 crore ABHA cards have been created and 38.10 crore health records have been 
linked. Further, 2.67 lakh health facilities have been verified on HFR and 3.49 lakh healthcare 
professionals have been verified on HPR. 
1.12.4 Under AB PM-JAY, ABHA ID of the beneficiary has been integrated with PM-JAY ID to 
ensure seamless integration with larger healthcare ecosystem. 
1.12.5 National Health Authority (NHA) is committed to the protection of beneficiaries’ privacy 
and is taking the necessary steps to protect the personal data belonging to beneficiaries’ or any 
individual who is a part of Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY). 
1.12.6 The repository in which NHA stores data is RDBMS (Relational Database management 
System) which has been setup in the NHA data center. PII (Personal Identifiable Information) of 
the beneficiary is stored in RDBMS in encrypted format.  
1.12.7 NHA has also engaged Telecom Consultants of India Limited (TCIL) as Security 
Operation Center (SOC) which monitors security postures (alerts & incidents) of the cloud 
infrastructure. They also conduct Security Assessment of all NHA Apps. They use the Threat 
Intelligence tools to ensure all known threats are configured in the rules and IOCs informed by 
various security agencies are blocked immediately to secure NHA Infrastructure. NHA also has a 
team of security experts over and above the security experts of Master Service Provider & Cloud 
Service Provider, who tracks the performance of IT system. 
1.13       Technology and Data Security 
Recommendation  
 

19 
 
1.13.1 The Committee also believes that the Government should give impetus to trust-building 
campaigns as some of the beneficiaries may hesitate to join the scheme of misleading information 
regarding breaches of their personal and medical data security. The Committee has also been 
informed that some of the healthcare professionals have also raised data security concerns and 
are hesitating to register at the NHA registry. The Government must address these concerns 
through continuous interaction and trust-building initiatives. 
(Para 3.2.3 (iv) (b) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2 Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) is designed on the principle of privacy 
preserving federated data architecture that is essential for enhancing the  security  and  privacy  of  
the  personal  and  sensitive  information  of  the citizens while ensuring interoperability and 
technological flexibility and independence. Therefore, data is not centralized but rather stored 
within the hospitals/facilities where it originates. Health data is always created and stored by 
healthcare providers. ABDM only facilitates secure data exchange between the intended 
stakeholders on ABDM network after the patient’s consent. Consequently, the responsibility for 
implementing robust data security mechanisms also falls upon these hospitals/facilities, where the 
data is stored. 
1.13.3 Only the data collected for registries such as the ABHA registry, Healthcare Professional 
Registry, and Healthcare Facility Registry is stored centrally. This central storage is imperative as 
these datasets play a crucial role in ensuring interoperability, trust, identification, and establishing 
a single source of truth across various digital health systems. 
1.13.4 Data sharing is allowed based in compliance with the ABDM Health Data Management 
Policy (“HDM Policy”) which has the principle of “Security and Privacy by Design” for the 
protection of individuals’ personal digital health privacy at its core. It acts as a guidance 
document across the National Digital Health Ecosystem (NDHE) and sets out the minimum 
standards for data privacy protection that should be followed to ensure compliance with relevant 
and applicable law, rules and regulations. 
1.13.5 The importance of trust-building campaigns, especially considering potential 
misinformation surrounding data security breaches is acknowledged. Extensive IEC in the form 
of radio spots, print media and IRCTC website have been initiated and will be continued to 
address these concerns and communicating the privacy related safeguards in ABDM so that 
beneficiaries feel confident in participating in the ABDM. 
1.13.6 In the National Healthcare Provider Registry (NHPR), healthcare professionals grant 
consent for the visibility of their profiles (public display) during registration. Additionally, 
professionals have the option to choose which fields they wish to display publicly. Consequently, 
based on their consent, specific fields within their profile, such as mobile numbers or email 
addresses, may be visible or not visible in the public domain as per their preference. We 
understand that some healthcare professionals may also have reservations regarding data security, 

20 
 
and we are actively working to engage with them directly and/or through their professional 
associations to address their concerns.  
 
1.14 Indirect Cost and Expenditure Beyond the cover of ₹ 5 lakh 
Recommendation  
 
1.14.1 The Committee has seen that, while interacting with the beneficiaries of Ayushman 
Bharat, even if the beneficiaries are insured, they must bear the high indirect cost that might go 
beyond their ability to pay. To address the catastrophic financial burden on poor patients and to 
achieve the objective of PMJAY, the Government needs to cover this indirect financial loss for a 
poor patient for whom this cost is not negligible. 
(Para 3.2.3(v) (a) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.14.2 AB PM-JAY provides health cover of up to ₹ 5 lakh per family per year for secondary 
and tertiary care hospitalization. The treatment packages under AB PM-JAY are very 
comprehensive which includes pre-hospitalization expenses including diagnostics, 
premedication, pre-anaesthetic examination, and consultation relevant to the present disease for 
up to 3 days and the package amount also covers post-hospitalization expenses including drug 
expenses for up to 15-days under this scheme. 
1.14.3 However, few States and UTs provide additional benefits in terms of transport allowance 
etc. to the scheme beneficiaries with the intent to reduce OOPE. 
1.14.4 The suggestions of the Committee regarding covering indirect expenses are noted.  
 
1.15 Indirect Cost and Expenditure Beyond the Cover of ₹ 5 lakhs 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.15.1 The Committee, while interacting with both private and government hospitals, has noted 
that some of the complex and high-end surgeries or chronic treatment cost more than the sum of 
₹ 5 lakhs covered under the PMJAY. Also, some of the costly procedures and surgeries are not 
covered under the scheme. To address such issues, some of the hospitals have set an example by 
successfully attracting Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds and private investment to 
create funds to bear the expenditure of beneficiaries for the cost of treatment over and above the 
insured sum of ₹ 5 lakhs. The Government need to implement such practices across the country 
to make PM-JAY more and more effective and beneficial for the poor sections of the society. 
Further, in many cases, the amount of ₹ 5 lakhs may not be utilised by every patient/family. Only 
in cases of serious diseases and other surgeries, this amount is utilised. Apart from Rashtriya 

21 
 
Arogya Nidhi, the Government should consider the creation of some special purpose vehicle or 
arrangement to cater to fill the gap in such special cases in a more structured manner. 
(Para 3.2.3 (v) (b) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.15.2 With regard to the limit of ₹ 5 lakhs, it may be noted that 99.4% of expenditure incurred 
per treatment cycle is usually below ₹ 2 lakhs. Therefore, almost all treatments are covered under 
AB PM-JAY and the existing wallet of ₹ 5 lakhs is sufficient for providing treatment to the 
beneficiaries. Currently, PMJAY covers 1949 procedures across 27 specialities. High-end 
treatments like bone marrow transplant, renal transplant, medical and radiation oncology are 
covered under AB PM-JAY. 
1.15.3 Further, under Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi (RAN), eligible beneficiaries are provided higher 
cover for identified treatment. 
1.15.4 Further, few States have decided to expand the benefit cover under the scheme. Further, 
few SHAs have created a corpus using certain percentage of the claim revenues earned under by 
Government hospitals under the scheme to provide additional support for high end treatment 
beyond 5 lakhs. 
1.15.5 In view of the above, treatment requirement of the beneficiaries is mostly met. However, 
suggestion of the Committee is noted.  
 
1.16 Need to expand the treatment procedures covered under PM-JAY 
Recommendation  
 
1.16.1 The Committee has come to know that some costly procedures and serious diseases are 
not included in the PMJAY. Further, the OPD expenses are not covered by the scheme and are 
considered only in the case of inpatients. The Committee recommends that the coverage of 
procedures and surgeries under PM-JAY needs to be increased. Further, the Committee suggests 
that the rates under the health benefit packages (HBP) of PM-JAY must be revised frequently and 
kept updated vis-à-vis the present market rates 
 
 (Para 3.2.3(vi) of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.16.2 Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY was launched as part of Ayushman Bharat, making a shift 
from a sectoral and segmented approach of health service delivery to comprehensive need-based 

22 
 
healthcare service. This involved two interrelated components viz. PM-JAY for secondary and 
tertiary care and Health and Wellness Centres (Ayushman Arogya Mandirs) to cater to primary 
healthcare needs of the scheme.  
1.16.3 Further, it may kindly be noted that the treatment packages under AB PM-JAY are very 
comprehensive and consists of 1949 procedures across 27 specialties which also includes 1 
unspecified package to include such packages not specified in the Health Benefit Package. 
Further, treatment covered under AB PM-JAY includes medical & radiation oncology, renal 
transplant, bone-marrow transplant etc. 
1.16.4 With respect to the rates and packages defined under PM-JAY, it is important to note that 
the Health Benefit packages used under AB PM-JAY have been revised and rationalized over the 
years. To begin with, AB PM-JAY initially had 1393 treatment packages. However, the fifth and 
the latest Health Benefit package - HBP 2022 was launched in April 2022 wherein a total of 365 
procedures have been added and rates have been revised upwards in case of 832 procedures. HBP 
2022 consists of 1949 procedures including 1 unspecified package across 27 specialities. Further, 
NHA is again undertaking the review exercise for the HBP and shall be taken up as per the 
recommendation/suggestion received in this regard. 
 
1.17 Inclusion of Above Poverty Line (APL) middle-class people in the PMJAY 
Recommendation  
 
1.17.1 The Committee is of the view that there are many lower middle-class people who fall in 
the APL category, and they are just above the BPL and the inclusion criteria for the PMJAY. 
Such people are in dire need of this scheme. The report of NITI Aayog titled “Health Insurance 
for India’s Missing Middle” also suggests that even after the implementation of the PMJAY, at 
least 30% of the population (over 40 crore individuals) still lack any form of financial protection 
for health. Adverse health events can lead to financial hardship and even push them into poverty. 
They are characterized by informal employment with unstable incomes and a lack of social 
security benefits. The Committee believes that the Government should consider expanding the 
base of beneficiaries to be covered under the PMJAY by including more categories in eligibility 
criteria. This is also in line with the eventual objective of the Government to attain the SDG goal 
of the UHC. 
 (Para 3.2.3(vii) of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.17.2 A total of 12 crore beneficiary families have been covered under PMJAY. Government of 
India has decided to include 37.18 lakh ASHAs/AWWs/AWHs included under the scheme. In 

23 
 
addition, many States have expanded the coverage under the scheme and 13 States/UTs are 
implementing near Universal Health Coverage. 
1.17.3 Further, NHA is working in collaboration with different Ministries to expand the 
coverage under AB PM-JAY ecosystem to eligible population through convergence of existing 
healthcare cover. Recently, NHA entered an MoU with the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (MoSJE) to expand healthcare services to manual scavengers, transgenders, etc. 
1.17.4 NHA is also engaging with NITI Aayog and different Ministries to identify potential 
missing groups and devise mechanisms to extend healthcare protection to them by using different 
modes of financing.  
 
1.18 Guidelines and Mechanism to Govern Employment and Conduct of Arogya Mitras 
Recommendation  
 
1.18.1 The Committee has been informed that the Central Government has not issued any 
standard guidelines to employ Arogya Mitras under the PMJAY. There are different 
arrangements to employ them and to pay them any honorarium across the States. In some States, 
they are retired or serving employees of the same hospital for which additional payment is made 
to them for their services. They help the patients in their registration and provide guidance 
during the treatment. The Committee recommends that the Central Government should issue 
guidelines and minimum qualifications to be complied with by the States while employing Arogya 
Mitras. The Government should devise a mechanism to monitor the conduct and ethical 
behaviour of Arogya Mitras. 
 (Para 3.2.3(viii) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.18.2 NHA has issued guidelines for onboarding of PMAMs where suggestive criteria for 
selection of PMAMs have been defined which are as follows: 
● Completed 10+2 from a recognized institution (Preferably Graduates) 
● Basic proficiency in computer operations 
● Completed the Pradhan Mantri Arogya Mitra Training Course and passed the respective 
course exam/certification. 
● Possessing fluent communication skills in Hindi/ English and Local language of the State/ 
region 
● Having adequate functional computer literacy which shall include understanding of 
Microsoft Office Suite and navigating through Internet Portals. 
● Preference to be given to Female Candidates for the position of Pradhan Mantri Arogya 
Mitra. 

24 
 
● Existing staff of Government hospitals can also be nominated to act as Pradhan Mantri 
Arogya Mitra by the State Government. 
1.18.3 However, the responsibility with regard to engagement of PMAMs rests with the 
States/UTs. 
1.18.4 As regards grievances of any misconduct and any unethical behavior, beneficiaries can 
register online/offline complaint through national call centre (14555) or on grievance redressal 
portal (https://cgrms.PM-JAY.gov.in/) or through any other medium. All such grievances are 
immediately assigned to respective authorities at the States or national level. Also, it is pertinent 
to note that post discharge of beneficiaries, the feedback mechanism also captures input with 
regard to PMAMs. Further, the input received on the matter has been noted.  
  

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
2.1 Healthcare and Health Insurance Schemes in Other Countries 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the experiences of Thailand, China, and Latin American 
countries demonstrate the difficulty of increasing health coverage in the informal/unorganized 
sector. Thailand made good progress in UHC by fully subsidizing the informal sector, while 
China has partially subsidized that segment. However, China’s experience also indicates the 
possibility of sustained coverage through a contributory and voluntary scheme. Further, the 
examples from Latin America highlight that adverse selection and inadequate risk-pooling is a 
pressing challenge for voluntary contributory schemes targeted towards the informal sector. The 
adverse selection due to opting out of high-income people reduces cross-subsidisation, leading to 
high premiums and inequality in access to healthcare.  
(Para 1.4.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 The suggestions from the Committee regarding different models for extending healthcare 
cover to different population groups have been noted.  
Recommendation 
2.1.3 The Committee is of the view that the Government may consider some of the provisions of 
the Affordable Care Act of United States for inclusion in Ayushman Bharat. By including some 
sections of the persons falling in APL category, the provisions for 'employer mandate' to provide 
health insurance to the employee and his family, subsuming of specific schemes for children and 
senior citizens, tax incentives and disincentives to corporate regarding healthcare are some of 
the measures worth including in the Ayushman Bharat Scheme and PMJAY. 
(Para 1.4.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.4 As of now, the benefit coverage under AB PM-JAY is completely funded by the Central 
and State Government together. 
2.1.5 Further, employees working in establishments with 10 or more persons (20 or more in 
some states) whose monthly wages do not exceed ₹ 21,000 are covered under ESIC. In such 
cases, collective contribution from employees is mandated which are used for extending different 
kinds of services including healthcare. NHA and ESIC are working towards establishing 

26 
 
synergies between PM-JAY and healthcare services provided under ESIC. As on date, ESIC 
beneficiaries can avail healthcare services under AB PM-JAY in 157 districts. 
2.2 Financing Mechanism 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee notes that the fund released by the Central Government during the last 
five years, from 2018-19 to 2022-23, towards PM-JAY is around ₹ 17,000 crore, of which ₹ 
6,180 crore were released in the last financial year. Also, except for the last financial year, the 
fund utilization was much less as compared to the budget estimation. The Government should 
take steps to ensure higher and more efficient utilization of funds allocated in the budget. The 
Committee would further like to state that the budget of ₹ 6,000-7,000 crore allocated as the 
share of the Central Government is much less for 33 States/UTs. The Committee suggests that the 
budget allocation for the scheme should be increased as the PM-JAY is the keystone scheme of 
the Government in achieving the UHC. For this purpose, other old/peripheral schemes of the 
Government in the healthcare sector may be subsumed or integrated with PM-JAY so that the 
unutilized funds, resources, and manpower involved in those schemes may be utilized for the 
efficient implementation of PMJAY. 
(Para 2.4.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 The budget allocated for the financial year 2018-19 was ₹ 2400 crore out of which 
₹1849.5 crore has been released to States/UTs. Further, the revised budgetary allocation for the 
financial year 2019-20 was ₹ 3,200 crore out of which ₹2992.9 crore have been released to 
States/UTs as part of central share of funds. During 2019-20, the budgetary allocation was 
increased to ₹ 6400 crore which was revised to ₹ 3,200 crore, of which ₹ 2,992.9 crore has been 
released to States and UTs. Further, ₹ 6400 crore were allocated for the financial year 2020-21 
and 2021-22 out of which ₹ 2544.1 crore and ₹ 2940.6 crore respectively have been released to 
States/UTs. This shortfall may be attributed to low utilization as the scheme was in its initial full 
year of implementation. Also, the uptake of scheme was affected during COVID. 
2.2.3 For the FY 2022-23, ₹ 6412 crore was allocated and the funds allocated have been fully 
utilized other than the North-East component. Further, the budget allocated for the financial year 
2023-24 is ₹ 7,200 crore (including ₹ 569 crore for capital expenditure and headquarter 
expenditure) out of which ₹ 6060.4 crore have been released to States / UTs implementing AB 
PM-JAY as part of the Central share of funds.  
2.2.4 Along with this, it is pertinent to note that as per Cabinet approval, the budget estimate for 
the upcoming Financial Years i.e. FY 2024-25 and 2025-26 has been revised to ₹ 8,498 crore for 
each FY anticipating the increase in scheme uptake.  
 

27 
 
2.3 Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
Recommendation 
2.3.1 The Committee came to know of the instances of delay in approval of empanelment of 
hospitals. In some cases, the delays beyond the stipulated period of 30 days ranged from 1 day to 
44 months. The Committee is of the view that the Government should review the procedures in 
this regard and take necessary steps to reduce the pendency in such approvals after carrying out 
all effective checks. 
(Para 2.5.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 The decision regarding the empanelment of the hospitals comes under the purview of 
respective State Government. However, NHA monitors this as part of performance indicators of 
the scheme and has issued guidelines to SHAs regularly regarding pending empanelment 
requests.  
2.3.3 The pendency is attributed to the delay in reply from the hospitals with the queries raised 
regarding certain deficiencies as per hospital empanelment criteria. 
2.3.4 Communication is sent to respective stakeholders via e-mail, SMS, webinars, various 
letters for clearing the Hospital Empanelment request pendency. Delay in empanelment is a key 
review area during the meetings with SHAs. 
2.3.5 Further, NHA is working with the stakeholders for process re-engineering to streamline 
the empanelment of hospitals.  
2.4 Best Practices in Providing UHC 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Ministry, in coordination with NHA and SHAs, should accelerate and intensify the 
IEC activities. The camps at village and block levels should be organised in a planned manner to 
increase awareness about the scheme and to fast-pace the registration of eligible beneficiaries. 
Civil societies, NGOs and local-level officials need to be involved in making these camps 
successful. The ration shops may also be roped in to increase awareness among the local masses, 
which could play a significant role in saturating beneficiary coverage across all the districts. 
Further, the verification of genuine beneficiaries is necessary to prevent the leakage of funds. 
The practice followed in Chandigarh should be implemented across the country, particularly in 
urban areas where the proportion of the migratory population is high, to ensure the genuineness 
of beneficiaries. A dedicated cell should be formed in every district for cross-checking of 
documents, telephonic verification, and door-to-door field verifications with a special focus on 
non-KYC beneficiaries. The success stories and testimonials of PM-JAY beneficiaries should be 

28 
 
given wide publicity through Community Radio, wall calendars and kiosks installed at EHCPs. 
Kerala's model of kiosks as a one-step solution should be encouraged.  
(Para 3.1.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 AB PM-JAY has a comprehensive media and outreach strategy to spread awareness and 
empower beneficiaries regarding their rights and entitlements focussing on rural areas. This 
includes intensive advertisement over traditional media platforms. NHA has shared model IEC 
materials including leaflets, flyers, pamphlets, banners etc. with the States/UTs. States/UTs 
customise these contents with respect to their regional language. NHA has been telecasting PM-
JAY related information on Doordarshan, DD News, Sansad TV, private news channels etc. 
Further, radio campaigns have been launched on AIR and private FM channels. Regular print 
advertisements are published. Other media channels like auto-branding, announcements at 
railway stations, mass-messaging, out-door branding, etc. have been undertaken. In radio, TVC 
and print-advertisement content in the local languages are used. Further, NHA has shared 
branding materials with SHA for use in local languages. Nukkad Nataks have been organised 
during events and fairs like IITF. States have organised many local events like run for Ayushman 
Bharat, painting and slogan writing competition etc. Further, many Ayushman Samvads have 
been organised with different stakeholders for reaching out to them. Also, beneficiary interaction 
sessions have also been telecasted on All India Radio (AIR) and Doordarshan.  
2.4.3 Along with this, it may kindly be noted that SHAs are extensively engaging Field Level 
Workers (FLWs) including ASHA in the Ayushman Card creation process. Also, few States have 
engaged Fair Price Shops (FPS) in Ayushman card creation.  It may be noted that in many States, 
FLWs are being incentivized by paying ₹ 5 for each successful e-KYC related to Ayushman card 
creation. 
2.4.4  It is pertinent to note that Beneficiary verification and card creation have been simplified 
with the launch of ‘Ayushman’ mobile application. This mobile application is equipped with 
face-auth technology that eliminates the dependency on any external authentication device. 
Mobile application is being leveraged for door-to-door campaign. 
2.4.5 Various campaigns like Ayushman Bhava and Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra (VBSY) have 
also been launched across the country to ensure saturation of Ayushman card creation.  During 
Ayushman Bhava campaign, over 9.6 crore verification requests for Ayushman card have been 
received, out of which approximately 9.42 crore Ayushman Cards have been created. Further, 2.8 
crore Ayushman cards have been created during VBSY. 
2.4.6 With respect to verification of genuine beneficiary, it is pertinent to note that the process 
of beneficiary verification has been based on Aadhaar authentication.  
 

29 
 
Recommendation 
2.4.7 The report of NITI Aayog highlighted the issue of low financial protection for health in 
the missing middle segment of the population. There are some States where the target set to cover 
the population under the PM-JAY scheme has not been met through identifying beneficiaries as 
per the SECC database and other digital databases available with the States. The Committee, in 
view of the findings of the NITI Aayog, is of the view that such States should include new 
categories for 100% targeted coverage under the scheme. This will also address the issue 
highlighted by NITI Aayog. Further, the expansion of health insurance / assurance coverage is a 
necessary step to achieve UHC. Hence, the outreach and base of beneficiaries to be covered 
under the PM-JAY scheme should be gradually increased till UHC is achieved. 
(Para 3.1.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.4.8 The beneficiary base under AB PM-JAY has been increasing over the years. Initially, 
when the scheme was launched, 10.74 crore beneficiary families under AB PM-JAY were 
targeted on the basis of the Socio-economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 data, which was 
increased to 12 crores in 2022. Further, States/UTs were given flexibility to use other databases 
for verification of beneficiaries under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY against such SECC 
beneficiaries who couldn't be identified and verified. Accordingly, all States/UTs have provided 
beneficiary database for unidentified families and same have been ingested in beneficiary 
identification system. Further, coverage have been expanded to vulnerable groups like PVTG, 
ASHAs (ASHAs) / Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) / Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs). 
2.4.9 It may kindly be noted that one of the core principles around which AB PM-JAY has been 
designed is to ensure appropriate convergence with the existing health insurance/protection 
schemes of various Central Ministries/Departments and State Governments. This ensures 
comprehensive coverage for catastrophic illness, establishes national standards for health 
assurance systems and provides national portability of care. As on date, 24 States/UTs have 
converged their State schemes with AB PM-JAY. Further, central government schemes for 
transgenders and manual scavengers have also been converged with AB PM-JAY. Also, NHA 
has onboarded multiple schemes on its platform which include CGHS, Ayushman CAPF, ESIC, 
BoCW, RAN-HMDG, PM-CARES. Further, efforts are being made for convergence with various 
other schemes.  
Recommendation 
2.4.10 The Committee appreciates the fact that the Ayushman Bharat scheme, since its 
implementation has covered a large section of population at a fair speed, about 40 crore 
Ayushman Cards have been targeted at the end of the current financial year. The Committee has 
however, observed that there is wide variation in the per capita amount spent on healthcare per 
annum among the States ranging from ₹ 556/- (Bihar) to ₹ 9450/- (Arunachal Pradesh), 
according to a study. To achieve UHC, the Committee recommends the Government to impress 

30 
 
upon the States/UTs with low investment in health care, to enhance it reasonably to achieve the 
targets of UHC. 
(Para 3.1.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.4.11 Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY is being implemented in 33 States and Union Territories 
(UTs). Various States / UTs are at different levels of preparedness and have varying capacity to 
manage the scheme. However, it has been seen that scheme uptake across States have improved 
under the scheme over the years of implementation.   
2.4.12 It is apparent that the increase in beneficiary awareness leading to higher number of 
Ayushman cards creation has substantially increased the uptake of the scheme across the States. 
For this, over the last five years, various initiatives have been undertaken to ensure that the 
benefit of the scheme reaches to the last mile. These initiatives include Aapke Dwar Ayushman, 
Ayushman Bhava campaign, launch of Ayushman App for Ayushman Card saturation etc. 
Ayushman card creation was also one of the on-spot services being offered during the Viksit 
Bharat Sankalp Yatra.  As a result of the persistent efforts, as on 15th May 2024, more than 34.32 
crore Ayushman cards have been created across the country, out of which approximately 11.58 
crore Ayushman cards have been created in FY 2023-24. Further, it may be noted that this has 
eventually resulted in over 1.98 crore hospital admission during FY 2023-24 which is the highest 
utilization under the scheme since inception. 
2.4.13 With respect to implementation of scheme in Bihar, it may kindly be noted that the card 
creation in the State has increased sharply reaching to a total of 2.89 crore Ayushman cards in the 
State where over 2.6 crore Ayushman cards have been created in the State in the last two months 
only.  Out of 6.96 crore hospital admission, 10.27 lakh hospital admissions worth ₹ 1052.54 crore 
hospital admission have been authorised in the State of Bihar.  
Recommendation 
2.4.14 The Committee observes that the initiative of District EHCP Connect in Kerala helps in 
information sharing and capacity building of EHCPs in dealing with the treatment of 
beneficiaries and improves adherence to scheme guidelines. The online referral system adopted 
in Karnataka made the search for available specialist treatment in the proximity to the residence 
easy and aided in the optimal utilization of available resources. The practice of following clinical 
protocols developed by using principles of evidence-based medicine checks the misuse of 
packages while raising pre-authorisations. The Committee is of the opinion that these good 
practices should be implemented across the country as these initiatives would lead to an overall 
improvement in scheme utilization. 
(Para 3.1.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 

31 
 
2.4.15 For successful implementation of the scheme across States/UTs, NHA publishes “Best 
Practices Booklet” as a knowledge product that would enable cross-learning of the States with 
respect to best practices in implementing the PM-JAY scheme. States have the flexibility to adopt 
these best practices considering the States’ requirements.  
2.4.16 As regards implementation of referral system in Karnataka, other States have also 
implemented other forms of referral systems. The suggestions of the Committee are noted for due 
action. 
2.5 Capacity and Workforce  
Recommendation 
2.5.1 Ensuring an adequate and skilled healthcare workforce to meet the increased demand for 
services is a challenge. In view of this fact, the Committee is of the opinion that the Government 
must fill the vacancies at various levels in NHA, SHAs, DIUs and other implementing agencies at 
the earliest. Apart from that, the Ministry must also engage with State Governments to ensure 
that the medical professional workforce, including the paramedical staff, is adequate in all 
healthcare institutions. A periodic report may be called from Health Secretaries in the States 
about vacancies at various levels in healthcare institutions of the respective State. 
(Para 3.2.3(ii) (a) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 NHA has been on boarding its workforce through various sources considering the 
expansion of the scheme over years. Along with this, NHA has issued model guidelines for 
manpower engagement at various levels in the State. NHA has also issued guidelines for the 
constitution of District Implementation Unit (DIU) where the role is defined for District Program 
Coordinator, District Operations Manager and District information System Manager. Further, 
NHA co-ordinates with the SHAs to ensure that human resources are deployed as per 
requirement. 
2.5.3 The Government has increased number of medical colleges and subsequently increased 
MBBS seats. There is an increase of 82% in Medical Colleges from 387 before 2014 to 706 in 
2023-24. Further, there is an increase of 112% in MBBS seats from 51,348 before 2014 to 
1,08,940 in 2023-24 and increase of 127% in PG seats from 31,185 before 2014 to 70,645 in 
2023-24. As per information provided by National Medical Commission (NMC), there are 
13,08,009 allopathic doctors registered with the State Medical Councils and the National Medical 
Commission (NMC) as of June, 2022. Assuming 80% availability of registered allopathic doctors 
and 5.65 lakh AYUSH doctors, the doctor-population ratio in the country is 1:834 which is better 
than the WHO standard of 1:1000.  
 
Recommendation 

32 
 
2.5.4 The Committee believes that capacity building of people involved in the implementation of 
PMJ-AY must be upgraded through training and mid-career programs. The Government should 
focus on providing training related to technical skills, IT systems, accounting, data analysis, 
optimal use of artificial intelligence, etc. This would help in the efficient and intensive usage of 
the new technologies in the implementation and monitoring of the PMJAY scheme. This would 
also play a major role in improving the indicators highlighting the achievements, acceptance, 
coverage, and impact of the scheme. 
(Para 3.2.3(ii) (b) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.5.5 For effective implementation of the scheme, NHA has been actively engaged in capacity-
building endeavours aimed at disseminating comprehensive knowledge about various aspects of 
the scheme and further, training human resources for an effective implementation. This initiative 
follows a systematic approach encompassing four key stages: needs assessment, training and 
content design, workshop execution across diverse regions, and feedback evaluation from each 
training session. 
2.5.6 Some of the key initiatives undertaken by NHA is as follows:  
● Mapping of stakeholders to thematic areas, analysing the specific knowledge levels 
required by each stakeholder group. 
● An Annual Training Calendar has been prepared for the States and NHA based on the 
different stakeholders and inputs received from 33 States and UTs. 
● National Health Authority has designed a Learning Management System (LMS) known as 
Arogya Shiksha, which serves as a platform for managing, documenting, tracking, 
reporting, and delivering training sessions related to PM-JAY. This initiative intends to 
help NHA to scale up knowledge dissemination to a large audience through various 
online modules.  
● A Cascade model of training has been formed where 92 Master Trainers were trained 
based on the different thematic areas for PMAMs, Claim Adjudication, and NAFU. 
● In addition to physical workshops, the division conducts around 15 virtual sessions every 
month on different thematic areas to offer ongoing support to the physical workshops and 
furnish stakeholders with updated information 
● Capacity Building team also conducts pre and post assessment for the participants to 
know the quality of the trainings conducted both in terms for the participants and the 
trainer.  
● NHA has collaborated/partnered with the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare 
(NIHFW) and IITs to impart training. 
2.6 Indirect Cost and Expenditure Beyond the Cover of Rs. 5 lakhs 
 

33 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.6.1 The Committee would also like to suggest that the Government must encourage more 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and take steps to attract more funds through CSR. The NHA 
management team should assist the Government hospitals in attracting more CSR funds from 
private companies and PSUs. The Government should also make strategies to bring more funds 
to less industrialized States through CSR and PPP mechanisms. These initiatives would also 
assist in addressing the lack of healthcare facilities in rural and remote areas and filling the gaps 
due to regional disparities. 
(Para 3.2.3(v) (c) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2  PM-JAY is completely funded by the Government and the costs are shared between 
Central and State Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  

34 
 
 
3.1 Healthcare Access and Affordability in India 
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee believes that the Government's health expenditure needs to be increased 
reasonably from the present 2.1 percent of GDP on the lines of the objectives of the National 
Health Policy 2017. Apart from increased public health expenditure, the efficient utilisation of 
available funds should also be emphasised to improve the quality and access of healthcare 
infrastructure. The active collaboration with private stakeholders may also help in strengthening 
the infrastructure significantly.  
(Para 1.2.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 As per Budget Division, MoHFW, the information concerning public health expenditures 
for the last five years is as under: 
(in crore of Rupees) 
Financial Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Actuals 
2019-20 62659.12 62659.12 62397.08 
2020-21 65001.80 78866.00 77569.33 
2021-22 71268.77 82920.65 81779.85 
2022-23 83000.00 76370.40 73308.30 
2023-24 86175.00 77624.79 75791.62 
(Provisional) 
 
3.1.3 National Health Policy (NHP), 2017 envisages raising government health expenditure to 
2.5% of GDP in a time bound manner. Further, NHP 2017, also envisages that States should 
increase their health spending to at least 8% of their budget and two-thirds of such expenditure 
should be on Primary care. The budget allocation for Department of Health & Family Welfare 
(DoHFW) has increased by 82% from ₹ 47,353 crore in 2017-18 (BE) to ₹ 86,175 crore in 2023-
24 (BE). Government is making continuous efforts to increase allocation in health budget. The 
15th Finance Commission has also provided ₹ 70,051 crore Grants for health through the Local 
Government. 
3.1.4 Further, the Government has launched four mission mode projects, namely PM-
Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM), Ayushman Aarogya Mandir 
(AAM), Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) and Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
(ABDM). 
3.1.5 PM-ABHIM was launched as a mission to develop the capacities of primary, secondary, 
and tertiary health care systems, strengthen existing national institutions and create new 

35 
 
institutions to cater to detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. PM-ABHIM has an 
outlay of ₹ 64,180 crore. 
3.1.6 Ayushman Aarogya Mandir (AAM) provides preventive, promotive, rehabilitative and 
curative care for an expanded range of services encompassing Reproductive and Childcare 
services, Communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases and all health issues. 
3.1.7 Pradhan Manti Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) is the largest publicly funded health 
protection Scheme in the world which provides health cover of ₹ 5 lakh per family per year for 
secondary and tertiary care hospitalization to 55 crore beneficiaries. 
3.1.8 Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) has been launched with aim to develop the 
backbone necessary to support the integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. 
3.1.9 Other notable initiatives are to provide financial and technical support to States/UTs 
under National Health Mission (NHM), setting up of new AIIMS, upgrading of Government 
medical colleges under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), support to 
States/UTs for setting up of new medical colleges as well as for increasing UG and PG medical 
seats, provision of free drugs and free diagnostic facilities at Primary Health Centres. 
3.1.10 The implementation of AB PM-JAY and the scheme uptake has improved over the years. 
Based on the scheme utilization, the central allocation of fund under AB PM-JAY has also 
increased which is as follows: 
Financial Year Budget Estimate (in crore of Rupees) 
2018-19 2,400 
2019-20 6,400 
2020-21 6,400 
2021-22 6,400 
2022-23 6,412 
2023-24 7,200 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.11 The Committee acknowledges the advancements made in health sector expenditure 
by the Government. However, it would like to underscore the need for a critical 
examination of these developments considering the National Health Policy (NHP) 2017.                 
The Government has set an ambitious target to elevate public health expenditure to 2.5% of 
GDP. As per recent PIB Press release there has been an  an increase in health expenditure 
from 1.4% to 1.9% between the fiscal years 2017-18 and 2023-24. While this upward trend 
is noticeable, it is essential to recognize that the target set by the Government remains a 
significant challenge to achieve. The Committee emphasizes that substantial efforts are still 

36 
 
required to meet this target. Therefore, it recommends that the Government realign its 
strategies and preparedness to intensify efforts towards achieving the stipulated goal. 
Additionally, the Committee urges upon the Government to submit a comparative analysis 
of the progress made by various States and Union Territories (UTs) concerning the NHP 
2017 mandate, which stipulates that States should allocate at least 8% of their budgets to 
health spending. This data will facilitate a comprehensive understanding and evaluation of 
progress in health expenditure across the country. Furthermore, the Committee would like 
to be informed about any obstacles impeding the realization of these targets. Identifying 
these hindrances will be crucial for devising effective strategies to enhance public health 
funding and ensure that the objectives set forth in the National Health Policy are met 
efficiently. 
 
3.2 Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
 
Recommendation 
3.2.1 The Committee, in the above context, was apprised that several beneficiaries were facing 
problems in addition and inclusion of family members above or less than the prescribed 6 family 
members. The ministry stated that the criteria of 6 family members is with reference to one 
mobile number only and there was no cap on family size in PM-JAY. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the difficulties being faced by the beneficiaries having family size less than or 
more than 6 members may be addressed promptly by updating the application software. 
(Para 2.3.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 Initially when the scheme was started, it intended to cover 10.74 crore families 
constituting the bottom 40% of India’s population. These beneficiaries were identified from the 
Socio-economic Caste Census (SECC) of 2011 basis 6 deprivation and 11 occupational criteria 
across rural and urban areas respectively. 
3.2.3 The Cabinet of Government of India, in 2022, approved a revision in the beneficiary base 
under AB PM-JAY from 10.74 crore to 12 crore families considering India’s decadal population 
growth of 11.7 % over 2011 population. 
3.2.4 Further, in pursuance of the decision of the Cabinet of Government of India, States/UTs 
have been given flexibility to use non-SECC databases to identify leftover (unverified) SECC 
beneficiaries. Subsequently, the States were asked to provide the list of eligible beneficiaries 
under the scheme. It was ensured that the States share the Aadhaar seeded database of the 
beneficiaries. 
3.2.5 In case of Uttar Pradesh, the scheme is implemented in convergence with State scheme 
viz. Mukhya Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana. A total of 1.8 crore families are eligible under the 

37 
 
converged scheme, out of which 1.31 crore beneficiary families are supported by Central and 
State Government, while approximately 49 lakh families are fully supported by the State 
Government. The State has included 49 lakh ration card families with more than 5 family 
members in the beneficiary base of approx. 1.8 crore beneficiary families. The rationale given by 
the State is that such families are more needy of healthcare support, however, it may kindly be 
noted that the State is also exploring options of covering more families.  
Further Recommendation 
3.2.6 The Committee takes note of explanation given by the Ministry.  But, the Ministry 
has not addressed the recommendation of the Committee regarding the difficulties being 
faced by the beneficiaries having family size less than or more than 6 members. 
Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendation and would like the Ministry to 
furnish a reply on the issue. 
Recommendation 
3.2.7 The Committee observes that the accurate identification and registration of the eligible 
beneficiaries under PM-JAY is a major challenge. It is difficult to reach the poorest and the most 
vulnerable population of the country due to low literacy and awareness. This is true for most 
Lower and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC), and India is not an exception. It is essential to 
ensure that the benefits reach the target section of population.  
(Para 2.3.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.2.8 AB PM-JAY has a comprehensive media and outreach strategy to spread awareness and 
empower beneficiaries regarding their rights and entitlements which emphasises IEC campaigns 
in rural areas. This includes intensive advertisement on traditional media platforms. 
3.2.9 NHA has shared model IEC materials including leaflets, flyers, pamphlets, banners etc 
with the States/UTs. States/UTs customize these contents with respect to their regional language. 
3.2.10 NHA has been telecasting PM-JAY related information on Doordarshan, DD News, 
Sansad TV, private news channels etc. Further, radio campaigns have been launched on AIR and 
private FM channels. Regular print advertisements are published. Other media channels like auto-
branding, mass-messaging, out-door branding, etc. have been undertaken. In radio, TVC and 
print-advertisement content in the local languages are used. Nukkad Nataks have been organised 
during events and fairs like IITF. States have organised many local events like run for Ayushman 
Bharat, painting and slogan writing competition etc. 
3.2.11 Further, NHA collaborated with the Indian Railways for beneficiary awareness through 
public announcements at various railway stations. Also, train wrapping with scheme related 
information has been undertaken to spread awareness among the beneficiaries. 

38 
 
3.2.12 Along with this, many Ayushman Samvads have been organised with different 
stakeholders to reach out to them. ASHAs, AWWs and other field level workers have also been 
roped in to reach out to eligible beneficiaries. 
3.2.13 As a result of persistent efforts, more than 34.3 crore Ayushman cards have been created 
out of which approximately 21 crore Ayushman cards have been created in the last two financial 
years i.e 2022-23 and 2023-24.  
Further Recommendation 
3.2.14  The Committee finds that the reply of the Government only mentions efforts 
undertaken by the Government to spread awareness about PMJAY. While the 
recommendation of the Committee was related to identification and registration of eligible 
beneficiaries is the last mile challenge in actual enrolment. For this, measures like intensive 
registration campaigns under the auspices of Local Self Government Institutions, ASHAs, 
AWWs workers, etc should be considered. Such campaigns should include door to door 
registration, organisation of registration camps, etc wherein problems related to low 
literacy, limited network coverage and availability of internet connection, etc. can be 
rectified. This aspect gains immense importance in the wake of introduction of health 
insurance cover of up to Rs. 5 lakh for citizens above 70 years of age, who may not always 
be in the best position to get them registered as beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that immediate measure be undertaken by the Government in this direction to 
make this coveted Scheme an effective one. 
3.3 Empanelment of Hospitals and Management 
Recommendation 
3.3.1 The Committee recommends that NHA and SHAs should ensure that the EHCPs follow all 
the norms and safety measures. The physical verification process should be followed earnestly to 
ensure that only those hospitals are empanelled that fulfil the requisite criteria. The Ministry 
should ensure that the periodic social audits of EHCPs, involving beneficiaries, are carried out 
effectively in coordination with NHA and SHAs so that malpractices may get detected and action 
may be initiated against the errant EHCPs. Consequently, this will also ensure that benchmarks 
for discharging social responsibilities are adhered to by EHCPs. There is also a strong need to 
invest in public hospitals to improve and upgrade the quality of the existing health facilities. The 
Committee believes that these steps would help in building an effective and accountable network 
of health service providers as per quality standards.  
(Para 2.5.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 NHA has developed guidelines for empanelment of hospitals under AB PM-JAY wherein 
hospitals are empanelled post physical verification and subject to fulfilment of certain minimum 

39 
 
criteria. However, SHAs have been provided flexibility regarding the empanelment criteria due to 
varying situation of demand and supply, and unique geographical situations in different States. 
3.3.3 Further, all public hospitals with inpatient facilities are deemed empanelled under PM-
JAY without any physical verification. Therefore, physical verification for empanelment of 
public hospitals is not mandated.  
3.3.4 With regards to other observations of the Committee, following may be noted: 
1. NHA has issued guidelines to setup and operationalise District Implementation Unit 
(DIU). The officials engaged under DIU are entrusted with the task of undertaking 
periodical inspection of empanelled hospitals. Based on the report of DIU personnel, 
hospitals are directed to take remedial action and failing to do so, they will be 
recommended for de-empanelment. 
2. NHA is working on an improved version of HEM which envisages a system of self-
certification as well as inspection and making this information available in public domain 
in an appropriate way.  
3. Under PM-JAY, Social audits have not been mandated, however there is provision of 
various other audits viz. medical audits, BIS audits, etc. to check fraud/malpractices under 
the scheme. 
4. National Health Authority has set up a National Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) with the 
primary responsibility for prevention, detection and deterrence of fraud and abuse under 
PM-JAY. Further, all States/UTs have set up State Anti-Fraud Units (SAFUs) at the State 
level to instrumentalize anti-fraud and abuse control activities at the ground level. 
5. NHA has been using technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning 
(ML) technologies to detect suspicious transactions / potential frauds in AB PM-JAY. 
These technologies are being used to realize the objectives of prevention, detection and 
deterrence of healthcare frauds that could occur in AB PM-JAY. Technologies deployed 
include rule-based triggers and Machine Learning algorithms, fuzzy logic, image 
classification and de-duplication, etc. They are helpful in ensuring appropriate treatment 
is provided to the eligible beneficiaries. 
6. Suspicious claims identified by NAFU are forwarded to the various SAFUs for desk and 
field investigation. Based on the investigation report, necessary penal action is initiated 
against the errant entity. 
7. With respect to public hospitals, it is pertinent to note that public hospitals are reimbursed 
for the services provided under the scheme at par with private hospitals in addition to the 
existing budgetary support from the Government to these public hospitals. The funds 
released to public hospitals are expected to be used for the purpose of augmenting the 
amenities including upgradation of health infrastructure, engaging the medical 
professionals for providing services to the beneficiaries, etc. There are numerous 
examples of hospitals who have improved the services significantly using the funds 
reimbursed under the scheme. 

40 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.5 The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Ministry regarding the 
empanelment of hospitals and subsequent management through various guidelines and 
audits that has been put in place for the same. With regard, to the recommendation of the 
Committee on the requirement of social audit, the Ministry has replied that the same is not 
mandated under PM-JAY. Here, the Committee would appreciate if the Ministry could 
include social audit among other audits and utilise it as evaluation method to understand 
and amplify the service delivery of the Scheme. The relevance of a social audit is that the 
feedback would be a first-hand report from a beneficiary. Accordingly, the Committee 
would like to ingeminate its recommendation that the Ministry should ensure periodic 
social audits of EHCPs, involving beneficiaries. 
Recommendation 
3.3.6 The Committee observes that failure to provide all available specialities by EHCPs 
reduces the availability of such services to beneficiaries. The Ministry, in coordination with NHA 
and SHAs, should ensure that all the specialities available in EHCPs are empanelled under 
PMJAY. Missing specialities should be empanelled in a time-bound manner. There is also a 
strong need to upgrade the speciality services available in EHCPs in all districts across the 
country as the lack of speciality services compels the beneficiaries to move off places, which 
causes hardship and a great amount of inconvenience, besides adding to the OOPE. 
(Para 2.5.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.3.7 The empanelment guideline requires the hospitals to request for empanelment of all the 
specialities, however, it is not necessary that the request of the hospital for empanelment will be 
accepted for all the specialities for which it has applied due to speciality specific eligibility. 
3.3.8 It is pertinent to note that NHA has issued guideline (OM number: S-
12015/146/2021/HA(HPQA) dated 13th October 2022) wherein States are allowed to consider 
selective empanelment of eligible healthcare providers for tertiary care specialities only. This is 
expected to increase access to such specialities for PM-JAY beneficiaries. 
3.3.9 Also, NHA is deploying HEM 2.0 shortly wherein hospitals would be required to declare 
about the available specialities, at the time of empanelment request as well as at the periodic 
intervals. 
3.3.10 NHA has issued guidelines to setup and operationalise District Implementation Unit 
(DIU). The officials engaged under DIU is entrusted with the task of undertaking periodic 
inspections of empanelled hospitals. Based on the report of DIU personnel, hospitals will be 
directed to take remedial action and failing which necessary action will be taken.  

41 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.11 The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. The Committee is of the view that since 
PM-JAY aims for Universal Health Coverage, the NHA should review hospital 
empanelment guidelines to ensure all specialities are available to beneficiaries. This would 
increase access and reduce patients' need to travel for treatment.  The Committee also 
recommends for a system to be evolved to monitor that all the specialities available in a 
particular empanelled hospital should be made available to a beneficiary under the PM-
JAY scheme. The HEM 2.0 application should be implemented promptly to provide real-
time access to hospital specialities.  
 
Recommendation 
3.3.12 The Committee has been informed that the average available bed size is roughly 48 beds 
per EHCP. This indicates that most of the hospitals/institutions empanelled under PM-JAY are of 
small scale, and many of the bigger hospitals/institutions are not empanelled under the scheme. 
The Ministry informed that most of these hospitals are in Tier-2 and Tier-3 towns and fewer in 
Tier-1 or metropolitan cities, and they are in a constant process of engagement with all bigger 
hospital chains to persuade them to join PMJAY. The Government should examine why larger 
hospitals are not joining the scheme and make efforts to empanel them. The Committee also 
recommends that the health facilities falling under the following categories be mandatorily 
empanelled: 
i. health facilities availing tax benefits. 
ii. those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/ State Governments for their 
establishment. 
iii. facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and 
iv. any other category deemed fit by the Government. 
(Para 2.5.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.3.13 As of 14th May, 2024, a total of 29,387 hospitals including 12 464 private hospitals with 
more than 13.7 lakh beds have been empanelled under the scheme. Of these, a total of 7,161 
hospitals empanelled under AB PM-JAY are 50 or more bedded, while 3,174 hospitals are 100 or 
more bedded. 429 hospitals which are 500 or more bedded have also been empanelled under the 
scheme. Further, out of the total empanelled hospitals, 238 Medical colleges have also been 
empanelled under AB PM-JAY.  
3.3.14 Further, NHA has actively engaged with various central ministries such as the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Home Affairs to identify and 

42 
 
empanel hospitals run by these ministries. As on 14th May 2024, there are 601 Central 
Government hospitals have been empanelled under AB PM-JAY.  
3.3.15 In addition to this, all Government hospitals with in-patient services or daycare facilities 
are deemed empanelled under AB PM-JAY. Accordingly, smaller hospitals are also empanelled 
under the scheme. In addition, there are many single speciality hospitals which cater to high-end 
treatment for such specialities. The empanelment policy of the scheme aims at ensuring access to 
quality healthcare services at the closest facility. Therefore, the average bed strength under the 
scheme is reduced due to empanelment of smaller public hospitals. 
3.3.16 With regard to mandating participation of certain categories of private hospitals, it may 
kindly be noted that public health being a state subject, any such decision will have to be taken 
by respective State Government. State Health Agencies (SHAs) are mandated with the 
responsibility of empanelling hospitals under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY as per State-specific 
regulations.  
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.17 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee 
understands that State Health Agencies (SHAs) are mandated with the responsibility of 
empanelling hospitals under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY as per State-specific regulations. 
However, the Committee still believes that since PM- JAY is a central sector scheme, the 
Central Government will be well with its rights to issue appropriate directives to the States 
to mandatorily empanel health services under PM-JAY which have availed benefits from 
the Government under the following categories:-  
i. health facilities availing tax benefits. 
ii. those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/ State Governments for 
their establishment. 
iii. facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and 
iv. any other such category deemed fit by the Government. 
 
 
 
3.4 Best Practices in Providing UHC 
Recommendation 
3.4.1 The Committee observes that the daily audit system by the dedicated audit team, as 
adopted by the states of Uttarakhand and Nagaland, aided in detecting fraudulent practices, 
improved quality and time of claim processing, and effective implementation of the scheme. The 
Committee also appreciates the IT-enabled beneficiary feedback and redressal system developed 

43 
 
in Punjab. The sharing of experiences and feedback by beneficiaries after obtaining the treatment 
services helps in monitoring the quality of services and checks for illegal activities. The 
Committee is of the opinion that a robust daily audit system and the IT-enabled automated 
feedback and redressal system should be established at the district level in all the States/UTs. 
(Para 3.1.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 In the existing AB PM-JAY ecosystem, Standard Treatment Guidelines (STGs) have been 
integrated into the AB PM-JAY Transaction Management System (TMS) to aid the Pre-
authorising Panel Doctor (PPD) and Claims Panel Doctor (CPD) of third party administrators 
(TPAs), insurance companies and SHAs while processing a pre-authorisation request or a claim 
by specifying the mandatory documentation required and specific information to look for in these 
documents for the prescribed procedure.  Standard Treatment Guidelines (STGs) aims to help in 
preventing and controlling fraud and abuse. Further, the Transaction Management System (TMS) 
has established protocols for beneficiary treatment and claim adjudication. Also, there are four 
levels in claims adjudication process and States have further flexibility to add more levels based 
on their assessment and availability of resources. 
3.4.3 Also, National Health Authority has setup a National Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) with the 
primary responsibility for prevention, detection and deterrence of fraud and abuse under PM-
JAY. Further, all States/UTs have set up State Anti-Fraud Units (SAFUs) at the State level to 
instrumentalize anti-fraud and abuse control activities at the ground level. 
3.4.4 NHA has been using technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning 
(ML) technologies to detect suspicious transactions / potential frauds in AB PM-JAY. These 
technologies are being used to realize the objectives of prevention, detection and deterrence of 
healthcare frauds that could occur in AB PM-JAY. Technologies deployed include rule-based 
triggers and Machine Learning algorithms, fuzzy logic, image classification and de-duplication, 
etc. They are helpful in ensuring appropriate treatment is provided to the eligible beneficiaries. 
3.4.5 Suspicious claims identified by NAFU are forwarded to the various SAFUs for desk and 
field investigation. Based on the investigation report, necessary penal action is initiated against 
the errant entity. 
3.4.6 Along with this, it is important to note that NHA has a robust system of beneficiary 
empowerment and collecting feedback from the beneficiaries. Two levels of beneficiaries’ 
feedback collection are as follows: 
● Outbound feedback calls to the beneficiaries done on the second day of the discharge for 
assessing beneficiaries’ satisfaction level. 
● Health status calls done on the 15th day after discharge to check the health status of the 
beneficiary. 

44 
 
3.4.7 Along with this, a robust grievance redressal system has also been designed where 
beneficiaries can easily register and track the grievances. In case of any grievance, the 
beneficiary may register their grievances through online/offline mode. Beneficiaries can register 
grievances online through the portal https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in or through Centralized Public 
Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System at (pgportal.gov.in). These grievances are forwarded 
to State Grievance Nodal Officer (SGNO) and further to National Grievance Nodal Officer 
(NGNO) for necessary action. The complainant can track the status of their grievances through 
the portal itself. For offline grievances, beneficiaries can call on the helpline ‘14588’ where 
complaint is registered through call centre executives.  
Further Recommendation 
3.4.8 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. But, the Committee would like 
the Ministry to explore the merit in daily audit system akin to the states of Uttarakhand 
and Nagaland, which has proven to be quite effective.  
 
3.5 Quality of Healthcare Services and health infrastructure 
Recommendation 
3.5.1 Maintaining the quality of healthcare services across a vast network of public and private 
providers is challenging. Variability in the quality of care can affect patient outcomes. The 
Committee has observed that most of the Government hospitals are not up to the standard in 
cleanliness, infrastructure, and the treatment of the patients. These hospitals are not patient 
friendly. The Government must take steps to make Government hospitals patient-friendly, ensure 
quality cleanliness and upgrade the basic infrastructure. The Ministry, through the Health 
Secretaries across the States, should have a periodic report on cleanliness and infrastructure in 
those hospitals. Government hospitals may be rated like private hospitals under NABH. 
(Para 3.2.3(i) (a) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.5.2 Under AB PM-JAY, all Government hospitals with in-patient services are deemed 
empanelled. 
3.5.3 Further, public hospitals are reimbursed for the services provided under the scheme at par 
with private hospitals. The funds released to public hospitals are expected to be used for the 
purpose of upgrading the health infrastructure and providing better amenities to the beneficiaries. 
Also, the hospitals certified with NQAS are given additional incentive of 15% as incentive. Thus, 
hospitals are recognised and rewarded for providing quality care. 
3.5.4 Public health is a state subject, therefore, the overall responsibility regarding the 
upgradation of facilities in public health institutions lies with the respective State Government. 

45 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.5.5 The Committee emphasizes that the overarching objective of the Central 
Government along with all the State Governments and Union Territories (UTs) is to provide 
high-quality and state-of-the-art healthcare facilities aiming at attaining UHC. 
Consequently, the significance of establishing advanced medical infrastructure throughout 
the country cannot be overlooked. Considering this, the Committee is of the view that a 
collaborative approach may be adopted, urging all State Governments and UTs to work in 
tandem with the Central Government to address this critical issue. The current scenario 
concerning health infrastructure calls for the implementation of a structured mechanism, 
including clearly defined guidelines applicable to all government hospitals nationwide. Such 
an initiative would not only enhance the quality of healthcare services but also ensure that 
the medical facilities are equipped to meet contemporary health challenges effectively.  
 
Recommendation  
3.5.6 The Committee is of the view that the cost of medicines, particularly in cases of diseases 
like cancer where long-term treatment is required, is also a matter of concern. The Government 
should consider providing medicines free of cost to all the beneficiaries across the States through 
the PMJAY scheme. 
(Para 3.2.3(v) (d) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.5.7 AB PM-JAY covers treatment during IPD services including pre-hospitalization expenses 
up to 3 days, and post-hospitalization expenses including drug expenses for up to 15-days. Also, 
certain drugs are provided by Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AAMs).  
Further Recommendation 
3.5.8 The Committee while taking into cognizance the reply of the Ministry, would like to 
reiterate its view on covering the cost of medicines, particularly in cases of diseases like 
cancer where long-term treatment is required, under AB PM-JAY. The Committee 
acknowledges that it would be a special provision. Since the Ministry itself had made a 
submission before the Committee that within the limit of ₹ 5 lakhs, 99.4% of expenditure 
incurred per treatment cycle is usually below ₹ 2 lakhs and the existing wallet of ₹ 5 lakhs is 
sufficient for providing treatment to the beneficiaries. The Committee wants the Ministry 
to explore the window provided by this difference to incorporate the component of covering 
the cost of medicines, particularly in cases of diseases like cancer, etc.  
 
 

46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
 
NIL 

47 
 
 
  

48 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
Healthcare Access and Affordability in India 
The Committee acknowledges the advancements made in health sector expenditure by the 
Government. However, it would like to underscore the need for a critical examination of 
these developments considering the National Health Policy (NHP) 2017. The Government 
has set an ambitious target to elevate public health expenditure to 2.5% of GDP. As per 
recent PIB Press release there has been an increase in health expenditure from 1.4% to 
1.9% between the fiscal years 2017-18 and 2023-24. While this upward trend is noticeable, it 
is essential to recognize that the target set by the Government remains a significant 
challenge to achieve. The Committee emphasizes that substantial efforts are still required to 
meet this target. Therefore, it recommends that the Government realign its strategies and 
preparedness to intensify efforts towards achieving the stipulated goal. Additionally, the 
Committee urges upon the Government to submit a comparative analysis of the progress 
made by various States and Union Territories (UTs) concerning the NHP 2017 mandate, 
which stipulates that States should allocate at least 8% of their budgets to health spending. 
This data will facilitate a comprehensive understanding and evaluation of progress in health 
expenditure across the country. Furthermore, the Committee would like to be informed 
about any obstacles impeding the realization of these targets. Identifying these hindrances 
will be crucial for devising effective strategies to enhance public health funding and ensure 
that the objectives set forth in the National Health Policy are met efficiently. 
 
(Para 3.1.11 of the ATR) 
 
Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
 
The Committee takes note of explanation given by the Ministry.  But, the Ministry has not 
addressed the recommendation of the Committee regarding the difficulties being faced by 
the beneficiaries having family size less than or more than 6 members. Accordingly, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and would like the Ministry to furnish a reply on 
the issue. 
(Para 3.2.6 of the ATR) 
 
The Committee finds that the reply of the Government only mentions efforts undertaken by 
the Government to spread awareness about PMJAY. While the recommendation of the 
Committee was related to identification and registration of eligible beneficiaries is the last 
mile challenge in actual enrolment. For this, measures like intensive registration campaigns 
under the auspices of Local Self Government Institutions, ASHAs, AWWs workers, etc 
should be considered. Such campaigns should include door to door registration, 
organisation of registration camps, etc wherein problems related to low literacy, limited 

49 
 
network coverage and availability of internet connection, etc. can be rectified. This aspect 
gains immense importance in the wake of introduction of health insurance cover of up to 
Rs. 5 lakh for citizens above 70 years of age, who may not always be in the best position to 
get them registered as beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that 
immediate measure be undertaken by the Government in this direction to make this 
coveted Scheme an effective one. 
(Para 3.2.14 of the ATR) 
 
Empanelment of Hospitals and Management 
The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Ministry regarding the 
empanelment of hospitals and subsequent management through various guidelines and 
audits that has been put in place for the same. With regard, to the recommendation of the 
Committee on the requirement of social audit, the Ministry has replied that the same is not 
mandated under PM-JAY. Here, the Committee would appreciate if the Ministry could 
include social audit among other audits and utilise it as evaluation method to understand 
and amplify the service delivery of the Scheme. The relevance of a social audit is that the 
feedback would be a first-hand report from a beneficiary. Accordingly, the Committee 
would like to ingeminate its recommendation that the Ministry should ensure periodic 
social audits of EHCPs, involving beneficiaries. 
(Para 3.3.5 of the ATR) 
 
The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. The Committee is of the view that since PM-
JAY aims for Universal Health Coverage, the NHA should review hospital empanelment 
guidelines to ensure all specialities are available to beneficiaries. This would increase access 
and reduce patients' need to travel for treatment.  The Committee also recommends for a 
system to be evolved to monitor that all the specialities available in a particular empanelled 
hospital should be made available to a beneficiary under the PM-JAY scheme. The HEM 
2.0 application should be implemented promptly to provide real-time access to hospital 
specialities.  
(Para 3.3.11 of the ATR) 
 
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee 
understands that State Health Agencies (SHAs) are mandated with the responsibility of 
empanelling hospitals under Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY as per State-specific regulations. 
However, the Committee still believes that since PM- JAY is a central sector scheme, the 
Central Government will be well with its rights to issue appropriate directives to the States 
to mandatorily empanel health services under PM-JAY which have availed benefits from 
the Government under the following categories:-  

50 
 
v. health facilities availing tax benefits. 
vi. those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/ State Governments for 
their establishment. 
vii. facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and 
viii. any other such category deemed fit by the Government. 
(Para 3.3.17 of the ATR) 
 
Best Practices in Providing UHC 
The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. But, the Committee would like the 
Ministry to explore the merit in daily audit system akin to the states of Uttarakhand and 
Nagaland, which has proven to be quite effective.  
(Para 3.4.8 of the ATR) 
 
Quality of Healthcare Services and health infrastructure 
The Committee emphasizes that the overarching objective of the Central Government along 
with all the State Governments and Union Territories (UTs) is to provide high-quality and 
state-of-the-art healthcare facilities aiming at attaining UHC. Consequently, the significance 
of establishing advanced medical infrastructure throughout the country cannot be 
overlooked. Considering this, the Committee is of the view that a collaborative approach 
may be adopted, urging all State Governments and UTs to work in tandem with the Central 
Government to address this critical issue. The current scenario concerning health 
infrastructure calls for the implementation of a structured mechanism, including clearly 
defined guidelines applicable to all government hospitals nationwide. Such an initiative 
would not only enhance the quality of healthcare services but also ensure that the medical 
facilities are equipped to meet contemporary health challenges effectively.  
(Para 3.5.5 of the ATR) 
The Committee while taking into cognizance the reply of the Ministry, would like to 
reiterate its view on covering the cost of medicines, particularly in cases of diseases like 
cancer where long-term treatment is required, under AB PM-JAY. The Committee 
acknowledges that it would be a special provision. Since the Ministry itself had made a 
submission before the Committee that within the limit of ₹ 5 lakhs, 99.4% of expenditure 
incurred per treatment cycle is usually below ₹ 2 lakhs and the existing wallet of ₹ 5 lakhs is 
sufficient for providing treatment to the beneficiaries. The Committee wants the Ministry 
to explore the window provided by this difference to incorporate the component of covering 
the cost of medicines, particularly in cases of diseases like cancer, etc.  
 
(Para 3.5.8 of the ATR) 

51 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Government on 
the 151st Report has been given hereunder: 
 
 
***** 
  
56%24%20%0%Status of action taken by the Government in respect of 151stReport of the CommitteeRecommendations/ Observationsaccepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire topursue in view of Government'srepliesCommittee has made furtherrecommendationsRecommendations/Observations inrespect of which final replies of theGovernment are still awaited

52 
 
 
  

53 
 
Annexure 
State/UT-wise details of 157 Medical Colleges approved under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for ‘Establishment of new medical colleges attached with existing district/referral 
hospitals’    
S. 
No 
State/UT No. of 
colleges 
Districts 
Phase-I (58) 
1 A & N Islands 1 Port Blair 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
1 Naharlagun 
3 Assam 4 Dhubri, Nagaon, North Lakhimpur, Diphu 
4 Bihar 3 Purnia, Saran (Chhapara), Samastipur 
5 Chhattisgarh 2 Rajnandgaon, Sarguja 
6 Himachal 
Pradesh 
3 Chamba, Hamirpur, Nahan (Sirmour) 
7 Haryana 1 Bhiwani 
8 Jharkhand 3 Dumka, Hazaribagh, Palamu (Daltonganj) 
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
5 Anantnag, Baramulla, Rajouri, Doda, Kathua 
10 Madhya 
Pradesh 
7 
 
Datia, Khandwa, Ratlam, Shahdol, Vidisha, 
Chindwara, Shivpuri 
11 Maharashtra 1 Gondia 
12 Meghalaya 1 West Garo Hills (Tura) 
13 Mizoram 1 Falkawn 
14 Nagaland 1 Naga Hospital (Kohima) 
15 Odisha 5 Balasore, Baripada (Mayurbhanj), Bolangir, Koraput, 
Puri 
16 Punjab 1 SAS Nagar 
17 Rajasthan 7 Barmer, Bharatpur, Bhilwara, Churu, Dungarpur, Pali,  
Sikar 
18 Uttar Pradesh 5 Basti, Faizabad, Firozabad, Shahjahanpur, Bahraich 
19 Uttarakhand 1 Almora 
20 West Bengal 5 Birbhum (Rampur Hat), Cooch Behar, Diamond 
Harbour, Purulia, Raiganj (North Dinajpur) 
Phase –II (24) 
1 Bihar 5 Sitamarhi, Jhanjharpur, Siwan, Buxar, Jamui 
2 Jharkhand 2 Koderma, Chaibasa (Singhbhum) 
3 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1 Satna 
4 Odisha 1 Jajpur 
5 Rajasthan 1 Dholpur 
6 Uttar Pradesh 8 Etah, Hardoi, Pratapgarh, Fatehpur, Siddharthnagar 
(Domariyaganj), Deoria, Ghazipur, Mirzapur 
7 West Bengal 5 Barasat, Uluberia, Arambagh, Jhargram, Tamluk 
8 Sikkim 1 Gangtok 

54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phase-III (75) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 3 Piduguralla, Paderu, Machilipatnam 
2 Assam 1 Kokrajhar 
3 Chhattisgarh 3 Korba, Mahasamund, Kanker 
4 Gujarat 5 Narmada, Navsari, Panchmahal, Porbandar, Morbi 
5 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
2 Udhampur, Handwara (Distt. Kupwara) 
6 Karnataka 4 Chikkamagaluru, Haveri, Yadgiri, Chikkaballapura 
7 Ladakh 1 Leh 
8 Madhya 
Pradesh 
6 Rajgarh, Mandla, Neemuch, Mandsaur, Sheopur, 
Singrauli 
9 Maharashtra 1 Nandurbar 
10 Manipur 1 Churachandpur 
11 Nagaland 1 Mon 
12 Odisha 1 Kalahandi 
13 Punjab 2 Kapurthala, Hoshiarpur 
14 Rajasthan 15 Alwar, Baran, Bansawara, Chittorgarh, Jaisalmer, 
Karauli, 
Nagaur, Shri Ganganagar, Sirohi, Bundi, 
SawaiMadhopur, Tonk, Hanumangarh, Jhunjhunu, 
Dausa 
15 Uttarakhand 3 Rudrapur (Distt. Udham Singh Nagar), Pithoragarh, 
Haridwar 
16 Uttar Pradesh 14 Bijnaur, Kushinagar, Sultanpur, Gonda, Lalitpur, 
LakhimpurKheri, Chandauli, Bulandshahar, Sonbhadra, 
Pilibhit, Auraiya, Kanpur Dehat, Kaushambi, Amethi 
17 Tamil Nadu 11 Tiruppur, Nilgiris, Ramanathapuram, Namakkal, 
Dindigul, 
Virudhunagar, Krishnagiri, Tiruvallur, Nagapattinam, 
Ariyalur, Kallakurichi 
18 West Bengal 1 Jalpaiguri 