Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
 
REPORT NO. 
73
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—16
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ...................... 17—20
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 1—43
7. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 45—68
8. L IST OF R EPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER ............................................................................. 69—73

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
 
&7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant
(i)
& Vacant vide disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Seventy-third Report of the Committee on the Indian Medical Council(Amendment)
Bill, 2013*.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of States relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Indian Medical Council(Amendment) Bill, 2013  (Annexure-
I) on the 12
th September, 2013 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August, 2013 for
examination and report by 11 th November, 2013. Subsequently Hon’ble Chairman granted extension
of time for presentation of Report on the Bill upto 21 st November, 2013.
3. The Committee issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from individuals and other
stakeholders. (Annexure-II) . In response thereto 23 Memoranda from individuals and others
relevant to the Bill have been received till the last date. List of individuals from whom memoranda
were received is at Annexure-III . Copies of the Memoranda and suggestions received were sent
to the Ministry for comments.
4.  The Committee held seven sittings during the course of examination of the Bill on
26
th September, 4 th October, 11 th October, 21 st October, 22 nd October, 31 st October, 11 th November
and 12 th November, 2013. The list of witnesses heard by the Committee is at Annexure-IV.
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 12 th November, 2013.
6. The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report.
(i) Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013;
(ii) Background Notes on the Bill received from the Department of Health and Family
Welfare;
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidences of Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare;
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various institutes/ bodies/associations/
organizations/experts and replies of the Ministry on the memoranda selected by the
Committee for examination.
(v) Oral evidences and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts from various
medical professions, on the Bill; and
(vi) Replies to the questions/queries raised by Members in the meeting on the Bill, received
from the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 19 th August, 2013
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.51259, dated 12 th September, 2013.

7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions
made by those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable
suggestions to the Committee through written submissions.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
BRAJESH PATHAK
N
EW D ELHI Chairman,
12th November, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartika 21, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(iv)

ACRONYMS
IMC (Amendment) Bill, 2013 – Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
IMC Act, 1956 – Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
MCI – Medical Council of India
NCHRH – National Commission for Human Resources for Health
UGC – University Grants Commission
(v)

1
REPORT
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
Introduction
Upto 1956 the affairs of medical education and medical profession were governed by the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 (27 of 1933), a British period legislation. In order to give
representation to licentiate members of the medical profession, to provide for registration of the
names of citizens of India who have obtained foreign medical qualifications, which were not
recognized by the Act of 1933, to provide for the temporary recognition of medical qualifications
granted by medical institutions in the countries outside India with which no scheme of reciprocity
exists to provide for the formation of a Committee of Post-graduate medical education for the
purpose of assisting the Medical Council of India to prescribe standards of PG medical education
for the guidance of Universities and to provide for the maintenance of an all India register by the
Medical Council of India, it became necessary to amend the Act of 1933 referred to above.
Accordingly, a Bill was introduced in the Parliament and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 came
into existence w.e.f. 30
th December, 1956. Since then the said Act has been amended several times
in 1958, 1964, 1993, 2001, 2005, 2010 and 2012.
2. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed the Committee that consequent upon
some reported irregularities in the functioning of the Medical Council of India and allegations of
corruption against its elected functionaries, the Council was superseded for one year and a Board
of Governors was notified to perform the functions of the Council during the interregnum through
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 issued on 15
th May, 2010. Section 3A(2)
of the above Ordinance stipulated that the Council shall be reconstituted within a period of one year
on the date of its supersession. In July, 2010 a replacement Bill for Ordinance was passed by the
Parliament and the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 received assent of the President
on the 4
th September, 2010. Subsequently, the term of the Board of Governors was extended to
one year at a time by amending the Act in 2011 and 2012. As per the provisions of Section 3A(2)
of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2012, the Council has to be reconstituted within
a period of three years from the date of its supersession i.e. latest by the 14 th May, 2013.
3. It was further stated that in the meantime the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
initiated a proposal to set up a National Commission for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH),
as an overarching regulatory body, thereby subsuming various functions of the existing Councils.
Accordingly, the National Commission for Human Resource for Health Bill, 2011 was introduced
in Rajya Sabha on the 22
nd December, 2011 and referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Health and Family Welfare for examination and report. The Committee presented its Report on
the said Bill on the 30
th October, 2012 wherein it has asked the Ministry to withdraw the Bill in
its present form and bring a fresh Bill after appropriately addressing the apprehensions of the
stakeholders. The Committee was informed that its recommendations are under consideration of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ministry further stated that realizing the fact that there
was extremely remote chance that the entire process for bringing the revised bill to set up the
NCHRH before the term of Board of Governors expires on the 14
th May, 2013 and it was not
desirable to again amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 for seeking another extension for
the Board of Governors beyond the 14 th May, 2013, it was decided to introduce a Bill to amend
the IMC Act, 1956 and remove a number of infirmities from which the existing Act suffers,
particularly in respect of the electoral process and elect a new council after following the due

2
process. It was also decided to allow the Board of Governors to continue till the time the Council
is reconstituted. Accordingly, the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 was introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on the 19 th March, 2013. However, the Bill could not be taken for consideration
and passing during the Budget Session.
4. The Ministry stated that the Department of Legal Affairs was consulted in the matter and
it was agreed that the only option that was left to enable MCI to function in the absence of an
elected Council was to extend the term of Board of Governors till the time the Government was
able to conduct election and reconstitute the Council as per provision of the above Bill. Thereafter,
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated on the 21 st May, 2013.
5. The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 introduced in the Rajya Sabha in the
last Budget Session provides that the Central Government shall, as soon as possible, after
commencement of the IMC (Amendment) Act, 2013, reconstitute the Council. The proviso to the
Clause was modified in the Ordinance to provide that the Board of Governors of the Medical
Council of India shall continue to exercise its powers till the Government is able to reconstitute
the Council or to a maximum period of six months from the date of the commencement of the
Act, whichever is earlier, meaning thereby that the Central Government has to reconstitute the
Council latest by the 10 th November, 2013.
6. As per the laid-down practice, the Ministry prepared another Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 to replace the Ordinance during the Monsoon Session. Accordingly, the
replacement Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August, 2013 and referred to the
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the 12 th September, 2013 for examination and
report.
7. On termination of the Monsoon Session, the IMC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013
promulgated on the 21 st May, 2013 automatically ceased to operate on the 16 th September, 2013.
Thereafter, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare re-promulgated a Second Ordinance on the
28th September, 2013. A few more amendments were incorporated in the Second Ordinance which
were not included in the IMC (Amendment) Bill, 2013. The Committee has questioned legality of
re-promulgation of the Second Ordinance by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and sought
a clarification in the matter from the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice.
The Department of Legal Affairs vide their note dated 16 th October, 2013 informed the Committee
that in the present matter, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide paras 2.7, 2.8 and 2.9
of its Cabinet Note dated the 17 th September, 2013 had justified as to why re-promulgation of
Second Ordinance was required which are reproduced below :-
“In pursuance of the said decision of the Cabinet, the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated on the 21 st May, 2013. Subsequently, a Bill namely, the
India Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 to replace the Ordinance was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August, 2013. The Bill, however, could not be taken up for
consideration and passing.
As the said Replacement Bill could not be passed at the expiration of six weeks from the
reassembly of Parliament in terms of the sub-clause(a) of clause(20) of Article 123 of the
constitution, the aforesaid Ordinance ceased to operate on the 16 th September, 2013.
In view of the position explained above, and the fact that both the Houses of the Parliament
have been prorogued, it is proposed that we may now promulgate a fresh Ordinance
incorporating minor modifications to the provisions contained in the earlier Ordinance and
making it effective w.e.f. the 15 th May, 2013 so that the work already done by the Board
of Governors of the Medical Council of India as per provisions of earlier Ordinance is

3
validated and may continue. Thereafter, on reassembly of Parliament, steps shall be taken
to withdraw the pending Bill and introduce a fresh Bill to the Second proposed Ordinance.”
8. The Committee was further informed that in view of the language of Article 123 of the
Constitution and various pronouncements in the matter of Dr. D.C. Wadhwa’s case, Gyanender
Kumar’s case and R.C. Cooper’s case and the precedents in this regard, there appears to be no
legal or constitutional bar in re-promulgating the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance,
2013 upon its cessation after termination of the Monsoon Session of Parliament.
9. The Committee was not satisfied with the clarification given by the Department of Legal
Affairs and sought further clarifications as to why the fact that the IMC Bill, 2013 had been
referred to the Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, was not mentioned in the
Cabinet Note referred to above and what would be the fate of referring the IMC (Amendment) Bill,
2013 to the Committee for examination and report when Government proposes to bring another
Amendment Bill before the Parliament to replace the Second Ordinance promulgated on the
28
th September, 2013. The representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that till the date
of sending the Cabinet Note, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare was not aware of the fact
that the Bill had been referred to the Committee. The Bill once referred to the Committee remains
property of the House and it was still alive. The Second Ordinance has been brought only to
validate the work done by the Board of Governors and it may continue till the Council is
reconstituted.
10. While deposing before the Committee on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill,
2013, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare has stated that the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated on the 21
st May, 2013. As per provisions
of the Ordinance, the Medical Council of India was to be reconstituted by the 10 th November, 2013.
As per the laid down practice the Ministry moved the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill,
2013 and introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August, 2013 to replace the Ordinance during
the Monsoon Session. However, the IMC (Amendment) Ordinance (4 of 2013) ceased to operate
on the 16 th September, 2013 and the Ministry had since decided to re-promulgate the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2013 so that the work already done by the Board of
Governors of the Medical Council of India as per the provisions of the earlier Ordinance was
validated and may continue till the Council was reconstituted on or before 10
th November, 2013.
The proposal to move a Second Ordinance and replace the IMC (Amendment) Bill, 2013 introduced
on the 19
th August, 2013 and presently before the Committee, was approved by the Cabinet on the
20th September, 2013 and the process was currently underway. The Second Ordinance had certain
changes which had been incorporated to further facilitate functioning of the Council. Thereafter,
a fresh replacement Bill would be required to be placed before the Parliament in the next session.
He further informed that this Bill still was the property of the House. However, since the life of
the First Ordinance ceased , it was incumbent on the Ministry to put in some mechanism by which
the Council was revived so that work of the Council would not cease till the process of election
of new Council was completed. The Second Ordinance, when issued, would also need a
replacement bill in the next session. The present Bill would be withdrawn for a new replacement
bill for replacing the Second Ordinance. He further informed that all the State Governments, State
Universities, State Medical Registers etc. have been asked to complete the election process and
send nominations for the Council. In this regard 53 nominations had already been received out of
129 nominations. Once the Governing Board came to life, the Ministry would be able to complete
this process. The Ministry was committed to complete the election process and had an elected
Council in position as soon as it could.
11. The Committee was further informed that vide  the Second Ordinance, the deemed
Universities would not have the same authority as regular Health Universities to nominate a member

4
to the Council. This aspect was overlooked when the election process began. After due consultation
and consideration within the Department and with the permission of the Law Ministry, a decision
had been taken that a deemed University would not be a University under Section 3 of the IMC
Act for the purposes of election. The second change proposed to be brought vide the Second
Ordinance was about Senate or Court. There were some universities that do not have a Senate or
a Court. But instead has something called “The Board of Management” which would take care of
those cases and would play same role as a Senate or Court.
12. The Committee received a considerable number of memoranda from various experts/
stakeholders on the provisions of the Bill. A list of the experts/stakeholders who submitted their
views in the form of written memoranda is placed at Annexure-I. A statement containing views/
suggestions given by the experts/stakeholders through their written memoranda and the Ministry’s
comments thereon on various provisions of the Bill is placed at Annexure-II.
13. In addition to the written memoranda, the Committee heard views of some experts/
stakeholders on various provisions of the Bill. A list of the witnesses who appeared before the
Committee for oral submission is placed at Annexure-III.
14. Various clauses included in the Amendment Bill, the justification given by the Ministry for
suggesting the amendments, views/comments expressed by the experts/stakeholders on the
suggested changes and the Committee’s observations and recommendations on the suggested
changes are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee has also discussed the
changes proposed in the Second Ordinance which were not there in the Bill.
15. Clause 3 of Second Ordinance issued on the 28
th September, 2013  : Proposes to amend
Section 2 (l) of the principal Act defining the word “University” as under:
“University means any University in India established by law and having a medical faculty
but does not include deemed university for the purpose of Section 3 of the Act ”.
16. Justification
The words “Deemed University” do not fall under the definition ‘University’. The
amendment is proposed to avoid any conclusion while electing members for the Council
from the Universities. There was no representation of deemed universities in the erstwhile
MCI. The proposed amendment simply clarifies the position. Besides, decision to exclude
the representation of deemed universities in the MCI was taken on the basis of
consultation and consideration within the Department and also in consultation with the
Ministry of Law.
17. While deposing before the Committee during Clause-by-Clause discussion, the Health
Secretary stated that the main reason was that the number of deemed Universities was very large
and a majority of them were private which would make the number of members of the Council
unwieldy.
18. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– Deemed Universities are universities for all purposes of the MCI Act, 1956 but this
amendment excludes these universities for the purpose of Section 3 of the Act.
– Presently, there are 36 deemed universities (as per the information received from the
Ministry, there are only 27 deemed universities) with medical faculty providing medical
education but this amendment debars those universities to elect and send their
representative to the Council which is not tenable.

5
– The proposed amendment is arbitrary, whimsical and untenable in the eyes of the law.
Thus the definition of the word ‘University’ in the Principal Act needs to be replaced.
19. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
– The Committee notes that deemed universities are universities for all purposes
of the MCI Act. These universities have been granted this status by the UGC
after fulfilling all the requirements and proper scrutiny thereof. These
universities are recognized by the Medical Council of India for imparting medical
education for both UG and PG courses as per its norms and guidelines issued
from time to time. But the proposed amendment debarred them from sending
their representative to the Medical Council of India which is, in view of the
Committee, not tenable as it is the right of the Deemed Universities to have
their representative in the Council. These Universities have every right to
contribute and involve in regulation of Medical education and medical practice.
The Committee was given to understand that presently there are 27 deemed
universities with 32 medical colleges affiliated thereto which are imparting medical
education. The Committee is not convinced with the Ministry’s contention that
the number of members of the Council would be unwieldy if each deemed
University was allowed to send one representative. There is no basic difference
between the medical colleges affiliated to the deemed Universities and those
affiliated to other private universities. The Committee feels that it would not be
justified to deprive the medical colleges affiliated with the deemed Universities
from sending their representative to the MCI. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that the proposed amendment should be withdrawn and the deemed
universities should be given representation in the Medical Council of India on
the similar lines as the other medical colleges have been allowed. One
representative each from the states with five or more Deemed Universities may
be elected. All other Deemed Universities which are less than five in each State,
may together elect one representative. Accordingly, the amendment proposed in
Clause 3 of the Second Ordinance should be withdrawn and provision of Section
3(1)(b) should be suitably amended.
20. The Committee also takes note of the definition given for the word ‘University’ in
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 which also includes an institution
deemed to be a university. The Committee recommends that the same definition may be
brought in the Bill.
21. Clause 3  : Proposes to amend Section 3 of the principal Act regarding constitution and
composition of the Council.
(i) Sub-clause (a) (ii)  : Proposes to insert the following proviso to Section 3(1)(b) of
Principal Act.
“Provided that where there is a Health University in a State, that University shall elect
one representative for every ten medical colleges affiliated to it to represent such
medical colleges:
Provided further that a Health University with less than ten medical colleges affiliated to it,
shall also be eligible to elect one representative to represent such medical colleges:
Provided also that such number of representatives shall be reviewed by the Central
Government after every four years.”

6
22. Justification for the above Proviso
The Ministry stated that presently each University with medical facility is entitled to send
a representative to the Council. The States which have established Health Universities can send only
one member under this category whereas other States having more than one University can send
as many members to the Council. Thus there was reverse discrimination against the States with
large number of medical colleges since they have established Health Universities. The above proviso
is proposed to be inserted to correct the anomaly.
Vide the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2013 notified on the
28
th September, 2013, the Ministry proposes to amend sub-section(1)(b) and proviso thereto of
Section 13 of the Principal Act as under :-
“(b) one member from each University, to be elected from amongst the members of the
medical faculty of the University by members of the Senate of the University or in case
the University has no Senate, by members of the Court or in case the University has no
Court, a body equivalent to the Senate or the Court:
Provided that where there is Health University in a State, the Senate of the Health
University or in case the Health University has no Senate, by members of the Court or in case the
University has no Court, a body equivalent to the Senate or the Court of that University, shall elect
one representative for every ten medical colleges affiliated to it, from amongst the medical faculty
of those medical colleges, to represent such medical colleges:
Provided further that a Health University with less than ten medical colleges affiliated to it,
shall also be eligible to elect one representative to represent such medical colleges:
Provided also that such number of representatives shall be reviewed by the Central
Government after every four years.”
23. Justification
There were instances where University does not have a Senate or a Court and the powers
of the Senate or Courts are exercised by Board of Management, it was desirable to amend the sub-
section(1)(b) of Section 3 so as to avoid difficulty for a University with BOM to elect a
representative. The amendment in the proviso thereto is consequential to the amendment in
section(1)(b) of Section 3. Further it also clarifies representative to the Council from Health
Universities will be elected from amongst the medical faculty of the affiliated medical colleges.
24. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
In the first proviso to Section 3(1)(b) as proposed in the IMC(Amendment) Second
Ordinance, 2013, the words ‘from amongst the medical faculty of those medical colleges, to
represent such medical colleges’ may be substituted by the words ‘from amongst the
Members of medical faculty of the University’.
25. The Committee further recommends that in the third proviso to the Section 3(1)(b)
as provided in Clause 3 of the Bill, the words ‘four years’ may be substituted by the words
‘five years’.
26. The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the fact that the Nursing Council,
under the Ministry, has two Members from the Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha
elected by the respective Houses. The Committee noted that the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 1987 had also recommended
in its Report presented to the House that three Members of Parliament, two from Lok

7
Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha, should also be nominated on the Medical Council of
India. The Committee in its 19 th Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2005, presented to the House on 19 th December, 2006, again reiterated the
recommendation made by the Joint Parliamentary Committee. On this issue, the Health
Secretary stated that the intent of the provision of Clause 3(1) (e) was to associate all
important functionaries, mainly associated with administering medical profession and
education, with the functioning of the Medical Council of India. The Committee is not
satisfied with the Ministry’s contention. There are a number of medical professionals
amongst Members of Parliament, both in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, and they can extend
constructive contribution in the field of medical education and medical practice.
27. The Committee, therefore, again reiterates its earlier recommendation that three
Members of Parliament, two from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha should be
nominated under the category of nominated Members under the Provision of Section 3(1)(e)
of the Principal Act and the provision may be amended suitably.
(ii) Sub-clause (b) : Proposes to insert the following provision to sub-section(2) of Section 3
of Principal Act.
“Provided that no person shall hold office as the President or, as the case may be, the Vice-
President for more than two terms.”
28. Justification
The circumstances leading to dissolution of MCI in 2010 makes it imperative to fix the term
of President and Vice-President of the Council providing that no person shall hold office of the
President or Vice-President for more than two terms.
29. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– The word ‘term’ is not defined in the Act. It is not clear as to whether a portion of
term would also be construed as a full term or not for the purpose of two terms
prescribed in the provision.
– It is undemocratic to restrict the term of office upto two terms for a democratically
elected body and not tenable before the law.
– There is no restriction on the number of term of office for which a functionary of
the Council can hold office in case of other Councils under the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare.
Similar amendment was also proposed by the Ministry in the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Committee in its report presented to the
House on the 19
th December, 2006 recommended as under:-
“Divergent views were put across to the Committee in this regard. While
some of the witnesses did not have any objection to the proposed restriction in
respect of term of President/Vice-President, other contended that it would be
curtailment of individual rights and negation of democratic spirit. The
Committee feels that the embargo of restricting the permissible number of
terms to be two in number definitely amounts to violating the democratic norms
and spirit, which is unheard of with reference to any elected professional
Councils anywhere in the country, hence the clause needs to be deleted.”

8
30. Notwithstanding the earlier recommendation of the Committee, some Members
objected to allowing unlimited terms and supported the provision contained in the Bill. The
Committee after some discussion decided not to change the provision as contained in the
Bill. But the restriction of two terms should be two full terms.
31. Clause 4  : Proposes to insert the following section after Section 3A of Principal Act.
“3AA. The Central Government shall, after the commencement of the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Act, 2013, reconstitute the Council, by notification in the Official Gazette,
and publish the names of the members nominated or elected to the Council under sub-section(1)
of section 3 within a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days:
Provided that the Board of Governors constituted under sub-section(4) of section 3A shall
continue to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Council till the new Council is
reconstituted or for such period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days, whichever is earlier.”
32. Justification
The new provision provides that the Central Government shall reconstitute the Council
within a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days. Further the Board of Governors shall
continue to perform the functions of the Council till the new Council is reconstituted or one
hundred and eighty days whichever is earlier.
33. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– Allowing Board of Governors to function after supersession came to an end is patently
illegal and against democratic norms.
– There are apprehensions that in view of the fact that it would not be possible to
complete the election process within the stipulated period. Whether the Council as
proposed to be constituted will have a representative character in terms of two-third
of its members should be elected and one-third should be nominated.
34. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
The Committee recommends that election process for nominated members of various
Universities/Health Science Universities should be completed well in time so that the
Council is reconstituted within the stipulated period by retaining its representative
character i.e. two-third of its members should be elected and one-third should be nominated.
The Committee further recommends that efforts need to be made for streamlining the
election procedure.
35. Clause 6  : Proposes to amend sub-section(1), (2) and (6) of Section 7 of the Principal Act
by substituting the words “five years” by “four years” as term of office of President, Vice-
President and members of the Council.
36. Justification
No justification given by the Ministry for reducing the term of office from five years to
four years.
37. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– Term of office for all democratically elected bodies is five years. There is no logic in
reducing the term to four years.

9
– Terms of office for all other Councils under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
is five years.
38. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
The Committee noted that the Ministry has not given any justification for reducing
the term of office from five years to four years. Some Members felt that there is no need
to change the provision made in the Bill and instead it should be reduced further. The
Committee, after some discussion, felt that all other bodies under the Health Ministry have
five years term and there is no justification to reduce it. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that necessary amendment may be brought in the Bill.
39. Clause 7  : Proposes to insert following new Section after Section 9 of the Principal Act:
“9A (1) The Council shall, subject to the Provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder,
take measures to determine, coordinate and maintain the standards of medical education and
practice in medicine, the Indian Medical Register and make endeavour in making available doctors
in all States.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures referred
to in sub-section(1), may, inter alia , provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :-
(a) Lay down the standards of professional ethics in the practice of medicine;
(b) Grant or withdraw permission for establishment of medical college and course of study
in medical education and ensure compliance of its terms and conditions for such
permission;
(c) Maintain the Indian Medical Register;
(d) Render advice to the Central Government or the State Government on matters relating
to the medical education and practice in medicine;
(e) Facilitate medical education in the institutions situated outside the country;
(f) Undertake and recommend to the Central Government or the State Government such
measures as may be necessary to regulate medical education in or outside the country;
(g) Organize seminars, symposiums and workshops in order to promote continuous
medical education and practice in medicine; and
(h) Perform such other functions as may be laid down in the rules made by the Central
Government.”
40. Justification
The new Section 9(A) specifies the function of the Council. Since the long title of the Act
is proposed to be made more specific vide Clause 2 of the Bill, it is also necessary to insert the
above new Section providing that the Council shall take measures to determine, coordinate and
maintain the standards of medical education and practice in medicine and also endeavour to making
doctors available in all the States.
41. Justification for Sub-section(2)(e)
This amendment has been proposed with a view to process the proposals received from
Indian Institutions seeking permission to establish their offshore campuses in foreign country.

10
42. Justification for Sub-section(2)(f)
The existing Act under Section 12 allows the Council to enter into negotiations with any
country outside India for setting of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical
qualifications. In 2002 the Ministry has introduced screening test and a medical graduate obtaining
preliminary medical degree from a University outside India has to qualify the Screening Test to
become eligible for enrolment with MCI and practice medicine in the country.
43. However, in order to meet the shortage of faculty in the country, Screening Test
Regulations were amended in December, 2011 to exempt all such persons from Screening Test,
who hold a primary medical qualification from Australia, Canada, New Zealand, United Kingdom
and USA and have also obtained a Post Graduate medical qualification and enrolment as medical
practitioner, from any one of these five countries. In view of the fact that a large number of Indian
students obtained their medical qualification from abroad and the Government has decided to allow
Overseas Citizens of India to practice medicine in the country, it was essential to empower the
Council to serve as a single point contact for foreign medical institutions, to coordinate and resolve
complaints of the students and also to assess the kind of medical qualification being imparted by
the foreign medical institutions.
44. Besides, some of the Indian Institutions have entered into agreements with foreign
universities and started twining programme in medicine. A part of the course under the twining
programme is taught in Indian campus of the collaborating intuitions. Presently Council has no
powers to assess these programmes. It was, therefore, necessary to plug this infirmity in the
existing act and provide oversight powers to MCI.
45. Here the meaning of regulation is to assess the standards of medical education being
imparted in the foreign countries for induction of medical professionals into the country.
46. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
Section 9A(2)(e)(f)
– Jurisdiction of IMC Act extends to whole of India vide above provisions, it is
proposed to be extended outside India.
– The Institutions outside India would be bound to follow rules/regulations of the
respective countries.
– It is an attempt to help some corporate houses who are running medical institutions
outside the country.
47. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
The Committee is not sure whether the offshore medical institutions will be governed
by the rules/regulations of the MCI or by the regulations of the respective country. In this
regard, the Health Secretary informed the Committee that the MCI has no authority to
regulate education outside the country. The intention of the proposed amendment was that
if a medical university or a medical college in India open a campus outside the country,
then the content of education being taught in that campus should in some manner be
appropriate to what the Medical Council would deem as appropriate within India. This
intention should be reflected in the proposed amendment. On the amendments proposed in
sub-section(1)(e)&(f) of Section 9A, the Committee agrees with the justification provided by
the Ministry and recommends that the provision contained therein should be amended
appropriately.

11
48. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
Section 9A(2)(h)
– An ambiguous provision and gives wide powers to Central Government in framing
rules/regulations without control of Parliament.
– Destroys autonomy of the Council.
– If provision of Section 32 of the current Act is complete then why a separate and
parallel provision is required to be incorporated here.
The Committee recommends that the Department may have a relook at this
provision in the light of the views of the stakeholders.
49. Clause 9 : Proposes to amend Sub-section 1(b) of Section 14 of the Principal Act by
omitting the words “for the time being for the purposes of teaching, research or charitable work”.
50. Justification
The proposed amendment will also allow medical practice by foreign nationals who are
registered medical practitioners in their country. However, they would continue to get only a
temporary registration for a limited period and their medical practice shall remain limited to the
institution to which they are attached.
51. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– Intention of inserting sub-section 1(b) of Section 14 of the Principal Act was to
promote teaching and research work and its omission makes no sense at all. Instead
such doctors should be allowed to practice anywhere in the country rather than
restricting them to practice only in those institutes who have engaged them (mostly
corporate institutions).
52. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
The Committee desires that before allowing medical practice by the foreign nationals
who are registered medical practioners in their countries, abundant safeguards should be
provided in the form of Screening Test etc. to protect the interests of the people of the
country.
53. Clause 11 :  Proposes to insert following new section after Section 30 of the Principal Act.
“30A (1) The President, Vice-President or any member of the Council may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from his office:
Provided that the President, Vice-President or any member of the Council shall, unless he
is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of a period of three months from the date of receipt of such notice
or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry
of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section(1), the Central Government may
remove from office the President, Vice-President, or any member of the Council, who
(a) Has been adjudged as an insolvent; or

12
(b) Has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such President, Vice-
President, or other member;: or
(c) Is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) Has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(e) Has acquired such financial or any other interest in any medical institution falling
within the purview of the Council, which is likely to affect prejudicially the
exercise of his functions as the President, Vice-President, or a member; or
(f) Is unable to perform or has made persistent defaults:–
(i) in the performance of the duties imposed on him under this Act or has
exceeded or abused his position; or
(ii) either willfully or without sufficient cause neglects to comply with the
directions issued by the Central Government under section 33A and 33B; or
(g) Has been guilty of proved misbehavior or his continuance in office would be
detrimental in public interest.
(3) No person shall be removed from his office on the grounds specified in clause (e) or
clause(f) or clause(g) of sub-section(2), unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter.”
54. Justification
Presently there is neither any provision in the Act to allow resignation by the President,
Vice-President and members nor any provision for their removal, if demanded by any extra ordinary
situation. In order to improve accountability in relation to the duties and responsibilities entrusted
to the Council under the Act, it is proposed to make suitable provision in the Act to empower the
Central Government to remove from office the President, Vice-President or a Member under certain
specified circumstances.
55. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– The proposed Section 30A vests the Central Government with the power of removal
and it would be dangerous as most of the terms used in the provision are completely
ambiguous, unbridled, sweeping and are not defined precisely and would be opened to
any interpretation.
– Power of removal should be with the nominating body or with the electorate.
– Sub-sections (2)(e), (f) and (g) are worded very loosely and discretionary. These are
open to grave misuse leading to avoidable litigations.
– Provision nullifies autonomy of the Council.
– Provision is deterrent to independent and unbiased decisions by the functionaries.
56. Observation/recommendation of the Committee
The Committee agrees that most of the terms used in various provisions of the proposed
amendment are ambiguous, unbridled, sweeping and not defined precisely and are opened to any
interpretation. Particularly, the proposed sub-sections(2)(e), (f) and (g) are vague and worded very
loosely and are discretionary. Vesting the Central Government with such powers of removal of

13
President, Vice-President and Members of the Council through such vague and undefined provisions
would not be in the public interest as these are likely to be misused. Such sweeping powers will
destroy the very autonomy of the Council as it would not be possible for the functionaries and
members of the Council to function and take any decision independently.
57. In this regard, the Committee takes notes of a similar amendment proposed by the Ministry
in the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Committee in its 19
th Report, on the
above Bill, presented to the House on 19 th December, 2006 recommended as under:
“The Committee observes that the decision for the removal of President/Vice-
President Member would be based on a majority decision taken by the Council after giving
a reasonable opportunity of being heard. The Committee, however, notes that a distinction
is proposed in the case of a Member where such a decision would be based on the views
of a Disciplinary Committee which would follow such procedure as determined by rules to
be framed by the Government. The Committee fails to understand the rationale for having
such a provision. It cannot be considered an additional safeguard as claimed by the
Department. It is not known what would be the composition of such Disciplinary
Committee and the authority under which it would be working. The Committee apprehends
that by virtue of such a provision, Member of the Council would not be in a position to
act independently. Further, the Committee would like to point out that in the light of the
proposed definition of Member which includes both President and Vice-President; it is not
clear whether their misconduct or incapacity could be considered by this Disciplinary
Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the action envisaged under Section
30A should remain confined to the Council only and while doing so, the Council should
ensure that principles of Natural Justice are followed in true letter and spirit and there
should also be no arbitrary action”.
58. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the powers of removal should not be
given to the Central Government. Instead it should remain confined to the Council only and
while doing so, the Council should ensure that principles of natural justice are followed in
true letter and spirit and there should also be no arbitrary action. Besides, all the terms
used in the clauses should be precisely defined and the provisions should be amended
suitably to avoid any ambiguity and misuse thereof. Government may have a relook at this
provision.
59. Clause 14 : Proposes to insert following sections after Section 33 of the Principal Act.
“33A(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Council shall, in the
discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
33B(1)Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in
writing, direct the Council to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations
already made by it, within such period as the Central Government may specify in this
behalf.
(2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified period,
the Central Government may make the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations
made by the Council, as the case may be, in such manner as the Central Government
thinks fit.

14
60. Justification
Vide Section 33A it is proposed to provide that the Central Government can give directions
to the Council on matters of policy.
61. In case the Council fails or neglects to comply with such directions within a specified
period, under the provision of Section 33B, the Central Government may itself makes the
regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the Council.
62. Views/comments of experts/stakeholders
– The provisions are sweeping and against the democratic tenets. Such provisions are
impermissible and unsustainable.
– Destroy autonomy of the Council.
– Council is an expert body to advice the Central Government on medical education and
medical practice. The Council should discharge its duties without any interference and
pressure from Central Government.
– The provisions give overriding power to Central Government to give directions. To
follow a policy and to decide what is a policy cannot be in the hand of same authority
i.e. a Central Government. It would be detrimental to overall development of medical
education and medical practice.
– There are no such provisions for other regulatory bodies under the Ministry.
– Power to issue directions (Section 33A) and power to assume discharge of core
matters regarding standards of medical education etc. by framing regulations by the
Central Government is completely contradictory to the entire scheme of the Act.
63. Sub-section(2) of newly inserted Section 33A is proposed to be deleted  vide  the second
ordinance issued on the 28 th September, 2013 and the provision contained therein has been merged
with the newly inserted Section 33A itself.
64. Justification
The modification has been desired by  some Members of Parliament during their discussion
with the Health Minister.
Observation/recommendation of the Committee
65. Clause 33A
The issue pertaining to the directions to be issued to the Council by the Central Government
has already been deliberated upon by various Parliamentary fora. In this regard, attention of the
Committee has been drawn to the following recommendations made in this regard by the Joint
Parliamentary Committee on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment), Bill, 1987 :
“The Central Government may, from time to time, give such directions to the
Council as it may think fit for carrying out any provisions of this Act or any order, rule
or regulation made thereunder and when such direction is given, the Council shall carry out
such directions.”
66. The matter was again deliberated upon by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare while examining and reporting on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment), Bill,
2005. The Committee in Para 14.17 of its 19
th Report on the said Bill, recommended as under:

15
“14.17 The Committee feels that the proposed Section 30C in the IMC Act, 1956
may lead to situations when in the name of ‘public interest’, day to day functioning of the
Council would be hampered. The Committee, therefore, feels that the recommendation made
by Joint committee on IMC (Amendment) Bill, 1987 would be appropriate for the purpose
of direction by Central Government. The Committee recommends that Section 30C be
substituted with the following:–
The Central Government may, from time to time, give such directions to the
Council as it may think fit for carrying out any provisions of this Act or any
order, rule or regulation made thereunder and when such direction is given, the
Council shall carry out such directions.”
67. The Committee observes that the provisions of the proposed new Section 33A & 33B
inserted vide Clause 14 of the Bill are ambiguous and give sweeping powers to the Central
Government to influence functioning of the Council and interfere with their day-to-day
working. Accordingly, these provisions are against the democratic tenets and are
impermissible and unsustainable before the law. Vesting the Central Government with such
sweeping powers will destroy the very autonomy of the Council. The Council is an expert
body of the medical professionals to advise the Central Government on regulation of
medical education and medical practice. If the above amendments are approved, then it
would not be possible for the Council to discharge its duties without any interference and
pressure from the Central Government. Vesting the Central Government with such
sweeping powers would be detrimental to the overall development of medical education and
medical practice and there are no such provisions for the other regulatory bodies under the
Ministry. The power to assume discharge of core matters like standards of medical
education etc. by framing regulations by the Central Government is contradictory to the
entire scheme of the Act. Such directions should be issued by the Central Government after
proper consultation with the Council. The Committee, therefore, disapproves the new
Section 33A in its present form.
68. Some Members, however, felt that colleges are given recognition without meeting the
basic requirements and this has been affecting the quality of the doctors being produced in
the country and desired that a regulatory mechanism should be there. The Committee feels
that though it is in agreement that there should not be any control on the autonomy of the
Council, but there should be a regulatory mechanism to ensure that the Council functions
in the right direction. Whenever there are any complaints, the Regulatory Mechanism
should look into them and take appropriate action. The Committee recommends that
Government may look into this and bring appropriate amendment in the Bill.
69. Clause 33 B
Section 33 of the Principal Act provides that the Council with the previous sanction of the
Central Government may make regulations necessary for its functioning. The issue pertaining to the
powers to the Central Government to direct the Council to make regulations and to amend the
regulations was also deliberated upon by the Committee while examining the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2005.
70. The Committee in Para 15.4 of its 19
th Report on the said Bill, presented to the House on
19th December, 2006 recommended as under:
“Section 33 of the Act provides that the Central Council with the previous sanction of the
Central Government may make regulations necessary for its functioning. The Committee fails to

16
understand the justification for assumption of overriding powers by the Central Government as
against the powers given to the Central Council, a professional body which will be making /
amending / revoking regulations with the previous sanction of the Central Government. The
Committee also feels that the provision of the proposed Section 30 C provides the Central
Government enough powers to give directions to the Council for carrying out any provision of the
Act and there is no need for a separate Section for this purpose. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends deletion of Section 33A.”
71. The Committee reiterates its earlier r ecommendation referred to above. Accordingly,
the Committee disapproves the new Section 33 B proposed to be inserted vide Clause 14 of
the Bill as there is no need for having a separate Section for this purpose.
72. Subject to various observations and recommendations made in the preceding
paragraphs, all the clauses of the Bill are adopted. The Bill may be passed after
incorporating the suggestions made by the Committee.
General observations/recommendations
73. The Ministry’s attention was also drawn to the provisions of Section 3A, 3B and 3C of the
Principal Act which were inserted vide the Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 and pertain
to supersession of the Council, its replacement by the Board of Governors etc. The Health
Secretary informed the Committee that there would not be any ambiguity. As soon as the new
Council is constituted, the provisions in question would not be in existence. The Committee, desires
that an amendment to this effect may also be included in the revised amendment bill.
74. The Committee’s attention has also drawn to the increasing incidents of negligence on the part
of doctors treating the patients in Government hospitals, private hospitals and private clinics and
nursing homes. All ......of the Members of the Medical Council of India are medical professionals and
whenever any complaint of medical negligence or violation of code of ethics is brought before the
Council such cases are decided by the medical professional themselves. There are reports that the
medical professionals probing into the allegations of medical negligence are very lenient towards their
colleagues guilty of negligence and none of them is willing to testify another Doctor as negligent. The
immediate impact of this arrangement is that the percentage of prosecution in the medical negligence
cases by the MCI is almost negligible. In other countries Non-doctors like patients and social workers
are mandatorily made members of the Medical Council and they are known as ‘lay members’ and
on occasions they may even lead the Council as was the case with UK’s General Medical Council.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all such cases of such medical negligence should
be inquired into by a Committee of experts drawn from various fields and experience
including social activists, patient’s representative, etc.
75. The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the provisions of Section 21(3) of
the Principal Act whereby six Members for the Post-Graduate Medical Education Committee
are to be nominated by the Central Government and the remaining three members to be
elected by the Council from amongst its members. The Committee desires that in order to
retain the representative character of the Committee, its six members should be elected from
amongst its Members and three members should be nominated by the Central Government.
76. Section 10A of the IMC Act provides for establishment of new medical college and
starting new course of study with the previous permission the Central Government. Some
Members felt that besides the permission of Central Government, permission of State
Government should also be obtained. The Committee recommends that necessary
amendment may be made in section 10A to provide for previous permission of State
Government for the purpose.

17
17
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee notes that deemed universities are universities for all purposes of
the MCI Act. These universities have been granted this status by the UGC after fulfilling
all the requirements and proper scrutiny thereof. These universities are recognized by the
Medical Council of India for imparting medical education for both UG and PG courses as per
its norms and guidelines issued from time to time. But the proposed amendment debarred
them from sending their representative to the Medical Council of India which is, in view
of the Committee, not tenable as it is right of the Deemed Universities to have their
representative in the Council. These Universities have every right to contribute and involve
in regulation of Medical education and medical practice. The Committee was given to
understand that presently there are 27 deemed universities with 32 medical colleges
affiliated thereto which are  imparting medical education. The Committee is not convinced
with the Ministry’s contention that the number of members of the Council would be
unwieldy if each deemed University was allowed to send one representative. There is no
basic difference between the medical colleges affiliated to the deemed Universities and those
affiliated to other private universities. The Committee feels that it would not be justified
to deprive the medical colleges affiliated with the deemed Universities from sending their
representative to the MCI. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the proposed
amendment should be withdrawn and the deemed universities should be given
representation in the Medical Council of India on the similar lines as the other medical
colleges have been allowed. One representative each from the states with five or more
Deemed Universities may be elected. All other Deemed Universities which are less than five
in each State, may together elect one representative. Accordingly, the amendment proposed
in Clause 3 of the Second Ordinance should be withdrawn and provision of Section 3(1)(b)
should be suitably amended. (Para 19)
2. The Committee also takes note of the definition given for the word ‘University’ in
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 which also includes an institution
deemed to be a university. The Committee recommends that the same definition may be
brought in the Bill. (Para 20)
3. In the first proviso to Section 3(1)(b) as proposed in the IMC(Amendment) Second
Ordinance, 2013, the words ‘from amongst the medical faculty of those medical colleges, to
represent such medical colleges’ may be substituted by the words ‘from amongst the
Members of medical faculty of the University’. (Para 24)
4. The Committee further recommends that in the third proviso to the Section 3(1)(b)
as provided in Clause 3 of the Bill, the words ‘four years’ may be substituted by the words
‘five years’. (Para 25)
5. The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the fact that the Nursing Council,
under the Ministry, has two Members from the Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha
elected by the respective Houses. The Committee noted that the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 1987 had also recommended
in its Report presented to the House that three Members of Parliament, two from Lok
Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha, should also be nominated on the Medical Council of
India. The Committee in its 19
th Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill,

18
2005, presented to the House on 19 th December, 2006, again reiterated the recommendation
made by the Joint Parliamentary Committee. On this issue, the Health Secretary stated
that the intent of the provision of Clause 3(1) (e) was to associate all important
functionaries, mainly associated with administering medical profession and education, with
the functioning of the Medical Council of India. The Committee is not satisfied with the
Ministry’s contention. There are a number of medical professionals amongst Members of
Parliament, both in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, and they can extend constructive
contribution in the field of medical education and medical practice. (Para 26)
6. The Committee, therefore, again reiterates its earlier recommendation that three
Members of Parliament, two from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha should be
nominated under the category of nominated Members under the Provision of Section 3(1)(e)
of the Principal Act and the provision may be amended suitably. (Para 27)
7. Similar amendment was also proposed by the Ministry in the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Committee in its report presented to the House on the 19
th
December, 2006 recommended as under:-
“Divergent views were put across to the Committee in this regard. While some of
the witnesses did not have any objection to the proposed restriction in respect of
term of President/Vice-President, other contended that it would be curtailment of
individual rights and negation of democratic spirit. The Committee feels that the
embargo of restricting the permissible number of terms to be two in number
definitely amounts to violating the democratic norms and spirit, which is unheard of
with reference to any elected professional Councils anywhere in the country, hence
the clause needs to be deleted.” (Para 29)
8. Notwithstanding the earlier recommendation of the Committee, some Members
objected to allowing unlimited terms and supported the provision contained in the Bill. The
Committee after some discussion decided not to change the provision as contained in the
Bill. But the restriction of two terms should be two full terms. (Para 30)
9. The Committee recommends that election process for nominated members of various
Universities/Health Science Universities should be completed well in time so that the
Council is reconstituted within the stipulated period by retaining its representative
character i.e. two-third of its members should be elected and one-third should be nominated.
The Committee further recommends that efforts need to be made for streamlining the
election procedure. (Para 34)
10. The Committee noted that the Ministry has not given any justification for reducing
the term of office from five years to four years. Some Members felt that there is no need
to change the provision made in the Bill and instead it should be reduced further. The
Committee, after some discussion, felt that all other bodies under the Health Ministry have
five years term and there is no justification to reduce it. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that necessary amendment may be brought in the Bill. (Para 38)
11. The Committee is not sure whether the offshore medical institutions will be governed
by the rules regulations of the MCI or by the regulations of the respective country. In this
regard, the Health Secretary informed the Committee that the MCI has no authority to
regulate education outside the country. The intention of the proposed amendment was that
if a medical university or a medical college in India open a campus outside the country,
then the content of education being taught in that campus should in some manner be
appropriate to what the Medical Council would deem as appropriate within India. This

19
intention should be reflected in the proposed amendment. On the amendments proposed in
sub-section(1)(e)&(f) of Section 9A, the Committee agrees with the justification provided by
the Ministry and recommends that the provision contained therein should be amended
appropriately. (Para 47)
12. The Committee recommends that the Department may have a relook at this
provision in the light of the views of the stakeholders. (Para 48)
13. The Committee desires that before allowing medical practice by the foreign nationals
who are registered medical practioners in their countries, abundant safeguards should be
provided in the form of Screening Test etc. to protect the interests of the people of the
country. (Para 52)
14. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the powers of removal should not be
given to the Central Government. Instead it should remain confined to the Council only and
while doing so, the Council should ensure that principles of natural justice are followed in
true letter and spirit and there should also be no arbitrary action. Besides, all the terms
used in the clauses should be precisely defined and the provisions should be amended
suitably to avoid any ambiguity and misuse thereof. Government may have a relook at this
provision. (Para 58)
15. The Committee observes that the provisions of the proposed new Section 33A and 33B
inserted vide Clause 14 of the Bill are ambiguous and give sweeping powers to the Central
Government to influence functioning of the Council and interfere with their day-to-day working.
Accordingly, these provisions are against the democratic tenets and are impermissible and
unsustainable before the law. Vesting the Central Government with such sweeping powers will
destroy the very autonomy of the Council. The Council is an expert body of the medical
professionals to advise the Central Government on regulation of medical education and medical
practice. If the above amendments are approved, then it would not be possible for the Council
to discharge its duties without any interference and pressure from the Central Government.
Vesting the Central Government with such sweeping powers would be detrimental to the overall
development of medical education and medical practice and there are no such provisions for the
other regulatory bodies under the Ministry. The power to assume discharge of core matters like
standards of medical education etc. by framing regulations by the Central Government is
contradictory to the entire scheme of the Act. Such directions should be issued by the Central
Government after proper consultation with the Council. The Committee, therefore, disapproves
the new Section 33A in its present form. (Para 67)
16. Some Members, however, felt that colleges are given recognition without meeting the
basic requirements and this has been affecting the quality of the doctors being produced in
the country and desired that a regulatory mechanism should be there. The Committee feels
that though it is in agreement that there should not be any control on the autonomy of the
Council, but there should be a regulatory mechanism to ensure that the Council functions
in the right direction. Whenever there are any complaints, the Regulatory Mechanism
should look into them and take appropriate action. The Committee recommends that
Government may look into this and bring appropriate amendment in the Bill. (Para 68)
17. The Committee reiterates its earlier r ecommendation referred to above. Accordingly,
the Committee disapproves the new Section 33 B proposed to be inserted vide Clause 14 of
the Bill as there is no need for having a separate Section for this purpose. (Para 71)
18. Subject to various observations and recommendations made in the preceding
paragraphs, all the clauses of the Bill are adopted. The Bill may be passed after
incorporating the suggestions made by the Committee. (Para 72)

20
19. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all such cases of such medical
negligence should be inquired into by a Committee of experts drawn from various fields and
experience including social activists, patient’s representative, etc. (Para 74)
20. The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the provisions of Section 21(3) of
the Principal Act whereby six Members for the Post-Graduate Medical Education Committee
are to be nominated by the Central Government and the remaining three members to be
elected by the Council from amongst its members. The Committee desires that in order to
retain the representative character of the Committee, its six members should be elected
from amongst its Members and three members should be nominated by the Central
Government. (Para 75)
21. Section 10A of the IMC Act provides for establishment of new medical college and
starting new course of study with the previous permission the Central Government. Some
Members felt that besides the permission of Central Government, permission of State
Government should also be obtained. The Committee recommends that necessary
amendment may be made in section 10A to provide for previous permission of State
Government for the purpose. (Para 76)

21
MINUTES

22

23
III
THIRD MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th September, 2013 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
10. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
11. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. Tarun Mandal
14. Shri Mahabal Mishra
15. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Ramkishun
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Shri P. T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
1. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
23

24
*** Relate to other matters.
2. Shri R.K. Jain, Additional Secretary and Director General (CGHS)
3. Shri C.K. Mishra, Additional Secretary
4. Dr. P. Prasannaraj, Additional Secretary
5. Dr. G.N. Singh, Drug Controller General (India)
6. Dr. Surinder Singh, Director, National Institute of Biologicals (NIB), NOIDA
Medical Council of India (MCI)
Shri Sanjay Srivastava, Secretary
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare on two Bills, namely (i) * * * and (ii) the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
II. ***
3. * * *
4. ***
III. Oral evidence on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
5. The Committee then heard views of the Secretary on the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill. He informed the Committee on the need to bring the proposed Bill before the
Parliament viz. to replace the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013. However,
since the said Bill had been referred to the Committee and the said ordinance lapsed after
termination of the session resulting in Board of Governors ceasing to exist, the Government was
contemplating to bring a second ordinance to extend the term of the Board of Governors and
secondly the Government was contemplating introducing another Amendment incorporating some
minor amendments by withdrawing the said Bill. The Committee however felt that since the Bill
had been referred to the Committee, a copy of the proposed ordinance may be made available
highlighting the changes after its promulgation.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.

25
IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 4 th October, 2013 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
3. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Kirti Azad
5. Shrimati Sarika Devandra Singh Baghel
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal
9. Shri Mahabal Mishra
10. Shri Ramkishun
11. Shri P. T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. ** *
II. ** *
III. ** *
IV. ** *
V. ** *
25
*** Relate to other matters.

26
VI. Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi
Dr. S.K. Sarin, Director (Formerly, Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical
Council of India)
VII. Max Super Speciality Hospital, Saket, Delhi
Dr. K.K. Talwar, Chairman, Cardiology, Max Healthcare (Formerly Chairperson,
Board of Governors, Medical Council of India)
VIII. Delhi Medical Officers Forum, New Delhi
1. Dr Pratibha Nanda, President
2. Dr Maruti Singh
3. Dr Vineet Relhan
IX. Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. Viswas Mehta, Joint Secretary
X. Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary
I. Opening Remarks
2. Shri Harin Pathak, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that due to certain
urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee, elected Shri Pathak to
preside over the meeting. He apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear views
of (a) * * * and (a)Dr. S.K. Sarin, Director, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences and former
Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical Council of India, New Delhi; (b) Dr. K.K. Talwar,
Chairman, Cardiology, Max Healthcare and former Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical
Council of India, New Delhi; and (c) Dr. Pratibha Nanda, President, Delhi Medical Officers Forum,
New Delhi on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment), Bill, 2013.
II. ** *
3. * * *
III. Oral evidence on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
4.  Before hearing the view of the witnesses on the said Bill, the Committee directed the
Department of Health and Family Welfare to inform the Committee whether an ordinance which had
lapsed consequent upon termination of the session could be re-promulgated in light of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court’s verdict in the DC Wadhwa case. The Committee then heard views of  Dr. S.K.
Sarin, Director, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi and former Chairperson, Board
of Governors, Medical Council of India , New Delhi on the said Bill. Dr. Sarin submitted before
the Committee that the Bill should not have focused on the regulation aspect only and the laying
of standards should also be given prominence; need to synchronise Clauses 9 A and 10 of the Bill
regarding the functions of MCI; need to make the provisions more ‘consultative’ rather than
‘directive’ in the matters involving the Central Government and the Medical Council of India on the
various provisions of the Bill. He was of the view that the emphasis on the Rule of Reciprocity
in granting recognition to degrees awarded by foreign universities should be there instead of blanket
recognition being brought in by the provisions laid down in Clause 8 of the Bill. He also questioned
*** Relate to other matters.

27
the reasons for removal of the term ‘Technical and ‘Administrative’ from Clause 14 (Section 33 A)
of the Bill and absence of consultation process in Section 33 B etc. Dr. K.K. Talwar, Chairman,
Cardiology, Max Healthcare and Former Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical Council of
India, New Delhi submitted before the Committee the following points on the said Bill viz. there
is a need to put in place well defined criteria to ensure selection to the Council; the term of
president should be restricted to one term of five years to ensure efficiency, integrity of the said
post; need to include representative of orthopedics in the Indian Medical Register and to take
measures to allow resumption of Common Entrance Test to ensure that real merit gets a chance
to be selected from all over the country in the medical field, number of post graduate seats needs
to be more than undergraduate seats, etc. Dr. Pratibha Nanda, President, Delhi Medical Officers
Forum, New Delhi submitted before the Committee that the medical professionals having post
graduate degrees have not been optimally utilized and there was a need to recognize such
professionals as specialists which would also take care of the shortage of teachers since these
professionals would be able to take the role of teachers in medical colleges. Thereafter, members
raised certain queries on the said Bill. The Chair directed the witnesses to furnish comprehensive
written replies to the queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.

28
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 11 th October, 2013 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Kirti Azad
9. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Shri Mahabal Mishra
12. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
13. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
14. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
15. Shri P. T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Indian Medical Association, New Delhi
1. Dr. Narendra Saini, Hony. Secretary General
2. Dr. Ajay Kumar, Past National President
3. Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Member
28

29
*** Relate to other matters.
II. ** *
III. ** *
IV. ** *
V . Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
VI. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1 Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2 Shri Udaya Kumara, Addl. Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
I. Opening Remarks
2. Shri Harin Pathak, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that due to certain
urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee, elected Shri Pathak to
preside over the meeting. He apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear views
of Dr. Narendra Saini, Hony. Secretary General, Indian Medical Association, New Delhi on the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment), Bill, 2013; and * * *.
II. Oral evidence on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
3.  Before hearing the view of the witnesses on the said Bill, the Committee took note of the
communication received from the Department of Legal Affairs seeking two weeks time for giving
its clarification on the issue whether an ordinance which had lapsed consequent upon termination
of the session, could be re-promulgated in light of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s verdict in the D.C.
Wadhwa case. The Committee directed the Secretariat that in addition to the above clarification,
few recent cases whereby ordinance were re-promulgated, may also be obtained from the
Department of Legal Affairs, before its next meeting to be held on 21
st October, 2013.
4.  The Committee then heard the views of the representatives of the Indian Medical
Association. Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra submitted the following points:
(i) Absence of rules to be framed under section 32 of the Act for conducting election
under the proviso inserted vide Clause 3 (a) (ii) of the Bill in the Section 3(1) (b) of
the principal Act.
(ii) Need to define the term (not more than 2 terms) in the proviso inserted vide Clause
3 (b) of the Bill in Section 3(2) of the Act.
(iii) Allowing Board of Governors to function after supersession of Medical Council of
India is patently illegal and against the democratic tenets.
(iv) Need to restore the term of office to 5 years as provided in Section 7 of the principal
Act instead of 4 years as proposed in Clause 6 of the Bill. In view of the democratic
traditions of 5 year terms of an elected body.

30
(v) Need to omit the words “out the country” in Clause 9 A(2) (e) and (f) proposing
jurisdiction of MCI outside the country.
(vi) Need to relook the provision of Section 9A (2) (h) viz. “permits such other functions
as may be provided by the rules made by the Central Government.
(vii) Need to omit provisions inserted by Clause 9 of the bill thereby omitting the words
“for the time being for purpose of teaching, research or charitable works” from
Section 14 of the principal Act.
(viii) Need to delete Section 33 A, 33 B proposed to be inserted vide Clause 14 of the bill
as it would destroy the autonomy of the Council etc.
Thereafter, members raised certain queries of the Bill, the Chair directed to furnish
comprehensive written replies to the queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
II. ***
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

31
VI
SIXTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati B. Jayashree
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Dr. Monazir Hassan
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
12. Dr. Tarun Mandal
13. Shri Mahabal Mishra
14. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
15. Shri Harin Pathak
16. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(i) Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, National Board of Examinations and President,
Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi.
(ii) Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalaya, Bangalore.
31

32
(iii) Prof. Amita Dhanda, Professor and Head, Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR
University of Law, Hyderabad.
(iv) Dr. H. B. Rajashekhar, Director, USM-KLE International Medical Programme,
Karnataka.
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sube Singh, Director
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana
Hrudayalaya, Bangalore; Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, National Board of Examinations and
President, Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi; Prof. Amita Dhanda, Professor and Head,
Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad and  Dr. H. B. Rajashekhar,
Director, USM-KLE International Medical Programme, Karnataka on the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 and * * *
II. Oral Evidence on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Mental
Health Care Bill, 2013.
3. The Committee first heard the views of Dr. Devi Prasad Shetty on the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013. Dr. Shetty delineated the following points by way of power point
presentation:–
(i) need to add 500 new medical colleges in the next five years to fulfill the requirement
of the doctors in the country;
(ii) lack of emergency obstetric care due to lack of specialists responsible for maternal
Mortality Rate;
(iii) need to increase post-graduate medical seats, etc. On the specific provisions of the
said Bill, he was of the view that the said Bill should include provisions so as to
empower State Governments as custodians of Healthcare.
4. Dr. Srinath Reddy, President, National Board of Examinations and President, Public Health
Foundation of India was of the view that the proposed section 9 A(1) (e & f) which gave mandate
to the Medical Council of India to regulate medical education outside the Country was untenable.
* * *
5. * * *
6. Dr. H. B. Rajashekhar, Director, USM-KLE International Medical Programme, Karnataka
delineated the following points on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013:- (i) need to
*** Relate to other matters.

33
include deemed Universities with medical faculty to have their representative in the Medical Council
of India; (ii) need to amend Section 7(2) to allow a member for only 4 years and after 4 years
he should remit office; (iii) need to amend proposed Section 9(A)(2)(e) & (f) which facilitate
regulation of medical institutions outside the countries as MCI has no scope or mandate to inspect
medical institutions outside the country; (iv) need to delete the proposed section 33 (A) and Section
33 (B) as this makes MCI subservient to the Central Government. Thereafter, Members raised
certain queries on the said Bill. The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to
the queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
7. The Committee then discussed the note received from the Department of Legal Affairs on
the issue regarding legality or otherwise of repromulgation of a second Ordinance after lapse of
the first Ordinance. The Committee was not satisfied with the reply given by the Department of
Legal Affairs and directed it to clarify the position on two points before the Committee next meets
on 31
st October, 2013:–
(i) Why is the cabinet note was silent on the fact that the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 had been referred to the Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare; and
(ii) If the Government is intending to bring a fresh Bill on the subject replacing the second
ordinance in the winter session of Parliament, what would be the fate of referring this
amendment Bill to the Standing Committee on Health in the first place, thereby wasting
valuable time and resources of the Committee?
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.

34
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22 nd October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati B. Jayashree
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
9. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
10. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
11. Dr. Monazir Hassan
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
14. Dr. Tarun Mandal
15. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Ramkishun
18. Shri P. T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
(I) Medical Council of India
Shri R. K. Srivastava, Chairman, Board of Governors (BOG)
34

35
Dr. K. S. Sharma, Member, BOG
Dr. Brijendra Kumar Rao, Member, BOG
Dr. Manoj K. Singh, Member, BOG
(II) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary,
(III) Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
(IV) Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of Shri R. K. Srivastava, Chairman, Board
of Governors and Members, Board of Governors of Medical Council of India, viz., Dr. K.S.
Sharma, Dr. Brijendra Kumar Rao and Dr. Manoj K. Singh on the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the  Chairperson and Members, Board of
Governors, Medical Council of India, on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
Issues like reasons warranting amendment to the Indian Medical Council Act; desirability of
empowering the Central Government to give directions to the Medical Council Of India on policy
matters and to make regulations; ensuring collective decision making in the matter of framing
regulations; need to preserve the autonomy of MCI so that it does not become a subordinate body
of the Ministry; need to review the sweeping powers envisaged for the Ministry under the proposed
sections 33 A and 33 B in the Bill; need to put in place a transparent process for nomination of
Members to MCI under the nominated category; need to ensure teaching faculty’s representation
in MCI; representation of medical associations of the Centre and States in MCI; efficacy of
guidelines governing conduct of doctors; need to follow transparent and fair procedures by the
MCI in dealing with cases of misconduct of doctors; terms of President and Vice Presidents of
MCI; provisions dealing with removal of President, Vice President and Members of MCI; need for
greater clarity with regard to the holding of office by President and other Members of MCI;
methodology contemplated to regulate medical education outside the country; need to curb the
sweeping powers envisaged to be given to the Central Government in the matter of removal of
President, Vice President and Members of the Council for the violation of Central directives; need
to bring back National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to medical courses to ensure
merit-based admissions; desirability or otherwise of representation of deemed University in MCI;
ensuring of quality of admission to medical courses etc. figured during the course of the
discussion.
4. The Committee also discussed some other issues like private colleges providing medical
education; need to curb dubious advertisements in electronic and print media, claiming cure/
treatment of deadly diseases etc. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare explained the reasons for which the fact that the IMC (Amendment) Bill, 2013 had
been referred to the Committee as not mentioned in the Cabinet Note. The Committee directed the
representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to ensure that the new amendments
contained in the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2013 are incorporated in
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013.

36
5. The Committee authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman seeking for
extension of time for presenting its Report on the * * * by the 20 th December, 2013.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 12.15 P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

37
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 31 st October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Kirti Azad
9. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
10. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
11. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
12. Dr. Monazir Hassan
13. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
14. Dr. Tarun Mandal
15. Shri Mahabal Mishra
16. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
17. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
18. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(I) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(i) Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
(ii) Dr. V ishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
37

38
(II) Legislative Department
Dr. G. N. Raju, Joint Secretary
(III) Deaprtment of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
(IV) Medical Council of India
Shri Sanjay Srivastava, Additional Secretary, MCI
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
in connection with the Clause-by-Clause discussion on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2013.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013. Shri Desiraju informed the
Committee that the need to bring a second ordinance arose after the first ordinance lapsed and the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 which was introduced in the Monsoon Session of
the Parliament was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health & Family Welfare.
The Committee, thereafter, discussed the said Bill clause-by-clause and sought clarification on
various clauses from the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare. The salient features
of the discussion are delineated below :
(i) On Clause 3 of the Second Ordinance, the Secretary submitted that the said provision
had been introduced so as to contain the number of Members in the Council as there
were a large number of the deemed Universities and a majority thereof were private.
This would make the number of MCI unwieldy.
(ii) On Clause 3(b) {Section 3(2)} the Secretary submitted that the said restriction of two
terms for the President, Vice President and Members of the Council had been
introduced to check vested interests from creeping into the Council; and it would
provide fair representation to those interested in the affairs of Medical education.
(iii) On Clause 3(a) (ii) {Section 3(1) (e)} the Secretary submitted that views on the said
clause would be furnished shortly.
(iv) On Section 3A, 3B, 3C of the Principal Act, the Secretary submitted that the said
Sections will cease to be in existence as soon as the new Council is reconstituted.
(v) On Clause 6 (Section 7), the Secretary submitted that the Department would re-
examine the provision contained therein.
(vi) On Clause 7 {new Section 9A(1)(e) and (f)}, the Secretary submitted that the
subclauses were introduced with an objective to coordinate and resolve the complaints
of Indian students and to assess the kind and quality of medical education imparted
by foreign Medical Institutions and ‘to regulate the content of education’ and if the
said clause was leading to ambiguous interpretation, the Department would amend this
clause.
(vii) On Clause 9 {Section 14(1) (b)}, the Secretary stated that the proposed amendment
would also allow medical practice by foreign nationals who are registered Medical
practitioners in their country.

39
(viii) On Clause 11 (Section 30 A), the Secretary stated that with a view to improve the
accountability in relation to the duties entrusted to the Council under the Act, it was
proposed to make suitable provision in the Act to empower the Central Government
to remove from office, the President, Vice President or a Member of the Council
under certain specified circumstances which could be used sparingly and only under
extra ordinary circumstances.
(ix) On Clause 14 (New Section 33 A and Section 33 B), the Secretary submitted that it
is in larger interest of the Medical Profession that if Council fails or neglects to
comply with orders of the Central Government within a specified period, the
Government may itself make regulations or amend regulations to ensure that policy
decisions are implemented.
4. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the said Bill. The Chairman directed the
Health Secretary to furnish comprehensive written replies to the queries which remained
unanswered, within three days time.
5. The Committee authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman seeking for
extension of time for upto the end of Winter Session of Parliament, 2013 in respect of * * * Indian
Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 for presentation of its Reports on the above mentioned
Bills in both the Houses of Parliament.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

40
X
TENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 11 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati B. Jayashree
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal
11. Shri Mahabal Mishra
12. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
13. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
14. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy,  Committee Officer
II . Opening Remarks
2. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, at the outset, welcomed Members of the Committee and informed them
that due to certain urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee,
elected Shri Jaiswal to preside over the meeting. He then apprised the Members about the agenda
of the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt draft Reports on (i) the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013; and (ii) * * *
40
*** Relates to other matter.

41
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
and * * *
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the draft Seventy-third and * * * Reports.
The Chairman invited Members to share their specific suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the
Draft Reports on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and * * *. The Committee
first took up the draft 73
rd Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013. The
issues which figured during the consideration and adoption of report were:- (i) the term of
President/Vice-President; (ii) need to set up a regulatory mechanism to enquire into allegations of
malpractices; (iii) need to retain the autonomy of Medical Council of India(MCI); (iv) need to have
representation of deemed University on the MCI and one representative each from the States with
five or more Deemed Universities may be elected; furthermore, all the Deemed Universities which
are less than five in each State, may together elect one representative. The Committee decided
to further consider and adopt the Report with the said modifications in its meeting to be held on
12
th November, 2013.
4. * * *
IV. Issues with regard to Medical Council of India
5. The Committee, thereafter, discussed certain issues related to Medical Council of India
(MCI) and felt that the replies received from MCI on the said issues were not forthcoming. The
Chairman, then, directed the Secretariat to call the representatives of MCI to clarify the issues
related to Medical Council of India on a date to be decided later.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

42
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 12 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Mahabal Mishra
11. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Ramkishun
14. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
15. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
***
***
***
***
42
*** Relate to other matters.

43
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Shri Arun Panda, Joint Secretary
Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
II . Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and informed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the view of the * * * and also to further
consider and adopt draft 73 rd Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
III . Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
3. The Committee further considered the draft 73 rd Report on the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 with the modifications suggested in its meeting held on 11 th November,
2013 and adopted the same. The Committee, thereafter authorized the Chairman to approach the
Hon’ble Chairman to present the 73
rd Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
and the 74 th Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013, since the House was not in session and
the last day by which the Reports on the said Bills were to be presented was 21 st November, 2013
and 19 th November, 2013, respectively.
IV. ***
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of proceedings of the Committee was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
19 AUG., 2013
Bill No. LII of 2013
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the
15th day of May, 2013.
2. In the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), for the long title, the following long
title shall be substituted, namely:––
“An Act to provide for the constitution of the Medical
Council of India and for the determination, coordination,
maintenance, and regulation of standards of medical education,
the practice of medicine, maintenance of Indian Medical
Register and to make endeavour in making available doctors in
all States and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.”.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
47
Short title and
commencement.
102 of 1956. Amendment of
long title.
Amendment of
section 3.

48
(i) after clause ( a), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(aa) one member, to represent the Union
territories by rotation, to be nominated by the
Central Government;”;
(ii) in clause ( b), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where there is a Health
University in a State, that University shall elect
one representative for every ten medical colleges
affiliated to it to represent such medical colleges:
Provided further that a Health University
with less than ten medical colleges affiliated to it,
shall also be eligible to elect one representative to
represent such medical colleges:
Provided also that such number of
representatives shall be reviewed by the Central
Government after every four years;”;
(iii) clause ( d) shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no person shall hold office as the
President or, as the case may be, the V ice-President for
more than two terms.”;
4. After section 3A of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“3AA. The Central Government shall, after the
commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Act, 2013, reconstitute the Council, by notification in the
Official Gazette, and publish the names of the members
nominated or elected to the Council under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 within a period not exceeding one hundred and
eighty days:
Provided that the Board of Governors constituted under
sub-section ( 4) of section 3A shall continue to exercise the
powers and perform the functions of the Council till the new
Council is reconstituted or for such period not exceeding one
hundred and eighty days, whichever is earlier.”.
5. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) the words, brackets and letter “or clause ( d)” shall
be omitted;
(b) the words, brackets, letter and figures “and any
rules so made may provide that pending the preparation of the
Insertion
of new
section 3AA.
Amendment of
section 4.
Reconstitution
of Council.

49
Indian Medical Register in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, the members referred to in clause ( d) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 3 may be nominated by the Central
Government instead of being elected as provided therein” shall
be omitted.
6. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “five years”, the
words “four years” shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, a
member, whether nominated or elected, shall hold office
for a term of four years.”;
(c) in sub-section ( 6), for the words “five years”, the
words “four years” shall be substituted.
7. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“9A. ( 1) The Council shall, subject to the provisions of
the Act and rules made thereunder, take measures to
determine, coordinate and maintain the standards of medical
education and practice in medicine, the Indian Medical
Register and make endeavour in making available doctors in
all States.
(2) Without pre judice  to the generality of the foregoing
provisions, the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1), may, inter-
alia, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) lay down the standards of professional ethics in the
practice of medicine;
(b) grant or withdraw permission for establishment of
medical college and course of study in medical education and
ensure compliance of its terms and conditions for such
permission;
(c) maintain the Indian Medical Register;
(d) render advice to the Central Government or the
State Government on matters relating to the medical education
and practice in medicine;
(e) facilitate medical education in the institutions
situated outside the country;
(f) undertake and recommend to the Central
Government or the State Government such measures as may be
necessary to regulate medical education in or outside the country;
Amendment of
section 7.
Insertion of new
section 9A.
Functions of
Council.

50
(g) organise seminars, symposiums and workshops in
order to promote continuous medical education and practice in
medicine; and
(h) perform such other functions as may be laid down
in the rules made by the Central Government.”.
8. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “a citizen of
India”, the words “a citizen of India or an overseas citizen of
India” shall respectively be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 4A), for the words “a citizen of
India”, the words “a citizen of India or an overseas citizen of
India” shall be substituted ;
(c) sub-section ( 4B) and the proviso relating thereto
shall be omitted;
(d) in sub-section ( 4C), for the words, brackets,
figures and letters “sub-sections ( 4A) and ( 4B)”, the word,
brackets, figure and letter “sub-section ( 4A)” shall be substituted;
(e) after sub-section ( 5), the following Explanation shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,
the expression “overseas citizen of India” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in clause ( ee) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955.’.
9. In section 14 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-
section ( 1), in clause ( b), the words “for the time being for the
purposes of teaching, research or charitable work” shall be omitted.
10. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “the names”, the
words “the names and biometric details” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(2A) The Council shall, in addition to the Indian
Medical Register referred to in sub-section ( 1), maintain
the Medical Register in electronic from containing the
particulars included in the Indian Medical Register.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section,
the expression, “electronic form” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in clause ( r) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.’.
11. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 21.
Insertion of new
section 30A.
57 of 1955.
21 of 2000.

51
“30A. ( 1) The President, Vice-President or any member
of the Council may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Central Government, resign from office:
Provided that the President, Vice-President or any
member of the Council shall, unless he is permitted by the
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue
to hold office until the expiry of a period of three months
from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly
appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the
expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), the Central Government may remove from office
the President, Vice-President, or any member of the Council,
who—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting as such President, Vice-President, or other
member; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by
a competent court; or
(d) has been convicted of an offence involving
moral turpitude; or
(e) has acquired such financial or any other
interest in any medical institution falling within the
purview of the Council, which is likely to affect
prejudicially the exercise of his functions as the
President, Vice-President, or a member; or
(f) is unable to perform or has made persistent
defaults—
(i) in the performance of the duties
imposed on him under this Act or has exceeded
or abused his position; or
(ii) either wilfully or without sufficient
cause neglects to comply with the directions
issued by the Central government under sections
33A and 33B;
(g) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour or his
continuance in office would be detrimental in public
interest.
(3) No person shall be removed from his office on the
grounds specified in clause ( e) or clause ( f) or clause ( g) of
sub-section ( 2) unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.
Resignation,
removal and
suspension of
President, Vice-
President or
members of
Council.

52
12. In section 32 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) In particular, and without pre judice  to the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of election of the Council under sub-
section ( 1) of section 4;
(b) such other functions of the Council under clause ( h)
of sub-section ( 2) of section 9A as may be laid down by the
Central Government;
(c) the conditions and payment of fees for filing of an
appeal before the Central Government under sub-section ( 2)
of section 24;
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, provided by rules or in respect of which provision is to
be made by rules.”.
13. In section 33 of the principal Act, the clause ( ma), the
following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(ma) the modalities for conducting screening test
under sub-section ( 4A) of section 13;”.
14. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“33A. ( 1) Without pre judice  to the foregoing provisions
of this Act, the Council shall, in the discharge of its
functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government
may give in writing to it from time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a
question is one of policy or not shall be final.
33B. ( 1) Where the Central Government considers it
expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct the
Council to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any
regulations already made by it, within such period as the
Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such
order within the specified period, the Central Government may
make the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made
by the Council, as the case may be, in such manner as the
Central Government thinks fit.
33C. Every rule and every regulation made under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 33.
Insertion of new
sections 33A,
33B and 33C.
Power of Central
Government to
give directions.
Powers of
Central
Government to
direct regulations
to be made or
to make or
amend
regulations.
Laying of rules
and regulations.

53
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule, regulation or both Houses agree
that the rule and regulation should not be made, the rule and
regulation shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.”.
15. ( 1) The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013
is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance,
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.
Repeal and
saving.
Ord. 4 of 2013.

54
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was enacted for the
purpose of reconstituting the Medical Council of India (the Council)
and to provide for the maintenance of the Indian Medical Register
and for matters connected therewith. The Act was amended, inter-
alia, by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010
superseding the Council for one year with effect from the 15th May,
2010 and providing for the constitution of a Board of Governors of
not more than seven persons to exercise the powers and to perform
the functions of the Council under the said Act. Subsequently, the
term of the Board of Governors was extended to one year at a time
by amending the Act in 2011 and 2012 and as per the provisions of
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2012 the Council has
to be reconstituted within a period of three years from the date of
its supersession, that is latest by the 14th May, 2013.
2. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 to amended by the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 to provide
for the reconstitution of the Council and review the composition of
the said Council so as to give representation to the Union territories
and to remove the anomaly where States having larger number of
medical colleges, but having formed a medical university, were
having fewer seats in the Council as compared to States having
fewer colleges affiliated to several Universities, by inserting a
proviso in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3.
3. The Council’s main functions as contained in the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 is to make recommendations to
the Central Government on matters relating to recognition of medical
qualifications, determining the courses of study and examinations
required to obtain such qualifications, inspection of examinations
and maintenance of register of medical practitioners, etc. By the
amendment of the said Act in 1993, the power to grant permission
for establishment of new Medical Colleges, increase in admission
capacity or for starting new or higher course of study or training
in the established colleges was entrusted to the Central Government
from the respective State Governments. For this purpose, the
Council became a recommendatory body to the Central Government
for taking final decisions in these matters. After reviewing the
working of the Council in this area and the problems being faced,
a need has been felt to empower the Central Government to give
such directions to the Council wherever necessary on matters of
policy and public importance and to ensure their proper compliance.
4. As Parliament was not in session and immediate action was
required to be taken to extend the term of the Board of Governors
of Medical Council of India beyond the 14th May, 2013 and to
54

55
allow the Board to exercise powers till the Council is reconstituted
and make necessary amendments to the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013
was promulgated on 21st May, 2013.
5. The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which
seeks to replace the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013 inter alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(a) to amend long title of the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 (Act) so as to make it more comprehensive;
(b) to amend sub-section ( 2) of section 3 of the Act so
as to provide that no person shall hold the post of President
or Vice-President for more than two terms;
(c) to amend section 13 of the Act relating to
recognition of medical qualification and provisional registration
so as to recognise the medical qualifications granted to the
citizen of India by medical institutions in India and to extend
the benefit to the overseas citizen of India;
(d) to amend section 14 of the Act which recognises
the medical practice by the persons having medical
qualifications granted by medical institutions in any country
outside India;
(e) to insert a new section 30A in the Act relating to
resignation by the President, Vice-President and Members of
the Council and the power of the Central Government to
remove from the office the President, Vice-President or a
Member; and
(f) to insert a new section 33A in the Act relating to
power of the Central Government to give directions to the
Council on the matters of policy and for making any
regulation.
6. The proposed amendments will make the composition of
the Council compact, more representative in character, and
empower the Central Government to discharge its functions
effectively to ensure proper development of medical education in the
country.
6. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
NEW DELHI; GHULAM NABI AZAD
The 1st August, 2013.

56
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 3AA, so as
to reconstitute the Medical Council of India within a period of one
hundred and eighty days. The proviso to section 3AA provides that
the Board of Governors (BOG) shall continue to exercise the
powers and perform the functions of the Council till the new
Council is reconstituted or for such period not exceeding one
hundred and eighty days, whichever is earlier. The proposed
amendment would automatically increase the term of the office of
the Board of Governors (BOG) up to the 10th November, 2013. The
Chairperson and other members, other than ex-officio members, of
the Board of Governors shall be entitled to such sitting fee and
other allowances as may be determined by the Central Government.
It is expected that such expenditure on sitting fee and travelling and
other allowances would be minimal and will be met from the funds
of the Medical Council of India. Further, as expenditure would
depend on the number of meetings of the Board of Governors
during the current financial year. i.e. 2013-14 recurring or non-
recurring expenditure cannot be anticipated at this stage.
56

57
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause ( 2) of clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation on matters relating to—( a) the manner of
election of the Council under sub-section ( 1) of section 4, ( b) such
other functions of the Council under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 2)
of section 9A as may be laid down by the Central Government;
(c) the conditions and payment of fees for filing of an appeal before
the Central Government under sub-section ( 2) of section 24; ( d) any
other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by rules
or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. The rules to be made under the proposed legislation shall
be required to be laid before the Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
4. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
57

58
Memorandum explaining the modifications contained in the
Bill to replace the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013.
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which
seeks to repeal and replace the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013, proposes to make the following modifications
apart from modifications of consequential or drafting nature in the
provisions contained in the said Ordinance, namely:—
(i) The words “in such manner as may be provided by
the rules made by the Central Government” have been
dropped from the proposed proviso to clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 3 of the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956.
(ii ) A new sub-clause has been inserted after
clause 8( b) to omit sub-section ( 4B) of section 13 of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
58

59
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE I NDIAN M EDICAL C OUNCIL A CT, 1956
(102 OF 1956)
An Act to provide for the reconstitution of the Medical
Council of India, and the maintenance of a Medical Register for
India and for matters connected therewith.
** * * *
3. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be constituted
a Council consisting of the following members, namely:—
** * * *
(d) seven members to be elected from amongst
themselves by persons enrolled or any of the State Medical
Registers who possess the medical qualifications included in
Part I of the Third Schedule;
** * * *
4. (1) An election under clause ( b), clause ( c) or clause ( d)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be conducted by the Central
Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it
in this behalf, and any rules so made may provide that pending the
preparation of the Indian Medical Register in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, the memebrs referred to in clause ( d) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 3 may be nominated by the Central
Government instead of being elected as provided therein.
** * * *
7. (1) The President or Vice-President of the Council shall
hold office for a term not exceeding five years and not extending
beyond the expiry of his term as member of the Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member shall
hold office for a term of five years from the date of his nomination
or election or until his successor shall have duly nominated or
elected, whichever is longer.
** * * *
(6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in
respect of any member, a successor may be nominated or elected
at any time within three months before the said term expires but he
shall not assume office until the said term has expired.
** * * *
59
Constitution and
composition of
the Council.
Mode of
election.
Term of office
of President,
Vice-President
and members.

60
13. (1)* * * * *
(2) The medical qualifications granted to a citizen of India—
(a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by medical
institutions in the territories now forming part of Pakistan,
and
(b) before the Ist day of April, 1937, by medical
institutions in the territories now forming part of Burma,
which are included in Part I of the Third Schedule shall also
be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this
Act.
(3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions
outside India before such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify which are included in
Part II of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act, but no person possessing
any such qualification shall be entitled to enrolment or on any State
Medical Register unless he is a citizen of India and has undergone
such practical training after obtaining that qualification as may be
required by the rules or regulations in force in the country granting
the qualification, or if he has not undergone any practical training in
that country he has undergone such practical training as may be
prescribed.
** * * *
(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical
qualification granted by any medical institution in any country
outside India recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in that
country after such date as may be specified by the Central
Government under sub-section ( 3), shall not be entitled to be
enrolled on any Medical Register maintained by a State Medical
Council or to have his name entered in the Indian Medical Register
unless he qualifies the screening test in India prescribed for such
purpose and such foreign medical qualification after such person
qualifies the said screening test shall be deemed to be the recognised
medical qualification for the purposes of this Act for that person.
(4B) A person who is a citizen of India shall not, after such
date as may be specified by the Central government under sub-
section (3), be eligible to get admission to obtain medical
qualification granted by any medical institution in any foreign
country without obtaining an eligibility certificate issued to him by
the Council and in case any such person obtains such qualification
without obtaining such eligibility certificate, he shall not be eligible
to appear in the screening test referred to in sub-section ( 4A);
Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired the medical
qualification from foreign medical institution or has obtained
admission in foreign medical institution before the commencement
of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001, shall not be
Recognition of
medical
qualifications
granted by
certain medical
institutions
whose
qualifications are
not included in
the First or
Second Schedule.

61
required to obtain eligibility certificate under this sub-section but, if
he is qualified for admission to any medical course for recognised
medical qualification in any medical institution in India, he shall be
required to qualify only the screening test prescribed for enrolement
on any State Medical Register or for entering his name in the Indian
Medical Register.
(4C) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 4C) and ( 4B) shall
apply to the medical qualifications referred to in section 14 for the
purposes of that section.
** * * *
14. (1) The Central Government after consusltation with the
Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in any country
outside India in respect of which a scheme of reciprocity for the
recognition of medical qualifications is not in force, shall be
recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act or
shall be so only when granted after a specified date:
Provided that medical practice by persons possessing such
qualifications—
*** * *
(b) shall be limited to the institution to which they are
attached for the time being for the purposes of teaching,
research or charitable work; and
*** * *
21. (1) The Council shall cause to be maintained, in the
prescribed manner a register of medical practitioners to be known
as the Indian Medical Register, which shall contain the names of all
persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State Medical
Register and who possess any of the recognised medical qualifications.
** * * *
32. ( 1)* * * * *
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Special provision
in certain cases
for recognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
medical
institutions in
countries with
which there is
no scheme of
reciprocity.
The Indian
Medical Register.
Power to make
rules.

62
33. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the
Central Government, make regulations generally to carry out the
purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice to the generality of this
power, such regulations, may provide for—
*** * *
(ma) the modalities for conducting screening tests
under sub-section ( 4A), and under the proviso to sub-
section ( 4B), and for issuing eligibility certificate under sub-
section ( 4B) of section 13;
** * * *
Power to make
regulations.

63
63
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare )

64
64
ANNEXURE-II
çsl foKfIr
PRESS RELEASE
jkT; lHkk lfpoky;
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE INVITES SUGGESTIONS ON THE
INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha
on 19th August, 2013 and pending therein, has been referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare headed by Shri Brajesh Pathak,
M.P., Rajya Sabha for examination and report thereon.
2. The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, seeks to replace the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 and, inter alia , proposes to (i) restrict the term of office of
the President, Vice-President upto two terms; (ii) recognize medical qualifications granted to the
citizens of India by medical institutions in India and to extend the benefit to the overseas citizens of
India; (iii) recognize medical practice by the persons having medical qualifications granted by medical
institutions in any country outside India; (iv) empower Central Government to remove from the office
the President, Vice-President or a Member of the Council; and (v) empower Central Government to
give directions to the Council on the matter of policy and for making any regulation.
3. In order to have wider consultations, the Committee has decided to invite written
memoranda containing suggestions/views/comments of individuals/institutions/organizations
interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
4. Those desirous of submitting memoranda to the Committee may send two copies thereof,
either in English or Hindi, to Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director, Room No. 222, Rajya
Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi - 110001 [Tel: 23035428 (O), Fax:
23012097] within 15 day of publication of the advertisement. Besides, those who are also desirous
of giving oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill are requested to indicate so, for
consideration of the Committee.
5. Copies of the Bill may be obtained on requisition from Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy
Director, Room No. 218, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi-110001 or downloaded from the Rajya Sabha website 
rajyasabha.nic.in under the head
‘Committees’ – sub-head – ‘Bills with the Committee and Press release seeking opinions/
suggestions from public’.
6. The memoranda submitted to the Committee will form part of the records of the Committee
and would be treated as strictly confidential and may not be made public as such an act would
constitute breach of privilege of the Committee.
Website: – rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in
Hkkjrh; laln
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

65
65
ANNEXURE-III
List of Individuals/Associations from whom Memoranda were received
Sl. No. Individual/Association
1. Shri P. Palanivel, Executive Secretary, Education Promotion Society for India,
New Delhi
2. Dr. Piyush Dubey, Co-ordinator, Soochow Medical College, Soochow University,
Madhya Pradesh
3. Ms. Memota Devi, Individual
4. Dr. Gouri Sankar Sarangi, Secretary, IMA, Jajpur Road, Orissa
5. Shri Vinay Mohan Tiwari, Chhattisgarh
6. Shri P. Nilamani Singh, Manipur
7. Dr. Anil Pachnekar, President, Indian Medical Association, Mumbai
8. Dr. Tushar Jagtap, General Secretary, Zen Medicos Commune, Mumbai
9. Shri Darshan Singh Brar, Punjab
10. Dr. Tushar Kanti Nayak, Odisha
11. Shri Kali Charan Nayak, Senior Citizen, Bhubaneswar
12. Dr. K. Ramesh Reddy, Head, Department of Pediatric Surgery, Niloufer Hospital,
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh
13. Shri R. Desikan, Chairman, CONCERT
14. Shri I.C. Sharma, Sr. Executive Director, Shriram New Horizons India Ltd., KG Marg,
New Delhi
15. Ms. Ksh. Tampha Devi, Manipur
16. Shri S. Tomba Miti, Manipur
17. Shri P.K. Gupta, New Delhi
18. Shri T.K. Jena, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi
19. Indian Medical Association, New Delhi
20. Dr. Narendra Saini, Hony. Secretary General, Indian Medical Association (HQS), New Delhi
21. Shri Ram Prasad, Distt. Balrampur
22. Dr. Krishan Gopal Mishra, Individual
23. Dr. Vedprakash Mishra, Datta Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences, Maharashtra

66
66
ANNEXURE-IV
List of Witnesses heard by the Committee
26th September, 2013
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain, Additional Secretary & Director General (CGHS)
3. Shri C.K. Mishra, Additional Secretary
4. Dr. G.N. Singh, Drug Controller General (India)
5. Dr. Surinder Singh, Director, National Institute of Biologicals (NIB), Noida
Medical Council of India (MCI)
Shri Sanjay Srivastava, Secretary
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
4
th October, 2013
WITNESSES
Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi
Dr. S.K. Sarin, Director (Formerly, Chairperson, Board of Governors, Medical Council of
India)
Max Super Speciality Hospital, Saket, Delhi
Dr. K.K. Talwar, Chairman, Cardiology, Max Healthcare (Formerly Chairperson, Board of
Governors, Medical Council of India)
Delhi Medical Officers Forum, New Delhi
1. Dr. Pratibha Nanda, President
2. Dr. Maruti Singh
3. Dr. Vineet Relhan

67
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. Viswas Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representative of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary
11
th October, 2013
WITNESSES
Representatives of Indian Medical Association, New Delhi
1. Dr. Narendra Saini, Hony. Secretary General
2. Dr. Ajay Kumar, Past National President
3. Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Member
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Legislative Department
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Udaya Kumara, Addl. Legislative Counsel
Representative of Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
21
st October, 2013
WITNESSES
1. Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, National Board of Examinations and President, Public
Health Foundation of India, New Delhi.
2. Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalaya, Bangalore.
3. Dr. H. B. Rajashekhar, Director, USM-KLE International Medical Programme, Karnataka.
Representatives from Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sube Singh, Director

68
Representative from Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
22nd October, 2013
WITNESSES
Representatives from Medical Council of India
1. Shri R. K. Srivastava, Chairman, Board of Governors (BOG)
2. Dr. K.S. Sharma, Member, BOG
3. Dr. Brijendra Kumar Rao, Member, BOG
4. Dr. Manoj K. Singh, Member, BOG
Representative from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary,
Representative from Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
31
st October, 2013
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
2. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representative from Legislative Department
Dr. G. N. Raju, Joint Secretary
Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
Representative from Medical Council of India
Shri Sanjay Srivastava, Additional Secretary, MCI

69
69
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
2. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
3. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
4. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of Health (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
5. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
6. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
7. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
8. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
9. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
10. Report on the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
11. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
12. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005
13. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
14. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-06) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

70
12
15. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-06) of the Department of Health (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
16. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
17. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
18. Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill, 2005
19. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
20. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
21. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2006-07) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
22. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
24. Report on Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Puducherry Bill, 2007
25. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
26. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
27. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
28. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
29 Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
30 Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
31. Report on the Paramedical And Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007

71
12
32. Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration And Regulation) Bill, 2007
33. Report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. Report on the functioning of the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
35. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
36. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
37. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
38. Report on Major Issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, Namely the
Central Research Institute(CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor,
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
39. Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
40. Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
41. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Health Research
42. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
43. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
44. Report on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Report on Issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded
Medicines, their Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness
46. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
47. Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill, 2010
48. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-first Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No.
48) of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

72
12
49. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the
Department of AIDS Control(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
50. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fortieth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
51. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Thirty-ninth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand
No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
52. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in it’s 38th Report on
major issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
53. Report on the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore
Bill, 2010
54. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
55. Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.47) of the Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
56. Report on Demands For Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.48) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
57. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
58. Report on Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic, Generic-
Branded and Branded Mediciens, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and
Effectiveness
59. Report on the Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO)
60. Report on the National Commission For Human Resources For Health Bill, 2011
61. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
62. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

73
12
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
64. Report on Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
65. Report on the Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
Course
66. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards
Control Organisation (CDSCO)
67. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
68. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of
AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
69. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.49) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
70. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
71. Report on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
72. Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies using Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)
Vaccine by Path in India

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.