 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
162 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
156THREPORT ON REVIEW OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
PARLIAMENT OF 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS
156TH REPORT ON 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
REPORT ON REVIEW OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
REVIEW OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
December, 2024) 
February, 2025) 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii)  
4. REPORT (iv) 
 Chapter I Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 1 - 3 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government 
4-10 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
11 - 16 
 Chapter IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government have not been received 17-18 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 19-20 
6. MINUTES* -- 
 To be appended at a later stage

i 
 
COMPOSITIONOFTHECOMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
3. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
4. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade 
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri RameswarTeli 
10. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan  Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar  Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Renu Sreekanth  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar  Assistant Committee Officer 
 

ii 
 
  
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this 162nd Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 156th Report on Review of National Ayush 
Mission.  
2. The 156 th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2024 and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 9th February 2024. The Action Taken Note of the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report was received from the Ministryin the 
month of July, 2024.   
3. The Committee made a total of 19 recommendations/observations in the 156th Report, out of 
which 3 recommendations/observations have been accepted by the Government and have been 
categorized under Chapter I. There are 7 recommendations/observations that the Committee does 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies that have been categorized under 
Chapter II. There are 7 recommendations/observations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further 
recommendations/observations thereon and has been categorized under Chapter III.  While 2 
recommendations/observations in respect of which final reply of the Government has not been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter- IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on18th December, 2024 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
December, 2024 
Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
                            Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 

iii 
 
  
ACRONYMS 
 
AAM  
ASEAN 
AYUSH (Ayush) 
A-HWCs 
BIMSTEC 
 
BIS 
BRICS 
CHCs 
CHO 
CPMU 
DHs 
DPMU 
HWCS 
IBSA 
ICD 
ISO 
MRAs 
Ayushman Arogya Mandir  
Association of Southeast Asian Nations  
Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
Ayush Health and Wellness Centres 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation  
Bureau of Indian Standards 
Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa 
Community Health Centres 
Community Health Officer 
Central Program Management Unit 
District Hospitals 
District Program Management Unit  
Health and Wellness Centres 
India, Brazil, South Africa 
International Classification of Diseases 
International Organisation for Standardisation 
Mutual Recognition Agreements  
NAM 
NCFSF 
NHM 
NISR 
OOMF 
PHCs 
RRM 
SAAP 
SCO 
SPMU 
STGs 
TC 
TM 
UCs 
UN 
WHO 
 
National Ayush Mission 
National Curriculum Framework for School Education 
National Health Mission  
National Institute of Sowa-Rigpa Leh Ladakh 
Output Outcome Monitoring Framework  
Primary Health Centres 
Regional Review Meetings  
State Annual Action Plan 
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  
State Program Management Unit  
Standard Treatment Guidelines 
Technical Committee 
Traditional Medicine 
Utilisation Certificates 
United Nations 
World Health Organisation  

iv 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 156th Report on Review of National Ayush 
Mission, Ministry of Ayush.  
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Ayush in respect of the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Reporthave been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para numbers 1.12, 2.13 and 2.23 of the Report 
       Total–3 (Chapter-I)  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: Para Numbers 1.11, 2.11, 
2.12, 3.7, 3.12, 3.13 and 3.15  of the Report. 
         Total– 7 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: Para Numbers 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 3.3, 3.4, 
3.6 and 3.11 of the Report. 
       Total–7 (Chapter-III) 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Para Numbers 2.3 and 2.22 of the Report. 
Total–2 (Chapter-IV)  
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
1.1 Budgetary allocation and utilisation status 
Recommendation: 
1.1.1 The Committee observes that although there has been a consistent upward trend of fund 
utilisation in the past 3 years, the actual utilisation of funds is still low. In RE 2022-23, despite 
an allocation of Rs. 643.80 crore, only Rs. 549.15 crore was spent which is about 85 percent. In 
view of the low utilisation of funds and considering the allocated fund of Rs. 1200.00 crore for 
2023-24, the Committee urges the Ministry to focus on thorough and complete fund utilisation. 
The Committee asserts that utilisation trends and absorption capacity justify increased funds, 
especially for NAM, the Ministry's sole Centrally Sponsored Scheme with diverse components. 
These funds should be optimally employed to revitalise and enhance Ayush systems in public 
health delivery services. 
(Para 1.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.1.2 Suggestions noted and it is stated that with collaborated effort by Central and State & UT 
substantial progress has been achieved in the last Financial Year 2023-24 as compared to 
previous years. Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the NAM, allocated BE and RE and 
actual utilization of Budgetary allocation during the last three years is as follows: 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Year Actual 
Allocation 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2021-22 553.80 500.00 458.87 
2022-23 800.00 650.00 549.15 
2023-24 1200.00 815.00 869.31 
 
1.1.3 States/UTs have faced problem w.r.t. compliance of conditions of guidelines issued by the 
Department of Expenditure (DoE) from time to time.  

2 
 
1.1.4 For compliance of DoE guidelines by States/UTs, the Ministry is in regular touch with 
them. The compliance of guidelines is being regularly followed up at the level of Secretary and 
Joint Secretary, Ayush. 
1.2 Co-location of Ayush facilities at Primary Health Centers (PHCs), Community 
Health Centers (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) 
Recommendation: 
1.2.1 The Committee, at this juncture, notices that in some states and UTs, a separate 
Department of Ayush has not been opened. The Committee, to boost the Ayush system and for 
better coordination in Ayush Healthcare, recommends the Ministry of Ayush to impress upon and 
persuade the States and UTs with no separate department of Ayush to create such a department 
for speedy development and implementation of Ayush sector and schemes respectively. 
(Para 2.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.2.2 Public Health is being a state subject, creation of separate Department of Ayush in the 
States/UTs comes under purview of respective State/UT Governments. However, Ministry of 
Ayush has requested State/UT Governments in different meetings to create separate Directorates, 
deployment of manpower in SPMU & DPMU in the States/UTs for speedy development and 
implementation of NAM scheme.As on date, separate Ayush Directorate is available in 24 
States/UTs. 
1.3 Traditional Medicine systems in India, China, South Korea and Africa  
Recommendation: 
 
1.3.1 The Committee recommends that given the global evidence quoted above, India must 
pursue private insurance companies to include AYUSH treatments, such as Panchkarma and 
other therapies, wherever scope prevails. The Committee also recommends that the Government 
persuade the countries to legalise the Ayurveda stream of medicines in the US and other 
countries. The Committee feels that this should be combined with ensuring insurance coverage 
of Ayush treatments and practicing them in a similar vein to promote the practice of Ayush 
treatments in countries like the USA, UK, etc., The Government must persuade companies 
providing insurance in those countries. Drawing from the experiences of South Korea, the 
Committee would like to recommend the Government take adequate measures to integrate the 
financial component of fixing rates for consultation in Ayush. 
 
(Para 2.23 of the Report) 
 
 
Action Taken: 

3 
 
1.3.2 Drug Policy Section 
i. Ministry of Ayush has constituted a Core Group of experts for Insurance Sector 
under Ministry of Ayush vide O.M. no. T.12020/02/2017-DCC (AYUSH) dated 
04.10.2023.  
ii. Two sensitization programmes were conducted, one at ITRA, Jamnagar and 
another at AIIA, New Delhi for General Insurance Companies and Ayush 
stakeholders till now. 3rd sensitization programme is going to be held at NIUM, 
Bengaluru on 28th June 2024.  
iii. Constituted a working group to prepare construct for Ayush treatment packages 
for inclusion of Ayush treatment packages in ABPMJAY and integration of Ayush 
treatment packages on NHA portal vide O.M. T-16011/1/2020-DCC dated 
08.12.2023, under the Chairmanship of Deputy DGHS, Ayush.  
iv. Established a Strategic Purchasing Committee vide O.M. T16011/1/2020-DCC 
dated 13.03.2024 to rationalize package costs, with representation from the NHA. 
 
1.3.3 Ministry of Ayush has been undertaking measures or various activities for promotion of 
Ayush practice and getting legal recognition to Ayush in foreign countries including USA, UK 
like- collaboration with Foreign Countries by signing of country level MoU for undertaking 
Ayush related activities on mutual interest; signing of MoUs with foreign institute for 
research/academic collaboration; establishment of Ayush Chairs in Foreign 
Universities/Institutes; collaboration with WHO or UN agencies for cooperation in the field of 
Ayush, support or organizing international training; conference, seminar, expo etc. in India or 
abroad for promoting and strengthening awareness and interest about Ayush Systems of 
Medicine at international level; establishment of Ayush cell (center) in foreign countries to 
provide authentic information about Ayush system; representing Ayush in various multilateral 
forums like BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), SCO (Shanghai Cooperation 
Organisation), ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations and Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization), IBSA(India, Brazil, South Africa), G20, BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for 
Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation)etc., support for undertaking clinical 
research in Ayush at international level etc. At various platforms appropriately, Ministry of 
Ayush also proposes to provide insurance coverage to Ayush treatment in foreign countries. 

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
2.1 Objectives and scope of the National Ayush Mission 
Recommendation: 
2.1.1 The Committee notes the foresighted objectives of the National Ayush Mission. The 
Committee is hopeful that the Scheme can transform India's traditional systems of medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Government intensify its focus on implementing the 
National Ayush Mission (NAM) by strategically aligning its objectives with mainstream 
healthcare delivery. The Committee opines that collaboration between traditional and modern 
medical practitioners will be crucial in the effective implementation of NAM. Additionally, 
investing in robust research and development, enhancing educational institutions, and promoting 
awareness will contribute to establishing Ayush as a viable and integral part of the healthcare 
system. This concerted effort will not only improve accessibility to Ayush services but also foster 
a holistic approach to health and wellness, ensuring the successful mainstreaming of traditional 
systems in the national healthcare framework. 
(Para 1.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.1.2 Suggestions noted. With respect to collaboration between traditional and modern 
medicines, it is informed that Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co-location of 
AYUSH facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and 
District Hospitals (DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients for different systems of medicines 
under single window. The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics and their training is 
supported by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under National Health Mission (NHM), 
while the support for AYUSH infrastructure, equipment/furniture and medicines are provided by 
Ministry of Ayush under National Ayush Mission (NAM). 6612 PHCs, 3035 CHCs and 469 DHs 
have been co-located as per the MIS report of NHM as on 31.12.2023. As per the choice of 
patients, treatment of common ailments in Co-located Ayush facilities at PHCs, CHCs and DHs 
is being provided through respective system of medicine. 
2.2 Co-location of Ayush facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community 
Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) 
Recommendation: 
2.2.1 The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry of Ayush in developing a 
pluralistic and holistic system of integrative healthcare. The Committee believes that co-located 
Ayush facilities at PHCs and CHCs may act as a one-stop center for both conventional and 

5 
 
traditional healthcare services and thus strengthen access to Ayush services. For better 
coordination, the Committee recommends the sharing of infrastructure, medical equipment, and 
administrative staff at Ayush facilities and allopathic teams, thus optimising resource utilisation 
and cost-effectiveness. 
(Para 2.11 of the Report) 
2.2.2 Physicians from both systems can work together to develop comprehensive treatment 
plans for patients, considering both Indian and Western medical perspectives. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry ensure at least one specialist practitioner in 
Ayurveda/Homeopathy/Yoga/Siddha in these co-located facilities. The Committee hopes that this 
initiative may result in integrating into the Ayush system of medicine for managing chronic 
conditions like respiratory ailments, digestive problems, and musculoskeletal disorders. 
(Para 2.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.2.3 Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co-location of AYUSH facilities at 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals 
(DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients for different systems of medicines under single 
window. The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics and their training is supported by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under National Health Mission (NHM), while the support 
for AYUSH infrastructure, equipment/furniture and medicines are provided by Ministry of Ayush 
under National Ayush Mission (NAM).  6612 PHCs, 3035 CHCs and 469 DHs have been co-
located as per the MIS report of NHM as on 31.12.2023. As per the choice of patients, treatment 
of common ailments in Co-located Ayush facilities at PHCs, CHCs and DHs is being provided 
through respective system of medicine. 
 
2.2.4 Physicians from both systems can work together to develop comprehensive treatment 
plans for patients, considering both Indian and Western medical perspectives:  Ministry of Ayush 
has taken initiatives for providing integrated healthcare services at Central Government 
Hospitals. The integrated medicine department is functional at Safdarjung hospital and Lady 
Hardinge Medical College & Hospital. Further, the Ministry of Ayush and Ministry of Defence 
have strengthened their association in providing Ayush health services at various establishments 
of Ministry of Defence through an MoU signed in year 2019. Later in 2022, 02 MoUs signed for 
starting Ayurveda centres at 37 cantonment hospitals and 12 military hospitals of AFMS.  Ayush 
vertical in DGHS has taken the initiative to publish the series of Standard Treatment Guidelines 
in different Ayush systems of medicine for the benefit of practitioners in the field. In this regard 
STG on Musculo-skeletal disorders were released in April, 2024. National level modular training 
for master trainers from the States/UTs was also conducted for orientation in these STGs. 
 
 
2.3 Implementation Status of National Ayush Mission 

6 
 
Recommendation: 
2.3.1 At this juncture, the Committee would like to mention that it heard the Director of the 
National Institute of Sowa-Rigpa (NISR)-Leh Ladakh on various aspects of this traditional system 
of medicine. The Committee observes that Sowa-Rigpa is particularly prevalent in the Himalayan 
regions of the country. It is a recognised system of medicine under the Indian Medicine Central 
Council Act, 1970. Besides the development of the Trans-Himalayan Herbal Garden in Leh 
Ladakh, there are several other activities conducted by Sowa-Rigpa practitioners and institutes 
in providing healthcare. 6 institutes are offering undergraduate courses. The Committee is, 
however, at a loss to know as to why Sowa-Rigpa has not been included in the National Ayush 
Mission and therefore, recommends the Ministry to give due consideration for including this 
system also under NAM. 
(Para 3.7of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.3.2 Ministry of Ayush is implementing National Ayush Mission (NAM) from 2014-15 
through State/UT Governments for development and promotion of Ayush system including 
Sowa- Rigpa. Accordingly, State/UT Governments may avail the eligible financial assistance by 
submitting suitable proposals through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). Further, States/UTs 
where Sowa-Rigpa is available are also being supported for development and promotion of 
Sowa-Rigpa in their State/UT. 
2.4 Challenges faced in the implementation of the National Ayush Mission 
Recommendation: 
2.4.1 The Committee observed that in the NAM governance and implementation mechanism, 
the same entity performs various roles of policy formulation, regulation, financing, purchasing, 
and provisioning. After carefully considering and analysing the current challenges facing the 
implementation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), the Committee underscores the critical 
need to delineate roles and responsibilities regarding purchasing, financing, provisioning, and 
policy-making functions. The Committee believes effective implementation demands a 
decentralised framework, empowering regional administrations and field teams with contextual 
understanding and expertise regarding ground-level dynamics. 
(Para 3.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.4.2 Public Health being a state subject, implementation of NAM scheme comes under 
purview of respective State/UT Governments. However, the Ministry of Ayush has drafted NAM 
guidelines guidance and support for smooth implementation of NAM scheme. As per provision 
of NAM guidelines, the Governing Body is to review of Ayush Policy and is the approving 
authority in the States/UTs whereas Executive Body is reviewing expenditureand preparation of 

7 
 
State Annual Action Plan and to submit for approval of Governing Body. District Programme 
Management (DPMU) has to execute the NAM Scheme in the field. Further, Monitoring is also 
being done using Third Party Monitoring Mechanism. 
 
2.4.3 Provisions of dedicated manpower like Programme Manager, Finance Manager, Accounts 
Manager, HMIS Manager etc. have been kept under SPMU/DPMU which have specific role and 
responsibility. 
 
2.4.4 Ministry of Ayush isregularlysuggesting State/UT Governments prepare their SAAPs in 
decentralized manner by consulting District Level/Grass Root level for need based actual 
requirements in the States/UTs, which are being examined by States/UTs during various 
interactions/meetings. 
 
Recommendation: 
2.4.5 The Committee also notes the delay in submission of completed/audited UCs with 
relevant documents as one of the major impediments in the implementation of NAM. The delay 
in UC submissions is typically a procedural, financial management and accountability issue. 
For this, the Committee recommends streamlining the procedure, in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance, if required, towards a just-in-time budget release and immediate receipt of 
UC. 
 (Para 3.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.4.6 The following efforts have been taken for expediting the liquidation of UCs: 
(i)  In various meetings like Appraisal committee meetings and Mission Directorate 
meetings, States/UTs were continuously reminded of timely submission of UCs. 
(ii)  Regular follow-up with States/UTs from officials of NAM Cell along with Central 
Program Management Unit (CPMU) is being undertaken along with hand holding 
for furnishing of UCs with relevant supporting documents. 
(iii)  States/UTs were requested to attend meetings at Ministry of Ayush, physically, 
along with UCs and other supporting documents. 
(iv) As per requirement, officials of NAM Cell along with CPMU also visited physically 
to States/UTs to provide assistance for preparing UCs and other supporting 
documents. 
(v)  Time to time correspondence has been made through different D.O. letters through 
Hon’ble Minister of Ayush, Secretary (Ayush) and Joint Secretary (Ayush) to 
State/UT Governments for expediting the expenditure and submission of UCs.  
(vi)  One to one meeting has been organized with States/UTs for resolving the issues 
w.r.t. submission of UCs.  
(vii)  A checklist has been circulated to States/UTs to avoid the common mistakes at the 
time of preparation of UCs, so that UCs may get liquidated smoothly.  
(viii) Funds released to States/UTs after reaching 75% UC and Expenditure. 
Recommendation: 
2.4.7 The Committee takes note of the challenges faced and the subsequent measures taken by 

8 
 
the Ministry to improve the implementation of the National Ayush Mission. To overcome the 
challenges mentioned in the implementation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), the 
Committee suggests the following measures: 
 
1. Capacity Building and Training: 
 
 Conduct training programs for existing staff and recruit additional personnel with 
expertise in Ayush systems to address the inadequate administrative setup. 
 Provide specialised training to the State Program Management Unit (SPMU) and 
District Program Management Unit (DPMU) staff to enhance their skills in 
managing Ayush programs effectively. 
 
2. Timely Operationalisation of AHWCs: 
 
 Develop a detailed timeline and action plan for the establishment and 
operationalisation of Ayush Health and Wellness Centers (AHWCs). 
 Collaborate with local health authorities, NGOs, and community leaders to 
streamline the process and address any local-level challenges hindering the timely 
set up of AHWCs. 
 
3. Regular Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 
 Implement a robust monitoring and evaluation system to track the progress of 
AHWCs and other program components. 
 Conduct regular site visits, inspections, and performance assessments to identify 
and address operational delays promptly. 
 
4. Streamlining Documentation Process: 
 
 Provide clear guidelines and templates for the submission of completed and 
audited Utilisation Certificates (UCs) along with relevant documents. 
 Conduct workshops and training sessions for implementing agencies on proper 
documentation procedures, emphasising the importance of timely submissions. 
 
5. Utilisation of Technology: 
 
 Implement digital platforms for submission and tracking of UCs and other 
relevant documents to streamline the administrative processes. 
 Utilise technology for training purposes, ensuring that all stakeholders are well-
versed in the use of digital tools for efficient program management. 
 
6. Financial Incentives: 
 

9 
 
 Consider providing financial incentives or rewards for states/UTs that 
demonstrate exemplary performance in the timely establishment of administrative 
setups, AHWCs, and submission of required documentation. 
 
7. Regular Communication and Reporting: 
 
 Establish a transparent and regular communication system between the Ministry 
of Ayush and State/UT Governments for timely reporting of progress and 
challenges faced. 
 Encourage open dialogue to address issues promptly and share best practices 
among different regions. 
 (Para 3.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.4.8 Suggestions noted. One to one meeting was conducted 6th May, 2024 to 7th June, 2024 
with State/UT Governments and respective autonomous bodies to sensitize the strategies for 
effective implementation of National Ayush Mission including capacity building and training. 
During the review meeting, major States/UTs have confirmed that they are conducting trainings. 
Further, some States/UTs have also assured for conducting training courses for other States/UTs 
where such trainings facilities are not so effective. The Ministry of Ayush has also conducted 
Master trainer Trainings on Musculoskeletal disease.  
 
2.4.9 Ministry of Ayush has approved 12500 AyushmanArogyaMandir (Ayush) from 2019-20 
to 2023-24 and as reported by the State/UT Governments, 12121 units are functional till now. 
Ministry of Ayush has sought extension from Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
for operationalization of all theremaining AAM (Ayush) functional till 2024-25 and same has 
been approved by them.  Further, during different review meetings on AyushmanArogyaMandir 
(Ayush), it has suggested to States/UTs for collaboration with Jan Arogya Samitis, Panchayats, 
Local health authorities etc. 
 
2.4.10 As per the procedure, NITI Aayog has the mandate to evaluate Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme including NAM and necessary action is being taken by the NITI Aayog to do the same in 
the current year. Apart from this, the following efforts have been taken to monitor and evaluate 
AAM (Ayush): 
(i) State/UT Governments are submitting physical reports through dedicated format 
monthly to know the progress of AAM (Ayush).  
(ii) In various meetings like regional review meetings, Appraisal committee meetings and 
Mission Directorate meetings, States/UTs were continuously reminded for timely 
operationalization of all approved AAM (Ayush). 
(iii)  One to one meeting has been organized with States/UTs to know the progress of 
AAM (Ayush) and to resolve the issues. 
(iv) The Ministry of Ayush is also visiting States/UTs to monitor the physical progress of 
AAM (Ayush) and suggesting them regularly for timelyoperationalization. 
(v) Different field visits have also been undertaken in different States/UTs in the year 
2023 and Regional Review Meetings (RRMs).  

10 
 
(vi) Dedicated team has been constituted for field visit during the month of August & 
September 2024. 
 
2.4.11 The following efforts have been taken for expediting the liquidation of UCs: 
 
(i)  In various meetings like Appraisal Committee meetings and Mission Directorate 
meetings, States/UTs were continuously reminded for timely submission of UCs. 
(ii)  Regular follow-up with States/UTs from officials of NAM Cell along with Central 
Program Management Unit (CPMU) is being undertaken along with hand holding for 
furnishing of UCs with relevant supporting documents. 
(iii)  States/UTs were requested to attend meetings at the Ministry of Ayush, physically, 
along with UCs and other supporting documents. 
(iv)  As per requirement, officials of NAM Cell along with CPMU also visited physically 
to States/UTs to provide assistance for preparing UCs and other supporting 
documents. 
(v)  Time to time correspondence has been made through different D.O. letters through 
Hon’ble Minister of Ayush, Secretary (Ayush) and Joint Secretary (Ayush) to 
State/UT Governments for expediting the expenditure and submission of UCs.  
(vi)  One to one meeting has been organized with States/UTs for resolving the issues w.r.t. 
submission of UCs.  
(vii)  A checklist has been circulated to States/UTs to avoid the common mistakes at the 
time of preparation of UCs, so that UCs may get liquidated smoothly.  
(viii)  Funds released to States/UTs after reaching 75% UC and Expenditure. 
(ix)  Further, Central PFMS, Dept. of Expenditure, has developed e-UC module and on 
pilot basis, five States of NAM scheme have been selected for submission of UC 
through PFMS. 
 
2.4.12 In order to incentivize good performing States/UTs, performance-based budgeting has 
been made. 20% of total allocation of Flexipool budget has been earmarked and this fund is being 
allocated to good performing States/UTs in the same proportion in which main budget of NAM is 
allocated. 
 
2.4.13 As stated above, regular meetings are being held through National/Regional/Direct 
meetings. Apart from that the CPMU Team are also constantly interacting with DPMU units 
suggesting them in all manners. 
 
2.4.14 NAM Conclave was held in May, 2023 where all States/UTs participated and during the 
conclave, best practices of different States/UTs were shared. Further, during the regional review 
meeting, the best practices were shared with participating States/UTs, apart from that, we are also 
referring States/UTs to have the best practice of other States seen. 

11 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
3.1 Flexible component 
Recommendation: 
3.1.1 The Committee is of the view that the National Ayush Mission's (NAM) initiatives like 
Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs/Arogya Mandirs) and co-location of Ayush facilities with 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and Community Health Centres (CHCs) represent a unique 
opportunity to strengthen clinical evidence and promote research and development (R&D) in 
Ayush systems. Standardised electronic medical records in HWCs and co-located Ayush facilities 
can systematically capture patient data on diagnoses, treatments, and outcomes, enabling large-
scale epidemiological studies and comparative effectiveness research. HWCs and co-located 
facilities can build trust with communities, facilitating long-term monitoring of patients and 
providing valuable insights into the chronic disease management potential of Ayush therapies. 
(Para 2.4 of the Report) 
Recommendation: 
3.1.2 The Committee believes that standardized data collection can pave the way for identifying 
biomarkers associated with specific Ayush interventions, opening doors for further research into 
mechanisms of action and personalized medicine. 
(Para 2.5 of the Report) 
3.1.3 The Committee recommends the following measures to develop clinical Research 
Infrastructure: 
 Strengthening manpower and training: Upgrading infrastructure and providing 
training opportunities for Ayush practitioners at HWCs can enhance their research 
skills and capacity to participate in clinical trials. 
 Establishing research networks: Collaboration among Ayush facilities and institutions 
can facilitate multicentric clinical trials and improve research quality. 
 Standardization of protocols and interventions: Developing standardized protocols for 
Ayush interventions can ensure data consistency and enable robust clinical research. 
 Community Engagement: Engaging communities in research design and 
implementation through Ayush facilities can address their specific needs and ensure 
culturally relevant research outcomes. 

12 
 
 Evidence Recording: Data gathered and generated in centres should be recorded and 
publicized. The clinically supported research and peer-reviewed articles should be 
placed in Ayush and allopathic medical colleges for better outreach, understanding, 
and coordination. 
(Para 2.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
3.1.4 Research and Development in Ayush is mandate of Research Councils, autonomous 
organizations of Ministry of Ayush. Further, however, during different Regional Review 
Meetings under National Ayush Mission, autonomous organizations under Ministry of Ayush 
like Research Councils& their peripheral institutes and National Institutes have been asked to 
provide their active support for the effective implementation ongoing activities/programmes of 
the National Ayush Mission (NAM) in the States/UTs especially for capacity building and 
training of State Programme Management Unit (SPMU)/ Community Health Officer (CHO), 
Telemedicine- hub and spoke model, Ayush Public Health Programmes etc. 
3.1.5 Further, State/UT Governments are furnishing beneficiaries data on monthly basis who 
have availed the services in the different Ayush facilities. Furthermore, 10,000 Geriatric Health 
Camps have been planned to organize from 15th June, 2024 to 15th September, 2024 through 
AyushmanArogyaMandir (Ayush) in States/UTs. In this regard, the Ministry of Ayush has 
developed standardized protocols for the said camp and shared with States/UTs for organizing 
Geriatric Health Camps uniformly. State/UT Governments have been requested to furnish the 
beneficiaries’ data to Ministry of Ayush. 
3.1.6 Standardization of protocols and interventions: Ayush vertical in DGHS has taken the 
initiative to publish the series of Standard Treatment Guidelines (STGs) in different Ayush 
systems of medicine for the benefit of practitioners in the field. In this regard the STGs on 
Musculoskeletal disorders were released on 10thApril, 2024. National level modular training for 
master trainers from the States/UTs was also conducted for orientation in these STGs. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.1.7 The Committee would like the Ministry to address the aspect like strengthening 
manpower and training, establishing research networks and enhancing community 
engagement as well and furnish a complete action taken note. 
3.2 Quality Control of Ayush Drugs 
Recommendation: 
3.2.1 The Committee understands that the quality of the medicines is essential as concerns have 
been raised over the high metal contents in the Ayush drugs, which damage people's health. In 
this regard, the Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry in 

13 
 
pharmacovigilance of the Ayush drugs. To accentuate these measures, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry further strengthen regulatory frameworks by developing user-
friendly systems for healthcare professionals and consumers to report adverse events related to 
Ayush medicines. The Ministry should also conduct regular post-marketing surveillance of Ayush 
medicines to monitor real-world safety and efficacy. This provides ongoing data for continuous 
improvement of quality. The data generated may also help identify potential safety concerns and 
take prompt action. 
(Para 3.3 of the Report) 
3.2.2 The Ministry may explore collaborating with the World Health Organization (WHO) and 
the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) to harmonise Ayush quality standards 
with international norms. This may facilitate global trade and recognition of Ayush products. The 
Ministry should also sign Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs) with other countries for 
regulatory compliance. The Committee is of the view that these steps may reduce duplicate 
testing and certification procedures, resulting in ease of the export and import of Ayush products. 
(Para 3.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
3.2.3 Drug Policy Section :  Ministry of Ayush requested to National Pharmacovigilance 
Coordination Centre to provide details regarding below mentioned points (vide letter no. T-
11012/03/2019DCC (AYUSH) dated 23rd April 2024).  
 
i. To publish a review article/booklet on all reported ADR and Herb-Drug interaction.  
ii. Report the therapeutic claims made by botanical products licensed under FSSAI in 
print/electronic media.  
iii. Report on product Licensed under FSSAI that covered under definition of 3a, 3h section 
of chapter IV-A of Drug and Cosmetics Act-1945. 
iv. To ensure reporting of all violation as mentioned under advisory no J11019/01/2017-DCC 
(AYUSH) dated 18-04-2024 issued by Ministry of Ayush. 
 
3.2.4 Drug Policy Section: Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the National Standards body of 
India has submitted a proposal to International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for 
creation of a dedicated technical Committee for Ayurveda and Yoga. As per ISO directives, the 
proposal has completed two stages of review  
• Four-week internal review  
• Four-week review with relevant groups (TMB, SPCG, IEC, SAGs and CCs).  
The proposal has been revised in response to feedback received during the both the stages of 
review and is now resubmitted to the ISO Central Secretariat. It is expected that, the proposal will 
soon undergo balloting among ISO member countries for a duration of 12 weeks. 

14 
 
3.2.5 IC Section: Ministry of Ayush has already collaborating with WHO on various 
projects/activities for the promotion of Ayush or Indian Traditional system of medicine globally 
i.e. establishment of WHO GTMC, in Jamnagar (India); Project Collaboration Agreements 
signed with WHO for developing Benchmarks Documents for Ayush, WHO terminology 
documents for Ayush etc.; Donor Agreement towards the implementation of developing a Second 
Module in the Traditional Medicine (TM) Chapter of the International Classification of Diseases 
-11 Revision (ICD-11); developing WHO M-Yoga App. etc. BIS has collaborated with ISO for 
developing global standards for Ayush and BIS has submitted a proposal to establish an ISO 
Technical Committee (TC) dedicated to Ayurveda and Yoga to ISO which is under consideration. 
Ministry of Ayush signed country level MoUs with 23 countries for cooperation in the field of 
traditional medicine. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.2.6 The Committee is of the view that a more proactive approach should be adopted, 
rather than asking some details from NPCC, for strict quality control of Ayush drugs. The 
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its recommendation and urges upon the Government to 
furnish a detailed status note clearly mentioning about the affirmative action taken in the 
direction to further strengthen the regulatory framework where cases of adverse effects 
related to Ayush medicine can be reported.  Also, apprise the Committee of the action taken 
in the direction of conducting regular post marketing surveillance of Ayush medicines to 
monitor safety and efficacy of these drugs. 
3.3 Implementation Status of National Ayush Mission 
Recommendation: 
3.3.1 The Committee understands that the National Ayush Mission has certainly provided the 
required fillip to the traditional medicine sector of the country. The Committee notes that the 
scheme has provisioned for the establishment of Ayush hospitals, dispensaries, and Health and 
Wellness Centres across the length and breadth of the country, however, the Committeeis 
concerned to observe that more than 69% of the integrated Ayush hospitals approved under 
NAM are still either under construction or the construction has not started yet. Similarly, only 
about 65% of the sanctioned A-HWCs have been established. The Committee recommends that 
since the Ayush sector is rising gradually and there are still important milestones and targets 
yet to be achieved under NAM, the Ministry should consider extending the period of the scheme 
beyond FY24 for at least 5 more years. 
(Para 3.6 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
3.3.2 Suggestion Noted.  National Ayush Mission (NAM) has been launched in 2014. NAM 
has been continued from time to time and present continuation is till 31.03.2026. The Ministry of 
Ayush has approved 167 integrated Ayush hospitals from 2014-15 to 2023-24 and the status of 

15 
 
which is - Functional-39, Construction Completed-7, Under Construction-99 and Construction 
not Started-22. Further, the Ministry of Ayush has approved 12500 Ayushman Arogya Mandir 
(Ayush) from 2019-20 to 2023-24and as reported by the State/UT Governments, 12121 units are 
functional as on date. Ministry of Ayush has sought extension from Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance for operationalization of all the remaining AAM (Ayush) functional till 
2024-25 and same has been approved by them. 
3.3.3 Regional Review Meetings (RRM) were held under chairmanship of Hon’ble Union 
Minister of Ayush to review the progress of the NAM. Various periodic review meetings were 
also conducted under the chairmanship of Secretary (Ayush) and Joint Secretary, Government of 
India. One-to-one meetings were also held to review the progress of the NAM in the Ministry of 
Ayush. Central team is also hand holding the States/UTs for smooth implementation of the NAM 
Scheme. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.3.4  One of NAM's primary components is providing Ayush Services. A decade after the 
launch of the scheme, the Committee is concerned about the slow progress in creating 
integrated AYUSH hospitals nationwide. Only 39 of the 167 approved hospitals are 
operational, which is just 23.35% of the sanctioned facilities. Hence, the Committee urges a 
more proactive and result-driven approach to accelerate the establishment of integrated 
AYUSH hospitals, given the rising demand for holistic healthcare. 
3.3.5 Further, the Committee still feels that the extension of time period of NAM for 
another  5 years would be required to achieve the set targets in a realistic and recommends 
accordingly. 
 
3.4 Challenges faced in the implementation of the National Ayush Mission 
Recommendation: 
3.4.1 The Committee observed that finalising the State Annual Action Plan (SAAP) and its 
approval process takes longer. Based on the pace of utilisation and availability of funds with the 
Ministry, funds are released in installments very late in the financial year. One of the reasons 
noticed was the large number of budget line items in the Action Plans. The Committee observes 
that reducing the budget line items in the Action Plans can improve the processing time and 
enhance administrative efficiency. Strengthening the outcome-based budgeting nudge the states 
to transform their health profile and promote cooperative federalism. The Ministry can also 
consider releasing a percentage of funds without waiting for the SAAP within the first month of 
the financial year. 
(Para 3.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
3.4.2 Ministry of Ayush usually allocates resource pool to States/UTs in the month of February 
every year based on the parameters of the Scheme including the physical and financial 

16 
 
performance of the States/UTs and request them submit the proposals through SAAPs as per their 
requirements. State/UT Governmentsare required to furnish the commitment of respective State 
share with due approval of Governing Body while submitting the SAAPs to Ministry of Ayush. 
Funds are only released after fulfilling the compliance of DoE guidelines by the States/UTs. 
 
3.4.3 As per DoE guidelines received during 2024-25, funds will be released in two 
installments. In the Ministry also there are two stage approval processes as common to other 
scheme guidelines. 
 
3.4.4 So far as outcome-based budgeting is concerned, the NAM guidelines have the provision 
to calculate the resource pool based on the physical and financial performance of the States/UTs. 
Further, while approving proposals, eachaspect of the implementation status is also examined. 
Moreover, the outcome parameters of the States/UTs are also evaluated by NITI Aayog for each 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme including NAM through Output Outcome Monitoring Framework 
(OOMF) Mechanism. 
 
3.4.5 Under NAM guidelines, there is a provisionto incentivize good performing States/UTs i.e. 
performance-based budgeting has been made. For this purpose, 20% of total allocation of 
Flexipool budget may be earmarked and this fund will be allocated to good performing 
States/UTs in the same proportion in which main budget of NAM is allocated. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.4.6 The Committee recommends the Ministry to furnish the measures taken to reduce 
budget line items in the State Annual Action Plan (SAAP) to improve the processing time 
and enhance the administrative efficiency instead of narrating the extant processes 
involved.  

17 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 Flexible component 
Recommendation: 
4.1.1 The Committee notes that in its vision, NAM intends to create an enabling environment 
for research and development in Ayush through various initiatives, programs, and aspects of its 
implementation. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that "Promotion of Research and 
Development" should be prominently included as one of the components of NAM. Similarly, the 
flexible component, which allows 25% flexible usage of funds, should include research and 
development as a supported activity. 
(Para 2.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
4.1.2 Suggestions noted. During review of NAM guidelines, the same will be incorporated.  
However, it is also informed that research and development in Ayush is mandate of Research 
Councils, Autonomous organizations of Ministry of Ayush. Further, under Ayurgyan Central 
Sector Scheme, many organizations involved in Research & Development are supported. 
Moreover, State/UT Governments may avail financial assistance for activities under flexipool 
component as per local requirement. 
4.2 Traditional Medicine Systems in India, China, South Korea and Africa 
Recommendation: 
4.2.1 The Committee notes that, like China, the Ministry of Ayush's efforts to establish 12,500 
Health and Wellness Centres (since renamed as Arogya Mandirs) go a long way in establishing 
Ayush as a medicinal system with the potential to fulfill the objectives of the universal health 
program. Like China, the Government of India should also devise ways to integrate the Ayush 
system with poverty alleviation initiatives to boost community engagement. Similarly, the 
Ministry of Ayush should collaborate with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to 
implement measures ensuring that the health workforce comprehends the importance of 
integrating systems. This collaboration aims to establish a pluralistic health system that caters to 
the population's diverse needs. Facilitating a dialogue among health providers from various 
systems becomes imperative for optimising patient outcomes. Substantial reforms in Indian 
medical education are essential to instill in medical students and practitioners an attitude 
supportive of the integration of modern medicine and traditional medicine. As a recommendation, 
the Committee suggests incorporating awareness of Ayush systems into school curricula, a 
significant step towards minimising knowledge barriers between Ayush and modern medicine. 

18 
 
(Para 2.22 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
4.2.2 Under NAM guidelines, Ayurvidya programme has been made to focus special emphasis 
on school children for promotion of healthy lifestyle & integrative diet education encompassing 
dietary principles from Ayush System in vulnerable regions where health indicators are poor, to 
create awareness about medicinal plants and home remedies in lucid, attractive manner that 
captures the mind of the School children so that they inculcate positive healthy behaviour as 
described in Ayush Systems of Medicine and to educate children about the role of yoga for 
fitness and wellbeing.  
 
4.2.3 Further, Ministry of Ayush constituted an Advisory Group and Committee to develop 
educational material for students of school education and higher education, dated 22/09/2022. 
The first meeting of the Advisory Group was conducted on 13/10/2022 and it was decided to 
form four sub-groups depending on age and standard of students. In this regard, a meeting was 
conducted by NITI Ayog at its premises on 20.11.2023, where Prof. B.S. Prasad, President, 
Board of Ayurveda, National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM), participated 
in which the frameworks of topics for school education were discussed.  
 
4.2.4 To incorporate Ayush component in the school education curricula, it needs to be 
mentioned/stated in the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCFSF), but it is 
observed that the present NCFSF does not have such specific mention of Ayush component in its 
deliberations". However, in this regard it was emphasized that, Ministry of School Education 
should take into consideration, the recommendations/request of Ministry of Ayush, which were 
earlier also stated in its letter (D.O. letter) addressed to the Secretary, Department of School 
Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education, New Delhi in the 29th September, 2021 and letter 
on reminders were also sent on 25.05.2022, 03.08.2023 and13.12.2023 from Secretary, Ministry 
of Ayush. 
  

19 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
Flexible component 
The Committee would like the Ministry to address the aspect like strengthening manpower 
and training, establishing research networks and enhancing community engagement as well 
and furnish a complete action taken note. 
(Para 3.1.7 of the ATR) 
 
Quality Control of Ayush Drugs 
The Committee is of the view that a more proactive approach should be adopted, rather 
than asking some details from NPCC, for strict quality control of Ayush drugs. The 
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its recommendation and urges upon the Government to 
furnish a detailed status note clearly mentioning about the affirmative action taken in the 
direction to further strengthen the regulatory framework where cases of adverse effects 
related to Ayush medicine can be reported.  Also, apprise the Committee of the action taken 
in the direction of conducting regular post marketing surveillance of Ayush medicines to 
monitor safety and efficacy of these drugs. 
(Para 3.2.6 of the ATR) 
 
Implementation Status of National Ayush Mission 
One of NAM's primary components is providing Ayush Services. A decade after the launch 
of the scheme, the Committee is concerned about the slow progress in creating integrated 
AYUSH hospitals nationwide. Only 39 of the 167 approved hospitals are operational, which 
is just 23.35% of the sanctioned facilities. Hence, the Committee urges a more proactive 
and result-driven approach to accelerate the establishment of integrated AYUSH hospitals, 
given the rising demand for holistic healthcare. 
(Para 3.3.4 of the ATR) 
 
Further, the Committee still feels that the extension of time period of NAM for another 5 
years would be required to achieve the set targets in a realistic and recommends 
accordingly. 
(Para 3.3.5 of the ATR) 

20 
 
Challenges faced in the implementation of the National Ayush Mission 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to furnish the measures taken to reduce budget 
line items in the State Annual Action Plan (SAAP) to improve the processing time and 
enhance the administrative efficiency instead of narrating the extant processes involved.  
(Para 3.4.6 of the ATR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Ministry of Ayush on 
the 156th Report has been given hereunder: 

21 
 
 
 
 
******* 
 
 
37%37%16%Status of action taken by the Ministry of Ayush in respect of 156th  Report of the CommitteeRecommendations/Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's repliesCommittee has made further recommendationsFinal replies of the Government's have not been received10%