Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report on Demands 
for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the Department 
of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
 
 
REPORT NO. 
61
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report on Demands
for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the Department
of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—36
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—6
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 7—25
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 26—35
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 36
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 37—38
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 39—42
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 43 —55

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby
present this Sixty-first Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s 55
th Report on Demands for Grants
2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
the year 2012-13.
2. The Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26
th and
25th April, 2012 respectively. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Report, received from the Department of AYUSH were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 8 th February, 2013 .
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the
8th February, 2013.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
8th February , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 8, 1934 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

(iv)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ASU – Ayurveda Siddha Unani
ASUDCC – A yurveda Siddha Unani Drugs Consultative Committee
AFC – M/s. Agricultural Finance Corporation
CDSCO – Central Drug Standards Control Organisation
CSS – Centrally Sponsored Scheme
CCEA – Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CCIM – Central Registers of the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
CCRYN – Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy
CCRAS – Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
EPC – Empowered Programme Committee
EMEA – European Medicines Evaluation Agency
GFR – General Financial Rule
GACP – Good Agricultural and Collection Practices
GMP – Good Manufacturing Practices
GCP – Good Clinical Practices
GLP – Good Laboratory Practices
HPI – Homoeopathic Pharmacopiea of India
IEC – Information, Education and Communication
MSG – Mission Steering Group
MDNIY – Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
MSP – Minimum Support Price
NIA – National Institute of Ayurveda
NIH – National Institute of Homoeopathy
NEIAH – North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
NBA – National Biodiversity Authority
NIIMH – National Institute of Indian Medical Heritage
NMPB – National Medical Plant Board
PCIM – Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine
PLIM – Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine
PMC – Project Management Committee
PCIM – Pharmacopoeial Commission of Indian Medicine
SMPB – State Medical Plants Boards
TKDC – Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
A TGA – Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration
TRIFED – Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India Limited
UCs – Utilisation Certificates
USFDA – US Food and Drug Administration
WHO – World Health Organization

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48) of
the Department of AYUSH for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.23, 2.25, 4.8, 7.25, 8.5, 13.5 Total–6
(Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 2.7, 2.9, 2.12, 2.18, 2.21, 3.5, 4.3, 4.9,
5.3, 5.9, 5.14, 5.19, 7.10, 7.12, 7.21, 7.22, 7.24, 7.26, 8.7, 9.3, 11.4, 12.3, 13.3
Total–23 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.3, 2.10, 2.16, 3.3, 3.4, 3.6, 5.6, 5.12, 5.18,
5.23, 5.24, 6.3, 7.3, 7.11 Total–14 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: 10.5 Total–1 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
IV. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
Utilization of Plan Allocation for North-Eastern States
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee is not aware of any follow-up action taken so far on the measures
suggested in the mid-term appraisal of the 11th Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
the Department that all possible efforts and follow-up action should be taken to take care of the
above suggestions. (Para 2.23)
Action Taken
1. Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries
provides financial assistance in ratio of 90:10 Shares for NE States and other hilly States (Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu and Kashmir). As regards the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
Development of AYUSH Institution and National Mission on Medicinal Plants are 100% funded by
Central Government for all States.
2. The guidelines for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Hospitals
and Dispensaries stipulate that the Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) and Mission Steering
Group (MSG) chaired by the Secretary, Health and FW and HFM respectively, set up under NRHM
will consider and approve changes, as deemed necessary, in this scheme. The enhancement of Unit
cost of construction in NE States would be taken up with EPC/MSG.
3. The existing guidelines for CSS for upgradation of AYUSH Institutions provide for one time
assistance on 50:50 matching share basis upto Rs. 10 crore for opening of new AYUSH Institutions/
Universities in the States not having such Institutions. Under the scheme an amount of Rs. 8 crore
was released as 1st installment to Tripura Sundari Ayurveda Medical College at Udaipur, Tripura
South during 2010-11. With regard to the special assistance on 100% basis, for setting up of at
least one AYUSH college along with teaching hospital in each of NE State would be taken up with
EPC after approval of 12th Five Year Plan.
4. The matter regarding reservation of seats in MD (Homoeo) for NE States students and
increase number of seats at BAMS level would be taken up with the concerned State Government/
Colleges.
Recommendation/Observation
1.2 The Committee notes that the Eleventh Plan has concluded; however, the 12th Plan outlay
of the Department is yet to be approved. The Committee feels that the delay in approval of the
12th Plan outlay is sure to impinge on the process of EFC/CCEA approvals which entails further
delay in finalization and implementation of the Schemes/Programmes of the Department for the 12th
2

3
Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Government to hasten the approval of 12th
Plan outlay and related proposals so that the Department is not hamstrung by lack of necessary
approvals and the consequent delay in finalization and implementation of various schemes/
programmes in the 12th Plan period. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for delay
in approval of the 12th Plan outlay of the Department. (Para 2.25)
Action Taken
12th Plan Outlay is yet to be approved by the National Development Council However, to
minimize delay in implementation of schemes the Department as a prelude to the 12th Plan is in
the process of appraisal of schemes by appointing evaluating agency. Moreover, the Department has
made comprehensive proposal for 12th Five Year Plan and geared up to implement it meticulously
after the approval is granted.
IV. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
CGHS Expansion in Dispensaries
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee is constrained to note the policy paralysis in regard to opening of AYUSH
dispensaries under the CGHS. On the one hand the DGHS had sent proposal for opening 13 new
AYUSH CGHS units and on the other, the Department of Health and Family Welfare was not
allowing any expansion of infrastructure of the CGHS in the name of introduction of a Health
Insurance Scheme for the Central Government Employees and Pensioners. While taking a serious
view in the matter, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in its 49th Report
presented to Parliament on the 4th March, 2011 which is reproduced below:
“It is very strange that though the Mid-term assessment of Eleventh Plan had emphasized
to provide AYUSH facilities in 10 CGHS dispensaries by 2011-12, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare has decided to halt any further expansion of infrastructure in CGHS on the
ground that a Health Insurance Scheme is being contemplated for Central Government
Employees. At a time when the avowed objective of the Government is to bridge the gaps
in health infrastructure and human resources, the Committee is at a loss to understand as
to why such a retrograde decision has been taken, especially in view of the dismal picture
of health infrastructure in the country. The Committee is of the view that even if the CGHS
is restructured, Health infrastructure created under it would not go waste, but contributes
to outreach of health care services in one way or the other. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should shed its indecisiveness in the matter and take concrete
action towards extending AYUSH facilities in CGHS dispensaries as per the Mid-term
Appraisal of the Eleventh Plan.” (Para 4.8)
Action Taken
CGHS scheme is implemented by the Department of Health and Family Welfare and all
policy decision regarding expansion and budgetary support are taken by them. They have informed
that the current administrative set up of CGHS is basically allopathic system oriented and to expand
AYUSH in CGHS, it would require creation of a proper administrative set up to deal the matters
related to AYUSH in a more effective manner. The Department of Health and Family Welfare/CGHS
has taken up the matter afresh and a more comprehensive proposal with detailed financial
implications and other logistic requirements is being worked out to expand AYUSH units in other
CGHS locations.

4
The Department of AYUSH is regularly funding some AYUSH CGHS Dispensaries from its
own budget provision. In the 11th Five Year Plan, funds to the extent of Rs. 2.85 crore
(provisional) has been released for supporting one Ayurvedic dispensary in Trivendrum, one
Homoeopathic dispensary each in Trivendrum and Guwahati, one Unani dispensary in Delhi, one
Siddha dispensary in Chennai and one yoga centre in Delhi.
National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
Recommendation/Observation
1.4 From the information furnished by the Department, the Committee notes that presently, only
seven States, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and
Tamil Nadu have full-fledged State Medicinal Plants Boards for proper implementation and
monitoring of the Schemes and Programmes of NMPB and twenty seven SMPBs are registered as
societies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken by the Department
to encourage the other States to set up full-fledged SMPBs. (Para 7.24)
Action Taken
Presently, only Seven States, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Kerala, Maharashtra and Rajasthan have full-fledged State Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPB) for
proper implementation and monitoring of the Schemes and Programmes of NMPB and twenty nine
SMPBs are registered as societies. The remaining States have been requested to set up full-fledged
SMPBs.
VIII. QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee observes that the quality and standardization of ASU&H products and
stringent implementation of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act are very vital for the
credibility of ASU&H drugs. However, the drug testing requirements of ASU&H drugs cannot be
met without setting up adequate number of quality control laboratories and strengthening of the
enforcement mechanisms of the States. The Committee also observes that the existing Drug Quality
Control Scheme suffers from certain inherent inadequacies due to which the off-take under the
Scheme in the Eleventh Plan has been very poor. The Eleventh Plan started in 2007 and has
completed in March, 2012. The Department should have sorted out the constraints with needful
modifications much before. The Committee expects that the Department would, at least from this
year onwards, act with greater promptness and iron out the hindrances in the implementation of
the Scheme with a sense of urgency. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
During the 11th Five Year Plan, thrust was given to accelerate the work of standardization
and quality control of drugs. In this direction, Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine
(PCIM) has been set up to provide overarching umbrella organization to the Ayurveda, Siddha and
Unani Pharmacopoeia Committees for augmenting the pace of developing standards of drugs. Apart
from the strengthening of Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine (PLIM) and Homoeopathy
Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, which are the central appellate laboratories for pharmacopoeial work
and testing of ASU&Homoeopathic drug respectively, the Department has supported 29 State Drug
Testing Laboratories to enhance their infrastructural and functional capacity. State Licensing
Authorities have been supported to improve the enforcement mechanism and testing of drug

5
samples. In order to increase the base of drug testing facilities in the country, a regulatory
provision was made in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules for recognition of private laboratories. With
this provision as many as 47 laboratories have been approved for testing of ASU&H drugs and the
number is likely to increase with recognition of more and more laboratories as the demand and
regulatory needs for testing of drugs have raised a lot with amendment of legal provisions.
Through the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Quality Control of ASU&H drugs, the
Department has assisted 29 State Drug Testing Laboratories, 46 State Pharmacies, 30 State Drug
Licensing Authorities for improving enforcement mechanism, 29 Drug Licensing Authorities for
testing of drug samples and 63 GMP compliant private manufacturing units for improving the
inhouse infrastructure of quality testing of drugs. It is envisaged to revise the scheme suitably in
the 12th Five Year Plan by broad-based consultative process with stakeholders for larger benefit
of the potential takers in accordance with the emerging needs of quality production and testing of
ASU&H medicines. Department has taken cognizance of the constraints that hindered the effective
implantation of the scheme in 11th Plan and would strive to iron out the hindrances in the
implementation of the scheme with a sense of urgency.
XIII. INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC)
Recommendation/Observation
1.6 The Committee observes that the enforcement of provisions of Drugs and Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisement) DMR (OA) Act leaves much to be desired. The Committee is
therefore of the view that the effectiveness of the said Act needs to be looked into closely. The
Committee also observes that the Department should not feel satisfied by merely issuing directions
to the State Governments and instead acquaint itself with the progress made towards
implementation of the directions so issued. The Committee also notes that regulation of content of
ads aired over the electronic and published in the print media falls within the exclusive domain of
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the Department of AYUSH and the concerned State
Governments should also approach that Ministry for containing such misleading ads. The
Committee would, therefore, advise the Department to bring instances of misleading advertisements
concerning AYUSH over TV and Radio and in print media to the notice of Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting for necessary remedial action. (Para 13.5)
Action Taken
The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act 1954 is implementable by
the State Governments and the Department of AYUSH has been directing State Licensing Authorities
to take action against the defaulters. The efforts for checking the impact of misleading
advertisements about AYUSH drugs have been reinforced with IEC and public awareness activities
through AROGYA Health Melas, National Campaigns, short films, video-clips, advertisements on TV ,
newspapers, and other print media about the safety and efficacy of medicines. The Department of
AYUSH will follow the advice of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to take up the matter of
objectionable advertisements with Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for imposing
appropriate remedial measures.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee was given to understand that a considerable number of AYUSH practitioners
are making tall claims of very effective cure and treatment of various ailments, viral/bacterial/fungal
infections, AIDS, cancer, Hepatitis etc. The Committee recommends that instead of ignoring such
claims, the Department should make all out efforts to verify these claims and find out whether

6
there is any substance therein. In case any of these claims are found to be true, the Department
should initiate further research thereon and assist such claimants in developing their line of
treatment in public interest. (Para 13.6)
Action Taken
The claims and such references received in the Department of AYUSH about the efficacy
of AYUSH remedies are referred to Research Councils for verification and appropriate scientific
studies. Further, extramural research activities and revitalization and validation of local health
traditions and midwifery practices are being supported.

7
7
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee observes that long pending UCs and unspent balances are not something
new. The Committee can also well-understand the limitations of the Department in getting the
liquidation of pending UCs and unspent balances expedited by the State Governments. However, the
Department could have anticipated these problems and accordingly made realistic projection for
requirement of funds. Thus it is obvious that there are shortcomings in the budgetary planning of
the Department and that the shortfall in utilization of the budgeted funds could have been avoided
and the unspent amount utilized more gainfully somewhere else had the Department assessed
requirement of funds properly for the purpose of making Budgetary Estimates as realistic as
possible. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to ensure that the entire
requirement of funds is assessed realistically so that the quantum of unutilized funds is minimized
in future. The Committee also appreciates the efforts made by the Department as it could convince
the Planning Commission for allocating Rs. 990 crores i.e. 10% more than BE 2011-12 and 52.31%
more than RE 2011-12 in spite of the fact that only Rs. 610 crores could be spent during the
previous year. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
The Department undertakes budgetary planning meticulously. The issue of pending UCs got
aggravated due to change of stand by Ministry of Finance and States not coming forward to
provide requisite UCs along with supporting documents. To ensure that the entire requirement of
fund is assessed realistically so that the quantum of un-utilized funds is minimized in future, the
Department has been reviewing comprehensively and adopting appropriate strategy w.r.t. the
expenditure profile of each major schemes/programmes at regular intervals and apply the result of
such analysis at the time of budget estimates and revised estimate.
Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has put in place a system of closer
monitoring of utilization of the budgeted funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
efficacy of this scheme in ensuring better financial performance. (Para 2.9)
Action Taken
As the system of closer monitoring has been put in place recently, the Committee will be
apprised of its efficacy after some time.

8
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee is aware of the fact that health needs of a vast and diverse country like
India cannot be met by a single healthcare system of medicine and AYUSH healthcare systems have
a very vital role in expanding the outreach of health care to the people because of their inherent
advantages in terms of diversity, modest cost, low level of technological input, growing acceptance
among the people, almost nil side effects etc. It is in this context that adequate allocation of funds
for AYUSH assumes added significance and resource crunch should not be allowed to come in the
way of achieving the envisaged objectives of AYUSH. Though the financial outlay allocated for
2012-13 is less than the projections made by the Department, the Committee recommends that
depending on better financial performance and greater absorption capacity of the Department and
the State Governments, quantum of funding for the Department of AYUSH be enhanced at the RE
2012-13 stage. Simultaneously, the Committee recommends that the Department should initiate and
implement remedial measures for better financial discipline and ensure that the scarce resources do
not remain locked up and surrendered later on. (Para 2.12)
Action Taken
The following measures would be taken for better financial discipline and ensuring that the
scarce resources do not remain locked up:–
(i) The absorption capacity of Central Government institutions e.g. Research Councils
and National Institutes shall be enhanced to make them state of art institution.
(ii) The im plementation of different scheme would be examined critically on regular basis
and accordingly budget would be reallocated at RE stage.
(iii) Monitoring and evaluation of all schemes shall be undertaken by third party.
(iv) States would be impressed to set up dedicated system for time bound implementation
of projects.
(v) The matter of liquidation of outstanding UCs would continue to be vigorously
followed up with the States through nodal officers appointed in the Department for
each State.
Pending Utilization Certificates
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 The Committee notes that though the Department has spelt out the measures it has taken
to liquidate the pending UCs, it has remained silent about the efficacy of the measures so taken.
The Committee, therefore, expects the Department to apprise it of the efficacy of the measures
in liquidating the pending UCs. (Para 2.18)
Action Taken
As a result of the measures taken by the Department to liquidate pending UCs, the position
of liquidated UCs has improved significantly which is evident from the position as follows:

9
(Rs. in crores )
(UCs of Grants paid during 2003-04 to 2010-11 liquidated during 2011-12)
Year of Sanction No. of UCs received Amount of UCs received
2003-04 2 1.56
2004-05 3 1.11
2005-06 4 8.97
2006-07 16 12.60
2007-08 57 39.76
2008-09 134 65.71
2009-10 189 193.61
2010-11 154 288.58
TOTAL : 559 611.90
The Department is striving hard for timely liquidation of UCs. It is expected that the
situation will improve further.
Utilization of plan allocation for North-Eastern States
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee welcomes the measures proposed to be initiated by the Department for the
purpose of sensitizing the North Eastern States and sincerely hopes that these would result in better
utilization of the outlays. The Committee is aware that 10 per cent of plan allocation earmarked
for a Department/Ministry is kept reserved for utilization in the North Eastern States so that the
outreach of development schemes could be ensured to these distantly located States of the country.
The Committee, therefore, desires to be kept apprised of the outcomes of the initiatives taken by
the Department of A YUSH. (Para 2.21)
Action Taken
Many actions have been planned/taken for North Eastern States. Some of them are as
follows:
(i) AROGYAs have been planned for North Eastern Region during 2012-13 in Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim.
(ii) Annual Action Plans under National Mission on Medicinal Plants for 2012-13 have
been approved for Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh.
(iii) Department is striving hard for establishing State of art institutions in North Eastern
States viz. (a) North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy and (b) North
Eastern Institute for Folk Medicine.

10
Statutory Institutions
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 The Committee also desires to be apprised of the time-lag between the receipt of
information from the State Governments and its publication in the Central Registers of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy. State-wise information may be furnished. (Para 3.5)
Action Taken
The status of Central Register of Homoeopathy is at Annexure-A and of Central Register
of Indian Medicine at Annexure-B.
IV. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Department that the project is on track
and it is expected to utilize the allocated amount during the Eleventh Plan period. However, the
Committee is constrained to note that though the Eleventh Plan has concluded, the actual
expenditure incurred till February, 2012 is Rs. 72.24 crore out of the total allocation of Rs. 150.00
crore. The Committee apprehends that despite the assurance of the Department that the project is
on track, there is every possibility that this ambitious and vital project may witness time and cost
overruns. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to put in a place a rigorous
monitoring mechanism for the project and ensure execution of the project within the approved cost
and designated time-line. (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
The Department is monitoring progress of AIIA vigorously. A Project Management
Committee (PMC) constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH) monitor the progress
quarterly. This PMC met on 30.04.12 last and gave certain recommendations/directions to the
concerned authorities. It advised Director in-charge of the institute to constitute a committee for
finalization of medical equipments for the institute by 31.05.2012 and to submit the proposals for
recruitment rules and creation of posts expeditiously. The consultancy agency i.e. HSCC was
directed to utilize unspent balance of the last financial year and budget provision for the current
year fully. Further the PMC directed to furnish a quarterly status report indicating quarterly targets
and achievements and reasons of variations, if any, and proposed corrective measures. The project
was again reviewed on 31.7.2012.
CGHS expansion in Dispensaries
Recommendations/Observations
2.8 The Committee also observes that at a time when mainstreaming of AYUSH is being
increasingly advocated so that it can contribute to achieving the National Health Outcome Goals,
putting a moratorium on the further expansion of the CGHS infrastructure, and the concurrent ban
on opening of the AYUSH units in the CGHS dispensaries in the name of introduction of a Health
Insurances Schemes is not only bad policy but also something which the Committee is unable to
comprehend. (Para 4.9)

11
Action Taken
The Department of Health and Family Welfare has informed that they are contemplating
introducing a Health Insurance Scheme for the Central Government employees and pensioners. It
is being contemplated with special focus in non-CGHS areas where the pensioners are not getting
adequate medical facilities as they are not covered under CS (MA) Rules which is applicable only
to the serving employees. The proposed Scheme will not be a substitute of CGHS; rather it will
provide an alternate option to the employees and pensioners to choose as per convenience. Despite
above development, the Department of AYUSH is continuing with the funding of AYUSH
Dispensaries and also taking initiative for its expansion.
V. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee notes that out of Rs.537.61 crores RE for 2007-12, only Rs.487.38 crores
could be spent upto February, 2012. The Committee would like to know the actual expenditure
during the Eleventh Plan period under this head. The Committee recommends to the Department
that the targets set under this scheme for the Twelfth Plan period should be achieved at the earliest.
For this purpose the Department should approach the Ministry of Finance for allocation of
additional funds, if any. The Committee should be apprised of the efforts made by the Department
in this direction. (Para 5.3)
Action Taken
The Outlay, BE, RE and AE in respect of Educational Institutions during the Eleventh Plan
period i.e. 2007-2012 is given as below:–
(Rupees in crore )
Name of Institutes Outlay BE RE A E
NIA 49.18 62.02 63.83 66.72
RA V 5.00 8.56 15.93 14.45
NIS 20.00 56.50 57.88 61.44
NIH 45.00 98.00 11 1.74 109.09
NIUM 25.00 53.00 49.99 45.89
MDNIY 20.00 19.65 23.88 19.14
Vishwayatan Yogashram, New Delhi 1.00 0.20 0.20 0.13
NIN 13.50 24.73 25.25 24.95
NEIAH 81.00 64.50 60.10 45.00
NEIFM 41.00 27.69 21.29 10.60
COE 100.00 81.00 63.02 62.65
IPGTRA 10.00 44.66 44.50 42.86
T
OTAL : 410.68 540.51 537.61 502.92

12
These schemes except Vishwayatan Yogashram, New Delhi will be continued in the Twelfth
Plan. It may be seen that actual expenditure incurred in respect of existing institutes has been in
consonance with outlay as well as BE/RE and hence, this may be taken as by and large a
satisfactory trend of expenditure.
2. As desired by the Committee, the additional allocation will be projected at the RE stage
depending upon the physical/financial progress of the sub-schemes.
National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The Committee would like to be informed of the updated expenditure figures and the
reasons for shortfall, if any, in the actual expenditure. (Para 5.9)
Action Taken
The details of funds released to NIH during the Eleventh plan period (year-wise) are as under:
Year Fund released
(Rs. in crore)
2007-08 16.98
2008-09 18.74
2009-10 20.00
2010-11 32.00
2011-12 21.37
T
OTAL : 109.09
As above there is no short fall in respect of expenditure incurred for functioning of the NIH
rather against approved outlay of Rs.45 crore in Eleventh Plan actual expenditure is Rs.109.09
crore for NIH.
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee is aware that Yoga is very effective in the area of Psychosomatic and
lifestyle diseases, where conventional medical approach does not provide any effective solutions.
The Committee, therefore, welcomes the enhanced allocation for MDNIY for the year 2012-13. The
Committee’s only concern is that the provisions so made should be utilized optimally and
judiciously. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a mechanism be put in place to evaluate
the outcomes of the funds spent on various Yoga projects. (Para 5.14)
Action Taken
The Institute has got the affiliation of Guru Gobind Singh Inderprastha University, New Delhi
to start B.Sc. (Yoga Science) three years duration course from 2012-13. The Institute has to follow
all guidelines and recommendations of the University and Statutory Bodies to conduct this course.
Under Swami Vivekananda District Yoga Wellness Centre Scheme, MDNIY has engaged
eight leading Yoga Institutions as Nodal Agencies which are continuously monitoring the activities

13
of these centres. There will be a high level monitoring Committee to monitor these centres under
the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Department of AYUSH. However, Institute is devising other
mechanism from the competent external agencies to evaluate the outcome of the Scheme.
Upgradation of the research centres for Yoga Education and Therapy established by MDNIY in the
premier Institutions of the country is under process. Necessary mechanism is being devised to
utilize the funds optimally and also to evaluate the outcome of these Centres.
North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Shillong, Meghalaya
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made towards full
operationalisation of NEIAH on a quarterly basis. (Para 5.19)
Action Taken
Present status of establishment of NEIAH is as follows:
(a) Posts have been identified and their draft recruitment rules have been formulated.
These RRs are under process for approval.
(b) As regards construction, Library block has been completed; Homoeopathic Teaching
block is expected to be completed by Oct., 2012, Ayurveda Teaching block to be
completed by January, 2013, Ayurveda Hospital block and Ward block are expected to
be completed by March, 2013.
(c) A committee to recommend purchase of equipments has been constituted.
(d) MoA, Rules and Regulations and Bye-laws of the Institutes have been finalized and
registration of the Institute as Society is under process.
VII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING MEDICINAL PLANTS
Development of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries and Mainstreaming of AYUSH
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 The Committee is constrained to note that against the BE of Rs. 275 crore for 2011-12
sanctioned under the above head, the expenditure till February, 2012 was Rs. 42.19 crore only. The
Department has attributed the under-utilization to non-submission of UCs by the States. At a time
when alignment of AYUSH programme with National Health Outcome Goals of reducing IMR,
MMR, TFR, Malnutrition etc. is being increasingly discussed, sub-optimal utilization of the
budgeted funds under this head to such a large extent is a very serious matter and calls for a
comprehensive review and reappraisal of the existing sys tem of submission  of UCs. The Committee
would, therefore, urge upon the Department to put in place a dedicated mechanism for pursuing
liquidation of pending UCs and addressing the procedural constraints witnessed in this regard.
(Para 7.10)
Action Taken
The expenditure in 2011-12 till 31.3.2012 was Rs. 93.34 crore. The Department is also
pursuing with Integrated Finance Division to give waiver of pending UC so that fund for medicine
and management support could be released in time.
The utilization certificates are accepted by the department of AYUSH in accordance with the
rules under General Financial Rule (GFR). For pursuing the liquidation of the UC’s with the States,

14
the department of AYUSH has assigned the task to identified nodal officers. They are making one
to one contact to the State Government and coordinate in implementing the programmes by the
States and timely submission of the UC’s.
Recommendation/Observation
2.14 The Committee would also like to advise the Department to continue to pursue with the
State Governments the matter of establishment of a dedicated AYUSH Directorate/Commissionerate
in the State Health Department. (Para 7.12)
Action Taken
The matter of establishment of separate dedicated institutional mechanism for undertaking
mainstreaming of AYUSH activities in the states is emphasized by the Department at every possible
forum. In the state health secretaries meeting held in the Department of AYUSH, this issue has been
constantly flagged. Further, in the existing guidelines of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
Development of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries, Department of AYUSH has incorporated an
advisory to the States to institute a dedicated institutional mechanism for implementing the scheme
activities with the approval of Mission Steering Group (MSG) under NRHM. The States were
informed to take action. Further, as advised by the committee the Department would pursue with
the State Government for establishment of dedicated AYUSH Directorate/Commissionerate.
National Medicinal Plants Board
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 However, the Committee is dismayed to note that the Department is deafeningly silent about
the specific query regarding the mechanism in place to check exploitation of medicinal plants
resources by multinationals. Instead of giving a comprehensive reply, the Department has skirted
the issue by merely stating that a Traditional Knowledge Digital Library has been set up and access
to this data base has been granted to international patent office for patent search purposes. The
Committee observes that India is home to 7% of the world’s bio-diversity and this richness of bio-
diversity should not be allowed to be exploited by the multinationals. Thus there is an imperative
need to formulate appropriate policy measures for the protection and augmentation of this bio-
diversity and sustainable harvesting of medicinal plants. The Committee desires to be further
enlightened in this regard. (Para 7.21)
Action Taken
Apart from the TKDL which has been set up by the D/o AYUSH as a defensive measure
to prevent grant of wrong patents based on Indian Traditional medicinal Knowledge at international
patent offices, the Department has provided a monitoring team under Project Director, TKDL to
monitor wrong patents filed/obtained by foreign nationals on Indian traditional knowledge.
The National Biodiversity Authority (NBA), Ministry of Environment and Forests has the
mandate to implement the provisions of the National Biodiversity Act, 2002. The Act inter alia
provides for conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and fair and
equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the use of biological resources, knowledge. CEO,
NMPB is ex-officio member of the NBA. In this capacity he attends the meetings of the authority
from time to time where applications for access to biological resources including medicinal plants
are considered as per the Act. The exploitation of medicinal knowledge by multinational are
prevented by the mechanism of TKDL and NBA. Ministry of Environment and Forest has mandate

15
for with conservation of biodiversity. Moreover, the Department is in touch with Ministry of Tribal
Affairs for providing Minimum Support Price to gatherers of Minor Forest Produce including
medicinal plants.
As far as conservation and augmentation of this bio-diversity and sustainable harvesting of
medicinal plants is concerned, the NMPB has been implementing the following schemes:
(a) Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of
Medicinal Plants under which 45,465.11hectares of land in forest areas under resource
augmentation/ in-situ  conservation has been covered upto 31st March, 2012. The
NMPB gives high importance to the resource augmentation of rare, endangered and
threatened species in the forests of different States.
(b) Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Mission on Medicinal Plants for
implementation during the Eleventh plan is primarily aimed at supporting market driven
medicinal plants cultivation on private land with backward linkages for establishment
of nurseries, for supply of quality planting material and forward linkages for post-
harvest management. Assistance has been given to State to support cultivation of
medicinal plants on 1,37,235 hectares till 31st March, 2012.
(c) The NMPB has developed good field collection practices.
Recommendation/Observation
2.16 The Committee welcomes the move to fix and provide minimum support price to medicinal
plant growers for their produce as the Committee is of the firm opinion that this would save
farmers from the exploitation by the middlemen. The Committee is not aware of what forward
movement has been made in this regard and whether any guidelines have been formulated for
implementation of this Scheme. The Committee expects the Department to lend more clarity to this
Scheme. The Committee further recommends that if needed the Department should make necessary
arrangements for procurement of medicinal plants from the growers at the minimum support price,
and make adequate arrangements for proper storage of the procured produce. The Committee
observes that there is a huge potential for production and export of AYUSH medicines and herbals.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should explore and exploit
optimum potential of production of Medicinal plants in the country. For this purpose the
Department should encourage cultivation of medicinal plants by providing adequate knowhow about
its scientific cultivation, proper irrigation facilities, adequate soft-term credit, marketing facilities,
voluntary certification for quality standards of medicinal plants, adopting organic certification of
medicinal plan ts etc. (Para 7.22)
Action Taken
• Minimum Support Price for the medicinal plants is important for preventing exploitation
of farmers at the hands of traders and other middlemen. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
had constituted a Committee on ownership, price fixing, value addition and marketing
of minor forest produce under the Chairmanship of Shri T. Haque. The Committee has
submitted its report in May, 2011. The Committee has recommended for MSP for
minor forest produce through a process as described below :
• The minimum support price should be fixed at the national level by a specially
constituted Central Price Fixation Commission, comprising one chairperson who will be
an expert in the field of tribal and rural development and three other members having
experience in the relevant field. The broad functions of the Commission would be the
following:–

16
(i) Fixation of minimum support price as bench-mark and setting quality standards.
(ii) Formulation of broad guidelines for effective implementation of the MSP scheme.
(iii) Monitoring and evaluation of the aforementioned scheme; suggesting corrective
measures from time to time.
• While fixing MSP for each crop season, the Commission shall have in depth
consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry
of Environment & Forests, Department of AYUSH, tribal leaders from all the
concerned regions, representatives of national level merchant/trade and industry
associations dealing with MFPs, state level agencies and the TRIFED. The
administrative ministry for the Commission will be the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.
• Ministry of Tribal Affairs has circulated an EFC memo for providing Minimum Support
Price to 13 minor forest produce including medicinal plants.
In due appreciation of potential of medicinal plants for development of country, the NMPB
has taken the following important steps in addition to resource augmentation in forest areas and
cultivation as stated in reply to Question at S.No. 35:
1. Supported Research Studies on:
• Multiplication of RET plants through Tissue Culture
• Computerized database of medicinal plants and monographs
• Bioactivity guided fractionation studies
• Sustainable harvesting
• Post Harvest Management
• Inter-cropping
• Chemical and Molecular Profiling
• Quality Planting Material
• Germplasm and Genotype Identification and Conservation
• Authentication and standardization of crude drugs
• Finding out substitute for RET plants
2. Developed Agro-techniques of 82 selected medicinal plants
3. Developed Good Agricultural Practices and Good Field Collection Practices
4. Undertaken Demand and Supply Study of Medicinal Plants
5. Finalized V oluntary Certification for Quality Standards of Medicinal Plants
6. Adopted Organic Certification of Medicinal Plants
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee observes that three important posts of Director (Technical), Deputy CEO
and Deputy Director (Medicinal Plants) have been lying vacant for quite some time, which is
certain to have a bearing on the smooth functioning of NMPB. The Committee also notes the
efforts made by the Department towards filling up of the vacancies. The Committee would

17
recommend that apart from pursuing the approaches already adopted, the Department should also
examine the desirability of appropriately revising the methods and conditions of recruitment without
compromising the standards, for the purpose of overcoming the shortage of key officers in NMPB.
(Para 7.23)
Action Taken
The post of Director (Technical) and Deputy CEO is likely to be filled up soon through
Ministry of Environment and Forests and post of Deputy Director (Medicinal Plants) would also
be filled up soon through UPSC as applications have been invited. The efforts are being made to
revise the RRs for the posts of ‘Documentation & IT Assistant’ and ‘Senior Accountant’. The
Department would seriously pursue the recommendation of the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
2.18 The Committee also notes that NMPB has initiated 100% monitoring of all the projects
under the Central Sector Scheme through Agricultural Finance Corporation. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the number of projects monitored during 2011-12, its findings and the
remedial measures taken thereon. (Para 7.25)
Action Taken
Total 1797 projects were handed-over to M/s. Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC), New
Delhi. Out of which, only 474 projects have been fully recommended for release of second
installment, 1280 projects have not been recommended and 43 projects have been partially
recommended, as detailed below:
Sl. Categories of the projects Status of the projects recommended by Total
No. monitored AFCL
Not Partially Fully
Recommended Recommended Recommended
(between 10-90%) (100%)
12 34 5 6
I Contractual Farming Projects
a) 2007-08 & 2008-09 677 37 159 873
b) 2005-06 & 2006-07 373 3 36 412
c) 2002-03, 2003-04 & 2004-05 175 3 70 248
S
UB-TOTAL : 1225 43 265 1533
II Promotional Schemes
A. Governmental Organizations
a) 2007-08 & 2008-09 16 – 91 107
b) 2005-06 & 2006-07 2 – 13 15
c) 2002-03, 2003-04 & 2004-05 – – 2 2
S
UB-TOTAL : 18 – 106 124

18
12 34 5 6
B. Non-Governmental Organizations
a) 2007-08 & 2008-09 12 – 50 62
b) 2005-06 & 2006-07 12 – 26 38
S
UB-TOTAL 24 – 76 100
III Amla Campaign
a) 2009-10 & 2010-11 10 – 9 19
S
UB-TOTAL 10 – 9 19
I V Capacity Building
2008-09 & 2009-10 3 – 18 21
SUB-TOTAL :3 – 1 8 2 1
TOTAL : 1280 43 474 1797
The report of AFC is being utilized for accepting UCs and release of second installment.
VIII. QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendation/Observation
2.19 Since the Committee does not have detailed information concerning Central Drug Controller
for ASU drugs, it would not give any value judgement. However, the Committee would like the
Department to furnish a detailed Status Note in the matter so as to enable it to examine the entire
spectrum of issues involved and make an observation accordingly. (Para 8.7)
Action Taken
The Ayurveda Siddha Unani (ASU) Drugs Consultative Committee (ASUDCC), which
consists of State ASU Drug Licensing Authorities and chaired by Drug Controller General (India),
in its meeting held on 17th June, 2010, had recommended that a separate Central Drug Controller
for ASU Drugs may be created. Similar recommendation was made by the Mashelkar Committee
for strengthening the drug control infrastructure for AYUSH at the central and State levels by
appointing separate Drug Controllers / Drug Inspectors for speedy enforcement of the provisions
of Drugs & Cosmetics Act. The ASUDCC also specifically recommended the strengthening of drug
testing facilities in the State Laboratories. The Government accepted the Mashelkar Committee
report and thereafter in 2005 Department of Health mo ved a Bill in Rajya Sabha for amendments
in Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 to inter alia  set up Central Drug Authority inclusive of dedicated
regulatory structure for AYUSH drugs. The Bill however was referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee, who in turn after listening to various stakeholders and Government Departments,
recommended for broad-based strengthening of the regulatory mechanism with comprehensive
infrastructure and structures. The Ministry accordingly could not materialize the proposal of setting
up Central Drug Authority, but the Drug Controller General (India) for allopathic drugs was
strengthened by sanctioning 175 posts and renamed as ‘Central Drug Standards Control
Organisation’ (CDSCO). However no posts were sanctioned for the regulation of drugs of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. Similarly, the State Drug Testing Laboratories funded by
Department of AYUSH under the quality control scheme failed to deliver the desired outputs for
want of adequate scientific manpower. Based on these grounds, the Department of AYUSH moved

19
a proposal to create the Central Drug Control infrastructure for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and
Homoeopathy (ASU&H) drugs along with strengthening of drug regulation system and the state
testing laboratories by equipping them with necessary technical manpower. In October 2010, the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by Secretary (Expenditure) cleared the proposal for
setting up the infrastructure for Central ASU&H Drug Controller and scientific manpower for State
Drug Testing Laboratories. Thereafter, the matter has been taken up with the Department of
Expenditure for creation of regular posts as well as for hiring of manpower on contractual or
outsourcing basis for five years in State Drug Testing laboratories. Allocation of Rs. 160 crore for
this purpose has been sought in the Twelfth Five-Year Plan and the proposal is included in the
annual plan 2012-13.
The need for a separate Drug Controller for ASU&H drugs is required at the Central level
is justified on the following grounds:–
(i) The convention of having only one Drugs Controller in developed western countries
and US may not be apt in India because of medical pluralism and diverse nature of
medicinal products of AYUSH systems. In western world, the traditional medical
systems like Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani are not recognized and their products are
treated in the same way as allopathic products for the purpose of quality control and
regulation. Contrary to this our country has well developed and officially recognized
medical systems including Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy with wide range
of manufacturers and medicines. The needs, demands and services of these systems
are regulated through different laws and rules and hence are governed by a separate
department in the Ministry i.e. Department of AYUSH. The Central Drug Standards
Control Organization (CDSCO) does not have any expertise in ASU&H drugs and thus
they have to rely on the inputs and advice of the Department of AYUSH in related
matters.
(ii) Unlike western developed countries, owing to specific needs and requirements we
have separate councils (Indian Medical Council, Central Council for Indian Medicine
and Central Council of Homoeopathy), separate Acts (Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956, Indian Medicine, Central Council Act, 1970 and Homoeopathy Central
Council act, 1973) to regulate medical education and practice of allopathic system,
Indian Medicine (Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani) and Homoeopathy respectively. The
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 contains separate chapter for ASU drugs and related
schedules and rules.
(iii) A YUSH is distinct from allopathic system in its philosophy, principles, concepts and
applications. Accordingly, the quality control and regulation of AYUSH systems is on
different plane. Specific regulatory requirements of ASU&H drugs necessitate setting
up a separate Central Drugs Controller in accordance with the recommendations of
the Mashelkar Committee and ASUDCC to provide for establishment of central
regulatory structure to deal with specific drug issues and enforce regulatory
provisions. The recommendations aim at strengthening the drug control infrastructure
for AYUSH at the Central and State levels by appointing separate Drug Controllers and
Inspectors for speedy enforcement of the provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and
strengthening of the Drug Testing facilities in State Laboratories.
(iv) Consequent upon the acceptance of the Mashelkar committee’s report by the
Government of India, the office of the Drug Controller General (India) has been
strengthened with the sanction of 175 posts for modern medicine experts. On similar
ground, sanctioning of posts and creation of a dedicated regulatory structure for
ASU&H drugs at the central level is, therefore, justified.

20
(v) There are 8644 drug manufacturing units of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and
Homoeopathy in the country and it is estimated that not more than 100 manufacturing
firms would have an annual turnover of Rs.5.00 crores and above. This brings out
a strong indication of requirement of a separate infrastructure with technical expertise
to handle the regulatory matters of different kinds.
(vi) In order to enhance acceptability of ASU & H Drugs, there is need to develop
formulations based on globally accepted practices like Good Agricultural and
Collection Practices (GACP), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Clinical
Practices (GCP) and Good Laboratory Practices (GLP). Apart from good industry
practices, manufacturers need to have established accreditation mechanism for
various processes of manufacturing. Regulatory norms laid out by US Food and Drug
Administration (USFDA), European Medicines Evaluation Agency (EMEA), Australian
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) and other such regulatory bodies, where
ASU & H Drugs may attempt registration for market authorization to expand their
international trade, need to be complied. These needs at present are not being taken
care of by the Central Drugs Controller Office due to non-availability of requisite
expertise and due to huge workload of matters related to allopathic drug.
IX. DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON FACILITIES FOR AYUSH INDUSTRY CLUSTERS
Recommendation/Observation
2.20 The Committee observes that very important and essential activities were contemplated to
be undertaken under the Scheme. However, the fact that till date only 9 AYUSH clusters have been
established and the expenditure incurred till February 2012 is Rs. 50.49 crore only against the
Eleventh Plan outlay of Rs. 500.00 crore is indicative of very sorry state of affairs. In a vast
country like India, there should be at least one AYUSH industry cluster in each state. The
Committee accordingly exhorts the Department to demonstrate greater prudence in budgetary
planning in future so as to avoid such instances of blockage of huge amount of funds as also to
redesign the scheme to facilitate development of common facilities for AYUSH industry clusters in
each State of the country. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
Initially the plan out lay Rs.500.00 crore for the Development of AYUSH Industry Cluster
was projected. In the meeting of EFC held on 03.12.2007 under the Chairpersonship of Secretary,
Expenditure, the EFC did not agree outlay of Rs.500 crore and recommended outlay of Rs.100.00
crore for setting up of 10 AYUSH Cluster during Eleventh year plan period. Accordingly the
department has sanctioned 09 projects with total outlay of Rs.83.71 crore excluding professional
fees. Rs. 50.49 crore have been released so far to sanction 09 projects as 1st, 2nd and 3rd
installment of Grant-in-aid. Further, the Planning Commission had also reduced outlay of Rs.130.00
crore for Development of AYUSH Industry Cluster scheme.
The Department would seriously pursue the recommendations of the committee.
XI. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION (IC)
Recommendations/Observations
2.21 From the information made available to the Committee, the Committee notes that though the
Department has listed the meticulous details of efforts made by it towards resolving the issues

21
arising out of Traditional Herbal Medicinal Products Directive, no substantive results could be
achieved so far. The Committee feels that the above case underlines the need to restructure
International Cooperation activities in the context of globalization and lay emphasis on promotion
of research projects with international R&D institutions. The Committee would like the Department
to formulate appropriate policy initiatives to address this issue at the earliest. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
The Department of AYUSH is striving hard in the area of promotion of research projects
and promotion of AYUSH systems of medicine at international level. Details of action taken in this
regard are indicated below:
(a) The Department of AYUSH has already signed Memorandum of Understanding on
Cooperation in the field of Traditional systems of Medicine with China, Malaysia, and
Trinidad and Tobago. Signing of MOU with Serbia, Nepal and Sri Lanka are in the
pipeline. The MoU envisages bilateral cooperation in the areas of standardization of
herbal medicines, collaborative research in drug development, and development of
common strategies for creating greater awareness about the safety and efficacy of
traditional medicine products. The MoU also envisages cooperation in policies relating to
regulation and administration of traditional medicine promotion of cooperation in
teaching, practice, drugs and drugless therapies of Traditional medicine.
(b) The Department is promoting establishment of AYUSH Chairs in Foreign Universities. It
has been agreed to establish Ayurveda Academic Chairs at University of Viadrina,
Germany, University of Durbin (South Africa) and University of West Indies (Trinidad
and Tobago). Department has also established a Unani Academic Chair at University of
Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa. The selected candidate for Unani Academic
chair at the University of Western Cape has already joined the chair in Month of June
2012, while for Ayurveda Academic Chair at University of Durbin, selected candidate
will join shortly. The selection and posting of candidates for Ayurveda Academic Chair
at University of West Indies (T&T) and Viadrina (Germany) is under process. These
Chairs would also deal with research projects with international Research and
Development institutions.
XII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
2.22 The Committee places on record its appreciation for the achievements made by the four
Research Councils. However, the Committee is of the considered view that a lot remains to be done
as far as the standardization of classical AYUSH formulations, AYUSH therapies and validation of
classical AYUSH drugs are concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should formulate a comprehensive programme focusing on the above issues with a view to promote
quality and holistic research in AYUSH and facilitate scientific validation of AYUSH remedies. The
Committee would also like the Department to establish a national registry of all AYUSH research
studies and get the health outcomes accruing from the research projects of the four Councils
evaluated by an independent agency. (Para 12.3)
Action Taken
The steps taken/proposed to be taken by each of the Councils on the concerns raised by
the Committee are outlined as follows:–

22
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences:
1. Standardization of Classical AYUSH formulations:
The Government of India set up ‘Pharmacopoeial Commission of Indian Medicine (PCIM),
an autonomous organization of Government of India in 2010 to strengthen the quality standards of
Classical Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulations by evolving referral Pharmacopoeia
• Standards.
• All Pharmacopoeial committees viz. Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia Committee, Siddha
Pharmacopoeia Committee and Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee work under this
umbrella.
• The prime objective of the Commission is to coordinate and harmonize the laying down
of Pharmacopoeial standards for classical Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Single drugs and
Compound formulations and subsequent publication in the form of ASU Pharmacopoeias.
2. Validation of AYUSH Therapies and Classical AYUSH Drugs:
• The Council has formulated a comprehensive Plan of Action for Scientific Validations of
Classical Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeial formulations under Twelfth Five Year Plan.
• This component of Twelfth Five Year Plan comprises Pre-clinical (Safety and Toxicity)
(about 33 formulations) and Clinical validation (about 37 formulations) of Classical
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeial formulations.
• This is being implemented in a phased manner by setting the targets in the Annual Action
Plan of each financial year.
• Furthermore, the Council has formulated an Intra Mural Research Policy which focuses
on ‘System validation of Ayurveda Therapies’ and validation of Classical Ayurveda
formulations.
Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy:
12.1 The Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) is involved in
conducting research studies to establish the efficacy of Yoga and Naturopathy systems in various
disease conditions by providing financial assistance to established/renowned Yoga and Naturopathy
institutions as well as Medical institutions. The Council has completed 37 research studies in past.
41 research papers have been published in National/ International Journals so far. The research
findings of some of the completed studies have been published as research monographs for
dissemination of the outcome of the studies among the Physicians and Researchers. 12 research
monographs have been published by the Council so far.
Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy:
In the process of laying down standards of Homoeopathic Medicines, up till now nine (09)
volumes of Homoeopathic Pharmacopiea of India (HPI) has been published which includes data of
956 drugs. As per action plan submitted to the Department of AYUSH for completing the
standardization of Homoeopathy medicines in the Twelfth five year plan, HPC of the Department
of AYUSH has proposed for completion of standardization of 256 drugs thereby completing the
target of 1200 drugs (commonly used in Homoeopathy). Preparation of Monographs on
homoeopathy drugs after drug standardization has been initiated in the year 2012-13 with a target
of 45 drugs (35 drugs by HPC and 10 drugs by CCRH).

23
Apart from intramural research studies on RCT design, Gold standard of Clinical Research,
Council has undertaken high end research in collaboration with the Institutes of excellence such as
IIT, Delhi, JIPMER, Kolkata Puducherry, University of Madras, School of Tropical Medicine,
Kolkata, Bose Institute, Kolkata, DIPAS, Delhi etc. to scientifically validate and to promote quality
and holistic research in Homoeopathy.
All the clinical trials are being registered under Clinical Trial registry of India since 2009. Till
now 17 clinical research trials have been registered and 09 trials are under process of registration.
Central Council for Research in Siddha:
Validation of AYUSH Therapies and Classical AYUSH Drugs:
• The Council has formulated a comprehensive Plan of Action for Scientific Validation of
siddha formulations under Twelfth Five Year Plan.
• This component of Twelfth Five Year Plan comprises Pre-clinical (Safety and Toxicity)
(about 15 formulations) and Clinical validation (about 15 formulations) of siddha formulation.
• This is being implemented in phased manner by setting the targets in the Annual Action
Plan of 2012-13.
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine:
• The Council is also engaged in the development of the pharmacopoeial standards of
Unani single and compound drugs. This work is being done at seven drug
standardization Units of the Council. The Council has so far developed pharmacopoeial
standards of 298 single drugs and 100 compound formulations. This work has been
incorporated in Unani Pharmacopoeial of India in different volumes. The work carried
out by the Council is being utilized by the Unani drug industries in order to manufacture
quality drugs.
• The Council has scientifically established efficacy of Unani therapeutics in different
diseases. During Eleventh Plan studies on 43 formulations undertaken. It has also
validated regimental therapies in different disease conditions at the Council’s centres.
• Scientific validation of classical Unani drugs has also been undertaken by the Council.
Studies on 25 classical drugs in 10 disease conditions has been complete.
AYUSH Research Portal (www.ayushportal.ap.nic.in.)
The Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India
emphasizes on dissemination of the merits of AYUSH systems across the globe. A web based
‘AYUSH Research Portal has been launched on 18th April 2012. The Central Council for Research
in Ayurvedic Sciences is the coordinating body and the National Institute of Indian medical heritage
(NIIMH) Hyderabad is maintaining the web portal in collaboration with National Informatics Centre,
Hyderabad.
AYUSH Research Portal is meant for dissemination of Research outcomes in AYUSH systems
and allied sciences making them accessible. The key objectives of the Research Portal comprise:
• Showcase the research findings in an organized fashion
• Preempt duplication of work
• Encourage interdisciplinary research
• Generate evidence for wider acceptance of AYUSH system worldwide
• Enhancing translational potential of core strengths and merits.

24
• The major categories of AYUSH System including research on related sciences viz. Clinical
Research, Pre-clinical Research, Drug Research and Fundamental Research are
covered in this portal
• The information embodied is categorized as per individual
• AYUSH medical system against standard set of Medical conditions, based on WHO disease
classification ICD-10, and navigation is provided according to ICPC’s (International
Classification of primary Care) in select disease categories.
• The Portal provides the relevant indigenous name of the medical conditions pertaining to
each medical system, which further adds to clarity. The users can browse from a
dashboard which provides access to all the categories with visually clear buttons meant for
the purpose. On selection of the displayed results, the user will get information in the form
of abstract and wherever possible, full text of the article.
• An important value addition of the portal is categorization of Clinical Research work into
Grade A, B, C based on “General Guidelines for methodologies on Research and Evaluation
or Traditional medicine” published by World Health Organization (WHO). The grading allows
the researchers and also policy makers to access the current R&D status of AYUSH and
plan further to fill in the gaps.
• The application has been developed by Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic sciences
(CCRAS), and the content is being provided by all AYUSH Research councils, drug
standardization laboratories, and National Institutes. AYUSH Research Portal is accessible
through www.ayushportal.ap.nic.in. Specific usernames and passwords have been provided
to research Councils, National institutes and Pharmacopoeial Laboratories functioning under
department of AYUSH.
• The portal content development is a three tier experience through rigorous consultative
process by Central Co-ordination Committee, Editorial Committee and Search.
• and Peer Review Committee to ensure its high quality content.
• So far information on about 11394 published research papers, conference proceedings,
postgraduate and PhD works etc. has been incorporated in the portal.
Research information in “AYUSH Research Portal” at a glance:
Categories Medical Systems
Ayurveda Yoga and Unani Siddha Homoeopathy Grand
Naturopathy T otal
1. Clinical 1332 985 281 79 538 3215
Research
2. Preclinical 1520 199 115 72 78 1984
Research
3. Drug 2524 – 843 223 230 3820
Research
4. Fundamental 662 212 274 214 1013 2375
Research
T
OTAL : 6038 1396 1513 588 1859 1 1394

25
XIII. INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC)
Recommendation/Observation
2.23 The Committee takes note of the suggestions made in the Mid-term appraisal and finds
merit therein. It, therefore, recommends that the suggestions made during the Mid-term appraisal
should be taken care of and implemented at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the follow-up action taken by the Department on the modifications suggested in the Mid-term
appraisal. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken
There is a provision of Rs.5.00 lakh for preparation of Publicity material by the States
Governments. As it is not possible to revise the IEC Scheme at this stage, it is submitted that the
modifications will be considered while preparing the scheme to be implemented during Twelfth Five
Year Plan.

26
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee observes that despite the fact that a Zero Based Budgeting exercise which
requires that budget request be evaluated thoroughly, starting from the zero base, was undertaken
at the beginning of the Eleventh Plan, a substantial amount of Rs.906.04 crore out of the total
Eleventh Plan Outlay could not be utilized, which is a serious matter. The Committee takes note
of the constraints, as pointed out by the Secretary, in utilizing the approved outlays and
recommends that the Department should review the norms governing the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes for the desired results and better financial performance. The Committee feels that the
AYUSH sector with its impressive infrastructure has a very important role to play in achieving the
National Health Outcome Goals of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
share of AYUSH may sufficiently be raised in the total health outlay in the Twelfth Plan.
(Para 2.3)
Action Taken
3.2 Apart from number of new initiatives proposed in the Twelfth Plan, the scope of the
existing Plan schemes is also proposed to be expanded. The norms governing the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme shall be reviewed. The Department has been striving for substantial
enhancement of allocation for AYUSH sector in the total Health Outlay in the Twelfth Plan.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Committee observes that the Department should have informed the concrete
action which has been taken or contemplated to be taken to optimize utilization of funds.
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Department should strive to
judiciously utilize the approved outlays simultaneously working to handle the existing
constraints. The Committee observes that this would strengthen the demand for
enhancement for AYUSH Sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings
of review of the norms governing the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and how the
Department is proposing to act on them to achieve the desired results.
Recommendation/Observation
3.4 The Committee notes that the unspent balance left with the implementing agencies is to the
extent of Rs. 263.33 crore for 2008-09, Rs. 378.46 crore for 2009-10 and Rs. 302.93 crore for
2010-11. From the above, Committee infers that more emphasis is being laid on approving projects
but completion aspect of the already approved projects is not getting the required attention. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to immediately initiate corrective steps to
strengthen the existing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms of the on-going projects so that the
26

27
unspent balances are liquidated and the outcomes of the on-going projects are made available in the
public domain. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the follow-up action taken in this
regard. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.5 The completion of ongoing project get higher priority as it may be seen that unspent balance
has come down from Rs. 378.46 crore to Rs. 302.93 crore in 2010-11.
To strengthen the existing monitoring and evaluation mechanism, the NMPB has already
engaged an Agency M/s. Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC), New Delhi on outsourcing for
monitoring and evaluating the on-going projects. The Agency is submitting the reports regularly. For
evaluation of other schemes of Department of AYUSH, the selection of an independent agency is
under process.
Further Recommendation
3.6 The Committee takes note of the declining trend of unspent balances of the on-going
projects after hiring of an independent Monitoring Agency. The Committee feels that the
Department should expedite selection of other independent Agency for evaluation of other
schemes of the Department of AYUSH so as to monitor their progress closely.
PENDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES
Recommendation/Observation
3.7 The Committee feels concerned to note that the Utilization Certificates for funds released
as far back as in 1997-98, 2000-01 and 2002-03 are still pending and a substantial amount of funds
are involved therein. The Committee feels that with the existing availability of information
technology resources the Department should have been able to develop an effective system of
coordination with the State Governments and remove the impediments in furnishing the UCs in
time. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to formulate an action plan in
coordination with the State Governments for developing an effective and efficient coordination
mechanism for the timely submission of UCs. This would also speed up execution of the projects
well within the approved cost. (Para 2.16)
Action Taken
3.8 In due appreciation of the need of action plan for liquidating UC, nodal officers have been
appointed for each State for efficient co-ordination. Nodal officers have visited their States and
have collected many UCs during their visit. Further, Secretary (AYUSH) is taking meetings of State
Health Secretaries at regular intervals to facilitate timely submission of UCs.
Further Recommendation
3.9 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department for liquidating the
pending UC’s. The Committee, however, feels that still a lot is required to be done in this
regard as merely appointing the nodal officer would not yield the desired results. The
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its recommendation that the Department should dwell
upon formulating an efficient and effective coordination mechanism for timely submission
of the UC’s. The Committee may be apprised of the achievements made.

28
III. S tatutory Institutions
Recommendation/Observation
3.10 From the tables of Annexure - C , the Committee notes that as regards the updation of the
Central Register of Homoeopathy, out of 24 States in respect of which information has been made
available, as many as 12 States are lagging behind in sending updated information in respect of their
State Registers and in respect of one State i.e. Nagaland, the Department has informed that the
State Register appears to be made in violation of the State Act. As regards the status of updation
of the Central Register of Indian Medicine, information in respect of only 15 States has been
furnished and, that too is not up-to-date. The Committee, therefore, observes that in this era of
advanced Information Technology when all such information should be made available in the public
domain in an updated form on the touch of a button, such procrastination is not acceptable to the
Committee. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to take up the matter of updation
of Registers with the State authorities at the highest level with a view to impress upon them the
imperative need for updation of the State Registers. (Para 3.3)
Action Taken
3.11 The website of Central Council of Homoeopathy has been revamped wherein information
about number of entries, dates of Official Gazette and updated position of Central Register has been
given. A decision has also been taken to display all entries of Central Register on its website for
which rate-negotiation and modalities with concerned agency are being finalized.
The Central Council of Homoeopathy is pursuing with Government of Bihar, Andhra Board,
Maharashtra Council, Odisha Board, U.P. Board and M.P. State Council for updating the register.
Cental Register of Indian Medicine
3.12 Central Council of Indian Medicine is maintaining Central Register of Indian Medicine on the
basis of State Register supplied by the State Registration Boards/Council to the Central Council.
Further, it is informed that the preparation and maintenance of Central Register of Indian Medicine
is a continuous process and the present position of State Registers as well as Central Registers of
Indian Medicine notified in the Gazette of India. Almost, all the Central Registers notified in the
Gazette of India have also been displayed on the website of this Council.
Some State Registration Boards/ Councils have agreed for computerization of their State
Register of Indian Medicine since inception to till date.
Further Recommendation
3.13 The Committee notes that some State Registration Boards/Councils have agreed for
computerization of their State Registers of Indian Medicine since inception to till date. The
Department should make efforts to sound other State Governments to opt for
computerization since this would go a long way in ensuring collection of updated data and
timely updation of Central Register of Homoeopathy and Central Register of Indian Medicine.
Recommendation/Observation
3.14 The Committee would also like the Department to undertake a review of the entire process
of updation of Central Registers of the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy and take corrective
action in the light of the findings thereof. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action
taken in this regard. (Para 3.4)

29
Action Taken
3.15 Central Council of Homoeopathy has conducted a workshop of Registrars of all State
Councils/Boards of Homoeopathy on 13.8.2012 to discuss all related matters of State Registers
viz-a-vis Central Register of Homoeopathy.
Further Recommendation
3.16 The Committee had desired to be apprised of the corrective action taken in the light
of findings of the review of the entire process of updation of Central Registers of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy. However, the Department has just informed about a workshop
conducted in this regard without coming forward with any concrete suggestion to handle the
constraints coming in the way of timely updation of Registers. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
3.17 As per the information furnished in the Outcome Budget 2012-13, during 2011-12, 300
colleges of Ayurveda and 13 colleges of Unani were inspected by the CCIM for verification of their
educational infrastructure and standards. Accordingly, recommendations were sent to the
Department for issuing/not issuing letter of permission. The Committee desires the Department to
furnish a detailed note in this regard, indicating therein whether the Department had accepted all
the recommendations made by CCIM or there were cases in which the action taken by the
Department was not in accordance with the recommendations of CCIM. (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
3.18 1. Out of 311 existing Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) colleges in India, the CCIM had
conducted visitation in 301 colleges and in rest 10 colleges the Central Government had
conducted visitation for the purpose of renewal of permission to the ASU colleges
during 2011-12 for taking admission in the 1st year of the existing courses,
1.1 Out of 301 colleges where the CCIM had conducted visitation, in 297 cases it
had submitted recommendation and in 4 cases no recommendation provided.
1.1.1 Out of 297 colleges where the CCIM had provided its recommendation, in 215
cases the action taken by the Department of AYUSH is in accordance with CCIM
recommendation (in 113 cases CCIM recommended for granting of permission
and Department of AYUSH granted permission and in 102 cases CCIM
recommended for denying of permission and Department of AYUSH denied
permission).
1.1.2 Further, out of 297 colleges where the CCIM had provided its recommendation,
in 82 cases the action taken by the Department of AYUSH is not in accordance
with CCIM recommendation (in 62 cases CCIM recommended for granting of
permission but Department of AYUSH denied permission and in 20 cases CCIM
recommended for denying of permission but Department of AYUSH has granted
permission)
1.2 Out of 301 colleges where the CCIM had conducted visitation but no
recommendation provided in 4 cases, Department of AYUSH has granted
permission to 1 college and denied to 3 colleges.

30
2. Out of 311 existing Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) colleges in India, as the CCIM
had not conducted visitation in 10 colleges, the Central Government had conducted
visitation and permission to all 10 colleges had been denied.
3. The colleges were granted conditional permission on qualifying the basic eligibility
criteria approved for 2011-12 session namely
(i) Teachers:
(a) For UG course: 90% eligible teachers, 50% Higher Faculty (Professor+Reader)
and at least one teacher in each Department,
(b) For PG course(s): In addition to the UG course, 1 Higher Faculty + 1 Lecturer
in the concerned PG department, 32 fulfillment of teacher-student ratio (1:3 for
Professor, 1:2 for Reader and 1:1 for Lecturer),
(ii) Beds in hospital:
(a) Minimum 100 beds in hospitals of Ayurveda/Siddha Colleges up to 50 UG intake
capacity + 1:2 student-bed ratio for 51-100 students intake capacity, and
Minimum 50 beds in hospitals of Unani Colleges up to 50 intake capacity + 1:1
student-bed ratio for 51- 100 students intake capacity.
(b) Minimum 150 bedded hospital for PG Colleges of Ayurveda and Siddha/75
bedded hospital for PG Colleges of Unani and stand alone PG institutes + 1:5
student-bed ratio for each PG clinical seat over the total requirement of beds
for UG students’ intake capacity,
(iii) Daily average of 100 patients per day in OPDs of the hospital during 2010,
(iv) 40% bed occupancy for UG courses and 50% bed occupancy for PG courses in
IPDs of the hospital during 2010, and
(v) Fulfilment of provisions including staff requirement under relevant PG Education
Regulations.
3.19 The colleges which were not meeting the eligibility criteria as detailed at point 3 above,
were given due opportunity of hearing under the provisions of the first proviso to sub-section 5
of section 13A of the IMCC Act, 1970 and on further examination as per eligibility criteria (detailed
above), the case was either granted permission or denied permission for 2011-12 session.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes that in as many as in 82 cases the action taken up by the
Department is not in accordance with the recommendation of CCIM. The Committee desires
that the recommendations of CCIM should be examined by a team of experts and an
objective view should be taken.
V . Educational Institutions
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur
Recommendation/Observation
3.7 The Committee is constrained to observe that with such a large number teaching posts
remaining vacant in the NIA, the functioning of NIA would certainly be impaired. The Committee

31
takes note of the measures being taken by the Department to wipe out the vacancies i.e. early
notification of the vacancies to be filled by Direct Recruitment and filling of the vacancies kept
for promotion along with the Direct Quota posts etc. However, the Committee feels that the
measures are unlikely to result in bridging the gaps in manpower requirements immediately. The
Committee, therefore, feels that the Department should consider roping in professionally qualified
persons on short term contract or deputation basis so as to overcome the staff crunch in teaching
posts. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
3.22 In spite of repeated all India level Vacancy Notifications, the Institute had not been getting
candidates with the requisite PG Teaching Experience resulting in a number of senior positions of
Professor and Associate Professor remaining vacant. Again these positions are being notified on all
India basis with wide circulation and the Notification will appear shortly.
As suggested by the Committee, action will be taken to appoint professionally qualified
persons on short-term contract or deputation basis in order to overcome the staff crunch on these
senior faculty positions in case of non-availability of suitable candidates with the prescribed PG
Teaching Experience after assessing the response to the present vacancy notification.
Further Recommendation
3.23 The Committee fails to understand that why the Department has not taken any
action so far to depute professionally qualified persons on short term contract rather than
waiting for the outcome of the present vacancy notification. The Department should take
immediate action in this regard.
National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata
Recommendation/Observation
3.24 The Committee notes that the expansion of hospitals to 250 beds was targeted to be
achieved during 2010-11. Almost a year has elapsed since then, but the target is yet to be
accomplished. The Committee takes note of the reasons adduced by the Department for the delay
i.e. non-completion of hospital building expansion. The Committee is of the firm opinion that had
the Department had a streamlined monitoring mechanism, the slippages in implementing the project
could have been avoided. The Committee also takes note of the fact that necessary approvals for
construction of the academic-cum-library building are yet to be obtained. The Committee would like
to advise the Department to expedite obtaining necessary approvals for the project so that the
budgeted funds for the Project do not get locked up for want of approvals. From the information
furnished by the Department, the Committee notes that there are 32 vacancies in Group A, 6 in
Group B and 37 in Group C posts. The Committee is constrained to observe that such a
considerable number of vacancies would certainly impinge on the functioning of NIH. The
Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to make sustained efforts to fill up the vacant posts
at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made by
the Department in this regard. (Para 5.12)
Action Taken
3.25 The building for expansion of hospital is being constructed by the CPWD. Almost 80% of
the work is complete. However, civil work was interrupted due to want of approval and sanction
for the additional estimate proposed by CPWD towards electrical works, installation of elevators,

32
mandatory firefighting equipments and lightening of the surrounding areas, from the competent
authority. Now, the proposal has been approved by Standing Finance Committee and Governing
Body of the Institute duly and part payment has been made to the CPWD on 30.04.2012 by the
institute. The institute has confirmed that they are in close touch with the CPWD and so that the
work is completed at the earliest.
Government’s approval for continuation of second and third phase of Academic-cum-Library
building has been conveyed to institute on 8th May 2012.
The Department is vigorously pursuing the matter regarding filling up of the vacancies in
National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata. In this regard, a Review Meeting was held on 8th May
2012 in the Department with the coordinating officers of the institute. New director of the institute
has joined and all out attempts are being made to sort out pending issues.
Further Recommendation
3.26 The work which was proposed to be completed during 2010-11 is yet far away from
completion stage. No positive steps have been taken to implement the Committee’s
recommendation. The reply is very vague. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation for filling up of vacancies and for expansion of the hospital.
North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, (NEIAH) Shillong, Meghalaya
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee expresses its serious concern at the tardy progress made towards full
operationalisation of NEIAH. The Committee apprehends that the delay in achieving the targets
within the designated timeline would lead to cost overrun. In this context that the Committee
emphasizes the need to vigorously supervise and monitor the implementation of the project at a
sufficiently higher level, identify the shortcomings and impediments and take corrective action
simultaneously. (Para 5.18)
Action Taken
3.28 The Department is monitoring progress of the Institute vigorously. A Project Management
Committee (PMC), under Chairmanship of Secretary has been constituted in the Department, which
monitors the progress quarterly. This PMC met on 30.04.12 and it analyzed progress achieved after
the previous meeting of PMC which was held on 14.12.2011 under which a sub-committee was
constituted to visit the site for inspection of the work. Further, it gave certain recommendations/
directions to the concerned authorities. Further, the PMC directed to furnish a quarterly status
report indicating quarterly targets and achievements and reasons of variations, if any, and proposed
corrective measures. Afterwards, a Review Meeting has been held in the Department on 31st July,
2012 in which progress in construction, purchase of equipment, furnishing of the hospital, creation
of posts and fund utilization were reviewed.
Further Recommendation
3.29 The Committee observes that the reply of the Department is silent as regards the
actual progress made till date and by when the Institute would be fully operational. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for early operationalization of the
Institute.
North-Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine, Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh.

33
Recommendation/Observation
3.30 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is a typical case of procrastination. The
Project was first targeted to be completed by January, 2010. Subsequently, it was rescheduled to
be completed by June 2011. The Committee notes that though almost a year has elapsed since then,
yet only 35% work of the building construction could be completed so far. The Committee is
constrained to observe that at a time when there is increasingly greater emphasis on optimal
utilization of scarce resources, such inefficiencies in execution of the Project can no longer be
overlooked. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is a case for spelling out monitorable goals
in respect of operationalising the project and putting in place a mechanism for holding people. The
Committee is constrained to observe that this is a typical case of procrastination. The Project was
first targeted to be completed by January, 2010. Subsequently, it was rescheduled to be completed
by June 2011. The Committee notes that though almost a year has elapsed since then, yet only 35%
work of the building construction could be completed so far. The Committee is constrained to
observe that at a time when there is increasingly greater emphasis on optimal utilization of scarce
resources, such inefficiencies in execution of the Project can no longer be overlooked. The
Committee, therefore, feels that there is a case for spelling out monitorable goals in respect of
operationalising the project and putting in place a mechanism for holding the people responsible if
the standards and targets are repeatedly not met. (Para 5.23)
Action Taken
3.31 Labour problems, heavy rains and floods, disruption of road communication, breakdown
of heavy machinery necessitating repair, distant location, road blocked by agitators etc. are the
main reasons for the delay. However, the Department is monitoring progress of the institute
vigorously. A Project Management Committee constituted to monitor the progress quarterly. This
PMC met on 30.04.12 and gave certain recommendations/directions to the concerned authorities.
It advised Director of the institute to prepare plan for total 40 acres of land which has been
allotted for construction of the institute. Further, the PMC directed to furnish a quarterly status
report indicating quarterly targets and achievements and reasons of variations, if any, and
proposed corrective measures. Progress on progress of construction, purchase of equipment,
furnishing of the hospital, creation of posts and fund utilization have been further reviewed on
31st July, 2012.
Recommendation/Observation
3.32 The Committee also observes that this project cannot be operationalised in the true sense
of the word until the requisite faculty and staff is appointed. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to move quickly towards sanctioning and recruiting the requisite
faculty and staff. The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts made by the department for
operationalisation of the North Eastern Institution of Folk Medicine. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make all out efforts for making the institutes operational.
The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made so far in this direction.
(Para 5.24)
Action Taken
3.33 Director, North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine, Passighat had already identified the
requirement of faculty and staff. This is under the consideration of the department. After the
approval of competent authority, the proposal would be sent to Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance for creation of post.

34
Further Recommendation
3.34 The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts made by the Department for
operationalisation of the North Eastern Institution of Folk Medicine. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should make all out efforts for making the
institutes operational. The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the efforts
made so far in this direction. The Committee is not convinced by the reasons given for non-
completion of the project within targeted deadlines and no further target has been
communicated as to till when the Institute would be fully operationised. The same sordid state
of affairs is with the faculty issues. Only requirement of faculty and staff has been identified
but their appointment is still at approval stage. The Committee only hopes that the Progress
Monitoring Committee (PMC) constituted to monitor the progress of the project would be
successful in ensuring operationalisation of the project in a dedicated time-frame.
VI. Assistance to Accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Government/Private
Sector Engaged in AYUSH Education/Drug Development and Research/Clinical Research/Folk
Medicine etc.
Recommendation/Observation
3.35 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another case of inefficiency in
budgetary planning and calls for urgent corrective measures. The Committee would have been
happy if the Department of AYUSH, instead of gloating over the under-utilization of budgeted funds
in 2011-12, analyzed the reasons behind non-receipts of eligible proposals and taken corrective
action accordingly. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to analyse the reasons for
non-receipt of suitable proposals under this head and take remedial measures accordingly and also
ensure expenditure monitoring and financial discipline so that the budgeted amount for 2012-13
does not meet the same fate. (Para 6.3)
Action Taken
3.36 The reasons behind non-receipt of eligible proposals in 2011-12 were analyzed and important
reasons are as follows:
1. There are very less reputed and credible organizations working in the AYUSH sector,
which may be upgraded to the level of excellence.
2. Most of such organizations have received grant under the Centres of Excellence scheme
during the initial years of the 11th plan period.
3. To receive grant under the Centres of Excellence scheme, the organizations have to
possess a minimum specified level from which, it will be upgraded to a higher specified
level. In AYUSH sector there are very few non-profit NGOs which are eligible to be
upgraded to the level of excellence.
Further, the scheme would be evaluated by third party. The expenditure under the scheme
shall be reviewed and corrective measures taken.
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee notes the reasons for under utilization. However, the Committee notes
that the Department has not clearly spelt out as to how it contemplates to tackle the problems.
The Department needs to take remedial measurers. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation that efficient expenditure monitoring and financial discipline may be ensured.

35
VII. Research and Development including medicinal plants
Development of AYUSH hospitals and dispensaries and mainstreaming of AYUSH
Recommendations/Observations
3.38 The Committee notes that by the end of the Eleventh Plan only 10% AYUSH hospitals could
be upgraded. Upgradation work of AYUSH dispensaries is negligible. Work of supply of AYUSH
drugs has been completed. The Committee observes that more than 90% of the upgradation work
is yet to be completed. Since upgradation of AYUSH hospitals and dispensaries is main work under
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the Committee strongly recommends to the Department to make
all out efforts and take all possible measures to achieve the target of upgradation of all AYUSH
hospitals and dispensaries in the first two to three years of the Twelfth Plan period. The State
Government authorities should be pursued vigorously to achieve the target. In order to achieve the
target, the Department should approach the Ministry of Finance for allocation of more funds at RE
2012-13 stage as also for more funds for the next financial years so that the desired targets are
achieved at the earliest. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken
3.39 Since, the State Governments are the implementing authorities with regard to up-gradation
of the AYUSH dispensaries; they will be pursued vigorously to achieve the targets. In this regard
Department has identified the nodal officers among the officials of the Department for each State,
so that they will make one to one contact to the state Government and coordinate in implementing
the programmes by the states and timely submission of the UCs. In due appreciation of the
recommendations of the committee the Department shall make all out efforts to upgrade AYUSH
hospitals and dispensaries in first two to three years of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Further Recommendation
3.40 The Committee once again emphasizes that upgradation of AYUSH hospitals and
dispensaries should be achieved in a dedicated time-frame and the Department needs to
chalk out an action plan in this direction. Simultaneously, the Department should pursue
with the Ministry of Finance for more funds for the scheme for ensuring completion of the
upgradation work in a targeted time-frame. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the outcome as a result of appointing the nodal officer for each State.
Recommendation/Observation
3.41 The Committee further desires to be kept apprised of the outcome of the proposals made
by the Department to the Department of Health and Family Welfare to include them in the NRHM
Cabinet note. (Para 7.11)
Action Taken
3.42 The Department of Health has not included the AYUSH proposal of AYUSH Flexipool under
NRHM cabinet note. However, they have suggested that Department of AYUSH may move separate
cabinet note for AYUSH Flexipool. Now, Department of AYUSH is bringing a proposal for
consideration of Cabinet on AYUSH Flexipool.
Further Recommendation
3.43 The Committee suggests that the Department should prepare a comprehensive and
realistic proposal for AYUSH Flexipool for consideration of cabinet and apprise the
committee of its outcome.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
X. Development of Institutions
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee notes that the Mid-term Appraisal of the Scheme—Development of AYUSH
Institutions had pointed out certain implementation constraints and suggested corrective measures.
However, the Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure did not support the proposals
of the Department for amendments to the existing scheme. The Committee notes there has been
massive under-performance of this Scheme, apparently due to constraints in its implementation and
structure. The Committee is at a loss to understand as to how the Scheme would be able to fulfill
its objective of bridging the critical gaps observed on compliance of the minimum standards and
norms of CCIM and CCH if the constraints are not taken care of. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to approach the Planning Commission and Department of
Expenditure again for the purpose of obtaining their support for carrying out the amendments to
the existing Scheme. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken
An independent appraisal and evaluation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of
AYUSH institutions is proposed to be taken up. In addition to this, a concurrent evaluation by a
Departmental Committee of three officials is also being done. Considering the evaluation reports and
after its scrutiny within the Department, the proposal for amendment to the scheme for
implementation during Twelfth Plan would be taken up. The Department would seriously pursue the
recommendations of the committee.
36

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee observes that the Department should have informed the concrete
action which has been taken or contemplated to be taken to optimize utilization of funds.
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Department should strive to
judiciously utilize the approved outlays simultaneously working to handle the existing
constraints. The Committee observes that this would strengthen the demand for
enhancement for AYUSH Sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings
of review of the norms governing the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and how the
Department is proposing to act on them to achieve  the desired results. (Para 2.3)
The Committee takes note of the declining trend of unspent balances of the on-going
projects after hiring of an independent Monitoring Agency. The Committee feels that the
Department should expedite selection of other independent agency for evaluation of other
schemes of the Department of AYUSH so as to monitor their progress closely. (Para 2.10)
PENDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department for liquidating the
pending UCs. The Committee, however, feels that still a lot is required to be done in this
regard as merely appointing the nodal officer would not yield the desired results. The
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its recommendation that the Department should dwell
upon formulating an efficient and effective coordination mechanism for timely submission
of the UCs. The  Committee may be apprised of the achievements made. (Para 2.16)
III. ST A TUTOR Y  INSTITUTIONS
The Committee notes that some State Registration Boards/Councils have agreed for
computerization of their State Registers of Indian Medicine since inception to till date. The
Department should make efforts to sound other State Governments to opt for computerization
since this would go a long way in ensuring collection of updated data and timely updation of
Central Register of Homeopathy and Central Register of Indian Medicine. (Para 3.3)
The Committee had desired to be apprised of the corrective action taken in the light
of findings of the review of the entire process of updation of Central Registers of Indian
Medicine and Homeopathy. However, the Department has just informed about a workshop
conducted in this regard without coming forward with any concrete suggestion to handle the
constraints coming in the way of timely updation of registers. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation. (Para 3.4)
The Committee notes that in as many as in 82 cases the action taken up by the
Department is not in accordance with the recommendation of CCIM. The Committee desires
that the recommendations of CCIM should be examined by a team of experts and an
objective view should be taken. (Para 3.6)
V. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur
The Committee fails to understand that why the Department has not taken any
action so far to depute professionally qualified persons on short term contract rather than
37

38
waiting for the outcome of the present vacancy notification. The Department should take
immediate action in this regard. (Para 5.6)
National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata
The work which was proposed to be completed during 2010-11 is yet far away from
completion stage. No positive steps have been taken to implement the Committee’s
recommendation. The reply is very vague. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation for filling up of vacancies and for expansion of the hospital. (Para 5.12)
North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, (NEIAH) Shillong, Meghalaya
The Committee observes that the reply of the Department is silent as regards the
actual progress made till date and by when the institute would be fully operational. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for early operationalization of the
institute. (Para 5.18)
North-Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine, Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh
The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts made by the Department for
operationalisation of the North Eastern Institution of Folk Medicine. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make all out efforts for making the institutes
operational. The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made so far in
this direction. The Committee is not convinced by the reasons given for non-completion of the
project within targeted deadlines and no further target has been communicated as to till when
the institute would be fully operationised. The same sordid state of affairs is with the faculty
issues. Only requirement of faculty and staff has been identified but their appointment is still
at approval stage. The Committee only hopes that the Progress Monitoring Committee (PMC)
constituted to monitor the progress of the project would be successful in ensuring
operationalisation of the project in a dedicated time-frame. (Para 5.23 & 5.24)
VI. ASSISTANCE TO ACCREDITED AYUSH CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE IN NON-
GOVERNMENT/PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGED IN AYUSH EDUCATION/DRUG
DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH/CLINICAL RESEARCH/ FOLK MEDICINE ETC.
The Committee notes the reasons for under utilization. However, the Committee
notes that the Department has not clearly spelt out as to how it contemplates to tackle the
problems. The Department needs to take remedial measures. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation that efficient expenditure monitoring and financial discipline may be
ensured. (Para 6.3)
VII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING MEDICINAL PLANTS  DEVELOPMENT
OF AYUSH HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES AND MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH
The Committee once again emphasizes that upgradation of AYUSH hospitals and
Dispensaries should be achieved in a dedicated time-frame and the Department needs to
chalk out an action plan in this direction. Simultaneously, the Department should pursue
with the Ministry of Finance for more funds for the scheme for ensuring completion of the
upgradation work in a targeted time-frame. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the outcome as a result of appointing the nodal officer for each State. (Para 7.3)
The Committee suggests that the Department should prepare a comprehensive and
realistic proposal for AYUSH Flexipool for consideration of cabinet and apprise the
Committee of its outcome. (Para 7.11)

39
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Thursday, the 8 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Dr. Tarun Mandal
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
14. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
15. Dr.Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
16. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them of the agenda of the
meeting viz. (i) to consider and adopt draft 61
st, * and * Reports of the Committee on Action Taken
by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in its Reports on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of AYUSH, * and *, respectively, of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare and (ii) *   * *.
41
* Relates to other matters.

42
II. Consideration and adoption of draft 61 st, * and * Reports
3. The Committee considered and draft 61 st, * and * Reports of the Committee on Action Taken
by the Government on Recommendations/observations contained in its Reports on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of AYUSH, * and *, respectively of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. *     *     *.
4 . ***
5 . ***
6 . ***
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
* Relate to other matters.

43
ANNEXURE

44

45
ANNEXURE-A
Central Council of Homoeopathy
Present Position of Central Register of Homoeopathy
State State of State Registers Date of receipt of Remarks
Notified Central Register
12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh From April, 09 to 31.03.12 Nil State Registers received on 09.04.12 were
(received on 09.04.12) found deficient regarding names of awarding
authority. Letter is written to Andhra Board by
C.C.H. on 27.4.12 and 07.08.12 to which
reply is awaited.
Assam Upto 21.07.11 3.3.2012 Upto 21.7.11 it has been taken in Central
Received on 12.9.12 Register published on 3.3.12.
No Further State Register received.
Letter sent to Assam Board on 7.8.2012
Bihar Part-(III) Received on 13.05.11 Included in Central Register 13888 Names of Bihar Part-II have been sent
and sent to Government Press to Government of India Press on 25.07.12 for
as indicated in Remarks publication in Gazette.
Part-(I) Not received Part-I of Bihar Register is not yet received
after repeated reminders.
Chhattisgarh 1.4.10 to 25.10.11 (received Yet to be taken in Central Entries of said period are being initiated for
on 05.12.11) Register Scrutin y for taking in Central Register.
Delhi Received on 30.8.11 Yet to be taken in Central Entries in English from 1.4.10 to 31.3.11 for
(from 1.4.10 to 31.3.11) Register next Central Register of Homoeopathy have
been done. However Hindi of these has to be
done.
Gujarat Received on 25.5.11 Yet to be taken in Central Entries in English are almost done in respect of
Register State Register of period from 1.4.10 to March,
2011 for next Central Register of Homoeopathy.

46
12 3 4
Haryana Received on 12.9.11 Yet not published in Central Entries in English are almost done in respect of
Register State Register of period from 1.4.11 to March,
2011 for next Central Register of Homoeopathy.
Himachal Pradesh Received on 11.5.10 16.4.2011 Published in the Central Register on 16.4.11,
and no further State Register received. Letter
sent to Himachal Council on 7.8.12.
Karnataka Received on 19.3.12 Yet not taken S tate Register received from 1.1.07 to 31.12.11
Kerala Received on 22.6.12 Yet not taken From 1.4.11 to 31.12.11.
Madhya Pradesh Received on 02.7.2010 Yet not taken Clarification from State Council has been called
vide CCH letter dated 21.12.09. Ministry has
also written vide letter No. R.13040/22/2008-
HD (Tech.)
dt. 16.04.2010. Again it has been written vide
Central Councils letter 08.07.2010, 21.10.10,
07.06.2011 & 04.07.11. No response has been
received so far. One more reminder sent on
7.8.12.
Maharashtra Received on 23.12.2010 Yet nto taken State Council has been written vide CCH letter
dt. 14.02.11. And meeting was held with the
authorities of State Council on 24.3.11.
Minutes of the same were sent on 10.5.11 and
reminders on 7.6.11 and 24.1.12 have also
been sent. Reply is awaited. (Copies of C.C.H.
letters enclosed). One more reminder sent on
7.8.12.
Meghalaya Received on 20.12.2011 3.3.2012 Upto March, 2011 entries of State Register
have been published in the Central Register on
3.3.12. No further State Register received to
this Council.

47
Odisha Received on 04.05.2011 Not yet taken in Central State Council has furnished incomplete
Register information. CCH has requested the State
Board on 25.05.11, 06.9.11 and reminder on
30.1.12 to furnish the complete information
(copies of C.C.H. letters enclosed). Reply is
awaited. One more reminder sent on 7.8.12.
Punjab Received on 28.07.2011 Not yet taken in Central S tate Register received upto June, 2011 on
Register 18.7.11. Being taken in next Central Register of
Homoeopathy and work has been started.
Rajasthan Received on 22.5.12 Not yet taken in Central
Register
Tamil Nadu Received on 16.12.09 Published in Central State Register entries received upto 31.3.09
Register on 16.4.11 have been published in Central Register.
No further State Register received.
U.T. Chandigarh Upto August, 2009 Published in Central State Register entries received upto August, 09,
Received on 14.12.09 Register on 16.4.11 have been published in Central Register.
No further State Register received. Reminder
sent on 7.8.12.
Uttar Pradesh Received on 18.12.06 Not yet taken in Central State Register received in 2006 has been not
Register worth reading for which U.P. Board was
written vide Council’s letter dated 29.03.2010
and reminder on 15.06.11 and 08.05.12 were
sent. Reply is awaited. However entries
received in 2003 have been taken in Central
Register.
State Register in proper manner not received.
Reminder sent on 7.8.12.
West Bengal Received on 02.02.2010 Not taken in Central Entries of said period are being Scrutinized for
(Part-I) Register taking in Central Register.

48
12 3 4
Arunachal Pradesh Received on 15.5.12 Not taken in Central Entries in English have been completed for the
Register period from 17.10.11 to 3.5.12 is being taken
in next Central Register.
Tripura Received on 30.4.2007 Published in Central T aken into Central Register published on
Register on 15.11.2008 15.11.2008.
No further State Register received.
Goa Received on 1.8.12 Yet to be taken in From 26.8.11 to 29.3.12
Central Register
Nagaland Received on 31.05.2010 Not taken in Central In r espect of Nagaland, the State Register
Register appears to be made in violation of State Act.
Please refer to Ministry’s letter No. R.13040/
27/2011/HD (Tech.) dated 23rd March, 2011.

49
ANNEXURE-B
Central Council of Indian Medicine
New Delhi
Present Position of Central Register of Indian Medicine as on 14.08.2012
The preparation and maintenance of Central Register of Indian Medicine is a continuous process. The Central Register
Pertaining to the following States for the period mentioned against their names has been notified in the Gazette of India:–
Sl. Name of Period of Central Date of receipt of Period of State Period of State Register Other
No. the St ate Register Notified Notified Central Register received but not received from State Remarks
Position Register not notified by CCIM Board/Council
12 3 4 5 6 7
1 Andhra (i) Upto Dec., 2007 13.03.2010 – (i) 01.01.2008 to 31.03.2012 Returned to State board
Pradesh due to discrepancies
2 Assam Upto 1986 and Dec.,99 15.03.2008 – (i) 01.01.1987 to 30.11.1999 For obtaining State Registers
Aug., 04 and (ii) Sept. 04 to 31.12.05 for the said period, letter
31.1.06 to 17.8.06 (iii) Sept. 06 to 31.03.09 has been sent to Assam
(iv) 01.04.2009 to 31.03.2012Board
3 Bihar Upto March, 2010 19.06.2010 April, 2010 to March, 2011 – Work is under process
April, 2011 to March, 2012
4 Chhattisgarh Upto March, 2009 06.05.2011 April, 2009 to March, 2010 – Work is under process
April, 2010 to March, 2011
5 Delhi Upto July, 2010 18.09.2010 Aug. 2010 to March, 2011 – Rtu rned (DBCP) due to
discrepancies
6 Goa Upto March, 2011 14.10.2011 – –
7 Gujarat Upto March, 2009 03.04.2010 April, 2009 to March 2010 – Work is under process
8 Haryana Upto March, 2010 27.12.2010 April, 2010 to March, 2011 – Work is under process
April, 2011 to March, 2012
9 Himachal Upto March, 2005 30.12.2007 From April 05 to Dec. 2012 – W ork is under process
Pradesh
10 J&K Upto March, 2010 15.04.2011 April 2010 to Ma rch 2011-Unani – W ork is under process

50
12 3 4 5 6 7
11 Karnataka Upto March, 2009 28.06.2011 – April, 2009 to March, 2012 Returned to State board
due to discrepancies
12 Kerala Upto March, 2010 08.10.2011 – 01.04.2009 to 31.03.2012 Returned to State board
due to discrepancies
1 3 Madhya Upto March, 2008 30.05.2011 April, 2008 to March, 2010 – Work is under process
Pradesh April, 2010 to March, 2011
1 4 Maharashtra` Upto March, 1992 12.03.2005 April, 1992 to 01.01.2008 to 12.01.2009 Likely to be sent for Gazette
 December, 2007 Has not ben received Notification
13.01.2009 to 28.12.2009
1 5 Odisha Upto March, 2010 03.04.2010 – April, 2010 to March, 2011 Letter sent to State Board
16 Punjab Upto March, 2009 24.12.2011 April, 2009 to March, 2011 – Work is under process
17 Rajasthan Upto March, 2010 25.06.2011 April, 2010 to March, 2011 – Work is under process
April, 2011 to March, 2012 –
18 Tamil Nadu (1) 01.4.03 to 31.03.06 24.01.2009 – 01.01.2010 (Ay) onwards Letter sent to State Board
(Ay.) – not received to sent for the remaining
(2) 01.01.07 to 01.01.2010 to 31.03.2012 period
31.12.09 (Sd.) 08.10.2011 (Sid.)
19 Uttar (i) Inception to 1987 28.01.2012 April, 2009 to March, 2010 – Work is under process
Pradesh (ii) 01.04.1988 to 03.07.2010 April, 2010 to March, 2011
31.03.2009
20 Uttarakhand Upto March, 2008 12.02.2011 April, 2008 to March, 2011 – Work is under process
21(i). West Bengal Upto January, 2009 22.08.2009 F eb.2009 to Feb. 2011 – W ork is under process
(Passchim
Banga
Ayurved
Parishad,
Kolkata)
(ii) State Council Upto Febraury, 1992 – March, 1992 onwards has Letter sent to the State
of Unani not been received Board to send State
Medicine, Register
Kolkata

51
51
During the year 2009-10 Central Register for the following States for the period
mentioned against the names were notified in the Gazette of India Part III Section 4
Sl. No. Name of State Gazette Notification Period
No. & date
1 Andhra Pradesh 34 dated 22.8.2009 1 st April, 2006 to 31 st December, 2007
2 Bihar 49 dated 6.12.2008 1 st January, 1987 to 31 st March, 1997
34 dated 22.8.2009 (Supplementary)
3 Delhi 12 dated 20.3.2010 1 st April, 2007 to 31 st March, 2009
4 Gujarat 14 dated 3.4.2010 1 st January, 2007 to 31 st March, 2009
5 Haryana 7 dated 14.2.2009 1 st April, 2007 to 31 st March, 2008
1st April, 2008 to 31 st March, 2009
6 Karnataka 39 dated 29.8.2009 1 st April, 2004 to 31 st March, 2007
7 Kerala 7 dated 14.2.2009 April, 2005 to 31 st March, 2007
8 Madhya Pradesh 7 dated 14.2.2009 1 st April, 2004 to 31 st March, 2007
9 Odisha 14 dated 3.4.2010 1 st April, 2007 to 31 st March, 2009
10 Rajasthan 39 dated 26.10.2009 1 st January, 2006 to 31 st March, 2009
11 Tamil Nadu 4 dated 24.1.2009 1 st April, 2003 to 31 st December, 2006
(Ayurveda, Unani 1 st January, 1998 to 31 st December,
& Siddha) 2006 (Siddha)
12 Uttar Pradesh 47 dated 22.11.2008 1 st  April, 2000 to 31 st  March, 2006
13 West Bengal 39 dated 26.10.2009 1 st  February, 2007 to 31 st January, 2009

52
52
During the year 2010-11 Central Register for the following States for the period
mentioned against the names were notified in the Gazette of India Part III Section 4
Sl. No. Name of State Gazette Notification Period
No. & date
1 Andhra Pradesh 11 dated 13.3.2010 1 st April, 2006 to 31 st March, 2007
2 Bihar 25 dated 19.6.2010 1 st April, 2007 to 31 st March, 2009
3 Delhi 12 dated 20.3.2010 1 st April, 2004 to 31 st March, 2009
38 dated 18.9.2010
4 Gujarat 14 dated 3.4.2010 1 st January, 2007 to 31 st March, 2009
5 Kerala 52 dated 25.12.2010 From 1963-1975 (DAM qualification)
6 Odisha 14 dated 3.4.2009 1 st April, 2007 to 31 st March, 2009

53
53
During the year 2011-12 Central Register for the following States for the period
mentioned against the names were notified in the Gazette of India Part III Section 4
Sl. G N Date State Period
No. No.
1 15 April 9 to April 15, 2011 J & K (Corrigendum) April, 2009 to March, 2010
2 18 April 30 to May 06, 2011 Madhya Pradesh April, 2007 to March, 2008
3 18 April 30 to May 06, 2011 Chhattisgarh April, 2008 to March, 2009
4 22 May 28 to June 03, 201 1 Karnataka April, 2007 to March, 2009
5 26 June 25 to July, 2011 Goa Oct., 2006 to March, 2009
6 26 June 25 to July, 2011 Madhya Pradesh April, 2005 to March, 2007
(Supp.)
7 26 June 25 to July, 201 1 Rajasthan April, 2009 to March, 2010
8 41 8 to 14 Oct., 2011 Kerala April, 2008 to March, 2010
9 41 8 to 14 Oct., 2011 Goa April, 2010 to March, 2011
10 41 8 to 14 Oct., 2011 Tamil Nadu Jan-2007 to March, 2009
(Siddha)
11 52 Dec. 24 to Dec. 30, 201 1 Punjab April, 2008 to March, 2009
12 52 Dec. 24 to Dec. 30, 2011 Corrigendum 2011 – 2012
13 52 Dec. 24 to Dec. 30, 2011 Direct Registration 2011 – 2012
14 4 Jan. 28 to Feb. 03, 2012 Uttar Pradesh Inception to 1987
15 6 Feb. 11 to Feb. 17, 2012 Bihar, Kerala, 2011 - 2012
Maharashtra
(Corrigendum)

54
54
ANNEXURE-C
Statutory Institutions
The status of updated notification of State-wise Central Register of Homoeopathy:
Sl. No. State Period upto which notified
1. Andhra Pradesh Upto 31.03.09
2. Assam Received on 20.11.11
Upto 21.07.11
3. Bihar Part-(II) Received on 13.05.11
4. Chhattisgarh Upto 25.10.11
5. Delhi Upto March, 2011
6. Gujarat Upto May, 2011
7. Haryana Upto September, 2011
8. Himachal Pradesh Upto September, 2009
9. Karnataka Upto 31.12.2006
10. Kerala Upto 31.03.2010
11. Madhya Pradesh Upto December, 2009
12. Maharasthra Upto 28.02.2010
13. Meghalaya Upto March, 2011
14. Odisha Upto March, 2011
15. Punjab Upto June, 2011
16. Rajasthan Upto 31.03.2011
17. Tamil Nadu Upto 31.03.2009
18. U.T. Chandigarh Upto August, 2009
19. Uttar Pradesh Upto Match, 2003 and also in 2006
20. West Bengal (Part-I) Upto June, 2006
21. Arunachal Pradesh Upto August, 2011
22. Tripura Upto August, 2006
23. Goa Upto February, 2010
24. Nagaland –

55
Status of updated notification of State-wise Central Register of Indian Medicine
Sl. No. State Period
1. J & K (Corrigendum) April 2009 to March 2010
2. MP April 2007 to March 2008
3. Chhattisgarh April 2008 to March 2009
4. Karnataka April 2007 to March 2009
5. Goa Oct. 2006 to March 2009
6. Madhya Pradesh April 2005 to March 2007 (Supp.)
7. Rajasthan April 2009 to March 2010
8. Kerala April 2008 to March 2010
9. Goa April 2010 to March 2011
10. Tamil Nadu Jan. – 2007 to March 2009 (Siddha)
11. Punjab April 2006 to March 2009
12. Corrigendum 2011-2012
13. Direct Registration 2011-2012
14. Uttar Pradesh Inception to 1987
15. Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra 2011-2012
(Corrigendum)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.