 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
49 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE   
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
  
ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AIDS CONTROL 
 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
  
 
 
      (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011)             
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011) 
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
  ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AIDS CONTROL 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011)             
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
  
 


  
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
                            
PAGES 
 
1.  Composition of the Committee                                 (i) 
2. Preface                                                     (ii) 
3. Report                                                1-36
              
CHAPTER  I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have been accepted by the Committee-------------- 2-7 
 
CHAPTER II       Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
        does not desire to pursue in  view of the Government’s replies -8-18 
 
CHAPTER III       Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies                                    
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee--19-35    
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observa tions in respect of which final                 
replies of the Government are still awaited-------------------------- 36  
 
4. Recommendations/ Observations at a glance---------------------------------------------37-42   
 
5. Minutes------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------43-44 
  
 
6. Annexures--------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------45-52   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011) 
        
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -     Chairman 
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5. Shri Balbir Punj 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9. Shri Rasheed Masood  
    *10.       Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Ashok Argal 
12. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh 
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
16. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi 
18. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
19. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
20. Shri Datta Meghe 
21. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
22. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
23. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri M. K Raghavan 
26. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha  
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
29. Shrimati Meena Singh  
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,          Additional Secretary 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                           Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,   Joint Director 
               Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra                          Committee Officer 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
*     nominated to the Committee w.e.f  21/9/2010 
 
(i) 

 
  PREFACE  
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
its behalf, hereby present this Forty-nint h Report of the Committee on Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Forty-second Report on  Demands for 
Grants of the Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 
2010-2011. 
2. The Forty-second Report of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok 
Sabha on 28
th April, 2010. Replies of the Government  on the recommendations contained in 
the Report, received from the Department of AIDS Control were considered by the Committee 
at its meeting held on the 10th December, 2010. 
3. The Committee considered the draft Report a nd adopted the same at its meeting held on 
the 10th December, 2010. 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
10
th December, 2010  
Agrahayana 19,  1932 (Saka) 
BRAJESH PATHAK 
           Chairman,  
 Department-related Parliamentary  
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

  
 REPORT 
  
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its Forty-se cond Report on Demands for Grants of the 
Department of AIDS Control for the year 2010-11. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report.  They have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Government 
have been accepted by the Government  5.4, 6.4, 7.4, 10.3, 12.5, 12.6, 13.1, 13.2 
Total–8                                                                                                    (Chapter 
I) 
(ii)                         
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 2.1, 2.6, 2.7, 3.3, 3.4, 6.3, 11.5, 11.6, 11.7, 
11.8   Total –10                                                                                      (Chapter 
II) 
     
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Comm ittee:  Total – 2.4, 3.2, 3.5, 4.2, 5.3, 5.7, 
8.3, 9.2, 12.3, 12.4     Total -10                      
(Chapter III)                             
 
(iv)  Recommendations/observation s in respect of which final replies of the          
Government are still awaited:   - Nil          (Chapter-
IV) 

CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
V.  SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
5.4 The Committee also recommends to the De partment to take special notice of 
the underserved districts of Uttar Prades h and Jharkhand. The Committee also hopes 
that the Department would k eep on assessing the requirements of Blood Banks based 
on actual needs in various states due to migration and other issues. 
Action Taken 
 
It is submitted that the underserved di stricts of Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand 
will be under continuous monitoring to a ssess the requirement of blood banks based 
on actual needs in these States. 
  
VI.    INTEGRATED COUNSELING AND TESTING CENTRES (ICTC). 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
6.4 This needs focused attention of the Dep artment, since the Department has itself 
informed the occurrence of rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women 
in the low prevalence/ vulnerable states of North India.  The Committee is of the 
opinion that the Department can hope for achieving the set targets by proper planning 
and execution. It needs to strengthen it s network of ICTCs and focus on strong 
Information, Education and Communication activities in such States to motivate 
institutional deliveries.  
 

Action Taken 
 
Network of ICTCs and facility integrated counselling and testing services are 
being up-scaled in vulnerable areas of North India.  A dedicated IEC plan for 
increasing public awareness will be implemented during the current financial year. 
  
VII  PERSONS TO BE COUNSELED AND T ESTED AT ICTC(Target of 220 lakh 
per year) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
7.4 The Committee is happy to note that the quality issues related to HIV test kits 
have been resolved.  The Committee hopes that the Department would keep a close 
monitoring of the quality related aspects of  the kits so that such problems do not 
recur.  The Committee also appreciates that some concrete steps have been taken to 
solve the issues of shortage of lab technicians by way of revising the guidelines of 
NABL.  The Committee hopes that with conc erted efforts like these, the Department 
would see an increase in the achievement level. 
Action Taken 
Process for timely procurement and suppl y of HIV kits has been initiated for 
2010-11.  Stocks and usages of HIV kits will be closely monitored to ensure 
uninterrupted supply of test kits and medicines. 
 
X.  ADOLESCENCE EDUCATION PROGRAMME (AED) 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
10.3 The Committee is happy to note that the Department in collaboration with 
Ministry of Human Resource Developmen t (MHRD) has been able to allay the 
apprehensions of many of the States w.r.t . implementation of the Programme.  The 

Committee fully shares the concerns of the various state Governments regarding 
suitability of the contents of the Programme  due to various demographic and cultural 
diversities that exist in the country.  Ho wever, the Committee is of the opinion that 
the Programme, which aims at generating awareness amongst adolescents under its 
preventive strategy, is the need of the hour against this deadly disease.  With changes 
in the study material and new modules al ready introduced under the revised AEP 
which takes care of the concerns of the States, the Committee hopes that the 
Department needs to make concerted efforts alongwith MHRD to bring the remaining 
States on board where the Programme is still under suspension.  The Committee may 
be informed about the efforts made by the Department in this regard. 
Action Taken  
 
The suggestions made by the Committee have been taken into consideration. 
The State AIDS Control Societies of the St ates where Adolescence Education Program 
(AEP) is under suspension have been asked to take up the matter with the respective 
State Education Departments for resumption  of the programme as per the revised 
material. The matter is being pursued. 
 
XII. NATIONAL PEDIATRIC INTIATIVE 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
12.5 The Committee is very concerned for th e welfare of the HIV patients and their 
dependents.  On a specific query regarding any initiative taken by the Department to 
come up with a rehabilitation policy for AI DS affected patients and their dependents, 
especially those of the weaker sections, in consultation with other Ministries/agencies, 

the Committee is informed that there is no  scheme to provide rehabilitation of AIDS 
affected patients under NACP-III. 
12.6 The Committee does not find the Dep artment’s response to be a healthy 
one.  Even if there is no such scheme under NACP-III, the Department can take up the 
idea further with other Ministries like Soci al Justice and Empowerment, Finance etc.  
In the opinion of the Committee providing fi nancial security to the patients and their 
dependents will be a boon in Department’s  fight against the epidemic and help in 
containing it.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Department to 
take a proactive approach in this regard. 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
An innovative scheme for children affect ed with AIDS (CAB A) which includes 
HIV+ children and orphans of HIV+ parents, is bein g undertaken in 10 high 
prevalence districts as a pilot scheme.  This scheme envisages coordination and 
integrating various schemes of the Govt. of  India being implemented by Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare (including RC H and NACP-III), Ministry of Women and 
Child Development, Ministry of Social Welfare, etc.  
A policy framework has been prepared join tly by Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Women and Child Develo pment, Ministry of Social Welfare and 
Ministry of Human Resource Developmen t supported by UNICEF that outlines 
package of services to be given to HIV+ and HIV/AIDS affected children. 
  
 
 

XIII.  INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
13.1 The Committee appreciates the various interventions initiated for carrying out 
IEC campaigns, theme-wise campaigns fo r promoting HIV counseling etc. Multi-
media campaigns, booklets for High risk Gr oups etc. Red Ribbon Express, a specially 
designed exhibition train can be righ tly considered as World’s largest mass 
mobilization against HIV/AIDS. The Commi ttee would, however, like to draw the 
attention of the Department towards report s received from time to time on the 
projected claims about successful treatmen t of HIV/AIDS. Apprehensions were also 
raised by some Members as regards the presen ce of quacks coming up in the name of 
Indian medicines promoting that AIDS is 1 00 per cent curable during the deliberation 
of the meeting. The Committee was informed  that the Department has very strong 
IEC component in their intervention fo r fighting HIV /AIDS. The Committee was 
apprised of the Red Ribbon Express Progra mme launched by the Department across 
the country, aiming at spreading knowledge and awareness about the disease. 
Action Taken 
 
The recommendation made by the Committee have been taken into 
consideration and will be complied with during program implementation. 
  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
13.2 The Committee is of the op inion that mere presence of  statutory provisions for 
prohibiting quacks is not sufficient. The Committee strongly recommends that there is 
need to combat all such myths by providing the masses with actual information in this 
regard by involving the State Governments. 

Action Taken 
 
The recommendation made by the Committee have been taken into 
consideration and will be complied with during program implementation. 

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES   
II BUDETARY PROVISION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.1 There has been optimum utilization of  allocated funds under NACP III so far. 
The only exception is that during 2008-09, in spite of marginal increase at the RE stage, 
pace of utilization at the end of the year wa s not very satisfactory with Rs. 91.00 crore 
remaining unspent at the end of the year. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.6 The committee would, however, like to poin t out that these efforts need to be 
sustained till the elimination of all the prob lem areas being faced by different states. 
The Committee is constrained to observe th at there was downward revision of funds 
at the RE stage during 2009-10. The Commi ttee does not find any merit in the 
justification put forth by the Department that across the board cut resulted in the 
downward revision of funds. In the Comm ittee’s opinion, opening balance of Rs. 
238.68 crore at the beginning of 2009-10 seems to  be the main reason for reduction of 
allocated funds during the year. The Commi ttee would like to poin t out that various 
components under NACP deserve to be purs ued vigorously and any cut in funds for 
the same would severely hamper the on-going fight against the deadly disease. 
 

Action Taken 
 
 Concern of the Committee is noted. In this connection it is mentioned that 
Annual Action Plan of the States have been issued well in time before the close of the 
year and placed on the NACO  website, to ensure there is no delay in taking up 
activities to achieve targets set for the new financial year. Releases to States are being 
done through e-transfer to reduce transit dela y. It is mentioned in this connection that 
98% of the funds allocated in the year 2009-10 were utilized and physical targets 
achieved.  Salary payments to the employees  of the peripheral units are being made 
electronically, in many States. This will brin g down the figure relating to outstanding 
advances. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.7 The allocation projected by the Department, for 2010-11 was Rs. 1494.43 crore 
which was restricted to Rs. 1435.00 crore by  the Planning Commission. Significant 
component of capital expenditure for establis hing Blood Banks in 4 Metro Cities viz, 
Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai would be adversely affected as the allocated 
domestic budget support would not be available and the Department would be 
seeking enhanced allocation therefor. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Matter of record. 
III .  ROLE OF NGOs 
Recommendations/Observations   
 
3.3 The Committee apprehends that the di scontinued/blacklisted NGOs may also 
resurface again by changing their name or place of work. The Committee would like 

to be apprised about the specific steps ta ken by the Department to thwart any such 
attempts by such NGOs and share with it su ch instances, if any, when it has been 
successful in preventing re-entry of such NGOs in the NACO network. 
 
Action Taken 
 
It may be mentioned that NGOs which do not optimally perform are 
discontinued but can be included in a proce ss for selection and th e verifying that all 
the drawbacks have been removed or not. However, if an NGO has been terminated 
on any financial misappropriation then it will not be allowed to be part of above 
process. To ensure that, all the SACS will k eep the list of NGOs terminated because of 
financial misappropriations and their reques t will not be considered. To ensure that 
such organizations will not resurface ag ain by changing the name, SACS has a 
transparent NGO selection process which includes the following steps:  
• Issue of Expression of interest th rough open advertisement in all leading                 
newspapers.   
• Preliminary screening of applications by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) 
for Joint Appraisal Team (JAT) visit. 
• Field visit by JAT teams to assess institutional capability and program effectiveness 
of the screened NGOs. The JAT will be comp rised of external consultants / experts 
both for programme and finance and SACS officials. Specific assessment tool has 
been developed for the field level assessment and minimum mark has been fixed 
for qualification for short listing for final selection. JAT will assess the NGO based 
on specific check list developed by NACO which includes, governance system, 
staffing and organizational structure and capacity, finance management system in 

the organization, experience of organizatio n in health sector specifically in HIV 
/AIDS programme, planning, monitoring and supervision system in the NGO etc.. 
During the interaction with office bearers  of NGOs, chances of  resurface again by 
changing the name of NGO will be ruled out. 
• Finalize NGOs partners by TAC headed  by Project director of the SAC. 
Empanelled NGO list to be approved by the executive committee of the 
respective SAC to initiate the project implementation. 
• Contracting of NGOs approved by the executive committee. 
• Development of project proposal an d assessment of the same through 
conducting workshop. 
• Contract period of TI implementation is 2 years. 
The above mentioned processes also involv e visiting the NGOs and verifying the 
credentials onsite. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.4 The committee observes that achievemen t level of various components under 
NACP during the first three years of the Elev enth Plan period has been more or less 
satisfactory. Significant achievement has b een reported under treatment of new STI 
cases and persons living with HIV/AIDS, setti ng up of ART centers, community care 
centers and Integrated Counseling and Testin g centers. However, the same can not be 
said about other components. Against 220 lakh  persons to be counseled and tested at 
the ICTC every year, target has remained  between 46.00 lakh to 85.00 lakh and that 
too, has remained unaccomplished. 
 

Action Taken 
 
The overall target of 220 lakh/year people to be counseled and tested in ICTCs 
comprises of all clients who come to an ICTC including pregnant women. However, 
the target mentioned in para 3.4 (i.e 46.00 lakh  to 85.00 lakh) reflects only the general 
clients who are counseled and tested in ICTCs, while pregnant women were excluded. 
If all clients are considered then target and achievement will be as follows: 
   
2007-08                                     2008-09   2009-10  
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement 
99.5 lakhs 78.4 lakhs 122.9 
lakhs 
102.18 lakhs 155.34 
lakhs 
143.87 lakhs 
 
The overall target of 220 lakh/year people to be counseled and tested in ICTCs is for 
the end of NACP-3 ie. March 2012. Already, as can be seen in the above table the 
target for 2009-10 is 155.34 lakhs which is 70% of the NACP-3 (11
th Plan) target. 
Therefore it is clarified that targets are not fixed below than what is envisaged.  
 
The annual targets for counseling and testing people have been substantially achieved 
as can be seen in the table mentioned ab ove. Achievement was 79% and 83% in 2007-
08 and 2008-09 respectively. In 2009-10, 143.87 la kh persons have been counseled and 
tested against a target of 155.34 lakh, an achievement of 92%.  
 
VI  INTEGRATED COUNSELING A ND TESTING CENTRES (ICTC). 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
6.3 The Committee is not conv inced with the evasive reply of the Department.  In 
the opinion of the Committee, while fixing targets for some component, one has to 

realistically assess all the hurdles/problems areas vis-à-vis the abilities of the system 
to deliver and achieve the targets.  Before fixing a target the Department should have 
taken into account all the relevant factors.   Low level of institutional delivery being 
cited as the negative factor amounts to criticizing its own planning.  
Action Taken 
 
Under NRHM, antenatal care (ANC) of pregnant women and institutional 
deliveries are being scaled up.  Prevention of  parent to child transmission necessitates 
contact at the time of delivery so that prop hylactic  medicines could be given.  Low 
ANC and large no. of home deliveries are fact ors that affect identification of HIV+ 
pregnant women and administering them medicines.  Some of the actions taken to 
increase coverage are: 
a) Involvement of ANMs in rural areas for counselling and testing pregnant women. 
b) HIV testing facilities at PHCs 
c) Providing testing and prophylactic treatment to pregnant women coming directly 
in labour pains 
d) Mobile ICTCs to serve far flung and difficult areas. 
e) Involvement of Private Health Sector  in PPTCT 
 
XI  NEW STRATEGIES 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
 
11.5 The committee is happy to note a pr ogress made with regard to the new 
initiatives started in 2009-10. The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of the 
District AIDS Prevention & Control Units wo uld fill up the necessary gap required as 
a supportive structure below the state level to coordinate the activities at the district 

level. The Committee would recommend expand ing the same to more districts in the 
near future so as to implement the programme effectively. 
 
Action Taken 
 
•      As per the Sentinel Surveillance 2006, 156 A category and 39 B category Districts 
were identified as high prevalence distri cts. It was decided that District AIDS 
Prevention and Control Units shall be esta blished in all A and B category of the 
Districts.  
 
•      Out of the total 195 A and B catego ry Districts – Mumbai and Mumbai Sub urban 
districts have not been included for DA PCU as Mumbai District AIDS Control 
Society is implementing National AI DS Control Programme. Chandigarh and 
Puducherry are having separate AIDS Cont rol Societies therefore DAPCUs will not 
be established in these Union Territo ries. Hence total 191 DAPCUs shall be 
established in the country.  
 
•      Out of total 191 DAPCUs till date 188 DAPCUs have been established. Only 3 
DAPCUs, Sonitpur in Assam, Devaria and Et awah in UP are yet to be established. 
Both Assam and UP SACS have been re quested to establish the DAPCUs by July 
2010.  
 
•      The DAPCUs are having the following  staff- 1 District Programme Officer, M&E 
Assistant, 2 Accountant-cum-Assistant and 1 Office Assistant. Th is unit is under 
District AIDS Control Officer, who is either ADMO/ADHO of the District.  
 
•      The DAPCU is expected to functio n as the District level coordination and 
monitoring unit. The main focus of the training is to strengthen: 

a. STI- ICTC- TB linkage 
b. ANC- ICTC linkage 
c. Condom campaign and demand generation campaign at grass root level 
d. Supply chain management- to ensure no stock outs   
e. Standardization and calibration of eq uipment and AMC – to ensure SOPs 
are followed up 
f. Funds devolved to HIV facility Centers, its utilization, submission of 
Statement of expenditure and utilization certificate follow up.  
g. Staffing and training of staff at HIV facility centers coordination. 
 
• NTSU, NACO is made as a nodal unit for administration and capacity building 
of DAPCU.  
• As per the roles and responsibilities of the DAPCU, a detailed DAPCU capacity 
building plan is developed. All the DAPCUs shall be trained by December 2010.  
• Data triangulation exercise is going on to understand HIV epidemic and 
vulnerability of the States. As per the data triangulation report, all A and B category 
districts shall get DAPCUs.  
List of the A and B category Districts is attached for ready reference- Annexure 3. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
11.6 The Committee notes that the Link Worker Scheme is an intensive rural-based 
intervention reaching out to the marginal ized groups which remain uncovered even 
after the expansion of urban based prev ention programme. However, the Committee 
notes that the same is being implemented on ly in 18 States as of now. The Committee 

recommends to the Department to assess the need to cover the re maining States and 
closely monitor the scheme as  the success of this scheme is crucial for achieving the 
goal of halting and reversing the epidemic of AIDS. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Link Worker Scheme was devised to  provide HIV related rural outreach 
services to HRG & Vulnerable population, in the identified priority districts (Based on 
HIV Sentinel Surveillance) of the coun try. Accordingly, the scheme is being 
implemented with the focus of saturating the rural HRG and vulnerable population of 
the high prevalent states i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur & 
Nagaland. Currently, the link worker scheme is also being implemented in the states 
with low prevalence rate e.g. UP, Bihar. In  FY 2010-11, two districts of state of Punjab 
will be covered under the scheme, whereas e xpansion of the scheme will take place to 
another 61 districts in the existi ng 18 states. In addition to this, proposal is also made 
for including 30 additional districts which are vulnerable due to high rate of migration 
to other regions.  
Under the Link Worker Scheme, close monitoring of the scheme is suggested as one of 
the key deliverables of the lead NGO wh ich are responsible for managing and 
identification of the district level NGOs. Th e monitoring indicators of the scheme are 
already developed and based on these indica tors monthly reports are received from 
all the districts.  For addressing the gaps  identified during monthly reports and for 
supportive supervision, regular field visits  are made by the LWS representatives at 
NACO & SACS. 
 

 
Recommendations/Observations   
 
11.7 The Committee welcomes Department’s co llaboration of its various activities 
with the backbone of India’s health care  delivery system in rural areas- the NRHM. 
The Committee hopes that the Department  would keep in close touch with the 
Department of Health & Family Welfare & explore more avenues to use its 
infrastructure and manpower under NRHM to further its various activities. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Under the Link Worker Scheme referral an d linkages to HIV related services is 
provided to the HRG and Vulnerable popu lation.  For achieving these goals, the 
Operational Guidelines  of the scheme clearly mentions the role of district NGOs in 
involvement and coordination with other heal th functionaries in the rural areas. The 
Link Worker Scheme aims to strengthen ST I/RTI referral and treatment, TB referrals, 
HIV testing of pregnant mother and othe r related issues through utilizing human 
resource and infrastructure available under NRHM. The Link Workers regularly 
participate in VHND which is already in stitutionalized under NRHM & observed 
every month at the village level for adol escence counseling, immunization etc. The 
link worker also ensures regular coordination with health committees. 
  Under the scheme an Operation Research is proposed to be conducted in selected 
district to explore the feasibility of ASHA model (under NRHM) as a substitute of the 
rural outreach to female population. 
 
 
 

Recommendations/Observations  
11.8 The Committee hopes that the department would expand the preferred private 
provider scheme for management of sexually  transmitted infection among high risk 
groups from existing 11 States to all Stat es having high risk groups in 2010 – 11. 
However, the Committee recommends close an d strict monitoring of the scheme as 
the numbers may be fudged by the provider s to get the token amount of Rs 50 which 
is being given as consultation. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Preferred provider scheme is being implemented for managing STI in High risk 
groups (HRGs). During 2009-10, 4744 providers have been identified and 3809 of them 
trained to deliver standardized package of STI/RTI services to HRGs. Close and 
strengthened monitoring of the scheme is be ing carried out to ensure that the figures 
are verified and are authentic.  
 
 
  
PPP scheme is being implemented in all th e states except Bihar wherein it will 
begin in FY 2010-11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.4 The Committee appreciates that with fo cused intervention of NACO there is a 
considerable decline in unspent balances available with the societies. The Committee 
would, however, like to point out that availability of unspent balance with some 
SACS, like Karnataka SACS (Rs. 11.34 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs. 8.40 crore) and West 
Bengal (Rs. 8.99 crore) is still quite high. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Department to introduce stricter monitori ng mechanism and financial discipline so 
that funds do not get accumulated and remain unutilized. 
 
Action Taken  
 
Recommendations of the Committee are no ted for guidance. It is always the 
endeavor of the Government to keep bala nces with the SACS to the minimum. The 
final availability of unspent balances at the end of the financial year 2009-10 for the 
SACS are Karnataka (Rs.9.65 crore), Tam il Nadu (Rs.7.06crore) and West Bengal 
(Rs.7.06 crore). The financial monitoring/d iscipline is being watched through 
Computerized Project Finance Management System (CPFMS). However, there is a 
necessity to have funds available with SACS at the beginning of the financial year as 
working capital requirement to meet the committed liabilities of salary, operational 
expenses etc. in the beginning of the year as first installment is released only in 
May/June. 
 

 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department enabling it to bring 
down the availability of unspent balances  with the various SACS at the end of the 
financial year 2009-10, like Karnataka (from Rs. 11.34 crore to Rs.9.65 crore), Tamil 
Nadu (from Rs. 8.40 crore to Rs.7.06 crore) a nd West Bengal (from Rs. 8.99 crore  to 
Rs.7.06 crore). However, the same is still on  the higher side and is not justifiable. 
The Committee takes note of the requireme nts of working capital funds with SACS 
at the beginning of the financial year to meet the committed liabilities like salary, 
operational expenses etc. as first installmen t of funds is released only in May/June.  
At the same time, it is also a fact that releases to Stat es are being done through e-
transfer to reduce transit delay with salary payments to the employees of the 
peripheral units in many States being made  electronically. In such a scenario, it 
cannot be considered appropriate and justifiabl e that funds to the tune of  Rs 7 to 8 
crores are available as unspent balance at the beginning of the year which could 
have been utilized by the SACS for th eir targeted activities. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that all activities as included in the Annual Action Plan 
issued to the States before the close of the previous year and placed on the NACO 
website need to be implemented as envisaged.  
III .  ROLE OF NGOs 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 00 
3.2 The Committee is dismayed to note that even after about two years; the 
Department has not been able to recove r the unspent funds available with the 

discontinued NGOs. There appears to be some slackness on the part of the 
Department and the other implementing agencies. Further, the fact that the 
Department has information only from 13 St ates, is an indicator of poor monitoring 
and control. The Committee, would accordingly like to have a complete updated 
status till 2009-10 on this inter-alia contai ning the issues like contract norms fixed for 
NGOs, their selection criteria, number of  blacklisted/discontinued NGOs-State-wise 
along with officials in the government se tup held responsible, if any, for poor 
monitoring/selection, unpsent funds availa ble with such NGOs, amount recovered 
and reasons for delay in recovering the same. The Committee would also recommend 
imposing severe penalties on NGOs which indulge in fraud and financial 
embezzlement.  
 
Action Taken 
 
As on 31 st March 2010, Out of Rs. 11.99  crore to be recovered from 304 NGOs, 
Rs. 8.81crore has been recovered. The remaining amount of   Rs. 3.18crore  is in the 
process of recovery.  At State level, SACS has taken various steps like issuing notices, 
show cause notice if there is no response on earlier notices, initiate legal action etc to 
recover the unspent amount. Details on numb er of NGOs discontinued, amount to be 
recovered & amount recovered and details of  action taken by respective SACS to 
recover the unspent amount from various NGOs are as given  in Annexure-I. 
 
The monitoring and control of programma tic and financial activities is done 
regularly at NACO and respective SACS leve l as well as during State visits by NACO 
officers. SACS is conducting financial auditi ng through external auditors in every six 

months. Corrective actions are based on the programme and financial review and 
auditing. 
 
NACO has issued detailed Operational Gu ideline for selection and contracting 
NGOs/CBOs. The contractual norms as part of the Operational Guideline (Part-I) is 
served to all NGOs/CBOs during contract with SACS. (The contractual norms are 
attached as Annexure II)  
 
The Operational Guideline for Targeted Intervention Part – 1 under NACP III 
clearly details the process of selectio n of NGOs/CBOs to implement targeted 
intervention projects. It is a transparent process having following steps: 
• Issue of Expression of interest through open advertisement in all leading news 
papers.  
• Preliminary screening of applications by the Technical Advisory Committee 
(TAC) for Joint Appraisal Team (JAT) visit.  
• Field visit by JAT teams to assess institutional capability and program 
effectiveness of the screened NGOs. Th e JAT will be comprised of external 
consultants / experts both for programme and finance and SACS officials. 
Specific assessment tool has been develo ped for the field level assessment and 
minimum mark has been fixed for qua lification for short listing for final 
selection. JAT will assess the NGO based on specific check list developed by 
NACO which includes, governance system , staffing and organizational structure 
and capacity, finance management system in the organization, experience of 

organization in health sector specific ally in HIV /AIDS programme, planning 
monitoring and supervision system in the NGO etc.. 
• Finalize NGOs partners by TAC headed  by Project director of the SAC. 
Empanelled NGO list to be approved by the executive committee of the 
respective SAC to initiate the project implementation. 
• Contracting of NGOs approved by the executive committee. 
• Development of project proposal an d assessment of the same through 
conducting workshop. 
 
Project Directors of State AIDS Control Societies are responsible for monitoring, 
taking up decisions on selection of NGOs based on the recommendation of executive 
committee at state level. The delay of reco very of unspent amount is subjected to 
various reasons like, delay in submitting audited reports by independent audit parties 
appointed by State AIDS Control Societies, delay or non response from discontinued 
NGOs after giving notices, time taken for le gal actions if NGO is not taking action on 
notices given by SACS, settlement of funds et c. SACS will take legal action against the 
NGOs not responding to the notices including show cause. 
 
NGOs which indulge in fraud and fina ncial embezzlement are subjected to 
strict action with legal advice. SACS w ill not consider these organizations for any 
future programme. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
As per latest details furnished by the Department, as on  31 st March, 2010 
recovery of Rs 8,81,37,884 has been made from 304 discontinued NGOs which were 

released funds amounting to Rs. 11,99,05,133 from April, 2007 to March, 2010. While 
appreciating the considerable progress ma de so far, the Committee takes a serious 
view of the disturbing trend noticed in  respect of some States. Out of the 304 
discontinued NGOs, maximum number of such NGOs, i.e. 50 are located in 
Andhra Pradesh. Total amount to be re covered from these NGOs is still being 
calculated. Only thereafter, defaulting N GOs will be identified for taking action. 
Besides that, out of 27 States/ UTs, no rec overy has been made so far in case of 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab and UP. All these States have varying 
number of discontinued NGOs with Ma dhya Pradesh having the maximum 
number of 23 NGOs showing recovery of Rs. 60,53,234. What is a cause of serious 
concern for the Committee is that in most of the cases, NGOs are simply not 
traceable. It seems that corrective measures  like monitoring mechanism in force at 
NACO and respective SACS level, State visits of NACO Officers, six monthly 
financial audit by external auditors have either not proved to be effective enough 
or are not being implemented properly. Th e Committee would appreciate if all the 
cases of discontinued NGOs are pursued vigorously and required action taken 
without any further delay. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.5 The Committee is constrained to obse rve that the achievement level under 
many of the physical target s set during 2009-10 has been far from satisfactory. There 
are instances of severe under-achievements  under the components  like –Setting new 
core group targeted interventions; setti ng up new bridge population targeted 

interventions; setting up new Blood Comp onent Separation Units; setting up new 
District Level Blood Banks etc. The Committee fails to understand that under such 
circumstances how the Department has utiliz ed more than 98% of the funds during 
2009-10 without achieving the satisfactory le vel of achievements under many of the 
physical targets. The Department needs to understand that it is good to achieve 
financial targets but what is more import ant is that achievement of the financial 
targets should be commensurate with the achi evement of the set physical targets. The 
same is apparently missing here. Under such circumstances,  the Committee has 
serious doubts over the planning and the su bsequent execution strategies of most of 
the components of the programme. The Committee can only infer that either the funds 
sought have been miscalculated or the Department has pumped in more money under 
certain components running successfully wher eby it could show a higher percentage 
of Utilization of allocated funds. The Department needs to clarify the same. 
Action Taken 
The total target set for NACP III (2007- 2012) is 2100, average 420 TI projects 
should on board every year. Out of which th e number of TI projects as of now are 
1568, in three years’ period. It is well above th e target for three years. It may be noted 
that the number of TIs is estimated an d designed based on High Risk Groups’ 
mapping that is undertaken to find out the High Risk Group population across the 
country. Number of interventions projects for each State is calculated based on the 
size estimation mentioned above to ensure the saturation of coverage of High Risk 
Population. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 

  
  The Committee had put up a simple query to the Department as to how the 
utilization of funds, which is almost 100 per cent, is not commensurate with the 
achievement of the physical targets, which are on the lower side in respect of several 
important components of the Programme. The response of the Department in no 
way addresses the issues raised by the Committee. In the absence of any 
justification, the Committee, as it said ear lier, can only infer that some serious 
problem areas in planning and the subsequent execution strategies of most of the 
components of the Programme exist. The De partment needs to take up this aspect 
very seriously. 
IV  SETTING UP OF NEW BLOOD COMPONENT SEPARATION UNITS 
(BCSUs) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
4.2 The Committee is constrained to observ e that the data made available to the 
Committee through the response to a query made twice reveals that the Department 
has fixed a target of 162 for setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units by 
the end of the Eleventh Plan . The Committee notes that no  target was fixed for the 
first year, i.e., 2007 – 08, and for 2008 – 09 an d 2009 – 10, 40 BCSUs each were kept as 
targets. However, a cumulative achievemen t of only 47 BCSUs could be made till 
February 2010. Out of the total target of 162 un its for the Eleventh Plan period, a total 
of 115 more such units are required to be set up during the last two years of the 
Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like the same to be clarified. 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
It is submitted that under Phase – III of National AIDS Control Programme, the 
target for setting up of 80 Blood Componen t Separation Units was fixed. As per the 

procurement cycle, the procurement of equipm ents for these units was to be taken up 
during 2008 – 09 and 2009 – 10 for 40 set of equi pments during each year.  No target 
was fixed during the 1st year, in view of the regulatory requirement for physical 
infrastructure for setting up of BCSUs, wh ich entails 7 rooms with the total covered 
area of 150 sq. metres and necessary electrical and mechanical fittings. 
It is also submitted that even after the procurement of equipments, the process 
of obtaining a license from the Drugs Controlle r General (India) is at various stages of 
processing viz. preliminary inspection; joint inspection and final inspection etc. which 
was followed up with the concerned authorities at every stage. Because of this, out of 
the 80 such units, 49 units have obtained a license to operate and for the remaining 
units, the matter is being followed up. 
Thus, the target for setting up of BCSUs as reflected in the report as 162, is the 
cumulative target for NACP, Phase – III.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee has been informed that under Phase III of NACO, against the 
target during 2007-08 to 2009-10 for setting up of 80 Blood Component Separation 
Units, 40 Units have obtained a license to  operate so far. The Committee is not 
aware whether the required infrastructure of 7 fully equipped rooms with total 
covered area of 150 sq. meters has been made available for these units. For the 
remaining 31 units, the process of procuring a license from the Drug Controller 
General of India is yet to be completed. Against this backdrop, the Committee is 
not very hopeful about the achievement level of 162 Blood Component Separation 

Units to be set up under Phase III of NA CO. The Committee can only emphasize 
that every conceivable effort needs to be made to accomplish this target. 
 
V.  SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
5.3 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the Department has not been able to 
take up the matter of setting up of the di strict level blood banks with a sense of 
urgency. The Department itself is aware  that these 39 Blood Banks have been 
identified on the basis of an assessment of  urgent requirement in underserved areas. 
Hence, a delay in setting up of the blood ba nks as envisaged, is against Department’s 
obligations to see that the facilities reach these underserved areas. Most of the reasons 
cited for the delay are non-availability of  adequate infrastructure, manpower and 
delay in issuance of license. The Department needs to play a pro-active role by taking 
up the matter with the concerned State Gove rnments as well as the agencies at an 
appropriate level to expedite the procedural  formalities. The Department should also 
consider providing appropriate additional funds, if required, for infrastructure and 
manpower related matters so that there is no delay due to financial constraints. 
 
Action Taken 
 
It is submitted that the target of taki ng up blood banks in the 39 districts was 
identified during the planning of National AIDS Control Programme (NACP), Phase – 
III; wherein both National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) and concerned State 
Governments have specific roles. NACO was supposed to provide equipment and the 
annual recurring grant for one Lab Techni cian and consumables, while the State 
Government has to provide physical infrastr ucture in terms of building with a space 

of 100 sq. mts in 5(five) rooms; manpower  in terms of Medical Officer, Laboratory 
Technician, Nurse and support staff. As pe r the laid down scheme for modernization 
of blood banks, the funds for infrastructu re and manpower are not included in the 
Pattern of Assistance and is the responsibility of the State Government. 
 
NACO has already completed the procurement of equipments and the matter 
is followed up with concerned State Gove rnments, so that once the physical 
infrastructure in terms of building is ready, further action can be initiated. 
 
In view of this follow up, Blood Banks in 8 ou t of the 39 identified districts have come 
up now and for the remaining blood banks, continuous follow up is in process. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee acknowledges the stand of the Department that the funds for 
infrastructure and manpower are not included in the Pattern of Assistance and is 
the responsibility of the State Governme nts. Factual position as given by the 
Department clearly indicates that majority  of the State Governments have failed to 
fulfil their commitment of providing physica l infrastructure, i.e. a building having 
an area of 100 sq.mts. and required manpower of Medical Officer, Lab Technician, 
Nurse and Support Staff. Moreover, when NACO has already procured the 
equipments for these Blood Banks, they  need to be supplemented by State 
Governments coming forward with fulfillment of their commitments. The 
Committee can only reiterate that the Depart ment has to play a pro-active role by 
taking up the matter with the concerned State Governments, if need be at the 
highest level. It can also help the States financially which are facing resource 

constraints. The Committee is of the firm op inion that the Department has to play 
the role of catalyst in achieving the targets under this component rather than 
remaining rigid on procedural aspects. 
  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
5.7 The Committee welcomes this new initiative  of the Department for establishing 
four Metro Blood Banks as Centres of Excellence. However, the Committee is 
unhappy to note that the slow progress of th e Department in realizing this initiative 
which has been pending since 2008 – 09. Th ese blood banks would not only act as 
model blood banks with latest equipments and technology but would also be of great 
help in meeting the ever rising dema nds of these metro cities. The Committee 
however notes that from the records available with it, that no dead lines have been set 
regarding making the same functional. Keep ing in mind the delay already made in 
implementation of this initiative, the Co mmittee recommends to the Department to 
have a targeted approach in making the four metro blood banks functional at the 
earliest. The Committee would also like to draw the attention of the Department to the 
undue delay in the operationalisation of mode l Blood Bank at Tirupati.  Infrastructure 
for the Blood Bank has already been provided by the State Government. The Secretary 
assured the Committee that action for se nding the equipment for the Blood Bank 
would be taken immediately. 
  
Action Taken 
 
It is submitted that a road-map has been prepared for setting up of Metro 
Blood Banks in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai an d Kolkata following the approval of the 
Cabinet. The requisite land has been made  available by the State Governments of 

West Bengal and Tamil Nadu, while the issue of allotment of land is followed up with 
the State Government of Maharashtra.  
The Design DPR Consultants for prepara tion of Architectural Drawings are 
already in place. The Preliminary Drawings  have already been approved for three 
Metro Blood Bank sites at Kolkata, Chennai and Delhi.  
It is submitted that the construction wo rk for these sites is expected to start 
during the current Financial Year itself. 
In regard to the Model Blood Bank in Tirupati, it is submitted that the proto-
type of equipments to be supplied to this blood bank has already been approved by 
an Expert Committee appointed by NACO. The equipments for the blood bank will be 
supplied and installed during the month of August 2010. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee observes that the establ ishment of four Metro Blood Banks 
as Centres of Excellence aimed at having four model Blood Banks in Delhi, 
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata with latest equipments and technology is in its 
third year of conceptualisation but still a lot needs to be done to actually realize the 
same.  Though the Department hopes to start construction on the three sites, the 
issue of land in case of Mumbai is st ill being sorted out. The Committee would 
like to emphasize that the road-map prepared for setting up these Blood Banks 
needs to be adhered to by all concerned, especially the State Implementing 
Agencies. The Committee is not aware abou t the targeted date of completion of 
construction work for these Blood Banks  which is expected to start during the 
current financial year. One must also not fo rget the fact that these Blood Banks can 

be considered fully functional only wh en they are well-equipped having the 
required infrastructure and manpower. As regards the Model Blood Bank in 
Tirupati, the Committee hopes that by no w it would have started functioning as 
per the latest information submitted by the Department. 
VIII  ART CENTERS 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
8.3 The Committee is satisfied that at pres ent the number of patients undergoing 
second line of ART is within the manageab le range. However, the Committee is of the 
considered opinion that the number of cent res of excellence being limited to just 10 
where the patients can have treatment fac ilities, the patients, especially the poor 
people residing far away from theses cent res, will have to spend a lot of money for 
transportation for visiting these centres regularly.  The Committee thinks that with the 
facilities of ART centres expanding, more nu mber of patients requiring second line of 
treatment is going to increase considerably.  Accordingly, the Committee recommends 
to the Department to have a realistic assess ment of the requirement of new Centres of 
Excellence with a view to make the facilitie s for treatment available within reasonable 
distance of the patients. 
Action Taken 
An assessment on the distribution of pa tients referred as “treatment failures” 
and those who were put on 2nd line ART is being done.  Subsequently, ART centres 
will be identified based on volume of eligible cases and capacity to provide 2nd line 
ART.  During 2010-11,  8-10 ART centres will be upgraded through training, provision 

of 2nd line drugs and linkage with viral load  testing facilities.  More centres will be 
upgraded based on volume of patients on 2nd line ART.   
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee appreciates that the Department is undertaking an 
assessment about the distribution of patient s referred as “treatment failures” and 
those who were put on 2nd line ART.  The Committee would like to have the 
details of such assessment as well as of  those ART centres wh ich will be upgraded 
through training, provision of 2nd line drugs and linkage with viral load testing 
facilities during  2010-11. 
IX  NEW INITIATIVES 
Recommendations/Observations 
9.2 The Committee is pained at the slow progress in establishing the National 
Blood Transfusion Authority and setting up of a Plasma Fractionation Plant. Both 
these initiatives are very important. It is very disappointing that the same still remains 
on paper even after two years. The Commi ttee would like to be informed about the 
reasons for the inordinate delay and the de adline by which the same would be set up. 
It recommends to the Department to make  all conceivable efforts to achieve the 
aforesaid targets at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
 
It is submitted that after approval of  the Cabinet, an Expert Committee was 
constituted to finalise adoption of techno logy for this project in view of the highly 
complex technical nature of the project.  The Expert Group has recommended for 
adoption of “Cohn n Chromatography Techno logy” for this project. Subsequently, an 
Expression of Interest was invited from  interested firms to work as Project 

Management Consultant. The process of sele ction of Project Management Consultant 
is in progress. 
In regard to setting up of National Bl ood Transfusion Author ity, the approval 
of Cabinet is under process. The National Blood Transfusion Authority will be set up, 
after approval of the Cabinet on this initiative. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which establishment of the 
National Blood Transfusion Authority and setting up of a Plasma Fractionation 
Plant is still entangled in paper work. As  both these components are crucial for 
furthering the objectives of NACO, th e Committee had called for reasons for the 
inordinate delay and the deadline by wh ich these two would be set up. Though 
the reply of the Department briefly indicates the progress made so far, nowhere it 
has specified the reasons for the delay or the timelines set by it. In the opinion of 
the Committee this is a case of poor plan ning and implementation strategy on the 
part of the Department. The Committee re commends to the Department to revisit 
its strategy and set out necessary correctiv e measures to achieve these two targets 
at the earliest. 
XII NATIONAL PEDIATRIC INITIATIVE 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
12.3 The Committee is very concerned at th e increasing number  of HIV+ children 
and rising trend of HIV prevalence in  pregnant women in low prevalence / 
vulnerable States of North India. However, the Committee considers it to be due to 
Department’s proactive approach in identify ing and tracking the HIV+ mothers or it 

m a y  b e  a n  i n d i c a t i o n  o f  r i s e  o f  t h e  d isease in the low prevalence States.  The 
Committee would recommend to the Department to keep a strict vigil on rising trends 
of HIV prevalence among pregnant wome n in low prevalence States and take 
immediate steps to contain the same.  The Committee may be informed of the specific 
steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
12.4 The Committee is pained to imagine the plight of the small children who 
would be requiring the ART treatment in the long run.  The Committee recommends 
to the Department to intensify its approach  to detect the HIV+ children by targeting 
the HIV+ mothers and ensuring full care and support to them.  The Committee may 
be informed about the status of all HIV+ children in India, state-wise. 
  
Action Taken 
 
A  two prong strategy is being implemented to check number of HIV+ children:- 
a) Scale-up identification of HIV+ pregnant women by offering HIV counselling and 
testing routinely at Antenatal Clinics. These identified as HIV+ will be assessed 
for eligibility of ART by performing CD4 count.  This would require better linkage 
between ICTC and ART centres.  Thos e not eligible for ART will be given 
prophylactic treatment.   
b) Follow-up of children exposed to HI V (children born to  HIV+ mother and 
children getting breast feeding from HIV+  mother). They will be identified and 
tested for HIV through latest techno logy (DNA-PCR) for early diagnosis and 
treatment. Active screening of vulnerable children by involving NGOs and 
outreach workers has been initiated. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 

 
  The Committee had called for a status of all HIV+ children in India, State-
wise and had specifically recommended to the Department to keep a strict vigil on 
rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in low prevalence States 
and, accordingly, had sought details of th e specific steps taken by the Department 
in this regard.  The Department in its response has just reproduced the existing 
procedure being adopted by it. The specif ic information sought by the Committee 
is missing. The Department may, accordingly, provide necessary details in this 
regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS---- AT A GLANCE 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department enabling it to bring 
down the availability of unspent balances  with the various SACS at the end of the 
financial year 2009-10, like Karnataka (from Rs. 11.34 crore to Rs.9.65 crore), Tamil 
Nadu (from Rs. 8.40 crore to Rs.7.06 crore) a nd West Bengal (from Rs. 8.99 crore  to 
Rs.7.06 crore). However, the same is still on  the higher side and is not justifiable. 
The Committee takes note of the requireme nts of working capital funds with SACS 
at the beginning of the financial year to meet the committed liabilities like salary, 
operational expenses etc. as first installmen t of funds is released only in May/June.  
At the same time, it is also a fact that releases to Stat es are being done through e-
transfer to reduce transit delay with salary payments to the employees of the 
peripheral units in many States being made  electronically. In such a scenario, it 
cannot be considered appropriate and justifiabl e that funds to the tune of  Rs 7 to 8 
crores are available as unspent balance at the beginning of the year which could 
have been utilized by the SACS for th eir targeted activities. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that all activities as included in the Annual Action Plan 
issued to the States before the close of the previous year and placed on the NACO 
website need to be implemented as envisaged.      
         (Para 2.4) 
III. ROLE OF NGOs 
 
 
As per latest details furnished by the Department, as on  31 st March, 2010 
recovery of Rs 8,81,37,884 has been made from 304 discontinued NGOs which were 

released funds amounting to Rs. 11,99,05,133 from April, 2007 to March, 2010. While 
appreciating the considerable progress ma de so far, the Committee takes a serious 
view of the disturbing trend noticed in  respect of some States. Out of the 304 
discontinued NGOs, maximum number of such NGOs, i.e. 50 are located in 
Andhra Pradesh. Total amount to be re covered from these NGOs is still being 
calculated. Only thereafter, defaulting N GOs will be identified for taking action. 
Besides that, out of 27 States/ UTs, no rec overy has been made so far in case of 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab and UP. All these States have varying 
number of discontinued NGOs with Ma dhya Pradesh having the maximum 
number of                    23 NGOs showing rec overy of Rs. 60,53,234. What is a cause 
of serious concern for the Committee is that  in most of the cases, NGOs are simply 
not traceable. It seems that corrective measures like monitoring mechanism in force 
at NACO and respective SACS level, Stat e visits of NACO Of ficers, six monthly 
financial audit by external auditors have either not proved to be effective enough 
or are not being implemented properly. Th e Committee would appreciate if all the 
cases of discontinued NGOs are pursued vigorously and required action taken 
without any further delay.      (Para 3.2) 
  
   
The Committee had put up a simple query to the Department as to how the 
utilization of funds, which is almost 100 per cent, is not commensurate with the 
achievement of the physical targets, which are on the lower side in respect of several 
important components of the Programme. The response of the Department in no 
way addresses the issues raised by the Committee. In the absence of any 

justification, the Committee, as it said ear lier, can only infer that some serious 
problem areas in planning and the subsequent execution strategies of most of the 
components of the Programme exist. The De partment needs to take up this aspect 
very seriously.  
                 (Para 
3.5) 
IV  SETTING UP OF NEW BLOOD COMPONENT SEPARATION UNITS 
(BCSUs) 
 
 
 The Committee has been informed that under Phase III of NACO, against the 
target during 2007-08 to 2009-10 for setting up of 80 Blood Component Separation 
Units, 40 Units have obtained a license to  operate so far. The Committee is not 
aware whether the required infrastructure of 7 fully equipped rooms with total 
covered area of 150 sq. meters has been made available for these units. For the 
remaining 31 units, the process of procuring a license from the Drug Controller 
General of India is yet to be completed. Against this backdrop, the Committee is 
not very hopeful about the achievement level of 162 Blood Component Separation 
Units to be set up under Phase III of NA CO. The Committee can only emphasize 
that every conceivable effort needs to be made to accomplish this target.  
           (Para 4.2) 
 
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS. 
 
 The Committee acknowledges the stand of the Department that the funds for 
infrastructure and manpower are not included in the Pattern of Assistance and is 
the responsibility of the State Governme nts. Factual position as given by the 
Department clearly indicates that majority of the State Governments have failed to 

fulfil their commitment of providing physica l infrastructure, i.e. a building having 
an area of 100 sq.mts. and required manpower of Medical Officer, Lab Technician, 
Nurse and Support Staff. Moreover, when NACO has already procured the 
equipments for these Blood Banks, they  need to be supplemented by State 
Governments coming forward with fulfillment of their commitments. The 
Committee can only reiterate that the Depart ment has to play a pro-active role by 
taking up the matter with the concerned State Governments, if need be at the 
highest level. It can also help the States financially which are facing resource 
constraints. The Committee is of the firm op inion that the Department has to play 
the role of catalyst in achieving the targets under this component rather than 
remaining rigid on procedural aspects.       
         (Para 5.3) 
 
 
 
The Committee observes that the establ ishment of four Metro Blood Banks 
as Centres of Excellence aimed at having four model Blood Banks in Delhi, 
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata with latest equipments and technology is in its 
third year of conceptualisation but still a lot needs to be done to actually realize the 
same.  Though the Department hopes to start construction on the three sites, the 
issue of land in case of Mumbai is st ill being sorted out. The Committee would 
like to emphasize that the road-map prepared for setting up these Blood Banks 
needs to be adhered to by all concerned, especially the State Implementing 
Agencies. The Committee is not aware abou t the targeted date of completion of 
construction work for these Blood Banks  which is expected to start during the 
current financial year. One must also not fo rget the fact that these Blood Banks can 

be considered fully functional only wh en they are well-equipped having the 
required infrastructure and manpower. As regards the Model Blood Bank in 
Tirupati, the Committee hopes that by no w it would have started functioning as 
per the latest information submitted by the Department.    
           (Para 5.7) 
 
VIII  ART CENTERS 
 
 
 
The Committee appreciates that the Department is undertaking an 
assessment about the distribution of patient s referred as “treatment failures” and 
those who were put on 2nd line ART.  The Committee would like to have the 
details of such assessment as well as of  those ART centres wh ich will be upgraded 
through training, provision of 2nd line drugs and linkage with viral load testing 
facilities during  2010-11.          
        (Para 8.3) 
 
IX  NEW INITIATIVES 
 
 
The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which establishment of the 
National Blood Transfusion Authority and setting up of a Plasma Fractionation 
Plant is still entangled in paper work. As  both these components are crucial for 
furthering the objectives of NACO, th e Committee had called for reasons for the 
inordinate delay and the deadline by wh ich these two would be set up. Though 
the reply of the Department briefly indicates the progress made so far, nowhere it 
has specified the reasons for the delay or the timelines set by it. In the opinion of 
the Committee this is a case of poor plan ning and implementation strategy on the 

part of the Department. The Committee re commends to the Department to revisit 
its strategy and set out necessary correctiv e measures to achieve these two targets 
at the earliest.                           
(Para 9.2) 
XII NATIONAL PEDIATRIC INITIATIVE 
 
 
  The Committee had called for a status of all HIV+ children in India, State-
wise and had specifically recommended to the Department to keep a strict vigil on 
rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in low prevalence States 
and, accordingly, had sought details of th e specific steps taken by the Department 
in this regard.  The Department in its response has just reproduced the existing 
procedure being adopted by it. The specif ic information sought by the Committee 
is missing. The Department may, accordingly, provide necessary details in this 
regard.                                                                                                        (Paras 12.3 & 12.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V 

FIFTH MEETING    
 The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Friday, the 10 th December, 2010 in Room 
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -    Chairman 
2. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
3. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
4. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh 
5. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
9. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
10. Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
12. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shrimati Vandana Garg   Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta    Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta        Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh     Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them of the agenda of the meet ing.  The Committee then considered the 
draft  *** and 49 th Reports on Action Taken Notes (ATNs) furnished by the 
Departments of  *** and AIDS Co ntrol, respectively, on the 
Recommendations/Observations as contained in its ***  and 42nd Reports on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the respective De partments.  After some discussion, the 
Committee adopted the Reports with certain modifications in the  *** Report. 
3. *                            *                            *    
4.  *                            *                            *    
5. *                            *                            *    
6. *                            *                            *    
  7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 p.m. 
 
______________________________________ 

***pertains to other matters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  