Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
66
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Fifty-Ninth Report on the Functioning of Central 
Drugs Standards Control Organisation (CDSCO)
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

65
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fifty-Ninth Report on the Functioning of Central
Drugs Standards Control Organisation (CDSCO)
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—45
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ 1—4
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by  the Committee 2.2, 2.19, 2.20,
4.7, 8.7, 8.8, 8.10, 8.11, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7, 10.2, 12.4
12.5, 12.6 & 15.7 (Total 19) .............................................................. 5—13
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies (T otal : NIL) .................. ........................... 14
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations
 in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 2.21, 2.22
2.23, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 4.8, 6.1/6.2, 7.13, 7.14, 7.15, 7.16, 7.27,
7.28, 7.29, 7.31, 7.32, 7.33, 7.34, 7.35, 7.36, 7.37, 7.38,
7.41, 7.42, 7.43, 7.45, 7.46, 7.47, 7.49, 7.51, 7.52, 8.4, 8.5,
9.8, 1 1.2,
 12.2,  12.3,  13.3,  14.3, 15.4, 15.5, 15.6, 15.11, 16.2
and 17.3 (Total 46) .............................................................................. 15—43
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited 4.5, 4.6, 5.11 & 15.9 (Total 4) ...... 44—45
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 46—59
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 61—64

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Sixty-Sixth Report on the action taken by the Department of Health and Family
Welfare on the recommendations/observations contained in the 59
th Report of the Committee on
“Functioning of Central Drugs Standards Control Organization (CDSCO)”.
2. The Committee had presented its 59 th Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 8 th May, 2012.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare furnished an Interim Action Note (ATN) on the
12
th September, 2012 and Final Action Taken Note on the 28 th December, 2012 on the
recommendations/observations as contained in the 59 th Report of the Committee.
3. The Committee at its meeting held on the 23 rd April, 2013, considered and adopted the Draft
Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
23rd April, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Vaisakha 3, 1935 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

(iv)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
A TN – Action Taken Note
APIs – Application Programming Interface
CDSCO – Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
CMC – Christian Medical College
DCG(I) – Drugs Controller General (India)
DTAB – Drug Testing Advisory Board
DCC – Drugs Consultative Committee
DDC – Deputy Drugs Controller
DMA – Danish Medicine Agency
FDCs – Fix Dose Combinations
GTB Hospital – Guru Teg Bahadur Hosptial
GCP – Good Clinical Practice
GMP – Good Manufacturing Practice
JIPMER – Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research
KGMU – King George’s Medical University
LHMC – Lady Hardinge Medical College
LNJP – Hospital Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital
MAMC – Maulana Azad Medical College
MCI – Medical Council of India
NDACs – New Drugs Advisory Committees
NLEM – National List of Essential Medicines
PSURs – Periodic Safety Update Reports
PGIMER – Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research
RML
 H – Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital
SOPs – Standard Operating Procedures
SSC – Staff Selection Commission
UCMS – University College of Medical Sciences
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
VMMC – V ardhman Mahavir Medical College

1
REPORT
Introduction
(A) The Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare (2011-12) on functioning of CDSCO was presented to the Parliament
on May 8, 2012. It was conveyed to the Government immediately thereafter vide Rajya Sabha
Secretariat Office Memorandum dated May 9, 2012 for implementation of the Recommendations
contained therein. As per rules the Government was required to furnish details of action taken by
them on the Recommendations contained in the Fifty-ninth Report to the Committee within three
months from the date of presentation of the Report i.e. by August 7, 2012. The Government
submitted its Action Taken Note (ATN), that on September 12, 2012.
(B) The Committee examined these action taken replies of the Government in-depth. Most of
them were evasive, inconclusive, dilatory and vague. Most importantly, the replies were without any
firm commitment about the implementation of Recommendations. During the course of its
examination of the ATN the Committee also found that the Government, had constituted a three
member expert committee to go into various irregularities, acts of omission and commission,
dereliction of duty and collusive acts of the Organization pointed out in the Report. This expert
committee set up immediately after presentation of the Report was required to submit its findings
to the Government within two months. The Committee, however, observed that the said expert
Committee had not submitted its findings to the Government even till the ATN was furnished to
it. Consequently, replies to nineteen Recommendations of the Committee, mostly pertaining to gross
irregularities, had not been furnished. These included Recommendation Nos. 7.14, 7.16, 7.31, 7.32,
7.33, 7.34, 7.35, 7.36, 7.37, 7.38, 7.41, 7.42, 7.43, 7.45, 7.46, 7.47, 7.49, 7.51 & 7.52.
(C) Taking cognizance of these serious deficiencies and shortcomings, Department of
Health and Family Welfare was asked to submit the revised Action Taken Note before
30th December, 2012.
(D) The Department of Health and Family Welfare vide its Office Memorandum dated the
28th December, 2012 furnished its final action taken replies to the Committee. The present Report
of the Committee is an analysis of these final actions taken replies of the Government to the
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee.
Preliminary Submissions
As a part of the action taken replies the Government has made the following preliminary
submissions:–
1. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in general agrees with the observations of the
Hon’ble Committee. It regrets the delay in submission of this final Action Taken Report.
2. The Government had constituted a three member expert committee comprising Dr. V .M.
Katoch, Secretary (Department of Health Research) and Director General, ICMR, Dr. P.N. Tandon,
President, National Brain Research Centre, Department of Biotechnology, Manesar and Dr. S.S.
Aggarwal, former Director, Sanjay Gandhi Post-graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow
under the following terms of reference and give its report:
To examine the validity of the scientific and statutory basis adopted for approval of new drugs
without clinical trials as pointed out in the Report for further appropriate action in the matter.

2
To outline appropriate measures to bring about systemic improvements in the processing and
grant of statutory approvals.
To suggest steps to institutionalize improvements in other procedural aspects of the
functioning of CDSCO.
3. The three-member expert Committee that was required to submit its report within a period
of two months took longer as it had to undertake comprehensive consultations with a large number
of medical experts all over the country. The Committee submitted its report to the Government on
22.11.2012. A copy of the full report is being submitted to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat separately.
The gist of its recommendations is as under:
(I) Is there scientific validity of the statutory pr ovision for allowing approval of drugs (already
approved in countries abroad) without clinical trial in India?
The overwhelming response of the selected medical professional community to this question
was “conditional Yes”. The committee agrees with the same. However, this provision shall be applied
only in highly selected cases and in a transparent and accountable manner. The committee recommends:
A select group should be constituted of knowledgeable medical professionals to:
Lay down the principles of determining the circumstances where such provision may apply,
and
Lay down the procedure that should be adopted while applying this provision
The Committee has also given a list of names that can be considered for constituting this
group.
A group of medical professionals and legal experts shall be constituted to revise the existing
Rule 122A (2), Rule 122B (3) (1) and sub-clause (3) of Clause 1 of Schedule Y on the basis
of guidelines and procedures evolved by the group constituted vide recommendation No. (i)
above to provide for approval/licensing of drugs (already approved abroad from recognized
countries) in India without clinical trial in India under exceptional circumstances only.
The CDSCO shall take appropriate steps to implement the revised statutory provisions and
the guidelines and the procedures laid down by the expert group constituted under
recommendation No. (i) above. For this purpose the CDSCO shall issue appropriate
guidance to the Industry and the NDACs should lay down SOPs for implementation of the
provision of providing approval/licensing of drugs in India without clinical trial in India. All
future approvals/licensing of drugs without clinical trial in India should be regularly monitored.
All the 38 approvals granted under existing provisions, as identified by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee (and CDSCO), and also others, if any, shall be re-reviewed by the
respective newly constituted New Drug Advisory Committees as per revised provisions and
the SOPs laid down by them. It would be prudent to take any action on already approved/
licensed drugs, such as withdrawal of the approval etc., only after such a re-review. The
NDACs may ask additional desired information from the manufacturers as deemed
necessary. This should be carried out in a time bound fashion.
The Committee endorses the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to
be extra careful in approving the FDCs. The CDSCO should constitute a Committee of
experts to lay down the principles and procedures to be adopted for approval of FDCs. The
committee shall also review the existing statutory provisions for the approval of FDCs by
the CDSCO and State Drug Authorities and recommend appropriate changes, if necessary.
It should be a thorough and systematic exercise carried out with due diligence.

3
In India, to by-pass the price regulatory requirement, the use of FDCs is rampant. Once
the rationale, principles and procedures for approval/licensing of new FDCs are laid down,
all the existing FDCs may be re-reviewed in the interest of public health at large.
(II) Measures to bring about systemic improvements in the processing and grant of statutory
approvals
(III ) Steps to institutionalize improvements in other procedural aspects of the functioning of
CDSCO.
In respect of (II) and (III) above, the Committee feels that a consultant/consultancy needs
to be commissioned to review the structure of CDSCO based on the recommendations of the
Mashelkar Committee.
4. Steps taken to strengthen the drug regulatory system of the country : A number of
steps have been taken to strengthen the CDSCO during the last four years. While the CDSCO had
a total strength of 111 posts in 2008 with 32 posts of Drug Inspectors, its strength has increased
to 310 sanctioned posts with 169 posts of Drug Inspectors. Efforts are being made to further
create additional posts in view of the increasing requirements of the organization and also to fill
up vacant posts. The organization, which had only 12 Drug Inspectors in position in 2008,
presently has 65 Drug Inspectors and selection of 90 more has recently been completed. Further,
as against in 2008 when there was no Deputy Drugs Controller, now there are 14 Deputy Drugs
Controllers.
In view of the constraints of staff due to delay in regular appointments, the Government
has resorted to appointment of 234 persons in various categories, including 113 technically qualified
personnel on contract basis so as to assist the organization in coping with the work load at the
Head Quarters as well as Zonal Offices. Strengthening of zonal offices of CDSCO has also been
done. During this period, two sub-zonal offices (Ahmedabad and Hyderabad) have been upgraded
to zonal offices and three new sub-zones (Chandigarh, Bangalore and Jammu) have been set up.
Now there are 6 Zones and 3 Sub-Zones of CDSCO in different parts of the country. The Ministry
has already identified places for creation of three more Zones/Sub-Zones at Goa, Indore and
Guwahati.
The Ministry has ambitious plans for capacity building for drug testing in the country
during the Twelfth Plan. This includes upgradation of existing labs, setting up of new labs, setting
up of Mini labs at ports of entry, commissioning of Mobile Labs, special labs for medical devices
and cosmetics, etc. On skill development front, the CDSCO has been vigorously engaged in
imparting comprehensive training to the staff of CDSCO at various levels. A separate training
division has already been constituted and operationalized in CDSCO.
For attending to the area of Pharmacovigilance, which is already being done through the
Pharmacovigilance Programme of India the Ministry aims at involving all medical colleges in the
country in the programme.
The status of working of States’ Drugs regulatory mechanism has been an area of concern
as the enforcement of Drugs and Cosmetics Act is mainly done by them. The Ministry has given
special attention to this deficient area. Considering the importance of making good quality drugs
available to the public at large, in the Twelfth Plan it is proposed to strengthen the drug regulatory
mechanism in the States/UTs through a specific scheme. This envisages augmentation of both the
physical infrastructure and human resources. A new budget line has been opened and an initial
token provision of Rs. 2 crore has been made in 2012-13 budget.
5. Measures taken to streamline the process of new drug approval : In order to streamline
the process of drug approvals, 12 New Drug Advisory Committees (NDAC) and 6 Medical Device

4
Advisory Committees (MDAC) consisting of eminent medical experts from across the country have
been constituted to advise the Drugs Controller General (India) in matters related to regulatory
approval of new drugs, clinical trials and new medical devices. Two more Committees of Experts
also advise the DCG(I) in matters related to regulatory approval of clinical trials for Investigational
New Drugs (IND) and special biological products. Expert committee would be constituted to define
polices, guidelines and lay down Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for approval of new drugs.
The situation is still evolving and will be a continuous process.
6. WHO National Regulatory Authority (NRA) Assessment (December, 2012): A WHO-led
team conducted a comprehensive review of the functioning of the National Regulatory Authority of
India (CDSCO) and its affiliated institutions (including drugs testing laboratories) by its international
experts drawn from eight different countries (USA, France, Sweden, Switzerland, China, Indonesia,
Thailand and Iran) to assess whether CDSCO meets WHO published indicators for a functional
vaccine regulatory system. WHO has established stiff benchmarks that define international
expectations for a functional vaccine regulatory system. The regulatory functions of CDSCO and
its affiliated institutions were assessed for compliance against the WHO indicators. In addition to
the general framework for the system, the following regulatory functions were evaluated: marketing
authorization and licensing; postmarketing surveillance including adverse events following
immunization (AEFI); lot release by the national regulatory authority; laboratory access; regulatory
inspections of manufacturing sites and distribution channels; and authorization and monitoring of
clinical trials. WHO prequalification, which is a guarantee that a specific vaccine meets international
standards of quality, safety and efficacy, is a prerequisite for manufacturers to supply to countries
through United Nations procuring agencies. The WHO assessment concluded that the vaccine
manufacturers in India continue to remain eligible to apply for Prequalification of specific products.
The WHO assessment also concluded that the National Regulatory Authority of India, i.e., CDSCO
continues to be functional.
The Committee takes note of various steps initiated by the Government and action
suggested on the Recommendations contained in its Fifty-ninth Report. It is, however,
hugely disappointed to observe that inspite of the Government being afforded another
opportunity to furnish conclusive responses on the various Recommendations of the
Committee, has once again chosen to come up with half measures, vague and dilatory
responses to say the least. As the subsequent analysis of the Committee will bear out that
general agreement of the Government with the Recommendations of the Committee is
mere platitude. The Government has done nothing concrete or conclusive even for the
Recommendations and findings of the Committee, which directly concern the safety, and
health of crores of our countrymen. The Preliminary Submissions, as is evident from its
plain reading only, confirms the intent of the Government in staggering decisions and action
on vital matters either by way of referring matters to committees after committees or
evolving timeconsuming policies. The Committee deprecates this tendency of the
Government in strongest terms.
The Committee would now deal with action taken by the Government on its individual
Recommendations.

5
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.1 The Committee is of the firm opinion that most of the ills besetting the system of drugs
regulation in India are mainly due to the skewed priorities and perceptions of CDSCO. For decades
together it has been according primacy to the propagation and facilitation of the drugs industry, due
to which, unfortunately, the interest of the biggest stakeholder i.e. the consumer has never been
ensured. Taking strong exception to this continued neglect of the poor and hapless patient, the
Committee recommends that the Mission Statement of CDSCO be formulated forthwith to convey
in very unambiguous terms that the organization is solely meant for public health. (Para 2.2)
Action Taken
1.2 The functions of CDSCO emanate from the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 and Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
1.3 The preamble of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is to regulate the import, manufacture,
distribution and sale of drugs and cosmetics. The quality control is exercised through the system
of licensing and inspections as provided under the Act and Rules.
1.4 In the spirit of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee a Mission Statement of
CDSCO has been formulated as under:
“To safeguard and enhance the public health by assuring the safety, efficacy and quality of
drugs, cosmetics and medical devices.”
Further Recommendation
1.5 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government has at last formulated
a Mission Statement, which is in consonance with the mandate of CDSCO. The Committee
expects the Government to move beyond the formulation stage and formally implement this
Mission Statement in letter and in spirit.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
1.6 The Committee notes with serious concern that CDSCO is substantially under-staffed. Of
the 327 sanctioned posts, only 124 are occupied. At this rate, what would be the fate of 1,045
additional posts that have been proposed is a moot point. If the manpower requirement of the
CDSCO does not correspond with their volume of work, naturally, such shortage of staff strains
the ability of the CDSCO to discharge its assigned functions efficiently. This shortcoming needs
to be addressed quickly. Consideration can also be given to employ medically qualified persons as
Consultants/Advisers (on the pattern of Planning Commission) at suitable rank. (Para 2.19)
Action Taken
1.7 The Government agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee. Staff constraint
5

6
has always been the key factor in the functioning of the organization. The Ministry has been
making continuous efforts at improvement in the situation. Though it has been attempted to take
care of the constraint of medically qualified personnel through NDACs in some respects, the
Ministry has already decided to consider engagement of highly qualified medical professionals in
various therapeutic fields to assist the CDSCO in its core functioning.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
1.8 The Committee also gathers that the average time taken for the completion of recruitment
process is approximately 12 to 15 months. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to
overcome the staff shortage, the Ministry should engage professionally qualified persons on short-
term contract or on deputation basis until the vacancies are filled up. Due to the very sensitive
nature of regulatory work, great care will need to be taken to ensure that persons employed for
short periods did not and will not have Conflict of lnterest for a specified period. (Para 2.20)
Action Taken
1.9 The Government agrees with the observations of the Hon‘ble Committee. Delays in
recruitment process do, however, take place as there are very time consuming procedures adopted
by the recruiting agencies (UPSC and SSC) mandated by various Government instructions. These
delays at times are beyond the control of the Ministry and despite the Ministry’s efforts at
expediting these recruitments, the situation has not improved. The Ministry would continue its
efforts to expedite the recruitment process. However, to bridge the gap between the demands of
the functioning of the organization and the availability of manpower, the Ministry has resorted to
engagement of personnel on contract basis.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.10 It is a matter of grave concern that there are serious shortcomings in Centre- State
coordination in the implementation of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules. This, the Committee
notes, is despite the Ministry’s own admission that Section 33P of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act
contains a provision that enables the Central Government to give such directions to any State
Government as may appear to it to be necessary for implementation of any of the provisions of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules made thereunder. The Committee understands that these
provisions are meant to be used sparingly. However, there have been several situations which
warrant intervention through Rule 33 P. Therefore the committee hopes that in future the Ministry
would not be found wanting in considering the option of using Section 33P to ensure that
provisions of central drug acts are implemented uniformly in all States. (Para 4.7)
Action Taken
1.11 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee.
1.12 The issue of cancellation of licenses by the State Licensing Authorities for manufacture of
drug formulations falling under the purview of the new drugs especially in respect of fixed dose
combinations in the light of the observations made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee was
discussed in the Drugs Consultative Committee in the meeting held on 20th July, 2012. It has been
reiterated in the meeting that such license for new drugs for unapproved FDCs must not be granted
by any State Licensing Authorities.
1.13 The State drug licensing authorities had also been issuing licenses of drug formulations
along with the brand names which were not as per the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules.

7
1.14 The Ministry has used the provisions under section 33P of the Act in the past. In order
to take care of these aforesaid issues, the Ministry has again issued statutory directions under
section 33P to the State Governments on 1.10.2012 on the following issues:
1. Not to grant licenses for manufacture for sale or for distribution or for export of new
drugs, except in accordance with the procedure laid down under the said rules i.e.
without prior approval of the Drugs Controller General (India).
2. To grant/renew licenses to manufacture for sale or for distribution of drugs in proper
generic names only.
1.15 Copies of the two letters dated 1.10.2012 of the Ministry containing the said directions are
enclosed at Annexures-I and II.
Further Recommendation
1.16 The Committee notes that the Government, albeit belatedly, has now started
invoking Rule 33 P to issue directions to the State Governments in connection with the
implementation of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules. It has in pursuance of the
Recommendation of the Committee issued statutory directions to State Governments on
October 1, 2012 under Rule 33P on two issues. The Committee while appreciating the action
taken by the Government on its Recommendation feels that had the Government shown
similar alacrity in resorting to Rule 33P in the past, things would not have come to such
a sorry pass. It, therefore, considers the continued inaction of the Government and
reluctance to resort to Rule 33 P in the past as inexplicable.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.17 The documents submitted by the Ministry show that even in large developed countries with
well developed drug regulation such as US the adverse reactions are not detected by spontaneous
reports from doctors in practice. All major side effects were detected in large scale controlled,
focused Post-Marketing Phase IV trials involving thousands of patients such as SCOUT on anti-
obesity drug sibutramine (now banned) and the RECORD trial on rosiglitazone (now banned).
Therefore to expect that any spontaneous reports from medical profession, either in private practice
or even institutions (medical colleges, large hospitals) will pick up hitherto unknown side effects
in India is not realistic. There is hardly any alternative but to take immediate cognizance of serious
adverse drug reactions reported from countries with well developed and efficient regulatory
systems. The health and lives of patients in India cannot be put to risk in the hope of detecting
ADRs within the country. (Para 8.7)
1.18 The Committee feels that since the chances of picking up unknown serious adverse effects
of drugs being marketed in the country are remote, therefore CDSCO should keep a close watch
on regulatory developments that take place in countries with well developed regulatory systems in
the West and take appropriate action in the best interest of the patients. (Para 8.8)
Action Taken
1.19 It has since been decided that whenever a drug is banned due to adverse drug reactions
in countries with well developed and efficient regulatory system viz. USA, UK, EU, Australia, Japan
and Canada, the manufacture, import and marketing of such drugs would be immediately put under
suspension till the safety of the drug is examined and established in the country.
1.20 The DCG (I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.

8
Further Recommendation
1.21 The Committee is happy to note that finally pragmatism and concern for public good
has prevailed and the Ministry has decided to suspend marketing approval of all drugs
prohibited for sale in the US, UK, EU, Australia, Japan and Canada for safety reasons. The
Committee is of the firm conviction that drugs not approved for use or approved for
extremely restricted use in countries with robust regulation should also be brought under
the purview as has been done by the World Health Organisation. It is a well-known fact
that drug manufacturers simply do not submit applications for the approval of new drugs
to robust regulators to avoid rejection by other agencies/countries. It is precisely for this
reason that several manufacturers, in spite of the huge potential of marketing drugs in the
US, avoid entering the US market. As once a drug is rejected in the US, it becomes highly
impossible to get approval even in countries with poor drug regulation. The Committee is
also confident that now when the Ministry has adopted, albeit, belatedly this global best
practice in drug regulation, it would immediately apply it on two burning cases viz. Analgin
and Buclizine.
1.22 Furthermore as this salutary mechanism has been put in place in India, the
Committee going a step further would also like the CDSCO to mandatorily go into the
regulatory status of drugs in countries with robust regulation. And any drug which is
relevant to the needs of the countries like the US, Canada, UK, EU, Australia and Japan,
if not cleared there should be subjected to intense scrutiny both when it is being considered
for approval as also when their continued marketing is being reviewed. The Committee
would appreciate a decision in the matter within fifteen days of presentation of this Report
to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.23 In most cases, most of these experts whether appointed by CDSCO or DTAB are from
Delhi. The following facts reveal this pattern:
• Rimonabant was referred to a committee of six experts, all from Delhi.
• Levonorgestrel: Four out of five from Delhi.
• Letrozole: Four out of five from Delhi.
• Sibutramine: All five from Delhi.
• Rosiglitazone: All five from Delhi.
A review of membership shows that one expert sat on 5 of the 6 committees. One wonders
whether expertise on drugs is confined to Delhi. (para 8.10)
Action Taken
1.24 As regards one expert, namely Dr. Y .K. Gupta who attended five of the six committees, it
may be mentioned that Dr. Y .K. Gupta is Professor and Head, Department of Pharmacology,
AIIMS, New Delhi. Dr. Gupta has wide experience and expertise in the relevant field. Being based
in Delhi and considering his standing, he was invited for attending most of those meetings.
1.25 However, henceforth, such committees will be constituted with experts from across the
country in light of the observation of the Hon’ble Committee.
1.26 The DCG(l) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.

9
Further Recommendation
1.27 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has finally veered towards
the idea of constituting committees with experts from across the country. The
Recommendation of the Committee was basically to highlight that the Delhi centric
composition of these committees was depriving them of the sage advice and expertise of the
immense talent present in Government medical colleges spread across the country. In this
age of specialization and super specialization in various disciplines and sub disciplines of
medical science it is, in any case, not very sensible to confuse expertise with hierarchy.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
1.28 The Committee strongly recommends that with some 330 teaching medical colleges in the
country, there are adequate number of knowledgeable medical experts with experience who can be
requested to give their opinion on the safety and efficacy of drugs. The need is to make such
consultations very broad based so as to get diverse opinion. The opinions, once received, can be
put in public domain inviting comments. Once the experts know that their opinions will be
scrutinized by others, including peers, they would be extra cautious and give credible evidence in
support of their recommendation. (Para 8.11)
Action Taken
1.29 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Committee. Efforts would be made to
make such consultations as broad-based as possible. The opinions of the experts would also be put
on the web-site. The DCG(I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
Further Recommendation
1.30 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has appreciated the nuances of
this recommendation of far reaching import and decided to implement it. It would, however,
like the Ministry to take immediate steps to commence the implementation proper of this
measure to derive its maximum benefit for the general public without any further loss of
time.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.31 Unfortunately some State Drug Authorities have issued manufacturing licenses for a very
large number of FDCs without prior clearance from CDSCO. This is in violation of rules though
till May, 2002, there was some ambiguity on powers of the State Drug Authorities in this respect.
However the end result is that many FDCs in the market have not been tested for efficacy and
safety. This can put patients at risk. (Para 9.2)
1.32 To remove such unauthorized FDCs from the market, the Central Government can either
issue directions under Section 33P to States to withdraw the licences of FDCs granted without
prior DCGI approval or the Central Government can itself ban such FDCs under Section 26A.
(Para 9.3)
1.33 The Committee was informed that DCGI has been requesting State Drug Authorities not to
issue manufacturing licences to new FDCs and suspend licences of unauthorized FDCs issued in
the past. However in exercise of powers under Section 33P specific directions have not been
issued. The Ministry failed to provide any coherent reason for lack of action under this Rule. The
Ministry informed the Committee that even if Section 33P was invoked, there was no provision to
take action against States if directions were not carried out. If considered necessary, the Ministry

10
may examine the possibility of amending the law to ensure that directions under Section 33P are
implemented. (Para 9.4)
1.34 It is also possible to ban FDCs, not authorized by CDSCO by invoking Section 26A which
empowers the Central Government to ban any drug to protect public health. The Committee was
informed that the Government has not evoked Section 26A either so far. No explanation was
offered for not using powers under Section 26A. (Para 9.5)
1.35 The Committee was informed that the issue regarding grant of Manufacturing Licenses for
unapproved FDCs by some State Drug Authorities were first deliberated in 49th DTAB meeting held
on 17 February, 2000 i.e. 11 years ago. It is a matter of great concern that even after a lapse
of a decade, no serious action has been taken. (Para 9.6)
1.36 The Committee is of the view that those unauthorized FDCs that pose risk to patients and
communities such as a combination of two antibacterial need to be withdrawn immediately due to
danger of developing resistance that affects the entire population. (Para 9.7)
Action Taken
1.37 The issue of cancellation of licenses by the State Licensing Authorities for manufacture of
drug formulations falling under purview of the new drugs especially in respect of fixed dose
combinations in the light of the observations made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee was
discussed in the Drugs Consultative Committee in the meeting held on 20
th July, 2012. It has been
reiterated in the meeting that such license for new drugs for unapproved FDCs must not be granted
by any State Licensing Authorities.
1.38 Earlier, in 2007, direction was issued to the State Drug Controllers to withdraw the 294
FDCs which were licensed without approval of DCG(I). However, the manufacturers Association
got stay order from the Madras High Court. The matter is still sub-judice.
1.39 The Ministry has, however, again issued statutory direction under section 33P to the State
Governments on 1.10.2012 to refrain from granting new drugs licensing including FDCs without
approval of DCG (I).
1.40 In the light of the observations of the Hon’ble Committee:
(i) Action in respect of the aforesaid 294 FDCs will be taken after the outcome of the
court case in Madras High Court;
(ii) In respect of other FDCs licensed by the State Licensing Authorities before 1.10.2012,
i.e. the date of issue of direction under section 33P, without the permission of
DCG(I), it has now been decided that the DCG(I) will ask all the State Drugs
Controllers to ask the concerned manufacturers to prove the safety and efficacy of
such FDCs before the CDSCO within a period of 18 months failing which such FDCs
will be considered for being prohibited for manufacture and marketing in the country.
As regards the new FDC, if any, licensed by the States Licensing Authorities after
1.10.2012 without approval of DCG(I), the same will be considered for being
prohibited from manufacturing and marketing in the country.
Further Recommendation
1.41 The Committee derives satisfaction from the fact that at last in pursuance of its
Recommendation the issue of manufacturing licenses to unauthorized FDCs has been centre
staged after more than eleven years and discussed in the Drugs Consultative Committee
meeting held on 20 July, 2012. It further notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has

11
issued statutory direction under Section 33P to State Governments on 1 October, 2012 to
refrain from granting drug licenses including FDCs without the approval of DCG (I). The
Ministry has also indicated its intention to take action against the 294 FDCs which are a
subject of litigation in Madras High Court based on the outcome of the case. Furthermore,
in regard to FDCs licensed by the State Authorities before 1 October, 2012, the State
Authorities have been asked to direct the manufacturer concerned to prove safety and
efficacy of such FDCs before the CDSCO within a period of 18 months or invite prohibition
for manufacture and marketing. The Committee feels that 18 months is too long a period
for the purpose of proving efficacy and safety of these products. As in the eventuality of
these being harmful or less advantageous to health and well being of public can cause
incalculable damage in this long interregnum. The Committee therefore strongly
recommends that this period should be curtailed to nine month i.e. up to 30 June, 2013
without fail.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.42 The Committee feels that though the Ministry is forming NDACs, which are given very
important powers, there is no transparent procedure for the selection of experts of such
Committees. The Committee also recommends that institutions from which experts are chosen
should be from different parts of the country . (Para 10.2)
Action Taken
1.43 The 12 New Drug Advisory Committees so far constituted consist of medical specialists
from Government medical colleges and reputed institutes across the country as under:
• AIIMS, New Delhi
• PGIMER, Chandigarh
• JIPMER Pondicherry
• LHMC and RML Hospital, New Delhi
• VMMC and Safdatjung Hospital, New Delhi
• Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai
• CMC, Vellore
• MAMC with GB Pant and LNJP Hospital, New Delhi
• UCMS (University College of Medical Sciences) with GTB Hospital, New Delhi
• Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai
• Regional Cancer Centre, Trivandrum
• SMS Medical College, Jaipur
• Medical College, Kolkata
• KGMU, Lucknow
• IPGME&R and SSKM Hospital, Kolkata
• Madras Medical College, Chennai
• Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi

12
• Gawahati Medical College and Hospital, Gawahati
• Government Medical College, Jammu
• Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad
1.44 The Committees would be more broad-based. The criteria for selection of experts will be
decided by a committee of experts and willing experts from Government, other institutions of high
repute and excellence will be invited for preparing a panel of experts to advise CDSCO in various
technical matters.
1.45 The DCG(I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
Further Recommendation
1.46 The Committee notes that to begin with the Ministry has formed twelve New Drug
Advisory Committees (NDAC) consisting of ten members each. These 120 experts have been
drawn from twenty institutions. Given the fact that the country has 135 government medical
colleges, the Committee finds this composition of NDACs not at all representative of the
vast pool of expertise available countrywide. However, taking the assurance of the Ministry
about broad basing of NDACs on face value, the Committee is confident that the Ministry
will give due representation to experts from different Government medical colleges when
the NDACs are constituted next.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.47 The Committee observed that even, in those cases where the PSURs were submitted, the
frequency and/or format was not as per rules. In the case of two drugs of MNCs (dronedarone
of Sanofi Aventis and pemetrexid of Eli Lilly), the PSURs were neither India specific nor in the
approved format as required by law. Some companies submitted PSURs for the products being
marketed in the country but very few PSURs were India-specific. (Para 12.4)
1.48 The Committee is of the firm view that there is a poor follow-up of side effects in Indian
patients both by doctors and manufacturers. The objective of PSURs is to collect information about
adverse effects on patients in India which would help to determine ethnic differences, if any and
result in dosage adjustment, revision of precautions and warnings, if necessary. The Committee
takes strong exception to such rampant violation of the mandatory requirements. (Para 12.5)
1.49 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should direct CDSCO to send a stem
warning to all manufacturers of new drugs to comply with mandatory rules on PSURs or face
suspension of Marketing Approval. PSURs should be submitted in CDSCO-approved format which
would help track adverse effects discovered in Indian ethnic groups. (Para 12.6)
Action taken
1.50 The applicants who have been granted approval of new drugs, have been instructed vide
letter dated 13.9.2012 to submit India specific PSUR in the format as specified in the rules.
1.51 The non-compliance of this provision would attract suspension/cancellation of the marketing
approval.
Further Recommendation
1.52 The Committee notes that in pursuance of its Recommendation, applicants who have
been granted approvals of new drugs have been instructed formally on 13 September, 2012

13
to submit India specific PSUR in the format specified in the rules or risk suspension/
cancellation of the marketing approval. The Committee is happy with this step in the right
direction. It, however, cautions the Ministry to merely not rest with the issue of
instructions but also monitor and follow up vigorously the compliance of these instructions
by the manufacturers so as to ensure that they do not remain restricted merely on paper.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
1.53 It is known that retail chemists also stock and sell items other than drugs including
chocolates, cold drinks etc. During summer these items are stored in the refrigerator while due to
paucity of space temperature-sensitive medicines may be lying outside. When samples are picked
up, tested and found to be sub-standard, the State Drug Authorities blame and prosecute
manufacturers. Therefore the Committee recommends that specifically in the case of temperature
sensitive products such as insulins, due consideration should be given to the reference samples of
the same batch preserved by the manufacturers. (Para 15.7)
Action Taken
1.54 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
1.55 The State Drugs Controllers have already been directed to take necessary action.

14
14
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
–NIL–

15
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.1 At the same time, the optimal utilization of the current staff in the best interest of public
is the responsibility of those who run the CDSCO. In a resource constrained country like India,
it is extremely difficult to meet the demands, however, genuine, of all the State entities in full.
Hence, prioritization is the key. For example, work relating to an application for Marketing Approval
of a New Drug that will be used by millions and thus have an impact on the well being of public
at large in India for years to come, is far more important and urgent than giving permission
to a foreign company to conduct clinical trials on an untested new patented, monopoly drug.
(Para 2.21)
Action Taken
3.2 The Government agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee and has noted
them for due compliance.
3.3 The DCG (I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard. However, the requisite policies
and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for prioritization in this regard would also be prepared.
Further Recommendation
3.4 The Committee is really dismayed by this casual attitude of the Government as it
strongly feels all these actions only involve routine application of mind and could have been
completed immediately after the Recommendations of the Committee were conveyed to the
Government. The Committee, therefore, feels that enough time has been wasted by the
Government in extending assurances in the matter and they should now complete all action
required in this context including preparation of policies and standard operating procedures
within one month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
3.5 The Committee also observes that the strengthening of drugs regulatory mechanisms cannot
be achieved by manpower augmentation alone. A host of issues involving capacity-building of
CDSCO like upgradation of existing offices, setting up of new offices, creation of new central
drugs testing laboratories and equipping them with the state-of-the-art technology to enable them
to carry out sophisticated analysis of drugs, upgradation of the existing 6 Central Drugs Testing
Laboratories, skill development of the regulatory officials, implementation of an effective result-
oriented pharmacovigilance programme drawing on global experience, increased transparency in
decision-making of CDSCO etc. will have to be addressed before the desired objectives are realized.
(Para 2.22)
Action Taken
3.6 The Government agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee and has noted
them for due compliance.
15

16
Further Recommendation
3.7 The Committee finds the instant reply of the Government yet another instance of
delaying tactics. If the Government agrees with this Recommendation of the Committee
what has stopped it from implementing it during last so many months is the moot point.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its Recommendation for immediate compliance by the
Government.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.8 In the absence of any reasons for unwillingness on the part of medically qualified persons
to join CDSCO, the Committee is of the opinion that emoluments and perquisites may not be the
main or only reason. It is noticed that minimum prescribed academic qualifications for the post of
DCGI is barely B.Pharm. On the other hand for Deputy Drugs Controller (DOC), the prescribed
minimum qualification is post-graduation for medically qualified persons. The stumbling block is the
requirement that DCGI should have experience in the “manufacture or testing of drugs or
enforcement of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetic Act for a minimum period of five years.”
This requirement virtually excludes even highly qualified medical doctors from occupying the post
of DCGI. Moreover the rule stipulates that doctors with post-graduation should be either in
pharmacology or microbiology only, thus excluding post- graduates, even doctorates (like OM) in
a clinical subject. Besides, highly qualified medical doctors may be reluctant to work under and
report to a higher officer with lesser qualifications in a technology driven regulatory authority set-
up. Unless these concerns are addressed, it would be difficult to get the desperately required
medically qualified professionals on the rolls of CDSCO. (Para 2.23)
3.9 The Committee fails to understand as to how a graduate in pharmacy or pharmaceutical
chemistry (B.Pharm) is being equated with a medical graduate with MD in Pharmacology or
Microbiology. Apart from the obvious anomaly, with rapid progress in pharmaceutical and
biopharmaceutical fields, there is urgent need to revise the qualifications and experience as
minimum eligibility criteria for appointment as DCGI. The Committee is of the view that it is not
very rational to give powers to a graduate in pharmacy, who does not have any clinical or research
experience to decide the kinds of drugs that can be prescribed by super specialists in clinical
medicine such as those holding OM and PhD qualifications and vast experience in the practice of
medicine and even research. (Para 3.6)
3.10 On a larger plane, the Committee is disillusioned with the qualifications provided in the age
old Rules for the head of a crucial authority like CDSCO. The extant Indian system is nowhere
in so far as sheer competence and professional qualifications are concerned when compared with
countries like USA and UK. There is, therefore, an urgent need to review the qualifications,
procedure of selection and appointment, tenure, emoluments, allowances and powers, both
administrative and financial of the DCGI. While doing so, the Government may not only rely on
the Mashelkar Committee Report which recommended augmented financial powers to DCGI but
also take cue from similar mechanisms functioning in some of the developed countries like USA,
UK, Canada, etc in order to ensure that only the best professional occupies this onerous
responsibility. The Committee should be kept informed of the steps taken to address this issue.
(Para 3.7)
3.11 In the considered opinion of the Committee, there can never be a more opportune time than
now, to usher in these changes recommended by it. The post of DCGI is vacant as of now, with
an official holding temporary charge. They, therefore, desire that the government should take
immediate measures in terms of their instant recommendations to ensure that CDSCO is headed by
an eminent and professionally qualified person. (Para 3.8)

17
Action Taken
3.12 The Government has duly taken care of the observations of the Hon’ble Committee. The
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules provide the qualification for the post of licensing and controlling
authority as “Graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or in Medicine with specialization
in Clinical Pharmacology of Microbiology”. These rules were made long before. As per these
existing rules, the DCG(I) being the licensing and controlling authority in CDSCO must have these
minimum qualifications.
3.13 The post of DCG(I) is equivalent to Joint Secretary and hence the qualification for the post
is required to be of sufficiently higher level to maintain its high level position. Therefore, additional
higher qualifications were considered for this post. Accordingly, the present notified RRs for the
post of DCG(I) contain the basic qualification prescribed in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules and
additional higher qualifications as under:
“Essential: (i) Graduate degree in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or in Medicine
with specialization in Clinical Pharmacology or Microbiology from a recognized University
established in India by law;
(ii) Postgraduate degree in Pharmacy/Pharmaceutical Chemistry/Biochemistry/Chemistry/
Microbiology/Pharmacology from a recognized University or equivalent; and
(iii) 15 years’ experience in manufacture or testing of drugs in a concern of repute or
enforcement of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules.
Desirable: (i) Two years’ experience in dealing with problems connected with drugs
standardization and control and import and export of Drugs, and/or administration of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules.
(ii) Ph.D in Pharmaceutical Sciences”.
3.14 However, the qualifications and the notified Recruitment Rules for the post of DCG(I) are
sub-judice in the Madras High Court on the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
3.15 However, the Ministry would set up an expert committee as also recommended by the three
member expert committee to review and lay down the qualifications/experience, job description,
powers and responsibilities etc. for the post of DCG(I) in consultation with the Ministry of Law
as the matter is sub-judice. Additionally, this committee would also review these issues relating to
other senior level posts in the organization.
Further Recommendation
3.16 The Committee notes that the modifications carried out previously by the
Government in the qualification and recruitment rules for the post of DCG (I) are a matter
of litigation. In any case these modified qualifications and rules do not address the concerns
of the Committee to any extent whatsoever. The Committee also notes that unfortunately
and as in the case of several of its other Recommendations, the Government has merely
decided to setup an expert committee which has been recommended by the previously setup
three member expert committee, referred to earlier in this Report, to lay down the
qualifications, experience, job description, powers and responsibilities for the post of DCG
(I) in consultation with the Ministry of Law. The proposed committee would also review
these issues relating to other senior level positions in the Organization.
3.17 The Committee derives no solace from this very open-ended response of the
Government. Nothing tangible has been done by the Government in the direction of

18
implementing this Recommendation of the Committee. The Committee understands that the
matter is sub-judice  in the context of the modifications carried out by the Government
previously in the qualifications and recruitment rules for the post of DCG(I). The
Committee is certain that this situation does not inhibit the Government from carrying out
all necessary activities including the formation of an expert committee for and in connection
with the implementation of the instant Recommendation of the Committee. It, therefore,
considers the delay by the Government in constitution of an expert committee, as also other
preparatory action, as unpardonable and desires that the same may be completed within a
month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.18 As regards lack of databank and accurate information, the Committee would like to observe
that given the information technology resources currently available, developing an effective system
of coordination amongst State Drug Authorities for providing quality and accurate data could have
been accomplished long back had the Ministry taken any initiative towards encouraging the States
to establish a system of harmonized and inter-connected databanks. Evidently, no serious efforts
seem to have been made in this regard. The Committee, however, expects that the Ministry would,
at least now, play a more pro-active role in encouraging the States to employ modern information
technology in the implementation of tasks assigned to them. At the same time a centralized databank
(e.g. licenses issued, cancelled, list of sub-standard drugs, prosecutions etc.) may be created to
which all the State Drug Authorities should be linked. (Para 4.8)
Action Taken
3.19 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee.
3.20 The following steps have so far been taken by the CDSCO in this regard:
(i) The data regarding about 85000 brands of drug formulations approved by the various
State licensing authorities as obtained from the State Food and Drug Control
Administration (FDCA), Gujarat has been uploaded on the web-site of CDSCO.
(ii) Information on various approvals /licenses granted by the CDSCO are uploaded on its
website from time-to-time.
(iii) Recommendations of the NDACs in matters related to approval of new drugs and
clinical trials are being uploaded on the CDSCO web-site from time-to-time.
(iv) A file tracking system and posting of queries/approvals etc on the website of CDSCO
on daily basis have been introduced.
3.21 The Government would take further necessary action on priority basis on creation of the
required infrastructure in this direction. During the 12th Plan, the Ministry envisages to put a
proper e-Governance system in place which will include inter-linking of all offices of Zonal/Sub-
Zonal/Port offices/Laboratories of CDSCO and offices of State Drugs Controllers for fast
communication and effective monitoring of quality of Drugs. The proposed system will include IT
enabled services, National Registry, Video Conferencing facilities, archiving of all files etc.
3.22 The WHO assessors during the assessment of the National Regulatory Authority (NRA) in
December 2012 have also recommended to have e-governance in the functioning of CDSCO.
Further Recommendation
3.23 The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Government in

19
consonance with its instant Recommendation. As a test case they also accessed the CDSCO
website with a view to evaluate the data regarding 85,000 brands of drugs that have been
uploaded on the website by the Ministry after obtaining the same from Food and Drug
Control Administration, Gujarat. To their utter surprise, they could locate only 65,500 odd
formulations on the site. They also found several banned drugs on the site; Drugs, which
have been discontinued and are generally known to be so to the public at large also featured
there. The Committee also noted a great degree of variance in the prices of some of the
generally known drugs as reflected on the website and as prevalent in the market. To sum
up, the Government has undertaken this measure in extreme hurry and in a very
unprofessional manner, without even bothering about the serious consequences it may have
in prescription procedures and also in financial terms on the poor hapless patients. The
Committee while strongly deprecating this action of the Ministry recommends that the said
data be immediately removed from the website of CDSCO so as to prevent any further
dissemination of wrong and archaic information about drugs, many of which may have life-
saving/threatening implications. It also recommends that since the data base is a critical
requirement for information generation, the information received from Gujarat authorities
be updated on war footing and put up on the website of CDSCO within a month of the
presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.24 The CDSCO has eleven airport and seaport offices. During its visit to Chennai-Bangalore-
Coonoor from 1 to 5 November, 2011, the Committee interacted with the authorities at Air Cargo
Complex, Chennai to understand the systems and procedures followed by Assistant Drugs
Controller’s Office to facilitate processing of pharmaceutical imports and exports. Subsequently,
Airports Authority of India, in a written submission, informed that the freight forwarders/shippers
were required to bring the cargo requiring cold storage facility through refrigerated trucks only at
Air Cargo complex to avoid spoilage of the contents of such cargo. The custodians at air cargo
complexes were required to provide necessary infrastructure for the temperature sensitive cargo,
at all stages, and ensure timely and proper handling of such cargo whilst in their custody. It was
further stated that the role of the airlines was of paramount importance when the cargo stands
released from the custodian and is to be uploaded to the connected flight. It was pointed out that
the grey area was on the apron of the Airport where the incoming/outgoing cargo was often under
the scorching sun for few hours by the airlines before loading of the same on their planes. It was
suggested that the cooled dollies and thermal blankets could be pressed into service on the apron
side by the airlines to provide requisite care to pharmaceutical products, thereby avoiding
the deterioration/decay of the inside contents or potency of the vaccines/drugs/medicines etc.
(Para 6.1)
3.25 The Committee agrees with the above suggestion and recommends that the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare should take initiative towards addressing the shortcomings forthwith in
coordination with the Ministry of Civil Aviation at all seaports/airports handling import and exports
of pharmaceutical products. The Committee will like to be informed of steps taken to address this
problem. (Para 6.2)
Action taken
Interim Reply
3.26 Initiatives have been taken for creation of Pharma zones at various ports in collaboration
with the concerned airport authorities, for providing dedicated areas for storage of drugs at the
ports. Pharma zone has been created at Hyderabad airport. The creation of Pharma zone at Delhi

20
airport is at an advanced stage. The Ministry is in communication with the Department of Civil
Aviation for creation of such facilities.
Final Reply
3.27 The Ministry would take up the issue with the concerned authorities in the Ministry of Civil
Aviation and Ministry of Shipping for necessary action.
Further Recommendation
3.28 The Committee finds it incomprehensible as to why the final reply of the
Government fails to mention some of the concrete actions in this regard mentioned in the
first action taken reply. The Committee, therefore, desires a detailed explanatory note in
the matter from the Ministry bringing out the exact position within one month of
presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.29 The Committee is of the view that due to untraceable files on three drugs, it is not possible
to determine if all conditions of approval (indications, dosage, safety precautions) are being
followed or not. Moreover the product monographs cannot be updated in the light of recent
developments and regulatory changes overseas. Therefore all the missing files should be re-
constructed, reviewed and monographs updated at the earliest. (Para 7.13)
Action Taken
3.30 The concerned files have since been reconstituted, though the complete details are still not
available. The issues relating to continued marketing of these drugs and updating of their product
monographs in the light of recent knowledge and regulatory changes overseas will be referred to
the NDAC for examination and review.
Further Recommendation
3.31 The Committee finds the action taken reply of the Ministry on this very important
aspect highly unsatisfactory. Even after the passage of several months these drugs continue
to be marketed with impunity though their exact effect, harmful or otherwise, is yet to be
ascertained. The Government without caring a bit about the ramifications is still
contemplating referring the issues related to continued marketing of these drugs and
updating of their product monographs in the light of recent knowledge and regulatory
changes overseas to NDAC for examination and review. The continued inaction of the
Government on this vital matter of public health needs to be deprecated in strongest terms.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should come out of its contemplation
mode and take action as recommended by the Committee in the context of these three
drugs without any further loss of time.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.32 On scrutiny of 39 drugs on which information was available, the Committee found the
following shortcomings:
• In the case of 11 drugs (28%) Phase III clinical trials mandated by Rules were not
conducted. These drugs are (i) Everolimus (Novartis), (ii) Colistimethate (Cipla),
(iii) Exemestane (Pharmacia), (iv) Buclizine (UCB), (v) Pemetrexid (Eli Lilly),

21
(vi) Aliskiren (Novartis), (vii) Pentosan (West Coast), (viii) Ambrisentan
(GlaxoSmithKline), (ix) Ademetionine (Akums), (x) Pirfenidone (Cipla), and (xi) FDC
of Pregabalin, Methylcobolamine, Alpha Lipoic Acid, Pyridoxine and Folic Acid
(Theon);
• In the case of 2 drugs (Dronedarone of Sanofi and Aliskiran of Novartis), clinical trials
were conducted on just 21 and 46 patients respectively as against the statutory
requirement of at least 100 patients;
• In one case (Irsogladine of Macleods), trials were conducted at just two hospitals as
against legal requirement of 3-4 sites;
• In the case of 4 drugs (10%) (Everolimus of Novartis; Buclizine of UCB; Pemetexid
of Eli Lilly and FDC of Pregabalin with other agents), not only mandatory Phase III
clinical trials were not conducted but even the opinion of experts was not sought. The
decision to approve these drugs was taken solely by the non-medical staff of CDSCO
on their own.
• Of the cases scrutinized, there were 13 drugs (33%) which did not have permission
for sale in any of the major developed countries (United States, Canada, Britain,
European Union nations and Australia). None of these drugs have any special or
specific relevance to the medical needs of India. These drugs are: (i) Buclizine for
appetite stimulation (UCB); (ii) Nimesulide injection (Panacea); (iii) Doxofylline (Mars)
(iv) FDC of Nimesulide with Levocetirizine (Panacea); (v) FDC of Pregabalin with
other agents (Theon); (vi) FDC of Tolperisone with Paracetamol (Themis); (vii) FDC
of Etodolac with Paracetamol (FDC); (viii) FDC of Aceclofenac with Thiocolchicoside
(Ravenbhel); (ix) FDC of Ofloxacin with Ornidazole (Venus), (x) FDC of Aceclofenac
with Drotaverine (Themis); (xi) FDC of Glucosamine with Ibuprofen (Centaur);
(xii) FDC of Diclofenac with Serratiopeptidase (Emcure) and xiii. FDC of Gemifloxacin
with Ambroxol (Hetero).
• In the case of 25 drugs (64%), opinion of medically qualified experts was not obtained
before approval.
• In those cases (14 out of 39 drugs), where expert opinion was sought, the number of
experts consulted was generally 3 to 4, though in isolated cases the number was more.
In a country where some 700,000 doctors of modern medicine are in practice such a
miniscule number of opinions are hardly adequate to get diverse views and come to a
well considered rational decision apart from the possibility of manipulation by interested
parties. As against this, to review just the dose of popular pain-killer paracetamol, the
United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) constituted a panel of 37 experts
drawn from all over the country. After extensive debate 20 members sought ban on the
combination of paracetamol with narcotics (17 opposed), 24 members sought reduction
of dose from 500mg. to 325mg. (13 opposed) and 26 members advised to make high
dose (1000mg.) formulation a prescription only medicine (11 opposed). The voting
pattern shows independent application of mind by each member. The opinions and
decisions are in public domain (website of USFDA) so that anyone is free to scrutinize,
offer comments and give suggestions. In India, every discussion and document is
confidential away from public scrutiny. This matter needs to be reviewed to ensure
safety of patients, fair play, transparency and accountability. (Para 7.14)
3.33 Unless there is some legal hitch, the Committee is of the view that there is no justification
in withholding opinions of experts on matters that affect the safety of patients from public.
Consideration should be given to upload all opinions on CDSCO website. (Para 7.15)

22
Action Taken
3.34 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Committee regarding review of the
approvals to ensure safety of patients, fair play, transparency and accountability.
3.35 The issues relating to continued marketing of these drugs and updating of their product
monographs in the light of recent knowledge and regulatory changes overseas will, however, be
referred to the NDACs for examination and review.
3.36 The Ministry agrees with putting the recommendations of the experts on the web-site.
3.37 The DCG(I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
3.38 The Ministry will also take further measures to bring transparency and accountability in
approvals.
Further Recommendation
3.39 The Committee is shocked to note this dilly-dallying by the Ministry on a matter,
which could be affecting lives of lakhs of people in the country who are consuming these
drugs. The Ministry agrees with Committee’s viewpoint about review of approvals to ensure
safety of patients, fair play, transparency and accountability, but instead of taking strict and
immediate action in all these proven cases of delinquency and omission and commission, it
still continues to be in a state of profound procrastination and wants to refer the issues
relating to continued marketing of these drugs and updating of their product monographs
in the light of recent knowledge and regulatory changes overseas to the NDACs for
examination and review. The continued inaction on the part of the Ministry on this serious
matter almost borders on collusion with an intention to save the guilty. Committees after
committee are being constituted to postpone the day of reckoning of the guilty people. On
another plane this inaction which has led to unhindered marketing of these drugs with
unknown and unspecified risks to the unsuspecting people who are consuming them
amounts to a serious violation of human rights of the hapless patients. While condemning
this continued inaction of the Ministry, the Committee recommends immediate and
conclusive action on this Recommendation of the Committee without indulging into the
charade of having a plethora of committees after committee to stall a decision in the
matter.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
3.40 According to information provided by the Ministry, a total of 31 new drugs were approved
in the period January, 2008 to October, 2010 without conducting clinical trials on Indian patients.
The figure is understated because two drugs (ademetionine and FDC of pregabalin with other
ingredients) were somehow not included in the list. Thus there is no scientific evidence to show
that these 33 drugs are really effective and safe in Indian patients. (Para 7.16)
Action Taken
3.41 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee. Accordingly, the 33 drugs will
be referred to the NDACs for examination and review. The Ministry will also constitute an expert
committee to define policies and lay down SOPs for approval of new drugs.
Further Recommendation
3.42 This is yet another instance where the Ministry inspite of appreciating the serious

23
problem the continued marketing of these 33 drugs may pose to the Indian patients has
chosen to take no action to resolve it. Even after a lapse of more than seven months and
with virtually nothing concrete having been suggested by the three-member expert
committee on this contentious matter, the Government intends to delay a decision by
referring it to yet another committee. These tactics have been, as stated at several places
in this Report, resorted to by the Government to delay indefinitely the decisions and
consequent actions that would be required to be taken against several officials and non-
officials who have indulged in rampant acts of omission and commission while approving
these drugs in gross violation of the law of the land. The Committee takes strong objection
to these dilatory tactics and recommends immediate decision on all these proven gross
violations lest the health of the people is compromised irrevocably.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.43 It is obvious that DCGI clears sites of pre-approval trials without application of mind to
ensure that major ethnic groups are enrolled in trials to have any meaningful data. Thus such trials
do not produce any useful data and merely serve to complete the formality of documentation.
(Para 7.27)
3.44 The Committee recommends that while approving Phase III clinical trials, the DCGI should
ensure that subject to availability of facilities, such trials are spread across the country so as to
cover patients from major ethnic backgrounds and ensure a truly representative sample. Besides,
trials should be conducted in well equipped medical colleges and large hospitals with round the
clock emergency services to handle unexpected serious side effects and with expertise in research
and not in private clinics given the presence of well equipped medical colleges and hospitals in
most parts of the country in present times. (Para 7.28)
3.45 The Committee is of the view that taking into account the size of our population and the
enormous diversity of ethnic groups there is an urgent need to increase the minimum number of
subjects that ought to be included in Phase III pre-approval clinical trials to determine safety and
efficacy of New Drugs before marketing permission is granted. In most western countries the
required numbers run into thousands. However since the major objective in India is to determine
the applicability or otherwise of the data generated overseas to Indian population, the requirement
should be re-assessed and revised as per principles of medical statistics so that major ethnic groups
are covered. A corresponding increase in the number of sites so as to ensure a truly representative
sample spread should also be laid down in black and white. Furthermore, it should be ensured that
sites selected for clinical trials are able to enroll diverse ethnic groups. For domestically discovered
drugs, the number of subjects should be revised as well. This can be easily achieved by changes
in the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines. (Para 7.29)
Action Taken
3.46 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee. While examining the applications
for clinical trials by CDSCO, the proposals are examined in consultation with NDACs. The NDACs
at the time of approving the trial sites will be advised to take note of the recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee.
3.47 The DCG(I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
3.48 The Ministry will also constitute an expert committee to define policies, lay down guidelines
and SOPs for approval of clinical trials and new drugs.
3.49 This Committee would also examine the issues relating to the minimum number of subjects,
number of sites, their distribution, etc. in clinical trials for the purpose of approval of new drugs
in the country.

24
Further Recommendation
3.50 The Committee notes with trepidation, its instant Recommendation of considerable
import for the health sector in the country, also getting lost in the maze of inactivity which
is all pervading in the final action taken notes of the Ministry. The systemic improvements
suggested by the Committee for pre-approval trials are easily doable, if the Government has
a will to carry them out. Unfortunately, however, apparently due to extraneous
considerations the Government is still contemplating constitution of committees and other
formalities to stall expeditious implementation of these measures for public good. The
Committee also feels that half measures like NDACs being advised to take note of the
Recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee would not suffice, as it would then not
be obligatory upon NDACs to scrupulously adhere to these norms. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should immediately codify all these measures in
the form of mandatory Rules so that the NDACs and all other agencies/bodies are left with
little room for exercising their discretion or their own interpretation of any measure, a
malaise that has, hitherto, wreaked havoc on the health care system of the Country.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.51 A review of the opinions submitted by the experts on various drugs shows that an
overwhelming majority are recommendations based on personal perception without giving any hard
scientific evidence or data. Such opinions are of extremely limited value and merely a formality.
Still worse, there is adequate documentary evidence to come to the conclusion that many opinions
were actually written by the invisible hands of drug manufacturers and experts merely obliged by
putting their signatures. Is the Committee mistaken in coming to the conclusion that all these letters
were collected by interested party from New Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh and Secunderabad and
handed over to office of the DCGI on the same day? If so, it is obvious that the interested party
was in the loop in the entire process of consultation with experts. (Annexure 6).............It is
inconceivable that a letter dated 17-6-2005 from New Delhi will be delivered to the office of DCGI
also in New Delhi after more than two months. The conclusion, as in aforementioned cases, is
obvious. (Para 7.31)
3.52 If the above cases are not enough to prove the apparent nexus that exists between drug
manufacturers and many experts whose opinion matters so much in the decision making process
at the CDSCO, nothing can be more outrageous than clinical trial approval given to the Fixed Dose
Combination of aceclofenac with drotaverine which is not permitted in any developed country of
North America, Europe or Australasia. In this case, vide his letter number 12-298/06-DC dated
12.2.2007, an official of CDSCO advised the manufacturer, Themis Medicare Ltd. not only to
select experts but get their opinions and deliver them to the office of DCGI! No wonder that many
experts gave letters of recommendation in identical language apparently drafted by the interested
drug manufacturer. (Para 7.32)
3.53 In the above case, the Ministry should direct DCGI to conduct an enquiry and take
appropriate action against the official(s) who gave authority to the interested party to select and
obtain expert opinion and finally approv ed the drug. (Para 7.33)
3.54 Such expert opinions in identical language and/or submitted on the same day raise one
question: Are the experts really selected by the staff of CDSCO as mentioned in written submission
by the Ministry? If so how can they, situated thousands of miles away from each other, draft
identically worded letters of recommendation? Is it not reasonable to conclude the names of experts
to be consulted are actually suggested by the relevant drug manufacturers? It has been admitted
that CDSCO does not have a data bank on experts, that there are no guidelines on how experts
should be identified and approached for opinion. (Para 7.34)

25
Action Taken
3.55 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
3.56 The applications for new drugs including FDCs are now examined by the NDACs and
decisions on their approval are taken based on the recommendations of these committees.
3.57 The issues relating to the Fixed Dose Combination of aceclofenac with drotaverine would
be referred to the NDAC for examination and review.
3.58 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has
recommended instituting an enquiry into the matter.
3.59 As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the DCG(I) will constitute an enquiry
committee to investigate into the matter.
Further Recommendation
3.60 The Committee is aghast to note the paralytic inertia gripping the Ministry which is
preventing it from taking action against guilty official(s) of CDSCO and others involved in
proven cases of delinquency and illegality six months should have been more than enough to
not only inquire into the misdeeds of those who had so want only indulged in the above cited
gross irregularity but also sufficed to take exemplary action against them so as to deter
others. The Ministry by still dithering over issuing instructions to NDACs and DCGI has
abundantly proved that it has neither the intention to clean the augean stables of CDSCO nor
any concern for probity and rule of law. Hoping against hope, the Committee expects the
Ministry to atleast even at this late stage take immediate action on these proven cases of
delinquency and irregularities so that a stern message is sent to all concerned that the drug
regulatory mechanism is not up for grabs for perpetuation of unethical and illegal practices.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.61 The Committee is of the view that many actions by experts listed above are clearly unethical
and may be in violation of the Code of Ethics of the Medical Council of India applicable to doctors.
Hence the matter should be referred to MCI for necessary follow up and action. In addition, in
the case of Government employed doctors, the matter must also be taken up with medical colleges/
hospital authorities for suitable action. (Para 7.35)
Action Taken
3.62 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
3.63 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has
recommended instituting an enquiry into the matter. The committee has also recommended laying
down a code of conduct for the members participating in these bodies as also Ethics Committees.
3.64 An expert committee would be constituted to define policies and SOPs for identification of
experts and their participation in these bodies.
3.65 However, as recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry would also refer the
issue to the Medical Council of India for necessary action. For Government employed doctors, the
matter will be brought to the notice of the concerned medical colleges/hospital authorities for
appropriate action.

26
Further Recommendation
3.66 The response of the Ministry is clearly indicative of the fact that it wants to drag
its feet when it comes to punishing the people who have compromised the system over the
years through their sheer illegal activities, which are totally against public interest. It is
incomprehensible as to what is stopping the Ministry from forwarding these proven cases of
gross illegality and proven collusion of the Medical Council of India and the medical
colleges/hospital authorities concerned for appropriate action though more than six months
have elapsed since the Committee brought these cases to the knowledge of the Parliament
and the Government. The Committee, therefore, while expressing its strong displeasure
with the Ministry recommends that these cases be referred to MCI and medical colleges/
hospital authorities concerned within seven days of presentation of this Report to the
Parliament. With a view to expedite action against these errant experts who have indulged
in unethical and illegal practices without any concern for the health and well being of
common people the Committee further desire the Ministry to impress upon MCI and all
other authorities concerned to act against these experts in a highly time bound manner and
report back to the Ministry at the earliest so that the Ministry is able to furnish the
feedback on all these cases to the Parliament within one month of presentation of this
Report to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.67 There is sufficient evidence on record to conclude that there is collusive nexus between
drug manufacturers, some functionaries of CDSCO and some med ical experts. (Para 7.36)
3.68 On a more fundamental issue the Committee has come to the conclusion that when it comes
to approving new drugs, too much is left to the absolute discretion of the CDSCO officials. There
are no well laid down guidelines for determining whether consultation with experts is required.
Thus the decision to seek or not to seek expert opinion on new drugs lies exclusively with the
nonmedical functionaries of CDSCO leaving the doors wide open to the risk of irrational and
incorrect decisions with potential to harm public health apart from the possibility of abuse of
arbitrary discretionary powers. (Para 7.37)
3.69 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that there should be nondiscretionary, well
laid down, written guidelines on the selection process of outside experts with emphasis on expertise
including published research, in the specific therapeutic area or drug or class of drugs. Currently,
the experts are arbitrarily chosen mainly based on their hierarchical position which does not
necessarily correspond to the area or level of expertise. All experts must be made to file the
Conflict of Interest declaration outlining all past and present pecuniary relationships with entities
that may benefit from the recommendations given by such experts. The consulted experts should
be requested to give hard evidence in support of their recommendations. (Para 7.38)
Action Taken
3.70 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
3.71 Now, the applications for new drugs including FDCs are examined by the NDACs and
decisions on their approval are taken based on the recommendations of these committees.
3.72 All members of the NDACs are required to sign a declaration of conflict of interest before
being involved with NDACs.
3.73 The Ministry will also constitute an expert committee to define policies, lay down guidelines
and SOPs for approval of clinical trials and new drugs.

27
3.74 The policies and SOPs for identification of experts would also be formulated.
3.75 The recommendations of the NDACs are being put on the web-site for ensuring
transparency and accountability.
3.76 The DCG(I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
Further Recommendation
3.77 The Committee appreciates that in pursuance of its Recommendation, the
applications for new drugs including FDCs are now being examined by NDACs and decision
on their approvals are taken based on the recommendation of NDACs. Moreover, all
members of NDACs are required to sign a declaration of conflict of interest before being
involved with NDACs. They also appreciate the fact that recommendations of NDACs are
being put on the website to ensure transparency and accountability. The Committee,
however feels that the Ministry has already inordinately delayed constitution of the expert
committee to define policies, lay down guidelines and SOPs for approval of Clinical Trials
and New Drugs. It also feels that the Ministry has equally badly delayed the formulation
of policies and SOPs for identification of experts, as it has not moved beyond mere intent,
in their context during more than six odd months. Since a lot of time has already been
wasted in these two crucial matters the Committee desires the Ministry to constitute the
two committees and recommends the said committees be directed to complete their work in
highly time bound manner and submit their respective reports within a period of one month
of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.78 The Committee is of the view that responsibility needs to be fixed for unlawfully approving
Buclizine, a drug of hardly any consequence to public health in India, more so since it is being
administered to babies/children. At the same time the approval granted should be reviewed in the
light of latest scientific evidence, regulatory status in developed countries, particularly in Belgium,
the country of its origin. (Para 7.41)
Action Taken
3.79 The issues relating to the drug Buclizine would be referred to the NDAC for examination
and review.
3.80 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has
recommended instituting an enquiry into the matter.
3.81 As recommended, the DCG(I) will constitute an enquiry committee to investigate into the
issue.
Further Recommendation
3.82 This is yet another instance where the Ministry has failed to act on a proven case
of gross illegality. Instead after whiling away more than six months, it has still chosen to
take recourse to its favorite ploy of referring the matter for examination and review to
NDAC. As far as culpability part is concerned that has also been staggered indefinitely as
the Ministry has till now only conveyed that DCG (I) will constitute an inquiry committee
to investigate into the issue. The Committee takes serious umbrage over these more than
apparent dilatory tactics being adopted by the Ministry to somehow delay action against the

28
wrongdoers. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its Recommendation that responsibility be
fixed in this case without any further loss of time and the approvals granted be reviewed
in the light of latest scientific evidence regulatory states in developed countries, particularly
in Belgium, the country of its origin, equally quickly.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.83 Letrozole discovered by Novartis, is an anti-cancer drug for use only in postmenopausal
women and is contraindicated (not permitted) to be used in women of reproductive age. If it is
to be used for any other indication except breast cancer, then the drug is categorized as a New
Drug under Indian laws. On 10-04-2007, DCGI approved the use of letrozole for improving
female fertility. The Drugs and Cosmetic Rules require that while approving a drug for use in
females of reproductive age, animal studies are to be done in this specific group. No such studies
were done in India. The innovator also did not conduct such studies abroad because there was
no plan to use letrozole in women of reproductive age. Under Indian rules, Phase II studies
should have been conducted before Phase III since such studies were not conducted anywhere.
Permission to conduct Phase III studies was given without prior Phase II studies. Phase III
clinical trial was conducted on just 55 women by three doctors in private practice while the
minimum requirement as per mandatory Good Clinical Practice (GCP) rules is at least 100. After
approval, the sponsor, Sun Pharmaceuticals did not submit periodic PSURs due every six months
as required by law. No action was taken against the Company in such a sensitive case since
India is the only country where the drug is permitted to be used for female infertility. Post-
marketing data is crucial and critical indetecting adverse effects both in women and babies born
to them if they use letrozole before the onset of pregnancy. Clearly there was a serious lapse
on the part of CDSCO. In the wake of media outcry, in a diversionary move, the DCGI instead
of investigating the allegations of regulatory lapse and taking corrective measures referred the
matter to clinical experts, DTAB etc. on the restricted issue of safety and efficacy. DCGI is
expected to take action against those CDSCO functionaries who colluded with private interests
and got the drug approved in violation of laws. The drug has since been banned by the Ministry
for use in female infertility. (Para 7.42)
3.84 The Committee takes special note of this case of gross violation of the laws of the land
by the CDSCO. First, in approving the drug for use in case of female infertility and thereafter, in
exhibiting overt resistance in taking timely corrective steps despite very strong reasons favouring
immediate suspension of use of letrozole for the said indication. Belatedly, the drug has been
banned for use in female infertility. (Para 7.43)
Action Taken
3.85 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has
recommended instituting an enquiry into the matter.
3.86 As recommended the DCG(I) will constitute an enquiry committee to investigate into the issue.
Further Recommendation
3.87 The Committee find it deeply perturbing as to why the Ministry has failed to take
action in this very open and shut case of impropriety and criminal lapse though more than
six months have elapsed the Committee strongly feel that if perpetrators of such illegalities
and collusive acts which are detrimental to public health are allowed to go scot-free then
the total collapse of an ethical health care system is inevitable. The Committee, therefore,

29
reiterates their Recommendation with all force at their command and desire immediate and
exemplary action against officials of CDSCO who colluded with private interest and got the
drug approved in violation of laws at once and without the delaying instrument of another
inquiry Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.88 The Committee is of the opinion that there must be some very good reasons for Danish
Medicine Agency (Denmark) not to approve a domestically developed drug where an anti-depressant
drug would perhaps be in greater demand as compared to India. Curiously, Deanxit is allowed to
be produced and exported but not allowed to be used in Denmark. (Para 7.45)
3.89 The Committee feels that the DCGI should have gone into the reasons for not marketing the
drug in major developed countries such as United States, Britain, Ireland, Canada, Japan, Australia just
to mention a few. United States alone accounts for half of the global drug market. It is strange that
the manufacturer is concentrating on tiny markets in unregulated or poorly regulated developing
countries like Aruba, Bangladesh, Cyprus, Jordan, Kenya, Myanmar, Pakistan, and Trinidad instead of
countries with far more patients and profits. Many of these developing countries are handicapped due
to lack of competent drug regulatory authorities. Instead of examining and reversing regulatory lapses,
DCGI has referred the matter to an Expert Committee to look at the isolated and restricted issue of
“safety and efficacy” instead of unlawful approval in the first place. (Para 7.46)
3.90 The Committee recommends that in view of the unlawful approval granted to Deanxit, the
matter should be re-visited and re-examined keeping in mind the regulatory status in well developed
countries like Denmark, the country of origin; the United States, Britain, Canada, European Union
and Japan etc. It is important to keep in mind that in Europe, there are two types of marketing
approvals: Community-wide (cleared by European Medicine Agency) and individual regulators of
member nations. EMEA is known to clear drugs after great deal of scrutiny while the competence
and expertise of drug regulatory authorities of individual nations is not uniform and varies greatly
from country to country. (Para 7.47)
Action Taken
3.91 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee. 3.82 Now, the applications for
new drugs including FDCs are examined by the NDACs and decisions on their approval are taken
based on the recommendations of these committees.
3.92 The drug FDC of Flupenthixol and Melitracen, of which the Deanxit is also a brand, is
already under examination in consultation with an expert committee. The expert committee
recommended for conducting Phase N Clinical trial after getting the protocol approved. The
protocol for the trial submitted by the firm is under examination by that expert committee.
3.93 The drug was approved in the country in 1998 and since then it is in the market. It is also
marketed in other countries.
3.94 Since the Hon’ble Committee has raised concern over the manner of approval of the drug
and has recommended that the same needs to be revisited, it has been decided that the
manufacturer of the drug shall be instructed to establish the safety and efficacy of the FDC within
6 months, failing which the drug would be considered for being prohibited for manufacture and
marketing in the country.
Further Recommendation
3.95 In its Fifty-ninth Report in another case study had noted that a drug Deanxit which

30
is marketed in India is allowed to be produced and exported by DMA but not allowed to be
used in Denmark. Opining that there must be some very good reasons for Danish Medicine
Agency (Denmark) not to approve a domestically developed drug where an anti-depressant
drug would perhaps be in greater demand as compared to India.
3.96 The Committee had felt that the DCGI should have gone into the reasons for not
marketing the drug in major developed countries such as United States, Britain, Ireland,
Canada, Japan, Australia just to mention a few. Noting further that instead of examining
and reversing regulatory lapses, DCGI has referred the matter to an Expert Committee to
look at the isolated and restricted issue of “safety and efficacy” instead of unlawful
approval in the first place the Committee had recommended that in view of the unlawful
approval granted to Deanxit, the matter should be revisited and re-examined keeping in
mind the regulatory status in well developed countries like Denmark, the country of origin;
the United States, Britain, Canada, European Union and Japan etc.
3.97 In its final ATNs the Government has stated that now, the applications for new drugs
including FDCs are examined by the NDACs and decisions on their approval are taken based
on the recommendations of these committees.
3.98 The drug FDC of Flupenthixol and Melitracen, of which the Deanxit is also a brand,
is already under examination in consultation with an expert committee. The expert
committee recommended for conducting Phase IV Clinical trial after getting the protocol
approved. The protocol for the trial submitted by the firm is under examination by that
expert committee.
3.99 The drug was approved in the country in 1998 and since then it is in the market.
It is also marketed in other countries. Since the Hon’ble Committee has raised concern
over the manner of approval of the drug and has recommended that the same needs to be
revisited, it has been decided that the manufacturer of the drug shall be instructed to
establish the safety and efficacy of the FDC within 6 months, failing which the drug would
be considered for being prohibited for manufacture and marketing in the country.
3.100 The case of Deanxit conveys a strong whiff of collusion and cover up, briefly put, in
its initial ATN, the Ministry informed the Committee that the matter had been referred to
the 3-member expert committee and hence action would be taken when the recommendation
is received. Surprisingly in its final ATN, there is no mention of any recommendation from
the 3-member expert committee. In order to investigate the matter, the Committee went
into the records of the 3-member expert committee and found a major intriguing
ommission. In its report to the Ministry, the 3-member expert committee had grouped
various cases of wrong doing under heading (a) on pages 4, 13 and 49. However either by
design or default, the case of Deanxit (FDC of flupenthixol and melitracen) identified by the
Committee as a blatant example of unlawful approval was omitted under the group while
other cases were listed. The Committee finds it more intriguing that such an omission was
not noticed by the Ministry.
3.101 The marketing approval granted to Deanxit (the first formulation of the Fixed-Dose
Combination of Flupenthixol and Melitarcen) was patently unlawful as stated in Para 7.44
of the Committee’s Fifty-ninth Report on the following counts:
3.102 Deanxit, though permitted to be manufactured and exported, is not allowed to be
prescribed to patients in Denmark, the country of innovation/origin. Hence permission to
import and manufacture granted by CDSCO was in violation of Rule 30-B of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules.

31
3.103 One of the ingredients, Melitracen, was not approved earlier; hence as per Appendix
VI (a) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules the clinical trials should have been conducted as
per Rule 122 (E) (a). In effect it means clinical trials on each indication on at least 100
patients at 3-4 sites. It was approved for four distinct and different indications. Such trials
were not conducted.
3.104 In its submission to the Committee, the Ministry referred to a vague letter dated
10.08.1998 written by a psychiatrist employed by Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi
directly to the DCGI alluding to some unspecified trial with no details (such as number of
patients enrolled, protocol, results etc.). Mandatory pre-approval clinical trials are sponsored
and conducted by applicant companies and then results submitted to DCGI for marketing
approval. This was a strange case where the purported letter was written by a self-appointed
investigator to the DCGI. The Ministry failed to give an authenticated copy of the letter and
results of the trial. Even if this vague, unsubstantiated letter is accepted as a substitute for
a clinical trial at one site, the same cannot account for trials at 3-4 centres for each
indication. It is clear that marketing approval was given without mandatory trials.
3.105 Deanxit is not allowed for marketing in any of the other advanced countries such as
United States, Britain, EU Community, Canada, Australia and Japan where depression is
more common than India. In the United States the two ingredients, Flupenthixol and
Melitracen are not even individually allowed to be marketed.
3.106 In the ATNs, the Ministry has gone out of the way to inform the Committee that the
drug “is also marketed in other countries,” as if it is a good defence for permitting the use
of the drug in India. The Ministry is advised to read Para 7.44 carefully of the Committee’s
Report where in the Committee has acknowledge that Deanxit is indeed marketed in
countries like Aruba, Cyprus, Jordan, Kenya, Pakistan, Trinidad etc and some other
developing countries which are handicapped by lack of competent drug regulatory system.
3.107 Neither Flupenthixol nor Melitracen is listed in the National List of Essential
Medicines (NLEM) published by the Government of India.
3.108 Notwithstanding this lapse, the 3-member expert committee has indeed stated, “Fixed
Dose Combinations have become a malaise. The rationality of the combinations is not
critically examined. Even where multiple drugs are required for treatment, the FDCs
jeopardize dose adjustment of individual medicines. Convenience and profit seem to have
overtaken service. The requirements for clearance of FDCs should be more stringent –
requiring empirical clinical trial to show advantage of FDC- before their approval.”
3.109 The Committee is amazed that such a crucial recommendation of the 3-member
Expert Committee is not being applied to the instant case.
3.110 If any drug is promoted for unapproved indications, DCGI has the statutory duty to
take action and even cancel marketing approval. The Committee is aghast that no action
was taken against the Danish manufacturer, Lundbeck even when it was openly flouting
Indian laws. Compare the lack of action in India with the United States where for a similar
offence Pfizer had to shell out Rs. 2,300 crores for promoting gabapentin for unapproved
indication.
3.111 Attempt by the Ministry to club Deanxit brand with other subsequent formulations
is also diversionary and misleading. Under Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, a New Drug is
deemed to be a new drug for four years after initial approval. As per records submitted to
the Committee the initial approval was granted to manufacturer of Deanxit. No other
approval was given by CDSCO to any other applicant in the first four years. Other

32
manufacturers launched the drug after four years not by seeking approval from CDSCO but
by obtaining manufacturing licenses from the State Drug Authorities which is perfectly
legal. Hence if initial approval by CDSCO is irregular or unlawful then nothing can stop
other manufacturers from marketing the product. Therefore the focus needs to be squarely
on the first approval.
3.112 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that concrete and exemplary action by the
Ministry on (a) unlawful approval against functionaries of CDSCO (b) reversal of unlawful
approval, (c) unlawful promotion by Lundbeck.
3.113 In the opinion of the Committee it is an open and shut case that needs immediate
action, not promise of prolonged fruitless deliberation designed to delay action. Why should
the people of India consume a questionable drug approved in a questionable manner even
for a day longer, more so when the drug regulator of the innovator country Denmark is not
allowing its use within its jurisdiction but allowing its export to developing countries with
weak or non-existent drug regulation?
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.114 The Committee recommends an enquiry into the said letter. The responsibility should be
fixed and appropriate action taken against the guilty. The Committee should be kept informed on
this case. (Para 7.49)
Action Taken
3.115 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has
recommended instituting an enquiry into the matter.
3.116 As recommended the DCG(I) will constitute an enquiry committee to investigate into the
issue. The Hon’ble Standing Committee would be kept informed on this issue.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.117 The Committee takes special notice of this case of persistent insolence on the part of
CDSCO and hopes that never again shall the DCGI approve drugs in violation of laws, that too
for use in neonates and young children. (Para 7.51)
3.118 The Committee expresses its deep concern, extreme displeasure and disappointment at the
state of affairs as outlined above. The Ministry should ensure that the staff at CDSCO does not
indulge in irregularities in approval process of new drugs that can potentially have adverse effect
on the lives of people. It is difficult to believe that these irregularities on the part of CDSCO were
merely due to oversight or unintentional. Hence all the cases listed above and cases similar to these
should be investigated and responsibility fixed and action taken against erring officials whether
currently in service or retired. (Para 7.52)
Action Taken
3.119 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee and action will be taken as
mentioned in previous recommendations.
3.120 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has
recommended instituting an enquiry into the matter.

33
3.121 The enquiry committee would be constituted by the DCG(I) to investigate into the matters.
3.122 As regard similar other cases, as and when they are brought to the notice, appropriate
action will be taken.
Further Recommendation
3.123 The Committee in its Fifty-ninth Report in another fully documented irregularity of
the Organisation had noted that though as per the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, whenever
there is either an additional formulation ( viz. tablets, solutions, suspensions, injections,
controlled-release, gels, etc.) or proposal to use in additional indications, the drug is deemed
to be a New Drug. But, in a clear case of extreme collusion and breach of this rule an
official of CDSCO though a letter dated February 11, 2000, inspite of additional indications
(burns and wounds, non-healing indolent ulcers, bedsore, mucositis, etc.), conveyed to the
manufacturer that Placenta Extract was not a New Drug and gave permission to promote the
Placenta Extract gel. By including the term ‘etc.’ loopholes were left wide open to add other
indications, which is an unprecedented irregularity and illegality. The collusive element was
so overpowering that the letter of the manufacturer dated February 7, 2000, not only
reached Delhi from Kolkata at breakneck speed, the permission, albeit wrong, was also
granted within four days on February 11, 2000.
3.124 The Committee had therefore, considering the serious dimensions of this violation
recommended an enquiry into the said letter so that responsibility is fixed and appropriate
action is taken against the guilty so that never again did the DCG(I) approve drugs in
violation of laws, that too for use in neonates and young children. Expressing its deep
concern, extreme displeasure and disappointment at the state of affairs the Committee had
asked the Ministry is to ensure that the staff at CDSCO does not indulge in irregularities
in approval process of new drugs that can potentially have adverse effect on the lives of
people and that all the cases listed and cases similar to these should be investigated and
responsibility fixed and action taken against erring officials whether currently in service or
retired.
3.125 In its final ATNs the Government has stated that as mentioned earlier, the Ministry
had constituted a three member expert committee. The expert committee submitted its
report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has recommended instituting an
enquiry into the matter. As recommended the DCG(I) will constitute an enquiry committee
to investigate into the issue. The Hon’ble Standing Committee would be kept informed on
this issue.
3.126 The Committee finds the instant response of the Government clear stonewalling to
protect the guilty. The matter of inquiring into and taking action against CDSCO
functionary who violated the rules to favour the manufacturer by treating a new drug
(Placenta extract) as old drug and permitting the use for additional indications, with
potential risk to patients, is a very simple open and shut case. In any case the 3-member
expert committee instead of straightaway suggesting concrete action has recommended an
enquiry, which the Ministry to its great comfort and convenience has interpreted to mean
forming an “inquiry committee”. Such repetitive references from the Ministry to the 3-
member Expert Committee to another “inquiry committee” would mean further delay in
taking action, if not placing the issue in cold storage. In the opinion of the Committee, this
is one case where no extraordinary investigative skills or legal acumen is required to fix
responsibility and punish the guilty official(s). A rule has been violated, all evidence is on
board and the extraordinary interest of the perpetrator(s) is also clearly visible. What
purposes, other than delaying the judgment day, would a series of inquiries serve is the

34
central message. The Government’s response that the Committee would be kept informed
on this issue is a clear indicator that quick action in this case of blatant violation is not
at all on Government’s mind. The Committee, therefore, reiterates immediate and
conclusive action in this instant case without any further dilly-dallying.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.127 The Committee has noted that there are a very large number of alternative analgesics,
antipyretics in the Indian market. With so many countries banning Analgin, not to mention unlawful
over-promotion by manufacturers, the CDSCO should be directed to re-examine the rationality of
continued marketing of Analgin. (Para 8.4)
Action Taken
3.128 The issue of rationality and continued marketing of Analgin in the country was examined
by DTAB in its 61st meeting held on 24
th July, 2012. The board after deliberations recommended
that the continued marketing of the drug may be examined by expert committee in the context of
present day knowledge while the manufacturers of Analgin may be directed to market the product
giving the full indications approved earlier by DTAB as under:
“Severe pain or pain due to tumor and also for bringing down the temperature in refractory
cases when other antipyretics fail to do so.”
3.129 The board further recommended that the use of all analgesics with special reference to
Analgin should be placed under focused Pharmacovigilance under Pharmacovigilance Programme of
India (PvPI). The safety data so collected should be properly analyzed to take further suitable
action on use of such drugs.
3.130 Based on recommendations of the board, the DCG(I) has issued letters to all State Drug
Controllers on 13.09.2012 requesting them to direct the manufacturers of analgin formulations to
market the drug mentioning the above indications in the package insert I promotional literature of
Analgin formulation.
3.131 Further, as per the recommendations, all analgesic with special reference to analgin have
been placed under focused PvPI.
3.132 The continued marketing ofanalgin will also be referred to NDAC for examination.
3.133 The DCG(l) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
Further Recommendation
3.134 The continued marketing of Analgin, discarded the world over, is a matter of grave
concern for the Committee. Analgin is not listed in the National List of Essential Medicines
(NLEM). Bureaucratic delays, repetitive references from one committee to another can do
nothing but hurt patients.
3.135 The Committee also feels that merely requesting State Drug Authorities to direct
manufacturers to label the drug Analgin as approved by CDSCO without exemplary, penal
action for documented violations is itself an act of negligence. The indications are approved
by CDSCO, not State Drug Authorities. Hence CDSCO should itself take immediate action
for violations.
3.136 Given the near non-existance pharmacovigilance in the country putting Analgin
under so called “focussed pharmacovigilance” is nothing but a dilatory and diversionary

35
move to let the drug be sold in the country to benefit the manufacturer. The Committee,
therefore, desires that a decision be taken on this open and shut case without taking refuge
behind committees after committees within one month of presentation of this Report.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
3.137 It is to be kept in mind that a drug becomes a candidate for withdrawal not only due to
serious side effects but also when safer, more efficacious drugs are launched. Unfortunately, no
attention is being paid to this issue. This principle should apply to all cases and all drugs need to
be evaluated periodically. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
3.138 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee is also of the
view that there should be an adequate system for withdrawal of drugs – with appropriate guidelines
and SOPs, so that unsafe drugs are weeded out in a timely fashion.
3.139 It would be pertinent to mention that most newer drugs are generally found to be more
expensive, while the previous drugs may be less expensive and relatively affordable. Thus, this
would require examination on case-to-case basis.
3.140 The matter would be referred to an expert committee to formulate guidelines, policies and
procedures in this regard.
Further Recommendation
3.141 The Committee is astounded to note the almost U-turn made by the Ministry on this
vital issue. In its initial ATN, the Ministry had taken the stand that; a drug could not be
banned when safer, more efficacious drugs for the same disorder are launched since there
is no such provision in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. There was incidentally no mention
of the matter having been referred to 3-member expert committee.
3.142 In any case the Committee finds no merit in the reason given by the Ministry. Under
current rules, any drug found to be unsafe can be banned under Rule 26-A irrespective of
whether safer substitutes are launched in the market or not. If there is no safer substitute
and the drug is essential or life saving, then obviously it is not possible to ban the drug.
Once a safer substitute is available then nothing stops the Central Government from
invoking Rule 26-A.
3.143 In its final ATN, the Ministry in spite of their own expert committee opining that
there should be an adequate system for withdrawal of drugs has found one more reason not
to ban risky remedies by stating that “most newer drugs are generally found to be more
expensive” The Committee has been given to understand that there is no provision under
Drugs and Cosmetics Rule to take the cost of drugs into consideration while approving or
banning drugs. It does not require a great deal of intelligence to conclude that it is better
to consume a safer drug, even if it is more expensive, than consume a risky drug that
ultimately will be far more costly due to adverse effects.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.144 The Committee is of the view that Section 26A is adequate to deal with the problem of
irrational and/or FDCs not cleared by CDSCO. There is a need to make the process of approving
and banning FDCs more transparent and fair. In general, if an FDC is not approved anywhere in

36
the world, it may not be cleared for use in India unless there is a specific disease or disorder
prevalent in India, or a very specific reason backed by scientific evidence and irrefutable data
applicable specifically to India that justifies the approval of a particular FDC. The Committee
strongly recommends that a clear, transparent policy may be framed for approving FDCs based on
scientific principles. (Para 9.8)
Action Taken
3.145 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Committee.
3.146 Requirements for approval of FDCs are specified in Appendix VI of schedule Y . At present,
all proposals of new fixed dose combinations are examined in consultation with the NDACs.
Decision to approve any FDCs in the country is taken based on the recommendations of these
committees. Further, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has recently issued statutory
direction under section 33P to the State Governments on 1.10.2012 to refrain from granting new
drugs licensing including FDCs without approval of DCG (1).
3.147 The CDSCO would constitute a Committee of experts to lay down policies, guidelines and
procedures to be adopted for approval of FDCs.
3.148 The DCG(I) has been adequately sensitized in this regard.
Further Recommendation
3.149 The Committee has already expressed its views on the directions issued by the Union
Government under Section 33 P to State Governments, previously in this Report. As regards
the intention of the Ministry to constitute another committee of experts to lay down
policies, guidelines and procedures to be adopted for approval of FDCs, the committee
considers it like many other replies of the Government to its other Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-ninth Report, a ploy to waste time and avoid an expedition decision
to curb this rampant and harmful practice. With piles of evidence available locally as well
as in the form of global best practices, the Ministry can do the needful suo motu and
without resorting to this time tested, time consuming device of an expert Committee. The
Committee expects the Ministry to take decisions in the matter accordingly at the soonest
so that the approval of FDCs is regulated by well laid out policies, guidelines and procedures
expeditiously.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.150 The Committee strongly recommends that all such cases should be thoroughly reviewed
in close coordination with State Drug Authorities. Specific procedures may be framed for
approval of brand names. The procedure adopted by the Registrar of Newspapers to avoid
duplication may be worth emulating. As a beginning, a data bank of all branded pharmaceutical
products along with their ingredients should be uploaded on the CDSCO website and regularly
updated. (Para 11.2)
Action Taken
3.151 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has recently issued statutory direction under
section 33P to the State Governments on 01.10.2012 for Issuance of manufacturing license of
drugs in generic names only.
3.152 The Ministry will take initiative to set up data bank with networking with all state drug
controllers.

37
3.153 The DCG(I) has also been adequately sensitized in this regard.
3.154 The CDSCO has already uploaded in its web-site about 85000 brands of drug formulations
as obtained from the State Food and Drug Control Administration (FDCA), Gujarat.
3.155 The State Governments have been advised to initiate immediate action to have data base of
all drugs licensed by them, manufacturers, etc.
Further Recommendation
3.156 The mess created by the uploading of the totally outdated data bank obtained by
CDSCO from its Gujarat counterpart has already been commented upon along with remedial
measures suggested previously in this report and thus requires no reiteration. The
Committee, however, expects from the Ministry to pursue the matter proactively with the
State Governments as also itself work towards setting-up a reliable, effective and real time
database on branded pharmaceutical products without any further loss of time.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.157 In order to scrutinize the compliance of this rule, the Ministry was asked to furnish PSURs
in respect of 42 randomly selected new drugs. Since files in respect of three drugs were reportedly
missing, PSURs should have been supplied for the balance 39 drugs. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that PSURs in respect of only 8 drugs were submitted by the Ministry. The
Committee was informed that 14 drugs though approved were not being marketed or were
launched lately and hence PSURs would be expected later. There was no explanation for not
submitting PSURs in respect of rest of 17 drugs. (Para 12.2)
3.158 Out of 14 drugs that were reported to be either not yet launched or lately launched, the
Committee discovered that, at least, two products (FDC of glucosamine with ibuprofen; and
moxonidine) were indeed in the market for some time and concerned manufacturers should have
submitted PSURs. But the Committee has not been given any explanation for non-submission of
PSURs for these two drugs. (Para 12.3)
Action Taken
3.159 Out of 42 new drugs, the files in respect of 3 drugs were missing. Out of the remaining
39 drugs, the requisite documents have already been furnished to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat in
respect of 23 drugs. The other 16 drugs were reportedly not launched in the market.
3.160 The FDC of glucosamine with ibuprofen was approved in favour of M/s Centaur Pharma
Ltd. on 21.10.2009. As per the letter of the firm dated 22.2.2011, the firm informed that they
propose to launch this FDC In the year 2012 (first quarter) and would comply with the
requirement of submitting the PSUR. In other case, Moxonidine drug was approved in favour of
M/s Solvay Pharma (I) Ltd. On 27.2.2007. The firm vide their letter dated 21.2.2011 informed the
office of DCG(I) that they had not launched the product for marketing in the country.
3.161 It has been decided that the DCG(I) will issue general directions addressed to all the State
Licensing Authorities and the manufacturers stating that in case an applicant/manufacturer fails to
launch their product for marketing in the country within a period of six months from obtaining the
permission/license from CDSCO, the permission /license will be treated as cancelled.
3.162 Further to ensure that the PSURs are submitted by the companies as per the regulatory
requirement, the system is being streamlined and a new cell in CDSCO under the overall charge
of a Deputy Drugs Controller has been set up.

38
Further Recommendation
3.163 The Committee is not at all convinced by the reply of the Government as it hides more
than what it reveals. The letters of the two manufacturers whose cases were pointed out by
the Committee have datelines of 21 and 22 February, 2011 respectively that is more than a
year before the examination of the Committee concluded. The proposal of one of the
manufacturers conveyed through its letter dated 22 February, 2011 schedules the launch of
the FDC in first quarter of 2012, a date which again preceded the culmination of the
examination of the Committee. Thus, the action of the Government on the observation made
by the Committee cannot be termed as irrefutable under any circumstances. The least the
Ministry could have done was to obtain updated information on these two cases not only from
the two manufacturers in question but also through market intelligence. The Committee
expects the Ministry to do so at least now and take further necessary action, accordingly. The
Committee also desires the Ministry to instruct the DGCI to issue the general directive to
state authorities as well as manufacturers about the failure to launch the product within six
months of obtaining permission entailing cancellation of permission/ license forthwith.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.164 The Committee feels that the conventional system of locating side effects through
spontaneous reporting by doctors to either drug companies or drug regulators has been found to
be unsatisfactory. The most effective system is by controlled post-marketing Phase IV studies on
a very large number of patients. In the past decade, all the major adverse effects that led to
banning of drugs were identified in large scale Phase IV trials. The Ministry may wish to consider
the possibility of using this format in the country. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken
3.165 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
3.166 At present, proposals for approval of new drugs are examined in consultation with NDACs.
At the time of approval of new drugs, the applicants are instructed to conduct appropriate
Phase-IV clinical trial as per the recommendation of the committees wherever considered necessary
by the committee. This is in addition to the mandatory requirements of submitting PSURs six
monthly for initial 2 years and annually for another 2 years.
3.167 As mentioned earlier, the Ministry had constituted a three member expert committee. The
expert committee submitted its report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has felt the
need for an adequate system for withdrawal of drugs – with appropriate guidelines and SOPs and
the need for carrying out Phase IV studies to be made mandatory for special situations.
3.168 The issue raised by the Hon’ble Committee will, however, be addressed by an expert
committee while defining the policies, guidelines, procedures etc. for approval of new drugs.
Further Recommendation
3.169 The Committee is disappointed with the non-committal and evasive reply of the
Ministry to the Recommendation. Even after spending more than six months, the Ministry
is almost directionless on several vital aspects of drug regulation in the country and has,
therefore, chosen to prolong decisions by the mechanism of establishing committees even
on matters where decision making is not only within its competence but can be arrived at
right away. While decrying this escapist tendency of the Ministry in strong terms the
Committee desires a categorical response to the adoption of this simple and effective global
best practice within fifteen days of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.

39
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.170 The Committee feels that unless information on marketed drugs is continuously updated,
there is risk of irrational or inappropriate use of medicines putting patients at risk. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that immediate steps need to be taken to address this issue. The CDSCO
should be directed to continuously update monographs based on information from regulatory
authorities the world over . (Para 14.3)
Action Taken
3.171 The Indian Pharmacopeia Commission has published the National Formulary of India (NFI)
2011, the book of reference for the use of clinicians, pharmacists and nurses containing detailed
information about medicines, their dosage, contraindications, etc. The NFI has been put on the
official website of CDSCO so that relevant information reaches the user easily.
3.172 A cell has been created in CDSCO to update the information for appropriate and rational
use of the marketed drugs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.173 The Committee is of the firm opinion that accurate information on drugs for patients is
absolutely essential to prevent inappropriate use more particularly in children, elderly, during
pregnancy and lactation. The Committee recommends that the matter may be looked into to ensure
that consumers have the required information to use medicines safely. Given the widespread
internet connectivity, it is advisable to devise a system where patients can get unbiased information
on drugs at the click of the mouse in any language. (Para 17.3)
Action Taken
3.174 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
3.175 The Indian Pharmacopeia Commission has published the National Formulary of India (NFI)
2011, the book of reference for the use of clinicians, pharmacists and nurses containing detailed
information about medicines, their dosage, contraindications, etc. The NFI has been put on the
official website of CDSCO so that relevant information reaches the user easily.
Further Recommendation (Paras 14.3 and 17.3)
3.176 The Committee is perturbed to note that its concerns and Recommendations have
neither been appreciated nor addressed. CDSCO is supposed to approve monographs/labels
on all formulations and amend/update them periodically as new information becomes
available. The Committee found that changes pertaining to approved drugs are not being
incorporated and hence monographs remain outdated had recommended that changes in
monographs should be made from time to time. At the same time manufacturers need to
be penalized for not keeping CDSCO informed on changes taking place globally as the
manufacturers are generally the first to get information on products in their portfolio.
Besides they are legally obliged to keep CDSCO informed on all changes. Instead of
responding to the Committee’s concern the Ministry has given evasive and irrelevant
information. The Indian Pharmacopoeia is a book of standards and is meant for use by the
pharmaceutical industry and drug testing laboratories. Moreover Indian Pharmacopoeia does
not list all drugs marketed in India because molecules appearing in other Pharmacopoeia
are also sold in the country, not to mention new, recent additions, which do not appear in
any Pharmacopoeia. By the time a new edition appears, lots of changes have already taken

40
place. The Committee had found out during the course of examination of the subject that
so far only 4 editions have appeared in the last 65 years. Similarly, the Committee had
found that the much-touted National Formulary of India (NFI) too has only appeared four
times: 1960, 1966, 1979 and 2011. Such an irregular publication cannot serve the purpose
of keeping prescribers informed of the latest developments. Moreover it lists just about 350
of 900 basic drugs sold in India. Doctors are interested in prescribing information such as
indications, dose, contraindications, precautions, side effects, drug interactions etc. and not
in the standards of testing of drugs. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its instant
Recommendation for implementation with utmost promptitude.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.177 A drug can be categorized ‘Not of Standard Quality’ for a variety of both major and minor
technical reasons such as not stating the name of the pharmacopoeia correctly, problem with
quality of bonding agent, colouring agent, dissolution time, etc. However, there are other more
serious cases, where the active ingredient is significantly less in quantity that can harm patients.
Therefore, this problem needs to be addressed with all the seriousness that it deserves both by
more rigorous checks in procuring bulk drugs (particularly from developing countries with not so
stringent quality checks and export controls) and by in-house quality control by manufacturers or
solving the problem in transportation and/or storage at distribution/retail levels. (Para 15.4)
3.178 By the time a sample is tested, a large number of packs get sold out with undeterminable
injury to patients. There is no effective method of recalling unsold stocks lying in the distribution
network. This cannot be allowed to go on. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken
3.179 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
3.180 Recently, guidelines have been issued on good distribution practices for ensuring the quality
of biological products during all aspects of distribution process.
3.181 Further, to check the GMP facilities of foreign manufacturing sites, overseas inspections of
such sites have started. Six bulk drug manufacturing units in China were inspected in May, 2011.
Registration Certificate and Import License of one unit so inspected, was cancelled.
3.182 Further, in March, 2012, four manufacturing units in China were inspected. In one case,
Registration certificate was cancelled.
3.183 In another case the inspection of the manufacturing facility showed some non-compliance
with the requirements of Schedule M of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. The firm was issued show
cause notice. In reply to the notice, the firm submitted satisfactory compliance report along with
documentary evidences. As the firm initially did not comply with the regulatory requirements, the
Registration Certificate and Import License of the firm was suspended for 15 days to ensure that
the firm will be cautious in future.
3.184 CDSCO has also formulated guidelines on recall and rapid alert system for drugs including
biologicals and vaccines. The same has been uploaded on its web-site.
3.185 CDSCO has started the drug alert system in respect of drugs found to be of not-of-
standard quality, spurious, adulterated etc by central drug testing laboratories.
Further Recommendation
3.186 The Committee is of the firm view that physical inspection of overseas

41
manufacturers of bulk drugs, apart from being cumbersome (serious language problem in
countries like China, Korea, Cuba, Hungary, Poland, documentation, etc.) and expensive
(due to sheer numbers of locations around the globe from Argentina to Turkey and multiple
sites within one country) may not be the best option. A sole inspector cannot undertake
physical inspection during a short visit, lasting a few days. In order to be effective, the
procedure would require a multi-disciplinary team which should have access to the
manufacturing premises and documentation (in English) on GMP without advance notice to
prevent manipulation; A possibility which, given the serious manpower and infrastructure
constraints of CDSCO is next to impossible. It may, therefore, be more practical, cost
effective and beneficial to collect samples of all imported APIs at the port of entry and get
them tested within the country. CDSCO can also insist on certification of good quality from
the Drug Regulatory Authority of the country concerned for each batch of each API being
imported into India. If such drugs are found to be of poor quality, the CDSCO will be in
a better position to take appropriate action including, but not limited to, blacklisting the
overseas manufacturers and taking up the case with the concerned DRA.
In its Fifty-ninth Report, the Committee had stated that the hype on spurious and
counterfeit drugs being produced in India was the handiwork of MNC drug producers aided
and abetted by so-called anti-counterfeit commercial “solution providers.” Spurious and sub-
standard drugs are two entirely different issues and cannot be clubbed. The 3-member
expert committee too has taken the bait by wrongly adding “spurious” to the problem of
sub-standard drugs. The Committee has serious apprehensions that such a factually
incorrect statement from a committee appointed by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare can and will be used to validate the false propaganda unleashed by MNC drug
producers to defame Indian drugs all over the world and hence needs to be rectified at once.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.187 The Committee feels that there should be severe punishment for manufacturing and for
allowing sub-standard drugs to enter the distribution chain. Products with severe deficiencies
should be penalized the same way as producers of spurious drugs by amending rules. There is
also a case to incorporate penal provisions for manufacturing misbranded and adulterated drugs.
(Para 15.6)
Action Taken
3.188 Dealing in spurious drugs has an element of intent whereas the same in respect of
substandard drugs may be for a variety of reasons and may not be intentional.
3.189 However, as per the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, punishment for selling any not-of-
standard quality drug which may cause death or grievous hurt is same as that applicable for
spurious or adulterated drugs causing death or grievous hurt which is imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than 10 years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine
which shall not be less than ten lac rupees or three times the value of the drug confiscated
whichever is more.
3.190 The penal provision for manufacture and sale of misbranded drugs is covered under section
27(d) of the Act.
Further Recommendation
3.191 The Committee is aware of the amendments to Drugs and Cosmetic Rules. The core
issue is implementation. Continuous Government inaction inspite of legal provisions have

42
rendered the entire exercise redundant and useless. Consequently, the market is flooded
with misbranded drugs, which exact a great cost on public health and economy. The
Committee, therefore, not only expects the Ministry to implement the relevant rules more
proactively and with honesty of purpose but also reiterates its Recommendation on
incorporating penal provisions for manufacturing misbranded and adulterated drugs with
alacrity that matter deserves.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.192 The Committee recommends that once a batch of a drug is found to be substandard and
reported to CDSCO, it should issue a press release forthwith and even insert paid advertisements
in the newspapers apart from uploading the information on the CDSCO website. Retail chemists
should be advised to stop selling unsold stocks and return the same to local Drugs Inspectors as
per rules. The Committee understands that at least two State Drug Authorities that of Maharashtra
and Kerala, have taken the initiative to upload information on spurious and sub-standard drugs on
their websites on a monthly basis. These are welcome measures worth emulating by other states
and the Centre. (Para 15.11)
Action Taken
3.193 CDSCO has started the drug alert system in respect of drugs found to be of not-of-
standard quality, spurious, adulterated etc by central drug testing laboratories.
3.194 The Ministry will, however, consider the feasibility of placing advertisements of such cases
regularly in the newspapers.
Further Recommendation
3.195 The Committee notes that to begin with CDSCO has started the drug alert system
in respect of drugs found to be not of standard quality, spurious, adulterated, etc. by central
drug testing laboratories. Furthermore, the Ministry is considering the feasibility of placing
advertisements of such cases regularly in the newspapers. The Committee is convinced that
this is a herculean task, which can be achieved only when the efforts of the Centre and
State Governments are fully synergized. Drug alerts of evaluations by central drug
laboratories though welcome would not take care of this acute problem in entirety as the
state drug laboratories handle major volumes of such evaluations. The Committee,
therefore, desires the Ministry to take up this matter with State Governments on a highly
proactive basis to ensure its early fructification. It also desires early decision by the
Ministry on utilizing newspapers in this task.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
3.196 The Committee would like the Ministry to take appropriate action against the companies that
have advertised the above Schedule H drugs in the lay press. The provisions in the Drugs and
Magic Remedies Act are not stringent enough with the result that manufacturers violate them at
will. It also recommends that apart from giving sharper teeth to the Drugs and Magic Remedies
Act, a provision should also be incorporated in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules to ban such
practices and penalize offenders. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken to
implement these recommendations. (Para 16.2)
Action Taken
3.197 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.

43
3.198 The proposed amendment to prohibit advertisement of Schedule H drugs has been
deliberated and approved in Drugs Consultative Committee (DCC) on 20.7.12 as well as in DTAB
on 24.7.12. The matter is under process.
Further Recommendation
3.199 The Committee notes that the Ministry has proposed an amendment to prohibit
advertisement of Schedule H drugs. The said amendment has been deliberated and approved
by the Drugs Consultative Committee on 20 July, 2012 and by the DTAB four days later on
24 July, 2012. The Committee is, however, pained to note that the matter instead of being
brought to its logical conclusion at the earliest is still under process. Deprecating this
laissez-faire attitude of the Ministry, the Committee desires that all necessary formalities
to formalize the proposed amendment be completed forthwith so that its proper
implementation starts in right earnest without any further delay.
CONCLUSION
3.200 Having said as much about the semblance of action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in its Fifty-ninth Report, the Committee would like to dwell
upon a larger and more fundamental question, the response of the Government or lack of
it in the case of the Fifty-ninth Report has posed before the Parliament and its various
entities. In our present constitutional arrangement the Parliament is mandated with the
sacrosanct responsibility of oversight over the Executive. The Parliamentary Committees
taking a leaf out from this mandate carry out their responsibility of oversight through their
Reports presented to the Parliament from time to time. Their advice in the form of
Recommendations though not mandatory, is invaluable in the sense that they guide the
Government to take remedial measures, for course correction in their various endeavors so
that public good and development proceed on an even keel without being impeded by lack
of professionalism, incompetence, corruption or injustice. The Government, therefore, is
morally bound to heed to the advice of the Parliamentary Committees in national interest
or else justify in a well-reasoned manner, their inaction or reluctance to take action on any
particular Recommendation of the Committee. In the instant case, it is clearly apparent
from the analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations of
Committee that out of 69 Recommendations that were actionable only 19 have been
implemented by the Government in varying degrees. In case of 46 Recommendations the
action taken by Government is only with the intent to delay, obfuscate, stagger
implementation or not implement at all with a view to delay/negate action in proven cases
of wrongdoing. This inspite of the fact that the Government took not the stipulated three
months to take action on Recommendations of Committee but more than six months and
they were afforded not one but an unprecedented two opportunities by the Committee to
implement the Recommendations contained in the Fifty-ninth Report. All this has been
done when CDSCO, which is mandated with the onerous task of directly ensuring health
safety of more than one-sixth of the population of the world has, most unfortunately, not
acquitted itself well, both, at professional and ethical planes. The Committee considers this
highly regrettable and with extreme pain and anguish is constrained to bring these facts on
record.

44
44
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
4.1 From an analysis of the above facts, the Committee concludes that shortcomings witnessed
in respect of coordination with and between the States as also in implementation of applicable
legislations in the States are primarily an offshoot of inadequacies in manpower and infrastructure
in the States. Strengthening the regulatory mechanism in the States will remain a far cry unless
these infirmities are taken care of. (Para 4.5)
4.2 Given the lack of adequate resources in the States it would be unrealistic to expect them
to improve the infrastructure and increase manpower without Central Assistance for strengthening
drug control system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare should work out a fully centrally sponsored scheme for the purpose so that the State Drug
Regulatory Authorities do not continue to suffer from lack of infrastructure and manpower
anymore. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the initiatives taken by the Ministry in this
regard. (Para 4.6)
Action Taken
4.3 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee and envisages
strengthening of the States’ drug regulatory system during the Twelfth Five Year Plan through a
suitable scheme.
Further Recommendation
4.4 The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted this Recommendation of the
Committee and in pursuance, thereof, intends to strengthen the States drug regulatory
system during the Twelfth Five Year Plan through a suitable scheme. With one year of the
Twelfth Plan almost gone by and the plan yet to be finalized, the Committee feels greatly
concerned by the continued delay in the requisite assistance reaching the State drug
regulation mechanisms. It, therefore, desires the Ministry to make expeditious efforts to
sew up the proposed Scheme and start its implementation proper at least from the Second
Fiscal of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the exact
contours of the proposed Scheme as soon as the necessary permissions/approvals in this
regard, are obtained by the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
4.5 The Committee agrees that the capacity-building of the Central Drugs Testing Laboratories
is the need of the hour. In this era of newer innovations coming up at rapid pace, equipping the
Drug Testing Laboratories with the high-end sophisticated equipments is very essential. However,
the Committee is aware that monitoring the quality of drugs is primarily the responsibility of the
State Drugs Authorities, supplemented by CDSCO, which play a major role in collection of samples
and testing them. Without manpower augmentation and upgradation of State Drugs Testing
Laboratories, the objective of ensuring availability of quality drugs to the public cannot be realized.

45
The Committee, therefore, recommends strengthening of both Central and State Drug Testing
Laboratories. (Para 5.11)
Action Taken
4.6 The Ministry agrees with the observations of the Committee. The Ministry would take up
the matter with the Department of Expenditure about the necessity of augmenting the resources of
the central jobs and consider creation of more posts. The strengthening of the States’ drugs
regulatory systems, including the upgradation of the State Labs would also be facilitated during the
Twelfth Plan period.
Further Recommendation
4.7 The Committee notes that the Ministry intends to take up the matter of
augmentation of resources of the Central Labs and creation of more posts with the
Department of Expenditure. The upgradation of States Laboratories would also be facilitated
during the of Twelfth Plan period. The Committee is of the view that in the present state
of availability of resources it is easier said than done to secure the finances required for
the aforementioned purposes. Keeping in view the fact that the upgradation of Central and
State Drug Labs would help immensely in ensuring quality drugs for the general public the
Committee exhort the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to make all efforts to secure
the requisite funds for the purpose in the Demand for Grants (2013-14) so that this much
delayed action is not staggered any further. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
results of the efforts of the Ministry at the soonest.
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION
4.8 The Committee is extremely anxious on both counts: such hugely costly imported drugs
losing their potency before use and the possibility of fakes entering the chain. It is strange that
multinational drug companies that have well-staffed marketing offices in India, instead of importing
drugs from their overseas affiliates and selling them are using traders to handle this activity. Apart
from risk to patients, there is leakage of revenue to income tax. While the promotional expenses
on imported formulations are being paid by the Indian branch of MNCs thus reducing income tax
liability, there is no corresponding income since traders are paying directly to overseas offices of
MNCs. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that in cases where MNCs have offices
in India, traders are not permitted to import formulations of such companies. The Committee would
like to be kept informed of the steps taken on this issue. (Para 15.9)
Action Taken
4.9 The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee.
4.10 Ministry has referred the matter to Department of Revenue to look into the issues raised
by the Hon’ble Committee and give its advice.
Further Recommendation
4.11 The Committee feels that the Ministry has very rightly referred this vexed issue to
the Department of Revenue in the Ministry of Finance for its advice. Since the continued
operations of such kind are a huge drain on the country’s resources in the form of Income
Tax avoidance apart from the risk to the quality of these drugs and possibility of fakes
entering the market due to these operations, the Committee desires the Ministry to follow-
up the matter with the Department of Revenue proactively and take further necessary
corrective action with utmost urgency.

46
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee takes note of various steps initiated by the Government and action
suggested on the Recommendations contained in its Fifty-ninth Report. It is, however,
hugely disappointed to observe that inspite of the Government being afforded another
opportunity to furnish conclusive responses on the various Recommendations of the
Committee, has once again chosen to come up with half measures, vague and dilatory
responses to say the least. As the subsequent analysis of the Committee will bear out that
general agreement of the Government with the Recommendations of the Committee is
mere platitude. The Government has done nothing concrete or conclusive even for the
Recommendations and findings of the Committee, which directly concern the safety, and
health of crores of our countrymen. The Preliminary Submissions, as is evident from its
plain reading only, confirms the intent of the Government in staggering decisions and action
on vital matters either by way of referring matters to committees after committees or
evolving time-consuming policies. The Committee deprecates this tendency of the
Government in strongest terms. (Para 6)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government has at last formulated
a Mission Statement, which is in consonance with the mandate of CDSCO. The Committee
expects the Government to move beyond the formulation stage and formally implement this
Mission Statement in letter and in spirit. (Para 1.5)
The Committee notes that the Government, albeit belatedly, has now started
invoking Rule 33P to issue directions to the State Governments in connection with the
implementation of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act and Rules. It has in pursuance of the
Recommendation of the Committee issued statutory directions to State Governments on
October 1, 2012 under Rule 33P on two issues. The Committee while appreciating the action
taken by the Government on its Recommendation feels that had the Government shown
similar alacrity in resorting to Rule 33P in the past, things would not have come to such
a sorry pass. It, therefore, considers the continued inaction of the Government and
reluctance to resort to Rule 33 P in the past as inexplicable. (Para 1.16)
The Committee is happy to note that finally pragmatism and concern for public good has
prevailed and the Ministry has decided to suspend marketing approval of all drugs prohibited
for sale in the US, UK, EU, Australia, Japan and Canada for safety reasons. The Committee is
of the firm conviction that drugs not approved for use or approved for extremely restricted use
in countries with robust regulation should also be brought under the purview as has been done
by the World Health Organisation. It is a well-known fact that drug manufacturers simply do
not submit applications for the approval of new drugs to robust regulators to avoid rejection by
other agencies/countries. It is precisely for this reason that several manufacturers, in spite of
the huge potential of marketing drugs in the US, avoid entering the US market. As once a drug
is rejected in the US, it becomes highly impossible to get approval even in countries with poor
drug regulation. The Committee is also confident that now when the Ministry has adopted,
albeit, belatedly this global best practice in drug regulation, it would immediately apply it on two
burning cases viz. Analgin and Buclizine. (Para 1.21)
Furthermore as this salutary mechanism has been put in place in India, the
Committee going a step further would also like the CDSCO to mandatorily go into the
46

47
regulatory status of drugs in countries with robust regulation. And any drug which is
relevant to the needs of the countries like the US, Canada, UK, EU, Australia and Japan,
if not cleared there should be subjected to intense scrutiny both when it is being considered
for approval as also when their continued marketing is being reviewed. The Committee
would appreciate a decision in the matter within fifteen days of presentation of this Report
to the Parliament. (Parat 1.22)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has finally veered towards
the idea of constituting committees with experts from across the country. The
Recommendation of the Committee was basically to highlight that the Delhi centric
composition of these committees was depriving them of the sage advice and expertise of the
immense talent present in government medical colleges spread across the country. In this
age of specialization and super specialization in various disciplines and sub disciplines of
medical science it is, in any case, not very sensible to confuse expertise with hierarchy.
(Para 1.27)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has appreciated the nuances of
this recommendation of far reaching import and decided to implement it. It would, however,
like the Ministry to take immediate steps to commence the implementation proper of this
measure to derive its maximum benefit for the general public without any further loss of
time. (Para 1.30)
The Committee derives satisfaction from the fact that at last in pursuance of its
Recommendation the issue of manufacturing licenses to unauthorized FDCs has been centre
staged after more than eleven years and discussed in the Drugs Consultative Committee
meeting held on 20 July, 2012. It further notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has
issued statutory direction under Section 33P to State Governments on 1 October, 2012 to
refrain from granting drug licenses including FDCs without the approval of DCG (I). The
Ministry has also indicated its intention to take action against the 294 FDCs which are a
subject of litigation in Madras High Court based on the outcome of the case. Furthermore,
in regard to FDCs licensed by the State Authorities before 1 October, 2012, the State
Authorities have been asked to direct the manufacturer concerned to prove safety and
efficacy of such FDCs before the CDSCO within a period of 18 months or invite prohibition
for manufacture and marketing. The Committee feels that 18 months is too long a period
for the purpose of proving efficacy and safety of these products. As in the eventuality of
these being harmful or less advantageous to health and well being of public can cause
incalculable damage in this long interregnum. The Committee therefore strongly
recommends that this period should be curtailed to nine month i.e. up to 30 June, 2013
without fail. (Para 1.41)
The Committee notes that to begin with the Ministry has formed twelve New Drug
Advisory Committees (NDAC) consisting of ten members each. These 120 experts have been
drawn from twenty institutions. Given the fact that the country has 135 government medical
colleges, the Committee finds this composition of NDACs not at all representative of the
vast pool of expertise available countrywide. However, taking the assurance of the Ministry
about broad basing of NDACs on face value, the Committee is confident that the Ministry
will give due representation to experts from different Government medical colleges when
the NDACs are constituted next. (Para 1.46)
The Committee notes that in pursuance of its Recommendation, applicants who have
been granted approvals of new drugs have been instructed formally on 13 September, 2012
to submit India specific PSUR in the format specified in the rules or risk suspension/
cancellation of the marketing approval. The Committee is happy with this step in the right

48
direction. It, however, cautions the Ministry to merely not rest with the issue of
instructions but also monitor and follow up vigorously the compliance of these instructions
by the manufacturers so as to ensure that they do not remain restricted merely on paper.
(Para 1.52)
The Committee is really dismayed by this casual attitude of the Government as it
strongly feels all these actions only involve routine application of mind and could have been
completed immediately after the Recommendations of the Committee were conveyed to the
Government. The Committee, therefore, feels that enough time has been wasted by the
Government in extending assurances in the matter and they should now complete all action
required in this context including preparation of policies and standard operating procedures
within one month of presentation of this  Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.4)
The Committee finds the instant reply of the Government yet another instance of
delaying tactics. If the Government agrees with this Recommendation of the Committee
what has stopped it from implementing it during last so many months is the moot point.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its Recommendation for immediate compliance by the
Government. (Para 3.7)
The Committee notes that the modifications carried out previously by the
Government in the qualification and recruitment rules for the post of DCG (I) are a matter
of litigation. In any case these modified qualifications and rules do not address the concerns
of the Committee to any extent whatsoever. The Committee also notes that unfortunately
and as in the case of several of its other Recommendations, the Government has merely
decided to setup an expert committee which has been recommended by the previously
setup three member expert committee, referred to earlier in this Report, to lay down
the qualifications, experience, job description, powers and responsibilities for the post of
DCG (I) in consultation with the Ministry of Law. The proposed committee would also review
these issues relating to other senior level positions in the Organization. (Para 3.16)
The Committee derives no solace from this very open-ended response of the
Government. Nothing tangible has been done by the Government in the direction of
implementing this Recommendation of the Committee. The Committee understands that the
matter is sub-judice in the context of the modifications carried out by the Government
previously in the qualifications and recruitment rules for the post of DCG(I). The
Committee is certain that this situation does not inhibit the Government from carrying out
all necessary activities including the formation of an expert committee for and in
connection with the implementation of the instant Recommendation of the Committee. It,
therefore, considers the delay by the Government in constitution of an expert committee,
as also other preparatory action, as unpardonable and desires that the same may be
completed within a month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.17)
The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Government in
consonance with its instant Recommendation. As a test case they also accessed the CDSCO
website with a view to evaluate the data regarding 85,000 brands of drugs that have been
uploaded on the website by the Ministry after obtaining the same from Food and Drug
Control Administration, Gujarat. To their utter surprise, they could locate only 65,500 odd
formulations on the site. They also found several banned drugs on the site; Drugs, which
have been discontinued and are generally known to be so to the public at large also featured
there. The Committee also noted a great degree of variance in the prices of some of the
generally known drugs as reflected on the website and as prevalent in the market. To sum
up, the Government has undertaken this measure in extreme hurry and in a very
unprofessional manner, without even bothering about the serious consequences it may have

49
in prescription procedures and also in financial terms on the poor hapless patients. The
Committee while strongly deprecating this action of the Ministry recommends that the said
data be immediately removed from the website of CDSCO so as to prevent any further
dissemination of wrong and archaic information about drugs, many of which may have life-
saving/threatening implications. It also recommends that since the data base is a critical
requirement for information generation, the information received from Gujarat authorities
be updated on war footing and put up on the website of CDSCO within a month of the
presentation of this Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.23)
The Committee finds it incomprehensible as to why the final reply of the
Government fails to mention some of the concrete actions in this regard mentioned in the
first action taken reply. The Committee, therefore, desires a detailed explanatory note in
the matter from the Ministry bringing out the exact position within one month of
presentation of this Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.28)
The Committee finds the action taken reply of the Ministry on this very important
aspect highly unsatisfactory. Even after the passage of several months these drugs continue
to be marketed with impunity though their exact effect, harmful or otherwise, is yet to be
ascertained. The Government without caring a bit about the ramifications is still
contemplating referring the issues related to continued marketing of these drugs and
updating of their product monographs in the light of recent knowledge and regulatory
changes overseas to NDAC for examination and review. The continued inaction of the
Government on this vital matter of public health needs to be deprecated in strongest terms.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should come out of its contemplation
mode and take action as recommended by the Committee in the context of these three
drugs without any further loss of time. (Para 3.31)
The Committee is shocked to note this dilly-dallying by the Ministry on a matter,
which could be affecting lives of lakhs of people in the country who are consuming these
drugs. The Ministry agrees with Committee’s viewpoint about review of approvals to ensure
safety of patients, fair play, transparency and accountability, but instead of taking strict and
immediate action in all these proven cases of delinquency and omission and commission, it
still continues to be in a state of profound procrastination and wants to refer the issues
relating to continued marketing of these drugs and updating of their product monographs
in the light of recent knowledge and regulatory changes overseas to the NDACs for
examination and review. The continued inaction on the part of the Ministry on this serious
matter almost borders on collusion with an intention to save the guilty. Committees after
committee are being constituted to postpone the day of reckoning of the guilty people. On
another plane this inaction which has led to unhindered marketing of these drugs with
unknown and unspecified risks to the unsuspecting people who are consuming them
amounts to a serious violation of human rights of the hapless patients. While condemning
this continued inaction of the Ministry, the Committee recommends immediate and
conclusive action on this Recommendation of the Committee without indulging into the
charade of having a plethora of committees after committee to stall a decision in the
matter. (Para 3.39)
This is yet another instance where the Ministry inspite of appreciating the serious
problem the continued marketing of these 33 drugs may pose to the Indian patients has
chosen to take no action to resolve it. Even after a lapse of more than seven months and
with virtually nothing concrete having been suggested by the three-member expert
committee on this contentious matter, the Government intends to delay a decision by
referring it to yet another committee. These tactics have been, as stated at several places
in this Report, resorted to by the Government to delay indefinitely the decisions and

50
consequent actions that would be required to be taken against several officials and non-
officials who have indulged in rampant acts of omission and commission while approving
these drugs in gross violation of the law of the land. The Committee takes strong objection
to these dilatory tactics and recommends immediate decision on all these proven gross
violations lest the health of the people is compromised irrevocably. (Para 3.42)
The Committee notes with trepidation, its instant Recommendation of considerable
import for the health sector in the country, also getting lost in the maze of inactivity which
is all pervading in the final action taken notes of the Ministry. The systemic improvements
suggested by the Committee for pre-approval trials are easily doable, if the government has
a will to carry them out. Unfortunately, however, apparently due to extraneous
considerations the Government is still contemplating constitution of committees and other
formalities to stall expeditious implementation of these measures for public good. The
Committee also feels that half measures like NDACs being advised to take note of the
Recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee would not suffice, as it would then not
be obligatory upon NDACs to scrupulously adhere to these norms. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should immediately codify all these measures in
the form of mandatory Rules so that the NDACs and all other agencies/bodies are left with
little room for exercising their discretion or their own interpretation of any measure, a
malaise that has, hitherto, wreaked havoc on the health care system of the Country.
(Para 3.50)
The Committee is aghast to note the paralytic inertia gripping the Ministry which is
preventing it from taking action against guilty official(s) of CDSCO and others involved in
proven cases of delinquency and illegality six months should have been more than enough
to not only inquire into the misdeeds of those who had so wantonly indulged in the above
cited gross irregularity but also sufficed to take exemplary action against them so as to
deter others. The Ministry by still dithering over issuing instructions to NDACs and DCGI
has abundantly proved that it has neither the intention to clean the augean stables of
CDSCO nor any concern for probity and rule of law. Hoping against hope, the Committee
expects the Ministry to atleast even at this late stage take immediate action on these
proven cases of delinquency and irregularities so that a stern message is sent to all
concerned that the drug regulatory mechanism is not up for grabs for perpetuation of
unethical and illegal practices. (Para 3.60)
The response of the Ministry is clearly indicative of the fact that it wants to drag
its feet when it comes to punishing the people who have compromised the system over the
years through their sheer illegal activities, which are totally against public interest. It is
incomprehensible as to what is stopping the Ministry from forwarding these proven cases of
gross illegality and proven collusion of the Medical Council of India and the medical
colleges/hospital authorities concerned for appropriate action though more than six months
have elapsed since the Committee brought these cases to the knowledge of the Parliament
and the Government. The Committee, therefore, while expressing its strong displeasure
with the Ministry recommends that these cases be referred to MCI and medical colleges/
hospital authorities concerned within seven days of presentation of this Report to the
Parliament. With a view to expedite action against these errant experts who have indulged
in unethical and illegal practices without any concern for the health and well being of
common people the Committee further desire the Ministry to impress upon MCI and all
other authorities concerned to act against these experts in a highly time bound manner and
report back to the Ministry at the earliest so that the Ministry is able to furnish the
feedback on all these cases to the Parliament within one month of presentation of this
Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.66)

51
The Committee appreciates that in pursuance of its Recommendation, the
applications for new drugs including FDCs are now being examined by NDACs and decision
on their approvals are taken based on the recommendation of NDACs. Moreover, all
members of NDACs are required to sign a declaration of conflict of interest before being
involved with NDACs. They also appreciate the fact that recommendations of NDACs are
being put on the website to ensure transparency and accountability. The Committee,
however feels that the Ministry has already inordinately delayed constitution of the expert
committee to define policies, lay down guidelines and SOPs for approval of Clinical Trials
and New Drugs. It also feels that the Ministry has equally badly delayed the formulation
of policies and SOPs for identification of experts, as it has not moved beyond mere intent,
in their context during more than six odd months. Since a lot of time has already been
wasted in these two crucial matters the Committee desires the Ministry to constitute the
two committees and recommends the said committees be directed to complete their work in
highly time bound manner and submit their respective reports within a period of one month
of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.77)
This is yet another instance where the Ministry has failed to act on a proven case
of gross illegality. Instead after whiling away more than six months, it has still chosen to
take recourse to its favorite ploy of referring the matter for examination and review to
NDAC. As far as culpability part is concerned that has also been staggered indefinitely as
the Ministry has till now only conveyed that DCG (I) will constitute an inquiry committee
to investigate into the issue. The Committee takes serious umbrage over these more than
apparent dilatory tactics being adopted by the Ministry to somehow delay action against the
wrongdoers. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its Recommendation that responsibility be
fixed in this case without any further loss of time and the approvals granted be reviewed
in the light of latest scientific evidence regulatory states in developed countries, particularly
in Belgium, the country of its origin, equally quickly. (Para 3.82)
The Committee find it deeply perturbing as to why the Ministry has failed to take
action in this very open and shut case of impropriety and criminal lapse though more than
six months have elapsed the Committee strongly feel that if perpetrators of such illegalities
and collusive acts which are detrimental to public health are allowed to go scot-free then
the total collapse of an ethical health care system is inevitable. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates their Recommendation with all force at their command and desire immediate and
exemplary action against officials of CDSCO who colluded with private interest and got the
drug approved in violation of laws at once and without the delaying instrument of another
inquiry committee. (Para 3.87)
In its Fifty-ninth Report in another case study had noted that a drug Deanxit which
is marketed in India is allowed to be produced and exported by DMA but not allowed to be
used in Denmark. Opining that there must be some very good reasons for Danish Medicine
Agency (Denmark) not to approve a domestically developed drug where an anti-depressant
drug would perhaps be in greater demand as compared to India. (Para 3.95)
The Committee had felt that the DCGI should have gone into the reasons for not
marketing the drug in major developed countries such as United States, Britain, Ireland,
Canada, Japan, Australia just to mention a few. Noting further that instead of examining
and reversing regulatory lapses, DCGI has referred the matter to an Expert Committee to
look at the isolated and restricted issue of “safety and efficacy” instead of unlawful
approval in the first place the Committee had recommended that in view of the unlawful
approval granted to Deanxit, the matter should be re-visited and re-examined keeping in
mind the regulatory status in well developed countries like Denmark, the country of origin;
the United States, Britain, Canada, European Union and Japan etc. (Para 3.96)

52
In its final ATNs the Government has stated that now, the applications for new drugs
including FDCs are examined by the NDACs and decisions on their approval are taken based
on the recommendations of these committees. (Para 3.97)
The drug FDC of Flupenthixol and Melitracen, of which the Deanxit is also a brand,
is already under examination in consultation with an expert committee. The expert
committee recommended for conducting Phase IV Clinical trial after getting the protocol
approved. The protocol for the trial submitted by the firm is under examination by that
expert committee. (Para 3.98)
The drug was approved in the country in 1998 and since then it is in the market. It
is also marketed in other countries. Since the Hon’ble Committee has raised concern over the
manner of approval of the drug and has recommended that the same needs to be revisited,
it has been decided that the manufacturer of the drug shall be instructed to establish the
safety and efficacy of the FDC within 6 months, failing which the drug would be considered
for being prohibited for manufacture and marketing in the country. (Para 3.99)
The case of Deanxit conveys a strong whiff of collusion and cover up, briefly put, in
its initial ATN, the Ministry informed the Committee that the matter had been referred to
the 3-member expert committee and hence action would be taken when the recommendation
is received. Surprisingly in its final ATN, there is no mention of any recommendation from
the 3-member expert committee. In order to investigate the matter, the Committee went
into the records of the 3-member expert committee and found a major intriguing
ommission. In its report to the Ministry, the 3-member expert committee had grouped
various cases of wrong doing under heading (a) on pages 4, 13 and 49. However either by
design or default, the case of Deanxit (FDC of flupenthixol and melitracen) identified by the
Committee as a blatant example of unlawful approval was omitted under the group while
other cases were listed. The Committee finds it more intriguing that such an omission was
not noticed by the Ministry. (Para 3.100)
The marketing approval granted to Deanxit (the first formulation of the Fixed-Dose
Combination of Flupenthixol and Melitarcen) was patently unlawful as stated in Para 7.44
of the Committee’s Fifty-ninth Report on the following counts. (Para 3.101)
Deanxit, though permitted to be manufactured and exported, is not allowed to be
prescribed to patients in Denmark, the country of innovation/origin. Hence permission to
import and manufacture granted by CDSCO was in violation of Rule 30-B of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules. (Para 3.102)
One of the ingredients, Melitracen, was not approved earlier; hence as per
Appendix VI (a) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules the clinical trials should have been
conducted as per Rule 122 (E) (a). In effect it means clinical trials on each indication on
at least 100 patients at 3-4 sites. It was approved for four distinct and different indications.
Such trials were not conducted. (Para 3.103)
In its submission to the Committee, the Ministry referred to a vague letter dated
10.08.1998 written by a psychiatrist employed by Lady Hardinge Medical College, New
Delhi directly to the DCGI alluding to some unspecified trial with no details (such as
number of patients enrolled, protocol, results etc.). Mandatory pre-approval clinical trials
are sponsored and conducted by applicant companies and then results submitted to DCGI
for marketing approval. This was a strange case where the purported letter was written
by a self-appointed investigator to the DCGI. The Ministry failed to give an authenticated
copy of the letter and results of the trial. Even if this vague, unsubstantiated letter is
accepted as a substitute for a clinical trial at one site, the same cannot account for trials

53
at 3-4 centres for each indication. It is clear that marketing approval was given without
mandatory trials. (Para 3.104)
Deanxit is not allowed for marketing in any of the other advanced countries such as
United States, Britain, EU Community, Canada, Australia and Japan where depression is
more common than India. In the United States the two ingredients, Flupenthixol and
Melitracen are not even individually allowed to be marketed. (Para 3.105)
In the ATNs, the Ministry has gone out of the way to inform the Committee that the
drug “is also marketed in other countries,” as if it is a good defence for permitting the use
of the drug in India. The Ministry is advised to read Para 7.44 carefully of the Committee’s
Report where in the Committee has acknowledge that Deanxit is indeed marketed in
countries like Aruba, Cyprus, Jordan, Kenya, Pakistan, Trinidad etc. and some other
developing countries which are handicapped by lack of competent drug regulatory system.
(Para 3.106)
Neither Flupenthixol nor Melitracen is listed in the National List of Essential
Medicines (NLEM) published by the Government of lndia. (Para 3.107)
Notwithstanding this lapse, the 3-member expert committee has indeed stated, “Fixed
Dose Combinations have become a malaise. The rationality of the combinations is not critically
examined. Even where multiple drugs are required for treatment, the FDCs jeopardize dose
adjustment of individual medicines. Convenience and profit seem to have overtaken service.
The requirements for clearance of FDCs should be more stringent - requiring empirical clinical
trial to show advantage of FDC- before their approval.” (Para 3.108)
The Committee is amazed that such a crucial recommendation of the 3-member
Expert Committee is not being applied to the instant case. (Para 3.109)
If any drug is promoted for unapproved indications, DCGI has the statutory duty to
take action and even cancel marketing approval. The Committee is aghast that no action
was taken against the Danish manufacturer, Lundbeck even when it was openly flouting
Indian laws. Compare the lack of action in India with the United States where for a similar
offence PfiZer had to shell out Rs. 2,300 crores for promoting gabapentin for unapproved
indication. (Para 3.110)
Attempt by the Ministry to club Deanxit brand with other subsequent formulations
is also diversionary and misleading. Under Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, a New Drug is
deemed to be a new drug for four years after initial approval. As per records submitted to
the Committee the initial approval was granted to manufacturer of Deanxit. No other
approval was given by CDSCO to any other applicant in the first four years. Other
manufacturers launched the drug after four years not by seeking approval from CDSCO but
by obtaining manufacturing licenses from the State Drug Authorities which is perfectly
legal. Hence if initial approval by CDSCO is irregular or unlawful then nothing can stop
other manufacturers from marketing the product. Therefore the focus needs to be squarely
on the first approval. (Para 3.111)
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that concrete and exemplary action by the
Ministry on (a) unlawful approval against functionaries of CDSCO (b) reversal of unlawful
approval, (c) unlawful promotion by Lundbeck. (Para 3.112)
In the opinion of the Committee it is an open and shut case that needs immediate
action, not promise of prolonged fruitless deliberation designed to delay action. Why should
the people of India consume a questionable drug approved in a questionable manner even
for a day longer, more so when the drug regulator of the innovator country Denmark is not

54
allowing its use within its jurisdiction but allowing its export to developing countries with
weak or non-existent drug regulation? (Para 3.113)
The Committee in its Fifty-ninth Report in another fully documented irregularity of
the Organisation had noted that though as per the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, whenever
there is either an additional formulation ( viz. tablets, solutions, suspensions, injections,
controlled-release, gels, etc.) or proposal to use in additional indications, the drug is deemed
to be a New Drug. But, in a clear case of extreme collusion and breach of this rule an
official of CDSCO though a letter dated February 11, 2000, inspite of additional indications
(burns and wounds, non-healing indolent ulcers, bedsore, mucositis, etc.), conveyed to the
manufacturer that Placenta Extract was not a New Drug and gave permission to promote the
Placenta Extract gel. By including the term ‘etc.’ loopholes were left wide open to add other
indications, which is an unprecedented irregularity and illegality. The collusive element was
so overpowering that the letter of the manufacturer dated February 7, 2000, not only
reached Delhi from Kolkata at breakneck speed, the permission, albeit wrong, was also
granted within four days on February 11, 2000. (Para 3.123)
The Committee had therefore, considering the serious dimensions of this violation
recommended an enquiry into the said letter so that responsibility is fixed and appropriate
action is taken against the guilty so that never again did the DCG(I) approve drugs in
violation of laws, that too for use in neonates and young children. Expressing its deep
concern, extreme displeasure and disappointment at the state of affairs the Committee had
asked the Ministry is to ensure that the staff at CDSCO does not indulge in irregularities
in approval process of new drugs that can potentially have adverse effect on the lives of
people and that all the cases listed and cases similar to these should be investigated and
responsibility fixed and action taken against erring officials whether currently in service or
retired. (Para 3.124)
In its final ATNs the Government has stated that as mentioned earlier, the Ministry
had constituted a three member expert committee. The expert committee submitted its
report to the Ministry on 22.11.2012. The committee has recommended instituting an
enquiry into the matter. As recommended the DCG(I) will constitute an enquiry committee
to investigate into the issue. The Hon’ble Standing Committee would be kept informed on
this issue. (Para 3.125)
The Committee finds the instant response of the Government clear stonewalling to
protect the guilty. The matter of inquiring into and taking action against CDSCO
functionary who violated the rules to favour the manufacturer by treating a new drug
(Placenta extract) as old drug and permitting the use for additional indications, with
potential risk to patients, is a very simple open and shut case. In any case the 3-member
expert committee instead of straightaway suggesting concrete action has recommended an
enquiry, which the Ministry to its great comfort and convenience has interpreted to mean
forming an “inquiry committee”. Such repetitive references from the Ministry to the
3-member Expert Committee to another “inquiry committee” would mean further delay in
taking action, if not placing the issue in cold storage. In the opinion of the Committee, this
is one case where no extraordinary investigative skills or legal acumen is required to fix
responsibility and punish the guilty official(s). A rule has been violated, all evidence is on
board and the extraordinary interest of the perpetrator(s) is also clearly visible. What
purposes, other than delaying the judgment day, would a series of inquiries serve is the
central message. The Government’s response that the Committee would be kept informed
on this issue is a clear indicator that quick action in this case of blatant violation is not
at all on Government’s mind. The Committee, therefore, reiterates immediate and
conclusive action in this instant case without any further dilly-dallying. (Para 3.126)

55
The continued marketing of Analgin, discarded the world over, is a matter of grave
concern for the Committee. Analgin is not listed in the National List of Essential Medicines
(NLEM). Bureaucratic delays, repetitive references from one committee to another can do
nothing but hurt patients. (Para 3.134)
The Committee also feels that merely requesting State Drug Authorities to direct
manufacturers to label the drug Analgin as approved by CDSCO without exemplary, penal
action for documented violations is itself an act of negligence. The indications are approved
by CDSCO, not State Drug Authorities. Hence CDSCO should itself take immediate action
for violations. (Para 3.135)
Given the near non-existance pharmacovigilance in the country putting Analgin
under so called “focussed pharmacovigilance” is nothing but a dilatory and diversionary
move to let the drug be sold in the country to benefit the manufacturer. The Committee,
therefore, desires that a decision be taken on this open and shut case without taking
refuge behind committees after committees within one month of presentation of this
Report. (Para 3.136)
The Committee is astounded to note the almost U-turn made by the Ministry on this
vital issue. In its initial ATN, the Ministry had taken the stand that; a drug could not be
banned when safer, more efficacious drugs for the same disorder are launched since there
is no such provision in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. There was incidentally no mention
of the matter having been referred to 3-member expert committee. (Para 3.141)
In any case the Committee finds no merit in the reason given by the Ministry. Under
current rules, any drug found to be unsafe can be banned under Rule 26-A irrespective of
whether safer substitutes are launched in the market or not. If there is no safer substitute
and the drug is essential or life saving, then obviously it is not possible to ban the drug.
Once a safer substitute is available then nothing stops the Central Government from
invoking Rule 26-A. (Para 3.142)
In its final ATN, the Ministry in spite of their own expert committee opining that
there should be an adequate system for withdrawal of drugs has found one more reason not
to ban risky remedies by stating that “most newer drugs are generally found to be more
expensive” The Committee has been given to understand that there is no provision under
Drugs and Cosmetics Rule to take the cost of drugs into consideration while approving or
banning drugs. It does not require a great deal of intelligence to conclude that it is better
to consume a safer drug, even if it is more expensive, than consume a risky drug that
ultimately will be far more costly due to adverse effects. (Para 3.143)
The Committee has already expressed its views on the directions issued by the Union
Government under Section 33P to State Governments, previously in this Report. As regards
the intention of the Ministry to constitute another committee of experts to lay down policies,
guidelines and procedures to be adopted for approval of FDCs, the committee considers it like
many other replies of the Government to its other Recommendations contained in the Fifty-
ninth Report, a ploy to waste time and avoid an expedition decision to curb this rampant and
harmful practice. With piles of evidence available locally as well as in the form of global best
practices, the Ministry can do the needful suo motu and without resorting to this time tested,
time consuming device of an expert Committee. The Committee expects the Ministry to take
decisions in the matter accordingly at the soonest so that the approval of FDCs is regulated
by well laid out policies, guidelines and procedures expeditiously. (Para 3.149)
The mess created by the uploading of the totally outdated data bank obtained by
CDSCO from its Gujarat counterpart has already been commented upon along with remedial

56
measures suggested previously in this report and thus requires no reiteration. The
Committee, however, expects from the Ministry to pursue the matter proactively with the
State Governments as also itself work towards setting-up a reliable, effective and real time
database on branded pharmaceutical products without any further loss of time. (Para 3.156)
The Committee is not at all convinced by the reply of the Government as it hides
more than what it reveals. The letters of the two manufacturers whose cases were pointed
out by the Committee have datelines of 21 and 22 February, 2011 respectively that is more
than a year before the examination of the Committee concluded. The proposal of one of the
manufacturers conveyed through its letter dated 22 February, 2011 schedules the launch of
the FDC in first quarter of 2012, a date which again preceded the culmination of the
examination of the Committee. Thus, the action of the Government on the observation
made by the Committee cannot be termed as irrefutable under any circumstances. The least
the Ministry could have done was to obtain updated information on these two cases not only
from the two manufacturers in question but also through  market intelligence. The
Committee expects the Ministry to do so at least now and take further necessary action,
accordingly. The Committee also desires the Ministry to instruct the DGCI to issue the
general directive to state authorities as well as manufacturers about the failure to launch
the product within six months of obtaining permission entailing cancellation of permission/
license  forthwith. (Para 3.163)
The Committee is disappointed with the non-committal and evasive reply of the
Ministry to the Recommendation. Even after spending more than six months, the Ministry is
almost directionless on several vital aspects of drug regulation in the country and has,
therefore, chosen to prolong decisions by the mechanism of establishing committees even on
matters where decision making is not only within its competence but can be arrived at right
away. While decrying this escapist tendency of the Ministry in strong terms the Committee
desires a categorical response to the adoption of this simple and effective global best practice
within fifteen days of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. (Para 3.169)
The Committee is perturbed to note that its concerns and Recommendations have
neither been appreciated nor addressed. CDSCO is supposed to approve monographs/labels
on all formulations and amend/update them periodically as new information becomes
available. The Committee found that changes pertaining to approved drugs are not being
incorporated and hence monographs remain outdated had recommended that changes in
monographs should be made from time to time. At the same time manufacturers need to
be penalized for not keeping CDSCO informed on changes taking place globally as the
manufacturers are generally the first to get information on products in their portfolio.
Besides they are legally obliged to keep CDSCO informed on all changes. Instead of
responding to the Committee’s concern the Ministry has given evasive and irrelevant
information. The Indian Pharmacopoeia is a book of standards and is meant for use by the
pharmaceutical industry and drug testing laboratories. Moreover Indian Pharmacopoeia does
not list all drugs marketed in India because molecules appearing in other Pharmacopoeia
are also sold in the country, not to mention new, recent additions, which do not appear in
any Pharmacopoeia. By the time a new edition appears, lots of changes have already taken
place. The Committee had found out during the course of examination of the subject that
so far only 4 editions have appeared in the last 65 years. Similarly, the Committee had
found that the much-touted National Formulary of India (NFl) too has only appeared four
times: 1960, 1966, 1979 and 2011. Such an irregular publication cannot serve the purpose
of keeping prescribers informed of the latest developments. Moreover it lists just about 350
of 900 basic drugs sold in India. Doctors  are interested in prescribing information such as
indications, dose, contraindications, precautions, side effects, drug interactions etc. and not

57
in the standards of testing of drugs. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its instant
Recommendation for implementation with utmost promptitude. (Para 3.176)
The Committee is of the firm view that physical inspection of overseas
manufacturers of bulk drugs, apart from being cumbersome (serious language problem in
countries like China, Korea, Cuba, Hungary, Poland, documentation, etc.) and expensive
(due to sheer numbers of locations around the globe from Argentina to Turkey and multiple
sites within one country) may not be the best option. A sole inspector cannot undertake
physical inspection during a short visit, lasting a few days. In order to be effective, the
procedure would require a multi-disciplinary team which should have access to the
manufacturing premises and documentation (in English) on GMP without advance notice to
prevent manipulation; A possibility which, given the serious manpower and infrastructure
constraints of CDSCO is next to impossible. It may, therefore, be more practical, cost
effective and beneficial to collect samples of all imported APIs at the port of entry and get
them tested within the country. CDSCO can also insist on certification of good quality from
the Drug Regulatory Authority of the country concerned for each batch of each API being
imported into India. If such drugs are found to be of poor quality, the CDSCO will be in
a better position to take appropriate action including, but not limited to, blacklisting the
overseas manufacturers and taking up the case with the concerned DRA.
In its Fifty-ninth Report, the Committee had stated that the hype on spurious and
counterfeit drugs being produced in India was the handiwork of MNC drug producers aided
and abetted by so-called anti-counterfeit commercial “solution providers.” Spurious and sub-
standard drugs are two entirely different issues and cannot be clubbed. The 3-member expert
committee too has taken the bait by wrongly adding “spurious” to the problem of sub-
standard drugs. The Committee has serious apprehensions that such a factually incorrect
statement from a committee appointed by the Ministry of Health &Family Welfare can and
will be used to validate the false propaganda unleashed by MNC drug producers to defame
Indian drugs all over the world and hence needs to be rectified at once. (Para 3.186)
The Committee is aware of the amendments to Drugs and Cosmetic Rules. The core
issue is implementation. Continuous Government inaction inspite of legal provisions have
rendered the entire exercise redundant and useless. Consequently, the market is flooded
with misbranded drugs, which exact a great cost on public health and economy. The
Committee, therefore, not only expects the Ministry to implement the relevant rules more
proactively and with honesty of purpose but also reiterates its Recommendation on
incorporating penal provisions for manufacturing misbranded and adulterated drugs with
alacrity that matter deserves. (Para 3.191)
The Committee notes that to begin with CDSCO has started the drug alert system
in respect of drugs found to be not of standard quality, spurious, adulterated, etc. by central
drug testing laboratories. Furthermore, the Ministry is considering the feasibility of placing
advertisements of such cases regularly in the newspapers. The Committee is convinced that
this is a herculean task, which can be achieved only when the efforts of the Centre and
State Governments are fully synergized. Drug alerts of evaluations by central drug
laboratories though welcome would not take care of this acute problem in entirety as the
state drug laboratories handle major volumes of such evaluations. The Committee,
therefore, desires the Ministry to take up this matter with State Governments on a highly
proactive basis to ensure its early fructification. It also desires early decision by the
Ministry on utilizing newspapers in this task. (Para 3.195)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has proposed an amendment to prohibit
advertisement of Schedule H drugs. The said amendment has been deliberated and approved

58
by the Drugs Consultative Committee on 20 July, 2012 and by the DTAB four days later on
24 July, 2012. The Committee is, however, pained to note that the matter instead of being
brought to its logical conclusion at the earliest is still under process. Deprecating this
laissez-faire attitude of the Ministry, the Committee desires that all necessary formalities
to formalize the proposed amendment be completed forthwith so that its proper
implementation starts in right earnest without any further delay. (Para 3.199)
CONCLUSION
Having said as much about the semblance of action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in its Fifty-ninth Report, the Committee would like to dwell
upon a larger and more fundamental question, the response of the Government or lack of
it in the case of the Fifty-ninth Report has posed before the Parliament and its various
entities. In our present constitutional arrangement the Parliament is mandated with the
sacrosanct responsibility of oversight over the Executive. The Parliamentary Committees
taking a leaf out from this mandate carry out their responsibility of oversight through their
Reports presented to the Parliament from time to time. Their advice in the form of
Recommendations though not mandatory, is invaluable in the sense that they guide the
Government to take remedial measures, for course correction in their various endeavors so
that public good and development proceed on an even keel without being impeded by lack
of professionalism, incompetence, corruption or injustice. The Government, therefore, is
morally bound to heed to the advice of the Parliamentary Committees in national interest
or else justify in a well-reasoned manner, their inaction or reluctance to take action on any
particular Recommendation of the Committee. In the instant case, it is clearly apparent
from the analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations of
Committee that out of 69 Recommendations that were actionable only 19 have been
implemented by the Government in varying degrees. In case of 46 Recommendations the
action taken by Government is only with the intent to delay, obfuscate, stagger
implementation or not implement at all with a view to delay/negate action in proven cases
of wrongdoing. This inspite of the fact that the Government took not the stipulated three
months to take action on Recommendations of Committee but more than six months and
they were afforded not one but an unprecedented two opportunities by the Committee to
implement the Recommendations contained in the Fifty-ninth Report. All this has been
done when CDSCO, which is mandated with the onerous task of directly ensuring health
safety of more than one-sixth of the population of the world has, most unfortunately, not
acquitted itself well, both, at professional and ethical planes. The Committee considers this
highly regrettable and with extreme pain and anguish is constrained to bring these facts on
record. (Para 3.200)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted this Recommendation of the
Committee and in pursuance, thereof, intends to strengthen the States drug regulatory
system during the Twelfth Five Year Plan through a suitable scheme. With one year of the
Twelfth Plan almost gone by and the plan yet to be finalized, the Committee feels greatly
concerned by the continued delay in the requisite assistance reaching the State drug
regulation mechanisms. It, therefore, desires the Ministry to make expeditious efforts to
sew up the proposed Scheme and start its implementation proper at least from the Second
Fiscal of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the exact
contours of the proposed Scheme as soon as the necessary permissions/approvals in this
regard, are obtained by the Ministry. (Para 4.4)
The Committee notes that the Ministry intends to take up the matter of
augmentation of resources of the Central Labs and creation of more posts with the

59
Department of Expenditure. The upgradation of States Laboratories would also be facilitated
during the of Twelfth Plan period. The Committee is of the view that in the present state
of availability of resources it is easier said than done to secure the finances required for
the aforementioned purposes. Keeping in view the fact that the upgradation of Central and
State Drug Labs would help immensely in ensuring quality drugs for the general public the
Committee exhort the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to make all efforts to secure
the requisite funds for the purpose in the Demand for Grants (2013-14) so that this much
delayed action is not staggered any further. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
results of the efforts of the Ministry at the soonest. (Para 4.7)
The Committee feels that the Ministry has very rightly referred this vexed issue to
the Department of Revenue in the Ministry of Finance for its advice. Since the continued
operations of such kind are a huge drain on the country’s resources in the form of Income
Tax avoidance apart from the risk to the quality of these drugs and possibility of fakes
entering the market due to these operations, the Committee desires the Ministry to follow-
up the matter with the Department of Revenue proactively and take further necessary
corrective action with utmost urgency. (Para 4.11)

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23 rd April, 2013 in Room No. ‘67’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
7. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e. consideration and adoption of draft 66
th Report on the action taken by
the Government on recommendations/observations contained in the 59 th Report of the Committee
on the Functioning of Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation and * * *. He invited Members
to share their specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports.
II. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the five draft Reports mentioned above. A
63
*** Relate to other matters.

64
few changes were suggested by Members for incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion,
the Committee adopted all the five Reports with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter,
decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Friday, the 26
th April, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence,
Shri D. Raja and Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Sanjay
Jaiswal, and in his absence, Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok
Sabha.
III. S tudy visit
4 . ***
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.