 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
156 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
REVIEW OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail:  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in  
  

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
REVIEW OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2.  PREFACE (ii-iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iv-v) 
4.  Chapter-I      
 
Introduction 
Chapter-II   
 
Key Components and Initiatives under the National Ayush 
Mission 
 
Chapter-III   
 
Quality Control of Ayush Drugs &Implementation Status 
of NAM 
 
 
 
1- 5 
 
6-13 
 
 
14-22 
 
5.  Recommendations at a glance  23-31 
6.  Annexures 32-49 
7. * MINUTES  
*To be appended at the printing stage. 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri MaddilaGurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. DrSaket Kumar   Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt.Noyaline Vineetha F.C.  JointDirector 
5. Shri.Saurav Trivedi   Secretariat Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred  Fifty-
Sixth Report on the subject “ Review of National Ayush Mission ” which was 
adopted by the Committee in its meeting held on the 7th February, 2024. 
 
2. The review of the National Ayush Mission in India holds paramount 
importance as it addresses integrating and promoting traditional Ayurveda, 
Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy systems within India's 
healthcare framework. These traditional systems, deepl y rooted in the country's 
cultural heritage, contribute to holistic health practices. The review is crucial for 
assessing the effectiveness of the National Ayush Mission in preserving and 
promoting these traditional healthcare practices. It also facilitate s examining 
public health outcomes public health outcomes, inclusivity, and accessibility, 
ensuring that Ayush benefits reach diverse sections of the population. 
 
3. The primary objective of the Committee behind identifying the subject 
was to evaluate the integration of Ayush with modern medicine and what 
measures have been taken to foster a comprehensive and evidence -based 
healthcare approach. The Committee aimed to assess steps taken to encourage 
research and development, aligning with international standards and refining 
policies to address evolving healthcare needs. The review of the National Ayush 
Mission is pivotal for maintaining the relevance and efficacy of traditional 
healthcare practices in contemporary society. 
 
4. The Committee held deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry 
of Ayush &Director General ( DG), CCRAS and DG, CCRUM  during its 
meeting held on the 28th July, 2023 for a holistic examination of the subject. The 
Committee also heard representatives from  fo etutitsnI aidnI llA ,rotceriD
ihleD weN ,adevruyA, i n-charge of the National Institute of Unani Medicine 
(NIUM) Ghaziabad  and representatives of Directorate of AYUSH, GNCT of 
Delhi in its meeting held on 22nd August, 2023 and representatives from Central 
Council for Research in Homeopathy (CCRH), Central Council for 
Research in Yoga & Naturopathy (CCRYN), Central Council for Research 
in Siddha (CCRS), National Institute of Sowa Rigpa (NISR) in its meeting 
held on 31st August, 2023.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report and reproduced at the end of the Report at 
„Observations/Recommendations-at a Glance‟. 

iii 
 
6. On behalf of the Committee, I extend special thanks to the Secretary, 
Ministry of Ayush, Director General s of Research Councils, and all 
representatives of other institutions who gave their views and enriched the 
Committee with their deep insight and valuable suggestions during interactions. 
I further extend special appreciation to the officers of the Committee Secretariat 
for their invaluable efforts in assimilating all relevant information and enabling 
the Committee to produce this Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
7th February, 2024 
Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
   
   
   
BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AOGUSY 
ASEAN 
AYUSH 
AYUSHEXCIL 
A-HWCs 
AIIMS 
BIMSTEC 
 
BIS 
CCRAS 
CCRUM 
CCRH 
CCRS 
CHCs 
DBT 
DNA 
DPMU 
FITM 
GMP 
GAP 
HMIS 
IEC 
IPvC 
ISO 
MRAs 
Ayush OushadhiGunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations  
Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
AYUSH Export Promotion Council  
Ayush- Health and Wellness Centres 
All India Institute of Medical Science 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation  
Bureau of Indian Standards 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
Central Council for Research in Homeopathy 
Central Council for Research in Siddha 
Community Health Centres 
Direct Benefit Transfer 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
District Program Management Unit  
Forum on Indian Traditional Medicine  
Good Manufacturing Practices  
Good Agricultural Practices 
Health Management Information Systems 
Information, Education & Communication 
Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centres 
International Organisation for Standardisation 
Mutual Recognition Agreements  
NAM 
NABH 
 
NGO 
NHM 
NPvCC 
NRHM  
PCIM&H 
 
PHCs 
PPvCs 
QCI 
R&D 
RRM 
SPMU 
SCO 
National Ayush Mission 
National  Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare 
Providers 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
National Health Mission  
National Pharmacovigilance Centre  
National Rural Health Mission  
Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine & 
Homoeopathy  
Primary Health Centres 
Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres 
Quality Council of India 
Research & Development 
Regional Review Meetings  
State Program Management Unit  
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  

v 
 
TCIM 
TM 
TCM 
UCs 
WHO 
 
Traditional, Complementary and Integrative Medicine  
Traditional Medicine 
Traditional Chinese Medicine  
Utilisation Certificates 
World Health Organisation  
 

1 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
Overview of Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy (Ayush) 
1.1 Ayush, an acronym collectively representing five traditional systems of 
medicine—Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa and Homeopathy —is 
an integral part of India's rich cultural and healthcare heritage. These systems 
offer unique perspectives on health and well -being, drawing from ancient 
wisdom and practices. The Ayush system in India has a rich and diverse history, 
deeply rooted in ancient traditions and practices. The Evolution of Ayush is an 
amalgamation of centuries-old knowledge, adaptations, and modern integrations. 
1.2 The National Ayush Mission (NAM) is one of several government initiatives 
and flagship schemes launched to promote the accessibility and affordability of 
Ayush services nationwide. The Committee selected this subject as the mission 
focuses on almost all aspects of the development of the Ayush system in the 
country, covering infrastructure development, quality control, medicinal plant 
cultivation, research, and awareness campaigns, among several o ther aspects of 
Ayush. 
Process Followed 
1.3 The Committee relied on government data about NAM and Ayush facilities 
available on its websites and publications. The publications such as the Annual 
Report of the Ministry of Ayush (2022 -23), Economic Survey (2022-23), Union 
Budget (2022-23), National Health Policy, 2017, research papers on the Ayush 
system and facilities, published in accredited national/international Journals 
were consulted. The Committee also heard the representatives of the Ministry of 
Ayush and other related organisations, research institutes, and hospitals. 
Common Threads and Distinct Features: 
1.4 While each Ayush system is distinct, they share common themes such as a 
holistic view of health, emphasis on prevention, and the belief in the b ody's 
innate healing abilities. However, their diagnostic approaches, treatment 
modalities, and philosophical foundations vary, contributing to the diversity and 
richness of India's traditional healthcare systems. 
 

2 
 
Historical Background and Evolution of th e National Ayush Mission in 
India 
1.5 The Ministry of Ayush was formed in 2014 to focus on developing, 
educating, and propagating Ayurveda, Yoga and naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, 
and Homoeopathy. The Ministry aimed to create policies, regulate education, 
promote research, and facilitate the growth and awareness of these traditional 
systems in India and the world. 
1.6 The National Ayush Mission (NAM) is a centrally sponsored scheme 
launched by the Ministry of Ayush in September 2014. The launch of NAM 
marked a significant milestone in promoting and integrating Ayush systems into 
the national healthcare framework. The decision to establish NAM was guided 
by the understanding that Ayush could offer holistic and cost -effective 
healthcare solutions aligned with Ind ia's cultural ethos. Before the launch of 
NAM, initiatives to promote Ayush were integrated with the National Rural 
Health Mission (NRHM). However, recogni sing the need for a dedicated focus 
on Ayush, the National Ayush Mission was launched as a separate mission. 
1.7 NAM comprises various components, including AYUSH services, 
educational institutions, quality control of Ayush drugs, medicinal plants, 
research and development, and management and capacity building. These 
components aim to improve infrastructu re, promote research, and enhance the 
overall development of Ayush systems. Over the years, the National Ayush 
Mission has evolved, and its scope has expanded to cover more areas and 
initiatives. It has contributed to the growth of Ayush practices and has played a 
role in integrating traditional systems with mainstream healthcare. 
1.8 Union Cabinet approved a new component of 12,500 Ayush Health and 
Wellness Centres under NAM for five years up to 2023 -24. The scheme has 
been approved for continuation up to 2025-26. 

3 
 
 
TIMELINE OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION (NAM) 
 
Objectives and Scope of the National Ayush Mission 
1.9 The primary objectives of the National Ayush Mission include increasing 
accessibility to Ayush services, promoting the cultivation of medicinal plants 
used in these systems, strengthening educational institutions for Ayush, and 
creating awareness about the benefits of Ayush practices. 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Ayush has further apprised the Committee that under 
“Ayush Educational Institutions” the following measures would be taken under 
NAM: - 
a. Infrastructural development/ upgradation of Ayush Under -Graduate 
Institutions and Post-Graduate Institutions. 
b.  Establishment of new Ayush Colleges in the States where the availability 
of Ayush teaching institutions is inadequate in the Government Sector, State/UT 
Governments may propose the establishment of new Ayush educational 
institutions subject to the condition that sufficient land should be available as per 
the provision of MSR in the proposed location and preference shall be given to 
the region where any Ayush hospital having minimum 50 beds for Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa& Unani and 25 beds for Homoeopathy is functioning. 
 
2014
Launch of 
NAM on 
15.09.2014
2020
Approval of 
12,500 Ayush 
HWCs
2021
NAM approved 
for continuation 
till 2025-26
2024
Operationalisation 
of approved 12,500 
Ayush HWCs


4 
 
1.11 The Committee notes the foresighted objectives of the National Ayush 
Mission. The Committee is hopeful that the Scheme can transform India's 
traditional systems of medicine. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government intensify its focus on implementing the National Ayush 
Mission (NAM) by strategically aligning its objectives with mainstream 
healthcare deliver y. The Committee opines that  collaboration between 
traditional and modern medical practitioners will be crucial inthe effective 
implementation of NAM.  Additionally, investing in robust research and 
development, enhancing educational institutions, and promoting awareness 
will contribute to establishing Ayush as a viable and integral part of the 
healthcare system. This concerted effort will not only improve accessibility 
to Ayush services but also foster a holistic approach to health and wellness, 
ensuring the successful mainstreaming of traditional systems in the national 
healthcare framework. 
 
Budgetary allocation and utilisation status 
 
BE vs RE allocation. 
Financial Year BE allocation (in 
crores) 
RE allocation (in 
crores) 
2021-22 553.80 500 
2022-23 800 643.8 
2023-24 1200 NA 
 
 
 
504.4 500.6
400
500
643.8
456.49 495.5
397.71
458.87
549.15
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Rupee (in crores)
RE Allocation vs Expendtiure
RE
AE

5 
 
1.12 The Committee observesalthough there has been a consistent upward 
trend of fund utilisation in the past 3 years, the actual utilisation of funds is 
still low. In RE 2022 -23, despite an allocation of Rs. 643.80 crore, only Rs. 
549.15 crore was spentwhich is about 85 percent.In view of the low 
utilisation of funds andconsidering the allocated fund of Rs. 1200.00 crore 
for 2023 -24, the Committee urges the Ministry to focus on thorough and 
complete fund utilisation. The Committee asserts that utilisation trends and 
absorption capacity justify increased funds, especially for NAM, the 
Ministry's sole Centrally Sponsored Scheme with diverse components. 
These funds should be optimally employed to revitali se and enhance Ayush 
systems in public health delivery services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
Chapter-II 
Key Components and Initiatives under the National Ayush Mission 
Components of the National Ayush Mission 
2.1 As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Ayush components of 
the National AyushMission are: - 
 
 
Flexible Component 
2.2 TheCommittee was apprised that States have been given the flexibility to 
use 25 percent of the approved amount under the National Ayush Mission as per 
the State‟s specific requirements. This 25% earmarked flexible fund can be 
spent on the following: 
1. Yoga Wellness Centres 
2. Tele-medicine 
3. Sports Medicine through Ayush 
Components 
of National 
Ayush 
Mission
Upgradation 
of existing 
standalone 
Government 
Ayush 
Hospitals
Ayush Health 
& Wellness 
Centres
Co-location of 
Ayush facilities 
at PHCs, CHCs 
and DHs
Ayush Gram
Ayush Public 
Health 
Programmes
Supply of 
essential drugs 
Setting up of up to 
10 bedded/ 30 
bedded/ 50 bedded 
integrated Ayush 
Hospitals
Upgradation of 
existing/setting up 
of new standalone 
Government/ 
Panchayat/ aided 
Ayush 
Dispensaries

7 
 
4. Reimbursement of Testing charges 
5. IEC activities 
6. Training and capacity building 
7. Support for HMIS and DBT tracking systems. 
8. NABH Accreditation of Ayush Healthcare facilities 
 
2.3 The Committee notes that in its vision, NAM intends to create an 
enabling environment for research and development in Ayush through 
various initiatives, programs, and aspects of its implementation. The 
Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that "Promotion of Research and 
Development" should be prominently included as one of the components of 
NAM. Similarly, the flexible component, which allows 25% flexible usage of 
funds, should include research and development as a supported activity. 
2.4  The Committee is of the view that the National Ayush Mission 's 
(NAM) initiatives like Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs /Arogya 
Mandirs) and co -location of Ayush facili ties with Primary Health Centres 
(PHCs) and Community Health Centres (CHCs) represent a unique 
opportunity to strengthen clinical evidence and promote research and 
development (R&D) in Ayush systems. Standardised electronic medical 
records in HWCs and co-located Ayush facilities can systematically capture 
patient data on diagnoses, treatments, and outcomes, enabling large -scale 
epidemiological studies and comparative effectiveness research. HWCs and 
co-located facilities can build trust with communities, fa cilitating long-term 
monitoring of patients and providing valuable insights into the chronic 
disease management potential of Ayush therapies. 
2.5 The Committee believes that standardised data collection can pave the 
way for identifying biomarkers associated with specific Ayush 
interventions, opening doors for further research into mechanisms of action 
and personalised medicine. 
2.6  The Committee further recommends the following measures to 
develop clinical Research Infrastructure: 
 Strengthening manpower and training: Upgrading infrastructure and 
providing training opportunities for Ayush practitioners at HWCs 
can enhance their research skills and capacity to participate in 
clinical trials. 

8 
 
 Establishing research networks:  Collaboration among Ayush 
facilities and institutions can facilitate multicentric clinical trials and 
improve research quality. 
 Standardisation of protocols and interventions:  Developing 
standardised protocols for Ayush interventions can ensure data 
consistency and enable robust clinical research. 
 Community Engagement:  Engaging communities in research design 
and implementation through Ayush facilities can address their 
specific needs and ensure culturally relevant research outcomes. 
 Evidence Recording: Data gathered and generated in centres should 
be recorded and publicised. The clinically supported research and 
peer-reviewed articles should be placed in Ayush and allopathic 
medical colleges for better  outreach, understanding, and 
coordination.  
Ayush Health & Wellness Centres: 
2.7 Union Cabinet on 20.03.2020 approved the proposal for the upgradation 
of 12,500 Health facilities (10,000 Ayush Dispensaries and 2500 Health sub-
centers) into Ayush Health and Wellness Centre under the Ayushman Bharat as 
a component of the National Ayush Mission in a phased manner by the year 
2023-24. These AYUSH HWCs would be operationalised through States/ UTs 
in Centrally Sponsored Scheme mode and unde r the broad umbrella of the 
National AYUSH Mission (NAM). The vision is to establish a holistic wellness 
model to reduce the disease burden and out -of-pocket expenditure and to 
provide informed choices to the needy public. 
2.8 The Ministry of Ayush has app rised the Committee that as of 28.07.2023, 
7603 Health and Wellness Centres have been operationalised, and the Ministry 
has released funds to establish a total of 10,275 H&WCs.  
Co-location of Ayush facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), 
Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) 
2.9 The primary responsibility to provide Ayush services at Primary Health 
Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs), and District Hospitals 
(DHs) lies with the respective State/UT Governments. However , the 
Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co-location of Ayush facilities at 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and 

9 
 
District Hospitals (DHs), thus enabling the choice of patients for different 
systems of medicines under a single window.  
2.10 The engagement of Ayush doctors/ paramedics and their training is 
supported by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under the National 
Health Mission (NHM). At the same time, the Ministry of Ayush supports 
Ayush infrastructure, equipment/ furniture, and medicines under the National 
Ayush Mission (NAM) as shared responsibilities. The status of co -located 
Ayush facilities at PHCs, CHCs and DHs, State/UT -wise, is furnished in 
Annexure-I. Further, the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
(CCRAS), Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), Central 
Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) and Central Council for 
Research in Siddha  (CCRS), Autonomous organisations under Ministry of 
Ayush have established treatment centres wherein allopathic and Ayush systems 
of medicines are available at one place in the country. State/UT -wise status of 
treatment centres wherein allopathic and Ayush systems of drugs are available at 
one place under CCRAS, CCRH, CCRUM, and CCRS is furnished in 
Annexure-II.  
2.11 The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry of Ayush in 
developing a pluralistic and holistic system of integrative healthcare. The 
Committee believes that co-located Ayush facilities at PHCs and CHCs may 
act as a one -stop center for both conventional and traditional healthcare 
services and thus strengthen access to Ayush services. For better 
coordination, the Committee recommends the sharing o f infrastructure, 
medical equipment, and administrative staff at Ayush facilities and 
allopathic teams, thus optimising resource utilisation and cost-effectiveness. 
2.12 Physicians from both systems can work together to develop 
comprehensive treatment plans for patients, considering both Indian and 
Western medical perspectives. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
ensure at least  one specialist practitioner in 
Ayurveda/Homoeopathy/Yoga/Siddha in these co -located facilities. The 
Committee hopes that this initiative may result in integrating the Ayush 
system of medicine for managing chronic conditions like respiratory 
ailments, digestive problems, and musculoskeletal disorders. 
2.13 The Committee, at this juncture, notices that in some states and UTs, a 
separate Department of Ayush has not been opened. The Committee, to 
boost the Ayush system and for better coordination in Ayush Healthcare, 

10 
 
recommends the Ministry of Ayush  to impress upon  and persuade the 
States and UTs with no separate department of Ayush to create such a 
department for speedy development and implementation of Ayush sector 
and schemes respectively. 
 
Traditional Medicine systems in India, China, South Korea and Africa  
 
CHINA 
 
2.14 Forum on Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) established under the aegis 
of the Ministry of Ayush in its "Study on China's Policy Initiatives for National 
and Global Promotion of Traditional Chinese Medicine", has highlighted that 
the foremost element in China's Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) policy lies 
in its acknowledgment as a medicinal system with the potential to fulfill the 
objectives of the universal health program. Additionally, TCM is recognised as 
an untapped knowledge resource for drug disco veries, representing a unique 
heritage for China and serving as a significant soft power strategy in its foreign 
policy. TCM is integrated into domestic health policy and poverty alleviation 
initiatives and is crucial to China's foreign economic and geopolitical strategy. 
 
2.15 Traditional Chinese Medicine forms an integral part of the public 
healthcare system that includes insurance coverage and an essential medicine list 
and is integrated with modern medical treatment facilities. Efforts are on to have 
TCM in the last mile coverage of primary healthcare represented through the 
village clinics. 
 
2.16 The Study further reveals that innovation in Traditional Chinese Medicine 
(TCM) education stands out as a notable feature in the Chinese systems, 
contributing to the comprehensive advancement of the sector. This focus 
extends to providing education and training support for the entire TCM 
pharmaceutical industry. Modern medicine education already incorporates TCM 
education, while innovative programs involve estab lishing leading TCM 
universities with diverse disciplines such as economics, commerce, humanities, 
and management. The goal is to cultivate a workforce that addresses the holistic 
needs of the TCM sector, encompassing manufacturing, research and 
development, sales, distribution, and marketing. The Chinese Government also 
ensures that foreign policy focus involves the globalisation of TCM, with global 
health platforms like the World Health Organization (WHO) and international 
TCM NGOs playing a crucial role in legitimising TCM. Academic institutions 
                                                           
Bodeker, G. (2000), Lessons on integration from the developing world's experience , British  Medical Journal 
(BMJ), 322(7279), 164-167. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.322.7279.164 
 

11 
 
outside China are promoting education and research in TCM, and geopolitical 
initiatives like the Belt and Road Initiative are anticipated to significantly 
contribute to the expansion of TCM in related countries, f ostering medical 
tourism to less developed provinces along the Belt. 
 
 
SOUTH KOREA 
 
2.17 South Korea established the parallel operation of two independent medical 
systems in 1952. It has set a goal for full integration of Western and oriental 
medicine by 2001. Measures taken to improve the quality of care with oriental 
medicine include the pr omotion of clinical cooperation, training of consultants, 
and lifting a ban on the employment of doctors practising oriental medicine in 
the public hospital sector. The profit margin on herbal drugs for oriental 
medicine is estimated to be 100 -500% compared with their essential cost. Not 
surprisingly, two -thirds of practitioners in traditional medicine want herbal 
remedies to be excluded from national medical insurance. As the clientele and 
revenues of practitioners in oriental medicine have increased, ther e have been 
moves by modern medicine to restrict the practice of specialists in oriental 
medicine and to ascribe their functions to current medical practitioners trained in 
oriental medicine. 
 
2.18 The Korean experience highlights the difficulties when the  traditional 
sector is not held financially accountable and when modern medical 
practitioners, through training, join the conventional industry and seek to 
dominate. 
 
AFRICA 
 
2.19 African countries typically utilise the parallel model. In April 2000, 
Ghanaian legislation established a council to regulate the practice of traditional 
medicine. By 2004, certified herbal medicines will be prescribed and dispensed 
in Ghanaian hospitals and pharmacies. Nigeria has develope d guidelines for 
handling herbal medication, and draft legislation has been prepared to establish 
national and state traditional medicine boards for regulation of practice and to 
promote cooperation and research. 
 
2.20 The Committee observes two basic poli cy models for practicing traditional 
systems of medicine across the world: the integration model and the parallel 
model. The Committee, in its study of these policy models, notes that China has 
adopted an integration model. At the same time, countries such  as South Korea 
and Africa follow the parallel model of practicing traditional medicine. Seeing 
the public health scenario in the Country at present, the Committee is of the 
view that India is running on a mixed model. While sufficient autonomy and 

12 
 
prominence have been given to the traditional system, efforts to integrate it with 
the modern allopathic system have also proven beneficial in Universal Health 
Coverage. The Committee also notes in this regard that the National Ayush 
Mission has achieved a significant boost to the usage of Ayush. 
 
2.21 The Committee would like to refer to the Guidelines of the National 
Medical Commission Undergraduate Medical Education Regulation 2023 . The 
Guideline specifies that at the end of the undergraduate program, the Indian 
Medical Graduate should be able to achieve competence in the practice of 
holistic medicine, encompassing promotive, preventive, curative , and 
rehabilitative aspects of common diseases. Furthermore, NMC under “Goals for 
the Learner” mandates that the Indian Medical Graduate must understand and 
provide preventive, promotive, curative, palliative , and holistic care with 
compassion. Also, alternate health systems i.e. AYUSH in India and History of 
Medicine are a part of the foundation course for Indian medical graduates. 
 
2.22The Committee notes that, like China, the Ministry of Ayush's efforts to 
establish 12,500 Health and Wellness Centres  (since renamed as Arogya 
Mandirs) go a long way in establishing Ayush as a medicinal sys tem with 
the potential to fulfill the objectives of the universal health program. Like 
China, the Government of India should also devise ways to integrate the 
Ayush system with poverty alleviation initiatives to boost community 
engagement. Similarly, the M inistry of Ayush should collaborate with the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to implement measures ensuring 
that the health workforce comprehends the importance of integrating 
systems. This collaboration aims to establish a pluralistic health system that 
caters to the population's diverse needs. Facilitating a dialogue among 
health providers from various systems becomes imperative for optimising 
patient outcomes. Substantial reforms in Indian medical education are 
essential to instill in medical stude nts and practitioners an attitude 
supportive of the integration of modern medicine and traditional medicine. 
As a recommendation, the Committee suggests incorporating awareness of 
Ayush systems into school curricula, a significant step towards minimising 
knowledge barriers between Ayush and modern medicine. 
 
2.23 The Committee recommends that given the global evidence quoted 
above, India must pursue private insurance companies to include AYUSH 
treatments, such as Panchkarma and other therapies, wherever s cope 
prevails. The Committee also recommends that the Government persuade 
the countries to legalise the Ayurveda stream of medicines in the US and 
other countries. The Committee feels that this should be combined with 
ensuring insurance coverage of Ayush t reatments and practicing them in a 
similar vein to promote the practice of Ayush treatments in countries like 
the USA, UK, etc.,  

13 
 
 
The Government must persuade companies providing insurance in those 
countries. Drawing from the experiences of South Korea, t he Committee 
would like to recommend the Government take adequate measures to 
integrate the financial component of fixing rates for consultation in Ayush. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
Quality Control of Ayush Drugs &Implementation Status of NAM 
Quality Control of Ayush Drugs 
3.1 According to the Ministry of Ayush, the Pharmacopoeia Commission for 
Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy (PCIM&H) is a subordinate office of the 
Ministry that is mandated to develop pharmacopoeial standards for ASU& H 
drugs and medicines. Further, it is the central appellate laboratory for testing 
ASU&H drugs and medicines. It has been mandated for the manufacturers to 
adhere to the prescribed requirements for licensing of manufacturing units & 
medicines including proof of safety andeffectiveness, compliance with the Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) as per Schedule T & Schedule M -I of Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 and quality standards of drugs given in the 
respective pharmacopoeia.  
3.2 In 2021, the Ministry of Ayush implemented the Central Sector Scheme 
Ayush "OushadhiGunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana" (AOGUSY). 
The total financial allocation to this Scheme is Rs. 122.00 crores for five years. 
The components of AOGUSY scheme are as follows -  
a)    Strengthening and up -gradation of Ayush Pharmacies and Drug Testing 
Laboratories to achieve higher standards. 
b)   Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs, including surveillance of misleading 
advertisements. 
c)    Strengthening of Central and State regulat ory frameworks, including 
Technical Human Resources and capacity-building programs for Ayush drugs. 
d)   Support for the development of standards and accreditation/certification of 
Ayush products & materials in collaboration with the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS), Quality Control of India (QCI) and other relevant scientific 
institutions and industrial R&D centres.  
(i)   Pharmacovigilance Program for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and 
Homoeopathy (ASU & H) Drugs has been established under the Central Sector 
Scheme of the Ministry of Ayush (AOGUSY Scheme). The program is working 
through a three-tier network of a National Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvCC), 

15 
 
Five Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centres (IPvCs) and 99 Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvCs) estab lished across the country. Under the 
Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU & H Drugs, the major objectives are to 
keep vigilance over Ayush drugs and to report misleading advertisements. 
3.3 The Committee understands that the quality of the medicines is 
essential as concerns have been raised over the high metal contents in the 
Ayush drugs, which damage people's health. In this regard, the Committee 
acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry in pharmac ovigilance of 
the Ayush drugs. To accentuate these measures, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry further strengthen regulatory frameworks 
by developing user -friendly systems for healthcare professionals and 
consumers to report adverse events related  to Ayush medicines. The 
Ministry should also conduct regular post -marketing surveillance of Ayush 
medicines to monitor real -world safety and efficacy. This provides ongoing 
data for continuous improvement of quality. The generated data may also 
help identify potential safety concerns and take prompt action. 
3.4 The Ministry may explore collaborating with the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and the International Organi sation for 
Standardisation (ISO) to harmoni se Ayush quality standards with 
international n orms. This may facilitate global trade and recognition of 
Ayush products. The Ministry should also sign Mutual Recognition 
Agreements (MRAs) with other countries for regulatory compliance. The 
Committee is of the view that t hese steps may reduce duplicate testing and 
certification procedures, resulting inease of the export and import of Ayush 
products. 
Implementation Status of National Ayush Mission 
3.5 According to the Ministry of Ayush, since the inception of the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of NAM in 2014 -15 to 2023 -24, major achievements have 
been: - 
 137 Integrated Ayush Hospitals, 12500Ayush Health & Wellness Centres 
(AHWCs), and 13 new Ayush Educational have been approved. 
 Increase in budget for NAM from 75.28 Crore (in 2014-15) to Rs.1200.00 
Crore (in 2023-24) 
 The number  of beneficiaries availing Ayush services through AHWCs 
increased from 1.50 Crores in 2020-21 to 8.42 Crores in 2022-23. 

16 
 
 State/UT-wise integrated Ayush hospital approved under NAM from 
2014-15 to 2022 -23 & State/ UT-wiseAyush Health & Wellness Centers 
(AHWCs) approved under NAM are given in Annexure-III & IV.  
 
3.6 The Committee understands that the National Ayush Mission has 
certainly provided the required fillip to the traditional medicine sector of 
the country. The Committee notes that the scheme has provisionedfor the 
establishment of Ayush hospitals, dispensaries , and Health and Wellness 
Centres across the length and breadth of the country, however, the 
Committee more than 69% of the integrated Ayushhospitals approved 
under NAM are still either under construction or the construction has not 
started yet. Similarly , only about 65% of the sanctioned A -HWCs have 
been established. The Committee recommends that since the Ayush sector 
is rising gradually and there ar e still important milestones and  targets yet 
to be achieved under NAM, the Ministry should consider extending the 
period of the scheme beyond FY24 for at least 5 more years.  
3.7 At this juncture, the Committee would like to mention that it heard the 
Director of the National Institute of Sowa -Rigpa (NISR) -Leh Ladakh  on 
various aspects of this traditional system of medicine. The Committee 
observes that Sowa -Rigpa is particularly prevalent in  the Himalayan 
regions of the country. It is a recogni sed syste m of medicine under the 
Indian Medicine Central Central Council Act,1970 . Besides the 
development of the Trans-Himalayan Herbal Garden in Leh Ladakh, there 
are several other activities conducted by Sowa -Rigpa practitioners and 
institutes in providing healt hcare. 6 institutes are offering undergraduate 
courses.   The Committee is, however, at a loss to know as to why Sowa -
Rigpa has not been included in the National Ayush Mission and therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to  give due consideration for including t his 
system also under NAM. 
3.8 In response to a specific query regarding, steps undertaken by the 
Ministry under NAM for effective coordination and monitoring to ensure better 
implementation of the program, the Ministry apprised the Committee about the 
following measures: - 
i. Regional Review Meetings (RRM) are held under the chairmanship of the 
Hon‟ble Union Minister of Ayush to review the progress of the NAM. In 
addition, various regional review meetings are also conducted regularly 
under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Ayush). 

17 
 
ii. The Ministry is continuously pursuing the State/UT Governments 
regarding compliance with the guidelines of the Dept. of Expenditure, so 
that grants may be released to them for implementation of approved 
activities under NAM. 
iii. One-to-one interaction with the States/UT officials  to evaluate utilisation 
of funds and assessment of field-level implementation of various activities 
sanctioned under the Scheme; and 
iv. Field visits have been conducted in States/UTs to review the progress of 
various approved activities. 
v. The number  of Ayush beneficiaries over the years has increased 
considerably as shown below. 
 
 
Challenges faced in the implementation of the National Ayush Mission 
 
3.9 The Ministry of Ayush has apprised the Committee that the following 
challenges are being faced in the implementation of the National Ayush 
Mission: 
 i. Inadequate administrative set-up of Ayush in States/UTs. 
ii. Strengthening State Program Management Unit (SPMU) & District Program 
Management Unit (DPMU). 
 iii. Delay in the operationalisation of AHWCs. 
 iv. Delay in submission of completed/ audited UCs with relevant documents. 
 
3.10 Regarding the administrative set up for the implementation of National 
Ayush Mission, the Ministry apprised the Committee about  administrative set 
up (shown below) both at the central   and State level.   
0
50000000
10000000
15000000
20000000
25000000
FY-15 FY-16 FY-18 FY-19 FY-22
No. of beneficiaries

18 
 
 
 
3.11 The Committee observed that finalising the State Annual Action Plan 
(SAAP) and its approval process takes longer. Based on the pace of 
utilisation and availability of funds with the Ministry, funds are released in 
instalments very late in the financial year. One of the reasons noticed was 
the large number of budget line items in the Action Plans. The Committee 
observes that reducing the budget line items in the Action Plans can 
improve the processing time and enha nce administrative efficiency.  
Strengthening the outcome-based budgeting will also achi eve nudge the 
states to transform their health profile and promote cooperative federalism. 
The Ministry can also consider releasing a percentage of funds without 
waiting for the SAAP within the first month of the financial year. 
3.12   The Committee observed that in the NAM governance and 
implementation mechanism, the same entity performs various roles of 
policy formulation, regulation, financing, purchasing, and provisioning . 
After carefully considering and analysing  the current challenges facing the 
implementation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), the Committee 
underscores the critical need to delineate  roles and responsibilities 
regarding purchasing, financing, provisioning, and policy -making 
functions. The Committee believes effective implementation demands a 
decentralised framework, empowering regional administrations and field 
teams with contextual understanding and expertise regarding ground -level 
dynamics.  
3.13     The Committee also notes the delay in submission of completed/ 
audited UCs with relevant documents as one of the major impediments in 
the implementation of NAM. The delay in UC submissions is typically a 


19 
 
procedural, financial management and accountability issue . For this, the 
Committee recommends streamlining the proc edure, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, if required, towards a just -in-time budget release 
and immediate receipt of UC. 
3.14 The Ministry has taken the following measures to tackle the challenges: 
 i. The Ministry of Ayush has requested the State/UT for a dedicated 
administrative set with an adequate workforce in the States/UTs where it is not 
available for effective implementation of the Scheme.  
 ii. State/UT Governments have been requested to strengthen SPMU/DPMU as 
per NAM guidelines by deploying an adequate workforce.   
 
3.15 The Committee takes note of the challenges faced  and the subsequent 
measures taken  by the Ministry to improve the  implementation of the 
National Ayush Mission. To overcome the challenges mentioned in the 
implementation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), the Committee 
suggests the following measures: 
 
1. Capacity Building and Training: 
 Conduct training programs for existing staff and recruit 
additional personnel with expertise in Ayush systems to address 
the inadequate administrative setup. 
 Provide specialised training to the State Program Management 
Unit (SPMU) and District Program Management Unit (DPMU) 
staff to enhance their skills in managing Ayush programs 
effectively. 
2. Timely Operationalisation of AHWCs: 
 Develop a detailed timeline and action plan for the  
establishment and operationalisation of Ayush Health and 
Wellness Centers (AHWCs). 
 Collaborate with local health authorities, NGOs, and 
community leaders to streamline the process and address any 
local-level challenges hindering the timely set up of AHWCs. 
3. Regular Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 Implement a robust monitoring and evaluation sy stem to track 
the progress of AHWCs and other program components. 

20 
 
 Conduct regular site visits, inspections, and performance 
assessments to identify and address operational delays 
promptly. 
4. Streamlining Documentation Process: 
 Provide clear guidelines and te mplates for the submission of 
completed and audited Utilisation Certificates (UCs) along with 
relevant documents. 
 Conduct workshops and training sessions for implementing 
agencies on proper documentation procedures, emphasising the 
importance of timely submissions. 
5. Utilisation of Technology: 
 Implement digital platforms for submission and tracking of 
UCs and other relevant documents to streamline the 
administrative processes. 
 Utilise technology for training purposes, ensuring that all 
stakeholders are well-versed in the use of digital tools for 
efficient program management. 
6. Financial Incentives: 
 Consider providing financial incentives or rewards for 
states/UTs that demonstrate exemplary performance in the 
timely establishment of administrative setups, A HWCs, and 
submission of required documentation. 
7. Regular Communication and Reporting: 
 Establish a transparent and regular communication system 
between the Ministry of Ayush and State/UT Governments for 
timely reporting of progress and challenges faced. 
 Encourage open dialogue to address issues promptly and share 
best practices among different regions. 
 
 
 

21 
 
Way Forward 
 
3.16 Based on the challenges faced in the implementation of the National 
Ayush Mission (NAM), the Committee suggests some potential ways forward to 
strengthen its impact and achieve the scheme‟s intended objectives: 
1. Deepening Quality Control and Standardisation: 
 Investing in advanced analytical labs and robust testing protocols. 
 Implementing stricter Good Ma nufacturing Practices (GMP) and Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAP) for Ayush products. 
 Harmonizing Ayush quality standards with international benchmarks like 
WHO. 
 Develop a robust framework along the lines of modern medicine to 
monitor and address adverse effects of Ayush medicines. 
2. Boosting Research and Evidence-Based Practice: 
 Increasing funding for high -quality clinical research on efficacy and 
safety of Ayush therapies, focusing on chronic diseases and preventive 
care. 
 Encouraging collaboration between Ayush and allopathic researchers for 
comprehensive healthcare solutions. 
 Establishing standardised research methodologies and transparent data 
sharing mechanisms. 
 Integrating evidence -based Ayush practices into mainstream me dical 
education and clinical guidelines. 
3. Bridging the Integration Gap: 
 Developing clear referral pathways and collaborative protocols between 
Ayush and allopathic healthcare systems. 
 Integrating Ayush practitioners into primary healthcare teams and 
community health campaigns. 
 Creating joint Ayush-allopathy clinics and hospitals for holistic patient 
care. 

22 
 
 Investing in training and capacity building for allopathic doctors on basic 
Ayush principles and applications. 
4. Enhancing Sustainability and Equitable Access: 
 Exploring public -private partnerships and innovative financing 
mechanisms to sustain NAM beyond public funding. 
 Prioritising resource allocation and program implementation in under -
served rural areas and marginalised communities. 
 Focusing on community-based Ayush interventions and empowerment of 
local healers. 
 Leveraging technology for telemedicine, online consultations, and digital 
training platforms. 
5. Building Consumer Confidence and Advocacy: 
 Launching nationwide awareness cam paigns highlighting the scientific 
basis and benefits of Ayush. 
 Promoting responsible advertising and patient education on the safe and 
effective use of Ayush medicines. 
 Actively engaging with consumer advocacy groups and traditional 
knowledge holders. 
 Establishing independent certification bodies and transparent labelling 
systems for Ayush products. 
3.17 By focusing on these strategic areas, the National Ayush Mission can 
move beyond infrastructure development and pave the way for a genuinely 
integrated and evidence -based healthcare system that harnesses the unique 
strengths of traditional Indian medicine. These measures will ensure widespread 
access to safe, effective, and affordable Ayush care for all, contributing 
significantly to India's overall healthcare advancement. 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
Objectives and Scope of the National Ayush Mission 
 The Committee notes the foresighted objectives of the National Ayush 
Mission. The Committee is hopeful that the Scheme can transform India's 
traditional systems of medicine. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government intensify its focus on implementing the National Ayush 
Mission (NAM) by strategically aligning its objectives with mainstream 
healthcare delivery. The Committee op ines that collaboration between 
traditional and modern medical practitioners will be crucial inthe effective 
implementation of NAM. Additionally, investing in robust research and 
development, enhancing educational institutions, and promoting awareness 
will contribute to establishing Ayush as a viable and integral part of the 
healthcare system. This concerted effort will not only improve accessibility 
to Ayush services but also foster a holistic approach to health and wellness, 
ensuring the successful mainstreaming of traditional systems in the national 
healthcare framework. 
(Para 1.11) 
Budgetary allocation and utilisation status 
 
The Committee observesalthough there has been a consistent upward 
trend of fund utilisation in the past 3 years, the actual utilisation of funds is 
still low. In RE 2022 -23, despite an allocation of Rs. 643.80 crore, only Rs. 
549.15 crore was spentwhich is  about 85 percent.In view of the low 
utilisation of funds andconsidering the allocated fund of Rs. 1200.00 crore 
for 2023 -24, the Committee urges the Ministry to focus on thorough and 
complete fund utilisation. The Committee asserts that utilisation trends and 
absorption capacity justify increased funds, especially for NAM, the 
Ministry's sole Centrally Sponsored Scheme with diverse components. 
These funds should be optimally employed to revitalise and enhance Ayush 
systems in public health delivery services. 
(Para 1.12) 
Flexible Component 
The Committee notes that in its vision, NAM intends to create an 
enabling environment for research and development in Ayush through 

24 
 
various initiatives, programs, and aspects of its implementation. The 
Committee is, theref ore, of the opinion that "Promotion of Research and 
Development" should be prominently included as one of the components of 
NAM. Similarly, the flexible component, which allows 25% flexible usage of 
funds, should include research and development as a supported activity. 
(Para 2.3) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the National Ayush Mission's 
(NAM) initiatives like Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs/Arogya 
Mandirs) and co -location of Ayush facilities with Primary Health Centres 
(PHCs) and Community Health Centres (CHCs) represent a unique 
opportunity to strengthen clinical evidence and promote research and 
development (R&D) in Ayush systems. Standardised electronic medical 
records in HWCs and co-located Ayush facilities can systematically capture 
patient da ta on diagnoses, treatments, and outcomes, enabling large -scale 
epidemiological studies and comparative effectiveness research. HWCs and 
co-located facilities can build trust with communities, facilitating long -term 
monitoring of patients and providing val uable insights into the chronic 
disease management potential of Ayush therapies. 
(Para 2.4) 
 
 The Committee believes that standardised data collection can pave 
the way for identifying biomarkers associated with specific Ayush 
interventions, opening doors for further research into mechanisms of action 
and personalised medicine. 
(Para 2.5) 
 The Committee further recommends the following measures to 
develop clinical Research Infrastructure: 
 Strengthening manpower and training: Upgrading infrastructure and 
providing training opportunities for Ayush practitioners at HWCs 
can enhance their research skills and capacity to participate in 
clinical trials. 

25 
 
 Establishing research networks:  Collaboration among Ayush 
facilities and institutions can facilitate multicentric  clinical trials and 
improve research quality. 
 Standardisation of protocols and interventions:  Developing 
standardised protocols for Ayush interventions can ensure data 
consistency and enable robust clinical research. 
 Community Engagement:  Engaging communi ties in research design 
and implementation through Ayush facilities can address their 
specific needs and ensure culturally relevant research outcomes. 
 Evidence Recording: Data gathered and generated in centres should 
be recorded and publicised. The clinica lly supported research and 
peer-reviewed articles should be placed in Ayush and allopathic 
medical colleges for better outreach, understanding, and 
coordination.  
(Para 2.6) 
Co-location of Ayush facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), 
Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) 
2.11 The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Ministry of Ayush in 
developing a pluralistic and holistic system of integrative healthcare. The 
Committee believes that co-located Ayush facilities at PHCs and CHCs may 
act as a one -stop center for both conventional and traditional healthcare 
services and thus strengthen access to Ayush services.  For better 
coordination, the Committee recommends the sharing of infrastructure, 
medical equipment, and administrativ e staff at Ayush facilities and 
allopathic teams, thus optimising resource utilisation and cost-effectiveness. 
(Para 2.11) 
 Physicians from both systems can work together to develop 
comprehensive treatment plans for patients, considering both Indian and 
Western medical perspectives. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
ensure at least one specialist practitioner in 
Ayurveda/Homoeopathy/Yoga/Siddha in these co -located facilities. The 
Committee hopes that this initiative may result in integrating the Ay ush 
system of medicine for managing chronic conditions like respiratory 
ailments, digestive problems, and musculoskeletal disorders. 

26 
 
(Para 2.12) 
 The Committee, at this juncture, notices that in some states and UTs, 
a separate Department of Ayush has not b een opened. The Committee, to 
boost the Ayush system and for better coordination in Ayush Healthcare, 
recommends the Ministry of Ayush to impress upon and persuade the 
States and UTs with no separate department of Ayush to create such a 
department for spee dy development and implementation of Ayush sector 
and schemes respectively 
(Para 2.13) 
 
Traditional Medicine systems in India, China, South Korea and Africa 
 
The Committee notes that, like China, the Ministry of Ayush's efforts 
to establish 12,500 Health and Wellness Centres (since renamed as Arogya 
Mandirs) go a long way in establishing Ayush as a medicinal system with 
the potential to fulfill the objectives of the universal health program. Like 
China, the Government of India should also devise ways to in tegrate the 
Ayush system with poverty alleviation initiatives to boost community 
engagement. Similarly, the Ministry of Ayush should collaborate with the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to implement measures ensuring 
that the health workforce compreh ends the importance of integrating 
systems. This collaboration aims to establish a pluralistic health system that 
caters to the population's diverse needs. Facilitating a dialogue among 
health providers from various systems becomes imperative for optimisin g 
patient outcomes. Substantial reforms in Indian medical education are 
essential to instill in medical students and practitioners an attitude 
supportive of the integration of modern medicine and traditional medicine. 
As a recommendation, the Committee sug gests incorporating awareness of 
Ayush systems into school curricula, a significant step towards minimising 
knowledge barriers between Ayush and modern medicine. 
(Para 2.22) 
 
The Committee recommends that given the global evidence quoted 
above, India must pursue private insurance companies to include AYUSH 
treatments, such as Panchkarma and other therapies, wherever scope 
prevails. The Committee also recommends that the Government persuade 
the countries to legalise the Ayurveda stream of medicines in the US  and 
other countries. The Committee feels that this should be combined with 
ensuring insurance coverage of Ayush treatments and practicing them in a 
similar vein to promote the practice of Ayush treatments in countries like 
the USA, UK, etc., The Governmen t must persuade companies providing 

27 
 
insurance in those countries. Drawing from the experiences of South Korea, 
the Committee would like to recommend the Government take adequate 
measures to integrate the financial component of fixing rates for 
consultation in Ayush. 
(Para 2.23) 
Quality Control of Ayush Drugs 
 The Committee understands that the quality of the medicines is 
essential as concerns have been raised over the high metal contents in the 
Ayush drugs, which damage people's health. In this regard, the Committee 
acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry in pharmacovigilance of 
the Ayush drugs. To accentuate these measures, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry further strengthen regulatory frameworks 
by developing user -friendly systems for hea lthcare professionals and 
consumers to report adverse events related to Ayush medicines. The 
Ministry should also conduct regular post -marketing surveillance of Ayush 
medicines to monitor real -world safety and efficacy. This provides ongoing 
data for conti nuous improvement of quality. The generated data may also 
help identify potential safety concerns and take prompt action. 
(para 3.3) 
The Ministry may explore collaborating with the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and the International Organisation for 
Standardisation (ISO) to harmonise Ayush quality standards with 
international norms. This may facilitate global trade and recognition of 
Ayush products. The Ministry should also sign Mutual Recognition 
Agreements (MRAs) with other countries for regulatory comp liance. The 
Committee is of the view that these steps may reduce duplicate testing and 
certification procedures, resulting inease of the export and import of Ayush 
products.  
(Para 3.4) 
Implementation Status of National Ayush Mission 
 The Committee understands that the National Ayush Mission has 
certainly provided the required fillip to the traditional medicine sector of 
the country. The Committee notes that the scheme has provisionedfor the 
establishment of Ayush hospitals, dispensarie s, and Health and Wellness 
Centres across the length and breadth of the country, however, the 
Committee more than 69% of the integrated Ayushhospitals approved 
under NAM are still either under construction or the construction has not 

28 
 
started yet. Similarly , only about 65% of the sanctioned A -HWCs have 
been established. The Committee recommends that since the Ayush sector 
is rising gradually and there are still important milestones and targets yet 
to be achieved under NAM, the Ministry should consider extend ing the 
period of the scheme beyond FY24 for at least 5 more years.  
(Para 3.6) 
 At this juncture, the Committee would like to mention that it heard 
the Director of the National Institute of Sowa-Rigpa (NISR)-Leh Ladakh on 
various aspects of this traditional system of medicine. The Committee 
observes that Sowa -Rigpa is particularly prevalent in the Himalayan 
regions of the country. It is a recognised system of medicine under the 
Indian Medicine Central Central Council Act,1970. Besides the 
development of the Trans-Himalayan Herbal Garden in Leh Ladakh, there 
are several other activities conducted by Sowa -Rigpa practitioners and 
institutes in providing healthcare. 6 institutes are offering undergraduate 
courses.   The Committee is, however, at a loss  to know as to why Sowa -
Rigpa has not been included in the National Ayush Mission and therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to give due consideration for including this 
system also under NAM. 
(Para 3.7) 
Challenges faced in the implementation of the National Ayush Mission 
 
 The Committee observed that finalising the State Annual Action Plan 
(SAAP) and its approval process takes longer. Based on the pace of 
utilisation and availability of funds with the Ministry, funds are released in 
instalments very late in th e financial year. One of the reasons noticed was 
the large number of budget line items in the Action Plans. The Committee 
observes that reducing the budget line items in the Action Plans can 
improve the processing time and enhance administrative efficiency . 
Strengthening the outcome -based budgeting will also achieve nudge the 
states to transform their health profile and promote cooperative federalism. 
The Ministry can also consider releasing a percentage of funds without 
waiting for the SAAP within the first month of the financial year. 
(Para 3.11) 
3.12   The Committee observed that in the NAM governance and 
implementation mechanism, the same entity performs various roles of 

29 
 
policy formulation, regulation, financing, purchasing, and provisioning. 
After carefully considering and analysing the current challenges facing the 
implementation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), the Committee 
underscores the critical need to delineate roles and responsibilities 
regarding purchasing, financing, provisioning, and  policy-making 
functions. The Committee believes effective implementation demands a 
decentralised framework, empowering regional administrations and field 
teams with contextual understanding and expertise regarding ground -level 
dynamics.  
(Para 3.12) 
 
3.13     The Committee also notes the delay in submission of completed/ 
audited UCs with relevant documents as one of the major impediments in 
the implementation of NAM. The delay in UC submissions is typically a 
procedural, financial management and accountabi lity issue. For this, the 
Committee recommends streamlining the procedure, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, if required, towards a just -in-time budget release 
and immediate receipt of UC. 
(Para 3.13) 
 
3.15 The Committee takes note of the chall enges faced and the subsequent 
measures taken by the Ministry to improve the implementation of the 
National Ayush Mission. To overcome the challenges mentioned in the 
implementation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), the Committee 
suggests the following measures: 
 
1. Capacity Building and Training: 
 Conduct training programs for existing staff and recruit 
additional personnel with expertise in Ayush systems to address 
the inadequate administrative setup. 
 Provide specialised training to the State Program Management 
Unit (SPMU) and District Program Management Unit (DPMU) 
staff to enhance their skills in managing Ayush programs 
effectively. 
2. Timely Operationalisation of AHWCs: 

30 
 
 Develop a detailed timeline and action plan for the 
establishment and operationalisation of Ayush Health and 
Wellness Centers (AHWCs). 
 Collaborate with local health authorities, NGOs, and 
community leaders to streamline the process and address any 
local-level challenges hindering the timely set up of AHWCs. 
3. Regular Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 Implement a robust monitoring and evaluation system to track 
the progress of AHWCs and other program components. 
 Conduct regular site visits, inspections, and performance 
assessments to identify and address operational delays 
promptly. 
4. Streamlining Documentation Process: 
 Provide clear guidelines and templates for the submission of 
completed and audited Utilisation Certificates (UCs) along with 
relevant documents. 
 Conduct workshops and training sessions for implementing 
agencies on proper documentation procedures, emphasising the 
importance of timely submissions. 
5. Utilisation of Technology: 
 Implement digital platforms for submission and tracking of 
UCs and other relevant documents to streamline the 
administrative processes. 
 Utilise technology  for training purposes, ensuring that all 
stakeholders are well -versed in the use of digital tools for 
efficient program management. 
6. Financial Incentives: 
 Consider providing financial incentives or rewards for 
states/UTs that demonstrate exemplary performa nce in the 
timely establishment of administrative setups, AHWCs, and 
submission of required documentation. 
7. Regular Communication and Reporting: 

31 
 
 Establish a transparent and regular communication system 
between the Ministry of Ayush and State/UT Governments for 
timely reporting of progress and challenges faced. 
 Encourage open dialogue to address issues promptly and share 
best practices among different regions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
Annexure-I 
 
The status of co-located Ayush facilities at PHCs, CHCs and DHs 
SI.No. Name of the State/UT DHs DHs PHCs Total 
1. Bihar 36 0 0 36 
2. Chhattisgarh 18 98 454 570 
3. Himachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 
4. Jammu & Kashmir 15 13 375 403 
5. Jharkhand 24 90 97 211 
6. Madhya Pradesh 36 99 287 422 
7. Orissa 0 301 850 1151 
8. Rajasthan 1 171 432 604 
9. Uttar Pradesh 102 666 627 1395 
10. Uttarakhand 13 53 44 110 
11. Arunachal Pradesh 16 34 50 100 
12. Assam 21 110 364 495 
13. Manipur 7 17 78 102 
14. Meghalaya 11 24 55 90 
15. Mizoram 12 9 10 31 
16. Nagaland 9 20 9 38 
17. Sikkim 4 1 4 9 
18. Tripura 3 21 84 108 
19. Andhra Pradesh 9 105 273 387 
20. Goa 2 6 22 30 
21. Gujarat 0 0 872 872 
22. Haryana 21 97 109 227 
23. Karnataka 15 78 349 442 
24. Kerala 0 0 0 0 
25. Maharashtra 23 238 20 281 

33 
 
26. Punjab 15 69 95 179 
27. Tamil Nadu 37 385 475 897 
28. Telangana 0 42 352 394 
29. West Bengal 8 280 368 656 
30. Andaman &Nicobar Islands 3 4 20 27 
31. Chandigarh 1 2 0 3 
32. Dadra Nagar Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 2 4 9 15 
33. Delhi 0 0 0 0 
34. Ladakh 2 7 32 41 
35. Lakshadweep 2 3 4 9 
36. Puducherry 4 4 39 47 
 All India 472 3051 6859 10382 
Source: MIS-NHM database as of 30th June 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
Annexure-II 
 
State/UT-wise status of treatment centers wherein allopathic and Ayush systems of 
 
medicines are available in one place under CCRAS, CCRH, CCRUM, CCRS 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Name of the Name of the hospitals 
 States Research  
  Councils  
    
1. Delhi CCRAS Ayurveda   Treatment   Centre, Lady   Hardinge 
   Hospital, New Delhi 
2. Delhi CCRAS Ayurveda   Central   Research   Unit, Safdarjung 
   Hospital, New Delhi 
3. Delhi CCRAS Ayurveda Chikitsa Kendra, Atal Bihar Vajpayee 
   Institute of Medical Sciences and Dr. Ram Manohar 
   Lohia Hospital, New Delhi 
4. Andhra CCRH Clinical   Research   Unit (Homoeopathy), Old 
 Pradesh  Maternity Hospital Campus Tirupathi 
    
5. Bihar CCRH Clinical Verification Unit (Homoeopathy), Guru 
   Govind Singh Hospital, Patna City, Patna 
6. Uttar Pradesh CCRH Clinical Trial Unit (Homoeopathy), Baba  Raghav 
   Das Medical College, Gorakhpur 
7. Delhi CCRH Homoeopathic   Treatment   Centres   Safdarjung 
   Hospital, New Delhi 
8. Delhi CCRH Homoeopathic Treatment Centres Lady  Hardinge 
   Medical College & Hospital, New Delhi 
9. Delhi CCRH Homoeopathic Treatment Centres Delhi Cantonment 
   General Hospital, New Delhi 
10. Delhi CCRS Siddha   Clinical   Research   Unit   at   Safdarjung 
   Hospital, New Delhi. 

35 
 
11. Andhra CCRS Siddha   Clinical   Research   Unit, Tirupati-   Sri 
 Pradesh  Venkateshwara   Institute   of   Medical   Sciences 
   (SVIMS) Tirupathi 
12. Goa CCRS Siddha Clinical Research Unit, Goa-  Old  Goa 
   Medical College Building, Ribander, Goa 
13. Tamil Nadu CCRS Siddha    OPD    wing    -National    Institute    of 
   Epidemiology - ICMR unit, Chennai 
14. Chhattisgarh CCRS Siddha OPD wing - All India Institute of Medical 
   Sciences (AIIMS), Raipur 
15. Uttarakhand CCRS Siddha OPD wing - All India Institute of Medical 
   Sciences-AIIMS Rishikesh 
16. Rajasthan CCRS Siddha OPD wing - All India Institute of Medical 
   Sciences (AIIMS), Jodhpur 
17. Delhi CCRUM Atal Bihar Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences 
   and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi 
18. Delhi CCRUM Dr. Deen Dayal Upadhaya Hospital, New Delhi 
    
19. Delhi CCRUM Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi 
    
20. Maharashtra CCRUM J.J. Hospital, Mumbai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Annexure-III 
(i) State/UT wise integrated Ayush hospital approved under NAM from 2014-15 to 2022-
23 
 
Sl. No. State/UT Location System of medicine 
No. 
of 
beds 
Status 
1.  
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Port Blair 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
2.  Andhra Pradesh 
Kakinada 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Visakhapatnam. 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
3.  
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Bhalukpong 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Likabali 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
4.  Assam 
Goalpara 
Ayurveda 50 Construction 
completed 
Majuli Ayurveda 50 Functional 
Kokrajhar 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Baksa 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Morigaon 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy  
50 Under 
construction 
Kaliabor 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy  
50 Under 
construction 
Diphu Ayurveda and 30 Under 

37 
 
Homoeopathy  construction 
Bajali 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy  
10 Under 
construction 
5.  Bihar Patna 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy, 
Unani and Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
6.  Chandigarh Chandigarh 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy 
50 Construction 
completed 
7.  Chhattisgarh 
JangirChampa 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Mahasamund Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Koria Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Korba Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Kanker Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Narayanpur Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Bijapur Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
Dantewada Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
10 Under 
construction 
DalliRajhara Ayurveda 30 Under 
construction 

38 
 
8.  Goa 
South Goa 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
North Goa 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
9.  Gujarat Surat 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
10.  Haryana Hisar 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy,Unani 
and Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
11.  
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Kullu 
Ayurveda, Sowa 
Rigpa, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Mandi 
Ayurveda, Sowa 
Rigpa, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
12.  
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Kishtwar 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Kupwara 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Bilawar 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Yoga 
&Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Kulgam 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
50 Under 
construction 

39 
 
Unani, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
Samba 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
13.  Jharkhand 
Ranchi 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Gumla 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Bokaro 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Deoghar 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Palamu 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Dumka 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Jamshedpur 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
14.  Karnataka 
Gadag 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
50 Functional 
Mangalore  
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
50 Functional 
Thrithahalli 
Ayurveda & 
Homoeopathy 
10 Construction 
not started 
15.  Kerala 
Chalakudy, 
Thrissur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy, 
Siddha, and Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Mattannur, 
Kannur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy, 
Siddha, and Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 

40 
 
Adoor, 
Pathanamthitta 
 Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
10 Construction 
not started 
Attapadi 
Ayurveda,Homoeop
athy, Siddha, and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Construction 
not started 
Kottarakara, 
Kollam 
Ayurveda,Siddha, 
and Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
30 Construction 
not started 
16.  Lakshadweep Kavaratti 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
20 Functional 
17.  Maharashtra 
Nandurbar 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
50 Under 
construction 
Sindhudurg 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
50 Under 
construction 
Pune 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
50 Construction 
completed 
Ahmednagar 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani 
50 Construction 
completed 
18.  Manipur 
Moreh, 
TengnoupalDist 
Ayurveda, , 
Homoeopathy  and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Functional 
Churachandpur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
KwakeithelKonj
engLeikai 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Functional 
Keirao, Imphal 
East District 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
50 Functional 

41 
 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
Chandel 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy 
andYoga & 
Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Jiribam 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Kangpokpi 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Bishnupur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Noney 
Ayurveda,Homoeop
athy and Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Thoubal 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
Senapati 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
10 Under 
construction 
19.  Madhya Pradesh 
Bhopal Ayurveda and Yoga 50 Functional 
Indore 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Narsinghpur 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Construction 
Completed 
Amarkantak 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy   
50 Under 
construction 
Mandleshwar 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
50 Under 
construction 

42 
 
Yoga 
Balaghat 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
and Homoeopathy   
50 Construction 
not started 
Sehore 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
and Homoeopathy   
50 Construction 
not started 
Guna 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
and Homoeopathy   
50 Construction 
not started 
Panna 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
and Homoeopathy   
50 Construction 
not started 
Bhind 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
and Homoeopathy   
50 Construction 
not started 
20.  Meghalaya 
Sohra 
(Cherapunje), 
East Khasi Hills 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Umtrew, RiBhoi 
District 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
21.  Mizoram 
Aizwal 
Ayurveda, and 
Homoeopathy   
50 Under 
construction 
Saitul 
Ayurveda, and 
Homoeopathy   
50 Under 
construction 
22.  Nagaland 
Noklak, 
Tuensang 
District 
Ayurveda, , 
Homoeopathy  and 
Yoga 
30 Functional 
Razha, Chedema 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Sapangya 
(Chungtia) 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Yachem, 
Longleng 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
30 Under 
construction 
23.  Odisha Dhenkanal Ayurveda, 50 Under 

43 
 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
construction 
Behrampur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Balasore 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
24.  Puducherry 
Villianur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Siddha 
50 Functional 
Yanam 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Siddha 
50 Under 
construction 
25.  Punjab 
Moga 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
DayalpurSodhia
Zirakpur 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
26.  Rajasthan 
Bhilwara 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, 
50 Functional 
Ajmer 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, 
50 Functional 
Churu 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, 
50 Functional 
Bikaner 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, 
50 Functional 

44 
 
Jaipur 
Ayurveda,Homoeop
athy and Unani, 
50 Functional 
Sikar 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, 
50 Under 
construction 
27.  Sikkim 
Kyongsa, West 
Sikkim 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy   
50 Functional 
NIT, Deorali 
Sowa-Rigpa 30 Under 
construction 
28.  Tamil Nadu 
Theni 
Siddha, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Functional 
Thiruvannamalai 
Siddha, Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
50 Functional 
Pudukkottai 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Siddha, Yoga 
& Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Namakkal 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Unani, Siddha, Yoga 
& Naturopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
29.  Tripura 
Paradise 
Chowmuhani, 
Agartala 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
50 Functional 
South Sabroom 
Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
30.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jaunpur 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
30 Construction 
not started 
Bulandshahar 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Bilhour, Kanpur Ayurveda, Unani, 50 Functional 

45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uttar Pradesh 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
West Kalli, 
Lucknow 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Badrasi, 
Varanasi 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
NawabGanj, 
Bareilly 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Basti 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Construction 
Completed 
SirathuKausham
bi 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Sonbhadra 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
OraiJalaun 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Construction 
Completed 
SantKabir Nagar  
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Saharanpur  
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Deoria 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Lalitpur 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
50 Functional 

46 
 
Yoga 
Amethi 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Kanpur Dehat 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Firozpur, Balia 
District 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Raebareli 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Baghpat 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Construction 
completed 
Fatehpur 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Shravasti 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Unnao 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Hardoi 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Gorakhpur 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy 
andYoga 
50 Under 
construction 
Sambhal 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 

47 
 
Mirzapur 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Under 
construction 
31.  Uttarakhand 
Haldwani 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy  
50 Functional 
Jakhnidhar, 
Tehri 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy 
50 Under 
construction 
Tanakpur, 
Champawat 
Ayurveda and 
Homoeopathy 
50 Construction 
not started 
PiranKaliyar 
(Haridwar) 
Unani 50 Construction 
not started 
 West Bengal 
Tapsikhata, 
Alipurduar 
District 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
Paschim 
Midnapore 
Ayurveda, Unani, 
Homoeopathy and 
Yoga 
50 Functional 
 
 
  

48 
 
Annexure- IV 
(ii) State/UT wise Ayush Health & Wellness Centers (AHWCs)approved under NAM 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the States/UTs 
Total No. of 
approved 
AYUSH 
HWCs 
Functional 
AYUSH HWCs as 
reported by 
States/UTs 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Island 6 6 
2 Andhra Pradesh 203 126 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 89 49 
4 Assam 489 268 
5 Bihar 388 113 
6 Chandigarh 12 5 
7 Chhattisgarh 400 400 
8 Delhi 0 0 
9 Dadra &Nagar Haveli and Daman 
&Diu 
1 0 
10 Goa 74 72 
11 Gujarat 365 283 
12 Haryana 569 372 
13 Himachal Pradesh 740 303 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 456 442 
15 Jharkhand 745 560 
16 Karnataka 376 376 
17 Kerala 520 334 
18 Ladakh 0 0 
19 Lakshadweep 7 7 
20 Madhya Pradesh 762 562 
21 Maharashtra 390 281 
22 Manipur 67 15 
23 Meghalaya 45 22 
24 Mizoram 38 38 
25 Nagaland 49 47 
26 Odisha 422 250 

49 
 
27 Puducherry 4 4 
28 Punjab 217 0 
29 Rajasthan 2019 919 
30 Sikkim 18 18 
31 Tamil Nadu 650 250 
32 Telangana 421 421 
33 Tripura 84 38 
34 Uttar Pradesh 1034 736 
35 Uttarakhand 300 267 
36 West Bengal 540 520 
Total 12500 8104 
 
 