PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 36
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH NOVEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 TH NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—42
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government .................................................................................. 2—8
CHAPTER II R ecommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................. 9—23
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ...... 24—41
CHAPTER IV Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited ............................................................ 42
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 43—47
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 49—52
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 53 —68

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss
LOK SABHA
11. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
12. Shri Ashok Argal
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
18. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
20. Shri N. Kristappa
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Shrimati Meena Singh
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
31. Shri Ratan Singh

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.47)
of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2008-09.
2. The Twenty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 30th April, 2008 and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 30th April, 2008. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Report, received from the Department of AYUSH were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 12th November, 2009.
3. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
the 12th November, 2009.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 12 , 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika  21, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Twenty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH for the year 2008-09.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
2.1, 2.6, 2.10, 3.6, 3.10, 3.17, 6.9, 7.2, 7.5, 9.7, 9.8, 10.3, 13.3 Total–12
(Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 2.5, 3.3, 3.11, 3.18, 3.23, 4.1, 5.4, 6.7, 6.12, 6.13,
8.5, 8.10, 9.5, 9.10, 9.16, 9.19, 9.22, 10.10, 10.13, 10.20, 11.3, 11.6, 12.2,
Total–23 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.7, 2.8, 2.13, 3.4, 3.13, 3.20, 3.22, 4.3, 4.7,
4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 5.2, 6.4, 6.16, 8.6, 8.7, 8.13, 9.11, 9.14, 9.24,
10.14, 10.16, 10.19, 11.7, 14.1 Total–28  (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: –Nil–  (Chapter-IV)

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.1 Against a projection of Rs.4102.00 crores by the Department of AYUSH for implementation
of existing schemes and launching of new schemes during the Eleventh Plan, a plan outlay of
Rs.3988.00 crores has been allocated by the Planning Commission. The Committee welcomes the
enhanced allocation for AYUSH Sector in the Eleventh Plan. The Committee, however, observes that
Tenth Plan provision of Rs.1194.60 crores although less than one-third of Eleventh Plan allocation
remained under-utilised with an expenditure of only Rs.1030.15 crores reported at the end of the
plan period. BE allocation in the last three years of the Tenth Plan had to be brought down at the
RE stage, with the reduced allocation too remaining under-utilised. The Committee views with
serious concern the continuance of this trend in the Eleventh Plan also.
Action Taken
The initial Tenth Plan approval outlay of the Department was Rs.775 crore which was
revised upward to Rs.1194.60 crore through Annual Plan allocation. The shortfall in expenditure
during the last three years of the Tenth Plan vis-a-vis the BE allocation is mainly attributable to
less expenditure incurred under setting up of All India Institute of Ayurveda, North Eastern Institute
of Folk Medicine and North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy which have been
sanctioned by the Government towards the end of financial year 2007-08. A high level monitoring
committee under the Secretary (AYUSH) is overseeing the implementation of the schemes i.e. All
India Institute of Ayurveda, filling up of vacancies/strengthening of infrastructure in NIUM, scaling
up of financial assistance by revising the existing Centrally Sponsored/Central Sector Schemes like
Development of Institutions, Drug Quality Control, Medicinal Plants Conservation, International
Exchange Programme/International Co-operation, Re-orientation Training Programme and Golden
Triangle Partnership Projects/Extra Mural Research. Department of AYUSH has started releasing of
grants under Centrally Sponsored Schemes directly to State Health Societies from 2007-08 onwards
to cut down delays. Further State agencies have been asked to get construction work done by any
agency which can utilize the grants expeditiously. The situation of pending of UCs has improved
because of rigorous monitoring by the Department facilitating fresh release of grant. To ensure that
funds allocated in the Eleventh  Plan are fully utilized the Department has already obtained the
administrative approval on most of the new and revised schemes.
Recommendations/Observations
2.6 The Committee deplores the fact that the BE 2007-08 has to be revised downward in some
of the most important schemes/projects of the Department. The Committee feels that had the
projects/schemes under reference, been monitored every quarter, the funds allocated could have
been put to more gainful use. The Committee, therefore, directs the Department to be more vigilant
in future so that such delays do not recur and the bottlenecks could be taken care of at the initial
stage itself. Last year, the Committee had observed that most of the States are not having an
2

3
effective Commissionerate/Directorate of AYUSH for proper planning, implementation and
monitoring of AYUSH Schemes. The Committee hopes that most of the States must have taken the
required steps by now. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific action taken
including setting up of a monitoring mechanism to ensure optimum and judicious utilization of the
funds allocated for 2008-09.
Action Taken
The Department of AYUSH is closely and continuously monitoring the release of funds by
the States to the implementing agencies and also their actual utilization. The Department has an
Area Officers system under which designated officers monitor the implementation of schemes in
the States. In addition to this, the Programme Officers In-charge of the three Centrally Sponsored
Schemes also monitor the implementation of the schemes.
The Department has got NIC to develop Software to monitor the implementation of the three
Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Among other things, the software would enable the monitoring of the
flow of funds from the State Government. As the three Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the
Department of AYUSH were revised for the Eleventh Plan, certain modifications were required to be
incorporated in the software so as to accommodate the changes in the revised Schemes. Accordingly,
NIC was asked to modify the software in light of the changes required. For operationalisation of the
modified software, it has been decided to do a Pilot Project in the States of Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh. Training has already been given to the official in these
States for the purpose. All the five States have started the Pilot Project.
Recommendations/Observations
2.10 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has put in place a rigorous monitoring
mechanism to tackle the problem of high pendency of Utilization Certificates and some procedural
changes have also been effected with a view to expediting submission of UCs. Though the above
measures have borne fruit, liquidation of UCs still leaves much to be desired. The Committee notes
that as on 29-02-2008 UCs amounting to Rs.163.51 crores under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes
and Rs.59.00 crores under the Central Sector Schemes are still outstanding, which goes against the
canons of financial prudence. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the progress made
towards liquidation of UCs and the outstanding amount involved therein be reviewed on a periodic
basis by a senior officer of the Department.
Action Taken
Due to rigorous Monitoring and effective measures taken up by the Department of AYUSH,
39.67% and 40.90% respectively of UCs pertaining to Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector
Schemes have been liquidated during the financial year 2007-08. Department of AYUSH has started
releasing funds directly to the State Health Societies from 2007-08 onwards to come over delay
by States in release of funds to the implementing agencies.
The measure is expected to bring down the pendency of UCs of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes even further.
The monitoring of liquidation of UCs of previous years is done by Secretary (Ayush)/Other
Senior Officers of the Department who have been designated as area officers for various States.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee notes that there has been considerable progress in the filling up of the

4
vacant posts in NIA, though a few posts of Professor, Associate Professor and Lecturer are yet
to be filled up. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that inspite of efforts, suitable
candidates for the post of Professor is yet to be found and as a result, posts are being re-
advertised. The Committee is of the view that a review of selection procedure including the
eligibility criteria for the posts of Professor and Assistant professor needs to be made on an urgent
basis. The Committee is afraid the situation is bound to worsen with the Implementation of
Supreme Court Judgment on OBC reservation. The Committee hopes that all the 15 successful
candidates for the post of Lecturer must have joined the Institute by now.
Action Taken
Filling up of Posts : The Institute has filled up a total of 23 Teaching Posts in 2007-08
(2 Professors, 7 Associate Professors and 14 Lecturers). Now only 11 Teaching Posts are lying
vacant as indicated below and they will be filled very soon:
3 Lecturer A Screening Test held for Shortlisting the candidates for Interview.
1 Lecturer For Interview along with the above.
2 Professor
1 Associate Professor
3 Lecturer: Stand notified on all India basis. The last date was 16.6.2008. Interview for
these 6 posts will be held thereafter.
1 Post of Professor stayed by Court.
1 Associate Professor To be filled by the DPC by October, 2008 by when incumbent
Assistant Professor becomes eligible for Promotion.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
Recommendations/Observations
3.10 In its 23rd Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department presented on the
3rd May, 2007, the Committee had noted with a sense of dismay that the target of completion of
the expansion of existing 60 bedded hospital to a 100 bedded hospital at NIH, Kolkata during the
Tenth plan could not be achieved. The Committee was given to understand that instead of 100
bedded Hospital, NIH was envisaged to have a 250 bedded hospital in view of increase in the
number of seats on account of 27% reservation for OBCs. In view of the tardy progress noticed
during the Tenth Plan, the Committee had tried to put in a word of caution. The Committee was
of the view that this long pending project needed to be completed in a time-bound manner under
close monitoring by the Department as well as the Institute authorities. Apprehension voiced by the
Committee has proved to be more than true. Utilisation of only Rs.48.00 lakhs against a non-plan
allocation of Rs.1.50 crores clearly indicates that the expansion project is yet to see the light of
day. Serious reservation expressed by the Committee in its 26th Report presented on the
7th December, 2007 has also failed to make any impact on the Department. The delay is certain
to cause cost overruns. Apart from it, the Committee is seriously concerned about the fact that
if the upgradation to 100 bedded Hospital could not be squeezed within the Tenth Plan, then what
is the guarantee for completion of the upgradation to the 250 bedded Hospital by 2009 and that
too out of the meager allocation of Rs.17 crores for 2008-09. The Committee fails to comprehend
the reasons for there being no mention about this major project in its Action Plan for 2008-09. It
seems that NIH will continue to function with a 60 bedded hospital only at least for another plan
period. The Committee, can only emphasize that Department needs to constitute a monitoring group

5
consisting of both the representatives of the Institute and the Department to not only monitor the
progress of work on a periodic basis, but also to iron out any procedural or administrative issues
that might crop up during the course of implementation of the project.
Action Taken
The number of beds in the hospital has already been enhanced from 60 to 100. On
completion of the construction of extension of hospital building by May, 2009 by CPWD the
number of beds will stand enhanced to 250. The Committee is being formed to oversee the ongoing
construction work.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE (NIUM), BANGALORE
Recommendations/Observations
3.17 The Committee deplores the fact that due to a combination of factors involving the slow
progress of construction work, non filling of vacant posts and under achieved targets for purchase
of machinery and equipments the sanctioned funds could not be utilized optimally. The fact that
the estimate submitted was reduced based on the progress of work is a clear indication that the
pace of work was tardy. The Committee is convinced that had the monitoring mechanism for the
construction work been streamlined, the progress of the construction work would have been far
better leading to optimal utilization of the funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
henceforth the Department should review the progress of work on a quarterly basis so that the
corrective action for overcoming the stumbling blocks, if any, could be taken timely.
Action Taken
The expenditure during 2008-09 to NIUM is already being monitored. The progress of
construction work in NIUM is going on steadily during the current year. 90% of the vacant posts
have since been filled up and efforts are being made to fill up the remaining. Further 9 posts on
contract and 29 posts on outsourcing basis are being filled up. Department is regularly monitoring
the work of NIUM.
YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
Recommendations/Observations
6.9 The Committee observes that one of the basic objectives of the National Policy on Indian
System of Medicine and Homoeopathy 2002 was to promote good health and expand the outreach
of health care to the people through preventive, promotive and curative interventions through ISM
and H. Yoga and Naturopathy, being cheaper and traditional curative systems, have to play a vital
role in translating the above vision into a reality. It is in this context that the Committee lauds the
role of CCRNY and the MDNIY in running the Yoga Therapy Centres in tertiary care institutions
in Delhi. At the same time, the Committee would like to be enlightened as to whether the
Department has any plans to extend the Yoga Therapy Centers to tertiary care institutions situated
in other parts of the country.
Action Taken
The CCRYN and the MDNIY do not have any immediate plans for expanding the scheme
for the setting up of therapy centres in tertiary care institutions to places outside Delhi on account
of lack of sufficient technical staff for the supervision and monitoring of such centres. However,
as a part of the planned expansion of its activities, MDNIY is setting up 30 Therapy units in CGHS

6
Dispensaries in Delhi to cater to CGHS beneficiaries. It is planned to set up 10 of these units in
2008-09 itself.
NEW INSTITUTES OF AYURVEDA, HOMOEOPATHY AND FOLK MEDICINE
All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
Recommendations/Observations
7.2 The Committee observes that the Institute was visualized as far back as February, 2004.
More than four years have elapsed since then but the operationalization of the Institute still remains
a far cry. As per the Department’s own admission, it will still take almost three more years before
its operationalization could see the light of day. Now that the Cabinet has approved the proposal,
the Committee exhorts the Department to pursue the project within a time-bound Action Plan
closely monitored by it. Every conscious effort needs to be taken so that this project does not spill
over beyond the designated time line. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard on a six-monthly basis.
Action Taken
Cabinet approved setting up of All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi on 24.1.08. Task
Force, under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (AYUSH) has been constituted for implementation.
HSCC has been appointed as in-house Consultant for the project. The progress will be reported,
on a six monthly basis till completion of the project, to Hon’ble Committee.
NORTH-EASTERN INSTITUTE OF  AYURVEDA AND HOMOEOPATHY IN SHILLONG AND
NORTH EASTERN INSTITUTE OF FOLK MEDICINE, PASSIGHAT, ARUNACHAL PRADESH
Recommendations/Observations
7.5 The Committee has been informed that the EFC approval for both the Institutes was obtained
in June and July, 2008. As per the Outcome Budget (2008-09) Cabinet approval on both the projects
has also been received. The Committee notes that a provision of Rs.10.50 crore and Rs.6.69 crore
has been made in 2008-09 for the NE Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Shillong and NE
Institute of Folk Medicine, Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh, respectively. The Committee hopes that
specific time-lines have been fixed for completion of these projects without any further delay. The
Committee would also like to point out that simultaneously, the exercise for procurement of required
infrastructure and equipment and recruitment of manpower may also be initiated.
Action Taken
Cabinet approved the setting up of North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine at Pasighat,
Arunachal Pradesh on 21.2.08. Possession of 40 acres of land has been taken. In the meantime,
Institute is to start from a rented accommodation from May, 2008. The work on survey has been
started. HSCC has been appointed as in-house Consultant for implementation of the project.
Cabinet approved the setting up of North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
at Shillong, Meghalaya on 27.3.08. Site for the Institute has been identified. HSCC is being
appointed as in-house Consultant for implementation of the project.
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
9.7 The Committee has been given to understand that a number of measures have been taken
for better implementation of the two major schemes handled by the Board as indicated below:—

7
• The project screening Committee is being restructured with domain experts so as to
improve quality of appraisal and have better techno-economic feasibility.
• Consultants are being engaged who would be working on behalf of the Board for
inviting proposals, scrutinizing proposals and other allied matters.
• State Boards have been asked to invite proposals through print media also.
• Seed Centres are to be set up in all the States in linkage with R and D institutions of
ICAR, CSIR, and State Agricultural Universities etc.
Recommendations/Observations
9.8 While appreciating the above steps, the Committee would like to emphasize that these
measures need to be backed by action at the ground level. Only then it would be possible to
achieve the mandate of the Board.
Action Taken
The point is noted for record and compliance. Measures have been incorporated in the
schemes to be implemented during the Eleventh Five Year Plan for taking up the programmes in
more concerted manner.
STANDARDISATION AND QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendations/Observations
10.3 The Committee welcomes this initiative of the Department. The Committee feels that
integration of the development of science and technology with ASU drugs will go a long way in
popularizing them globally. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the quantifiable
outcome of this initiative.
Action Taken
In Golden Triangle Partnership (GTP) Scheme Department of AYUSH – CCRAS, CSIR and
ICMR are working together for the development of ASU drugs to popularize them globally. The
achievements under this scheme are as follows:
CCRAS—
1. 16 Brainstorming sessions for 8 disease conditions have been conducted to identify suitable
Ayurvedic formulations. 39 formulations have been identified, out of which 20 formulations
have been identified for 5 prioritized conditions viz. Mutra Vikara, Sleep disorders,
Rasayana, Joint disorders, Cardiac disorders and details are sent to CSIR for preclinical
studies.
2. The work for the development of parijat ghanavati on malaria has been initiated by CCRAS
at CSMDRIA, Chennai.
3. Three batches of 8 Rasayoga viz. Rasa Manikya, Kajjali, Rasa Sindura, Basant Kusumakara
Rasa, Arogya vardhini vati, Maha Yogaraja Guggulu, Maha Laxmi Vilasa Rasa, Makardhwaja
(Swarna Ghatit) have been prepared under the supervision of CCRAS and sent to IICT,
Hyderabad for preclinical studies.
4. Draft of 5 protocols have been prepared by the CCRAS and provided to ICMR for further
revision.

8
CSIR—
1. The dossier on chemical analysis, safety/toxicity studies and biological activities of
5 formulations will be completed by 15th June, 2008 and dossier of 3 formulations will be
completed by 16th August, 2008. The work on another 12 formulations are under process.
2. The Chemical analysis of 8 Rasayogas have been completed and safety/ toxicity studies will
be completed by October, 2008.
ICMR—
The protocols for 5 diseases viz. Benign Prostate Hypertrophy, Osteoporosis, Hypertension,
Dyslipidemia and HIV/AIDS have been designed and in the verge of finalization.
ROLE OF NGOs
Recommendations/Observations
13.3 Committee’s attention has been drawn by a new scheme, ‘Funding of NGOs
for revitalization of local health tradition/midwifery practices/bone setters/veterinary care etc.’
launched in 2007-08. Against an allocation of Rs.5.00 crore, Rs.54.00 lakhs could be released upto
February, 2008 due to delay in the approval of the scheme. The Committee notes that the same
provision has been kept for 2008-09. The Committee would like to have an idea about the
modalities of this NGOs-specific scheme.
Action Taken
We have held a workshop of Stake Holders at FRLHT, Bangalore. Project Manager and Data
Entry Operator for implementation for the scheme have been appointed. The modalities of the
scheme may be seen at Annexure-V .

9
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.5 The Committee observes that performance under following programmes/Institutions during
2007-08 cannot be considered satisfactory:
(Rs. in crores)
Programme/Institution BE RE Actual
Exp. upto
Feb., 08
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur 14.82 7.25 7.25
All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi 10.00 50 lakh 0.00
CGHS Ayurveda Hospital 1.00 50 lakh 1 lakh
HPL, Ghaziabad 1.50 89 lakh 35 lakh
NIUM, Bangalore 10.00 6.73 5.38
NIN, Pune 3.88 3.28 2.98
National Medical Plant Board 80.00 50.18 44.01
Development of common facilities for 27.00 9.00 0.00
AYUSH Industry Clusters
IEC 7.00 6.25 3.93
NIS, Tamil Nadu 8.00 4.00 3.33
The Committee is also disturbed to note that provision of Rs. 40.18 crores meant for ‘Other
Miscellaneous Schemes’ had to be brought down to Rs. 27.27 crores at the RE stage with only
Rs. 7.56 crores being spent till February, 2008. Schemes like programme for Training/Fellowship/
Exposure Visit/Upgradation, TKDL and ISM&H Intellectual Property Rights, North East Institute of
AYUSH/Folk Medicine have shown nil expenditure.
Action Taken
Reasons for less expenditure item-wise is as follows:—
1. National Institute of Ayurved, Jaipur: The Plan allocation in BE was projected keeping in
view the implementation of 22% reservations for OBC in education institutions, payment of
scholarships to students and for developing adequate infrastructure with enhancement of intake
capacity of the students. The BE was kept at Rs.14.82 crores keeping in view the increase in
9

10
capacity of PG from 55 to 86 and UG from 60 to 92 for OBC quota, development of a separate
campus on additional land and payment of NPA arrears to the faculty. Since, the implementation
of reservation for OBC was put on hold and payment of arrears of NPA to faculty was not
approved by the Competent Authority, the allocation was reduced to Rs. 7.25 crores at RE stage.
2. All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi:  The Plan allocation for AIIA, Delhi was reduced
from Rs.10 crores to Rs.0.5 crores at RE stage because the Cabinet approval for the Institute was
only received on 24.01.2008. After receipt of the approval, Department has taken immediate
following steps for implementation of the project:
• HSCC has been appointed in-house Consultant for implementation of the project
• EoI for appointment of design consultant has been notified on 17.3.2008.  Two firms
have been shortlisted for submitting their offers for Design and Detailed Project
Report. It is expected that DPR would be ready and construction of work would be
awarded by 2008-09 end.
• Work of EIA and pre-construction survey has been awarded and is in progress.
3. CGHS Ayurveda Hospital: Non-filling up of vacant post.
4. Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory, Ghaziabad: Order given to HSCC, a public sector
undertaking, for purchase of instrument could not be executed by the said PSU during 2007-08.
However, now the HSCC has already supplied the instruments and settled the advances.
5. National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore: As far as the reduction in grant from
Rs.10 crore to Rs.6.73 crore in RE is concerned it has been due to the fact that the Institute was
having the unspent balance of previous years and also due to non filling up of vacant posts.
The variation between BE and RE for the year 2007-08 is mainly under the following heads:
S1. Heads of Provisions Provisions variation
No. Account made in made in
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08
in lakhs in lakhs
1 Construction 300.00 200.00 100.00
2 Pay and Allowances 250.00 174.00 76.00
3 Machinery and Equipment 170.00 90.00 60.00
Construction Activities:  M/s. HSCC (India) Ltd., Noida had submitted an estimate for
the additional funds of Rs.300.00 lakh for the additional building work in the Institute upto
31.03.2008. Based on the progress of work upto 31.01.2008, the estimate, submitted was reduced
to Rs.200.00 lakhs by M/s. HSCC India Ltd., Noida.
Pay and Allowances: Provision of Rs.250.00 lakhs was made in the Budget Estimate towards Pay
and Allowance for the year 2007-08, keeping in view the additional sanction of posts due to
introduction of 4 new PG courses during the year. The Institute presently has 92 sanctioned posts
of which 75 have already been filled up. Advertisement for filling up remaining teaching and non-
teaching posts have already been issued and the selection proceedings are likely to be finalized in
a time-bound manner. The proposal for additional posts on contractual basis is being processed in
the integrated Finance Division.

11
Machinery and Equipment:  Provision of Rs.170.00 lakhs was made in the Budget Estimate for
the year 2007-08 towards purchase of Machinery and Equipment. But due to some administrative
reasons, the institute could not utilize the entire amount during this year and only Rs.80.00 lakhs
could be utilized for this year. Despite tender notification issued on all India basis firms
supplying Pharmacy equipments did not respond. Hence, the sanctioned budget could not be
fully utilized.
6. National Institute of Naturopathy: The funds at the disposal of CPWD for undertaking the
work of renovation of Yoga hall and extension of treatment sections could not be spent.
7. National Medicinal Plant Board:  In the B.E. 2007-08 the NMPB was allocated Rs.80 crores
(including Rs.14.80 crores for the North Eastern States). This was done based on the discussions
in the Planning Commission wherein it was agreed that the outlay for the Centrally sponsored
Scheme on “Medicinal Plants Processing Zones” will be taken out of the outlay allocated under the
Central Sector Scheme being implemented by NMPB. However, since the new CSS scheme is yet
to be approved, the R.E. 2007-08 was revised to Rs.50.18 crores (including North Eastern Region)
which is also the final estimate. This represents 11% increase over the actual expenditure of
Rs.44.92 crores during 2006-07.”
8. Development of common facilities for AYUSH Industry Cluster: A new scheme introduced
in Eleventh Plan. The saving due to delay in approval in scheme. However, the scheme has since
been approved and many cluster projects have been granted in principle approval for setting up
common facilities relating to raw material standardization and quality control.
9. Information, Education and Communication:  The reduction of the allocation for Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) to Rs. 6.25 crores in the RE 2007-08 from the original
allocation of Rs.7.00 crores in the BE 2007-08 was done as a part of the 10% cut in Plan
allocation for the RE 2007-08. However, the revised allocation of Rs. 6.25 crores was sufficient
for the various activities which had been envisaged for 2007-08 and this reduction in outlay did
not in any way affect the IEC activities conducted by the Department. It is anticipated that the
entire allocation will be utilized during the year.
10. National Institute of Siddha, Tamil Nadu:  Allocation of Rs.8.00 crores was projected to
develop a high grade Drug Testing Laboratory and Pharmacy in the vicinity of the institute at
Tambaram, Chennai. Due to delay in handing over the land by State Government, the projection
in RE was scaled down. Hon’ble HFM has personally taken up the matter with the State
Government to expedite transfer of land so that the lab can be developed in next financial year,
hence the enhanced allocation in 2008-09.
2. There was a downward revision in the Plan provision from Rs.40.18 crore in BE 2007-08
to Rs.22.27 crore in RE 2007-08 which is largely on account of lack of expenditure in the first
two quarters due to time taken in sanctioning new schemes. However, as indicated in the reply to
para 2.1 above comprehensive steps has been taken to ensure that fund allocated are judiciously
utilized in financial year 2007-08.
3. As regard to nil expenditure under the scheme “Programme for training/Fellowship/Exposure
visit/Upgradation” is concerned it may be mentioned that no expenditure could be incurred in
financial year 2007-08 for lack of suitable proposal and so far as the scheme “North Easte Institute
of AYUSH/Folk Medicine” is concerned the funds to extend of Rs.3.00 crore was released in
Financial Year 2007-08. In the current Financial Year the full amount is proposed to be utilized.
Fund allocated to the scheme “TKDL and ISM&H Intellectual Property Rights” has been fully
utilized in the Financial Year 2007-08.

12
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
3.3 The Committee notes from the Outcome Budget that construction of an auditorium was
planned during 2006-07. However, the work on the project is yet to start. The Department has
attributed the delay to non finalization of construction works by CPWD. The Committee would like
the Department to apprise it of the stumbling blocks in the way of finalizing the construction works
of the auditorium, explain the shortfall in achievement of the SC/ST medical mobile camps and
specify the contributory factors for the reduced number of the patients. The Committee would also
like to be intimated about the corrective measures taken by the Department to address the above
issues.
Action Taken
Construction of Auditorium: The proposal for construction of an Auditorium was planed
during 2006-07 and the CPWD was paid Rs.1.84 crores as advance for this deposit work. It was
decided to construct the new Auditorium at the spot where the old Assembly Hall stood by
dismantling and demolishing it. Accordingly the CPWD prepared the Estimate, Drawings etc. in
consultation with the Central Design Bureau of the Ministry and the CPWD could not start the
work due to the difficulty in appointing a Consultant for Interior Decoration etc. prior to finalization
of final Drawing, Estimate etc. The estimated cost was worked out to Rs.2.45 crores.
In the meantime, the Institute as well as the Department felt that the proposed new
Auditorium should be planned keeping in view the national status of the Institute and also
considering the increased activities of Workshops, Seminars, Conferences of national and
international level. Therefore, constructing the Auditorium at the present site, which is very small,
will not help this purpose and it was felt that the Auditorium should come up with modern look
and with all facilities suiting not only to the present day needs but also keeping in mind the future
requirements of the fast developing Institute. This will also benefit in increasing the seating capacity
as well as adding more amenities.
Accordingly, the Central Design Bureau and the CPWD prepared a revised Plan and Estimate
and the estimated cost raised to Rs.4.50 crores. This was approved by the Standing Finance
Committee in December, 2006.
The CPWD was accordingly conveyed the sanction but due to some legal proceedings, the
CPWD was not able to spend money on constructions, they could not take up the work on time.
The matter was taken up with CPWD and they were apprised of the concern of the Hon’ble
Parliamentary Committee on the delay in starting the work.
The CPWD has now promised that they are in the process of issuing the Tenders for the
work and it was also assured that construction of the Auditorium will start very soon.
Shortfall in SC/ST Mobile Camps: The initial provision for SC/ST Mobile Camps for 2006-07
and 2007-08  was Rs.3.00 lakhs each respectively, which was raised to Rs.10 lakhs each
respectively in the RE. The Institute organized 32 Medical Camps benefiting 24,467 patients in
2006-07 and 33 Medical Camps benefiting 25,703 patients in 2007-08.  Actually there is no shortfall
in the Medical Camps as the Institute has organized the possible number of Camps and utilized the
allocated provision to the maximum extend possible. The Institute was running with shortfall in the
number of teachers and it was not possible to spare teachers to undertake the Camps as they were
hectically engaged in various teaching, patient care, research activities etc. and also that for each
Camp, at least one teacher has to be spared and deputed for a minimum 8 days. Therefore, the
maximum possible number of Camps was organized.

13
The allocation proposed for 2008-09  is Rs.6 lakhs and accordingly, the Institute will organize
maximum Camps for the benefit of SC/ST Population and will ensure to increase the number of
Camps. During 2008-09  (up to 20-5-2008) 2 Camps have already been organized.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
Recommendations/Observations
3.11 The Committee also notes that the commencement of certificate course, opening of two
more peripherals OPD, and development of Green House land Laboratory, which were targeted to
be achieved during 2007-08 could not materialize. The Committee observes that non-achievement
of the above targets reflects poorly on the existing implementing mechanism and calls for
immediate remedial measures. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to identify
the underlying causes of under-achievements in this regard and take the corrective measures
accordingly so that this National Institute could live upto its reputation.
Action Taken
Opening of two more peripheral OPDs figures at 2nd quarter of Annual Action Plan for the
year 2008-09. Action is in the process for achieving the target within the prescribed quarter. A
certificate course for dispensers shall be introduced during the current academic session onwards.
After finalization of the detailed module the same will be placed for approval of the competent
authority before implementation. In absence of in house expertise, the requisite technical knowhow
for development of Green House Land Laboratory is being gathered for implementation.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE (NIUM), BANGALORE
Recommendations/Observations
3.18 The Committee is also not satisfied with the explanation that the sanctioned budget for
purchase of machinery and equipments could not be fully utilized due to poor response to the
tender notification by the firms supplying Pharmacy equipments. In this era of global competition
when firms are vying to go the extra mile to bag a contract, such a reasoning does not carry much
conviction. The Committee is reasonably convinced that had the Department re-advertised the
tender notification with suitable terms and conditions, it would have been able to get the desired
response. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should devise a fresh tender
strategy, offering the permissible flexibility vital for attracting interests of supplying firms so that
with necessary flexibility it could quicken the process of procurement of machinery and
equipments.
Action Taken
Equipment/machinery used for manufacturing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani medicines have to
be custom made and are not available in open market. As suggested by the committee, the tender
notification has been re-activated on All India basis in leading publications like Time of India, Indian
Trade Journal, etc. In addition to this, tender forms have been sent directly to known firms
manufacturing such equipment.
Recommendations/Observations
3.23 The Committee notes that the NIUM has projected a number of very important outcomes
for 2008-09, which inter-alia  include creation and recruitment of staff for 2nd phase of new PG
courses, starting of an OPD at PHC in Bangalore, establishment of an Endoscopy unit;

14
establishment of specialized wards on nominal payment basis; establishment of 3rd IPD ward;
making the existing OT functional etc. The Committee apprehends that the above targets might also
meet the same fate as those set for 2007-08, if sustained and vigorous efforts are not made
towards their implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
communicate to it the roadmap for achievement of targets set for 2008-09 and also the steps taken
to rectify the deficit in targets for 2007-08.
Action Taken
Government has reviewed the progress of activities in NIUM and has taken a view to
monitor the targets set on a bi-monthly basis. Physical and financial progress of activities will be
monitored at senior officers’ level. As regards creation and filling up of new posts action has
already been initiated to take up the matter with nodal Ministries i.e. Ministry of Finance,
Department of Personnel etc. The above would enable the NIUM to achieve its target of starting
M.D. courses in new disciplines, a mandate given to the institute, which could not materialize
owing to non-creation of posts.
The road map set for NIUM for the year 2008-09 is as follows:
Reorientation Training Programmes and CME for AYUSH teachers and practitioners.
Seminars/Workshops.
STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF INDIAN MEDICINE, NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
4.1 The Central Council of Indian Medicine is a statutory body established under the Indian
Medicine Central Council Act, 1970. The preparation and maintenance of the Central Register of
Indian Medicine is one of the main functions of the Central Council. Taking into account the poor
status of updation of the Central Register of Indian Medicine, the Committee has been urging the
Department to take steps towards improving the position. In reply to a question, the Department
informed the Committee that the matter of updation of Central Register of Indian Medicine has been
taken up with the State Chief Secretaries and State Boards/Councils. On being asked about the
impact of this exercise, the Department has stated that during the meeting of State Health
Secretaries and Directors of Ayurveda on 12-12-2007, the position of re-registration/renewal of
practitioners every 5 years was reviewed and it was found that most of the states have the
provision for re-registration/renewal and in such states, updation of registers does not pose a
problem. Other states were advised to have a provision for re-registration of practitioners in their
State Acts for timely updation of registers. The status of updation of Central Register of Indian
Medicine as intimated by the Department is given below:—
Sl. Name of Period upto Updation of State Registers as informed by
No. the State which Central the State Authorities in the meeting of Health
Register is notified Secretaries on 12-12-2007
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh Upto March, 2004 Updated up to 31.3.2006
2. Assam Upto 1986 and A commitment was given that the up dation
From Dec. 1999- will be completed by 31-3-2008.
August, 2004

15
12 3 4
3. Bihar Upto March, 2005 Updated 31.3.2007
4. Chhattisgarh Newly created A commitment was given that the updation
Board will be completed by 31-3-2008.
5. Delhi Upto March, 2001 Updated up to 31.3.2007
6. Goa Upto March, 2004 Updated up to 30.9.2006
7. Gujarat Upto March, 2005 A yu. Register updated up to 31.12.2006.
Unani-Pending
8. Haryana Upto March, 2005 Updated 31.3.2007
9. Himachal Pradesh Upto March, 2005 Updated up to 31.3.2007
10. J&K Upto March, 1983 Board remained defunct from 30-4-1985 to
30-11-1995
11. Kerala Upto February, 2005 A commitment was given that the updation
will be completed by 31-3-2008.
12. Karnataka Upto March 2004 Up to 31.3.2006 updated
13. Madhya Pradesh Upto March, 2004 Up to 31.3.2007 updated
14 Maharashtra Upto March 1992 Up to 31.12.2007 updated
15 Orissa Upto May, 2004 Up to 30.6.2006 updated
16. Punjab Upto February, 2006
17. Rajasthan Upto March, 2002 Updated up to 31.12.2006
18. Tamil Nadu Upto March, 2002 Updated up to 31.12.2006
19. Uttar Pradesh January, 1998- Up to 31.3.2006
March, 2000
20. Uttarakhand Newly created Board Updated 31.3.2006
21. West Bengal Upto March, 2004 Updated up to 31.12.2006
Action Taken
The updated position of Central Register of Indian Medicine is shown in Annexure-II.
RESEARCH COUNCILS
Recommendations/Observations
5.4 The Committee commends the initiative taken by the Department to review working of
the Research Councils. The Committee would like to be informed of the major findings of
Dr. Nityanand Committee and the extent of their implementation till date. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the recommendations of Dr. Qazi Committee in due course and the action
taken thereon by the Department.

16
Action Taken
Nityanand Committee on reorganization of CCRAS has given its report. The Recommendations and
its implementation is at Annexure-III. The report of Qazi Committee has not been received. The
recommendations of Nityanand Committee are being implemented in a phased manner.
YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
Recommendations/Observations
6.7 The Committee is happy to note that the MDNIY and CCRYN, which are premier
institutions of the country operating in the field of Yoga and Naturopathy, have started research
projects in collaboration with the private sector for the benefit of the common people. However,
taking into account the fact that private firms are largely driven by profit motive, the Committee
has a word of caution for the Department. The Committee is of the view that since these research
projects are being financed by taxpayer’s money, it should ensure that the health benefits ensuing
from them percolate down to the lowest rung of the society in terms of cheaper and viable health
care alternatives. The Committee also recommends that MDNIY should make more sincere efforts
for undertaking more research projects on various aspects of Health Care so that the infrastructure
available with the institution and the funds allocated to it could be utilized optimally.
Action Taken
Most of the research projects undertaken by the MDNIY and the CCRYN have been taken
up with government institutions. Only a few research projects have been taken up with reputed
private institutions.
Research projects are taken up on the basis of their relevance to public health objectives
and they are not taken up only for the purposes of intellectual or scientific interest. The intention
is that the research projects should yield outcomes which should directly impact public health in
the country.
As regards the recommendation that the MDNIY should take up more projects relating to
health care, it may be pointed out that the two major initiatives taken up by the MDNIY involve
the setting up of full-fledged research centres in NIMHANS, Bangalore and JIPMER, Puduchery.
The research outcomes from both these centres are bound to be significant.
In addition to this MDNIY also intends to set up an Advanced Yoga Education and Research
Centre at the Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, Delhi (DIPAS). The collaboration
with DIPAS. which has played a pioneering role in conducting scientific research into various
aspects of Yoga, is bound to be very fruitful.
Recommendations/Observations
6.12 The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation, of taking steps for regulating the Yoga
and Naturopathy courses and accreditation of Institutions in these two areas. The Department also
needs to explore the possibility of setting up of a Regulation Council for Yoga and Naturopathy.
The Committee notes that some initiatives have been taken by the Department which need to be
pursued by the Department with all concerned. Only then, the real objective of extending the
benefits of these two therapies to the needy would be achieved.
Action Taken
The Department has examined the issue of the regulation of Naturopathy courses and the
accreditation of Naturopathy institutions in depth and has come to the conclusion that the optimal

17
course of action would be for the State Governments to enact suitable legislation for the purpose.
The Department has already advised the State Governments accordingly. There has not been much
response from the States. However, the Department of AYUSH will continue to try to persuade the
State Governments to initiate action in the matter.
Recommendations/Observations
6.13 The Committee is happy to note that some headway has been made in the direction of
regulation of Yoga and Naturopathy, though a lot still remains to be done. The Committee
recommends to the Department to continue to pursue with the State Governments the
implementation of all the model guidelines for regulation and standardization of naturopathy courses
that have been circulated to them.
The Committee was informed that a naturopathy centre at V aidyanath Dham, Deoghar,
which was started by Gandhi ji, is presently not operational. The Committee recommends the
Department to get the above centre revived in consultation with its management and with the local
authorities. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made in the matter.
Action Taken
Given the small number of colleges offering courses in Naturopathy and which are located
in a handful of States, there does not appear to be any need for Central Regulation in the matter.
Given the limited number of these institutions, a Central Regulatory Council would be both
unnecessary and unviable. As far as Yoga is concerned, it is felt that a self-regulatory association
consisting of the premier Yoga institutions in the country would be a far better proposition for the
regulation of Yoga in the country. After extensive consultations with all the major Yoga schools in
the country, a consensus has been evolved about standardized syllabi for Yoga education, therapy
and training courses.
The Director, CCRYN has been in touch with the erstwhile management of the Naturopathy
centre at Vaidyanath Dham, Deoghar. It is learnt that the institution is in receivership and is now
under the control of the District Collector. The Director, CCRYN will visit Deoghar to contact the
District Collector to find out the status of the institution. Any assistance required for re-starting
the institution will be provided.
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
Recommendations/Observations
8.5 The Committee welcomes this development and urges upon the Department to vigorously
pursue filling up of the vacant posts of Ayurveda doctors and communicate to it the efforts made
and the progress achieved in the matter.
Action Taken
The result of the examination which was under stay by the Honorable Supreme Court is
expected to be announced shortly by UPSC. The Department will endeavor to complete pre
appointment formalities as early as possible.
AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
8.10 The Committee is not satisfied with the languid pace of the progress made in the matter.

18
The Committee observes that more the delay, more would be the cost escalation of the project.
The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to ensure that the timeline for completion
of this project should not spill over into the next financial year and the project is operationalised
within the shortest possible time
Action Taken
It may be seen that of the Budget Allocation of Rs.1.00 crore Rs.51.00 lakhs were
apportioned for salary and wages. The funds remained un-utilized under this head due to non-filling
up of the posts of Medical Officer due to a pending Supreme Court case. Also Rs.30.00 lakhs were
apportioned for Minor works against which sanctions amounting to Rs.27,21,700 were issued. Pay
and Accounts office also had issued advise for placement of funds to Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation - being the user Ministry. However, the user Department have
not booked the expenditure with Pay and Accounts Office as a result of which this amount does
not appear in the actual expenditure for the year 2007-08.
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendations/Observations
9.5 The Committee notes that actual expenditure upto February, 2008 was Rs.44.01 crore only,
which was well below the level of allocated funds. The Committee finds that the under utilization
of plan funds allocated for NMPB during 2007-08, has been attributed to non approval of the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme on medicinal Plants Processing Zone. The Committee would however,
like to point out that the components of the new scheme were approved by the Board on the 10th
July, 2007. Approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee is, however, yet to come. The
Committee is afraid that completion of all the procedural formalities is going to take considerable
time. From the past experience, the Committee can only infer that chances of the scheme taking
off in 2008-09 are quite dim. The Committee is of the considered view that the Department needs
to pursue the approval of the above Centrally Sponsored Scheme with greater vigour, so as to
ensure its implementation at the earliest.
Action Taken
Against Budget Estimate of Rs. 80.00 crores and Revised Estimate for Rs.50.14 crores, the
actual expenditure during 2007-08 was Rs.50.14 crores. Savings was due to non approval of
Schemes formulated by NMPB for Eleventh plan. Department has pursued the matter vigorously
and as a result, the following schemes have already been approved by Expenditure Finance
Committee:
(i) Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, development and sustainable management of
medicinal plants.
(ii) Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Setting up Medicinal Plants Processing Zones
including Cultivation, Processing and Marketing”.
Proposals were processed for approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
and implementation of scheme during the current financial year. Both the schemes have already
been approved by CCEA.
Recommendations/Observations
9.10 The Committee is well aware that process of filling up recently created 11 posts will be
a long drawn affair. In the meantime the Board would continue to be managed by temporary

19
posting of technical and ministerial staff from the Department of AYUSH and the Research
Councils. The Committee observes that sound recruitment policy is the comer-stone of success of
any organizational set up and, therefore, parallel forward movement should have been planned in
the matter of recruiting the required manpower, both technical and non technical for NMPB. The
Committee’s attention has been drawn by the Report of M/s JPS Consultants engaged for
undertaking study of status, organizational structure of the Board. The Committee notes that the
Consultants have recommended staff strength of 38 for the Board for the Eleventh Plan if the
Board continues to be part of the Department. The other option suggested is to convert the Board
into a Registered Society with strength of 73. The Committee would appreciate if follow-up action
on the aforesaid study is initiated at the earliest. In the light of the study and also targets set for
2008-09, creation of mere 11 posts cannot be considered sufficient enough. The Committee hopes
that a final view on the actual requirement of manpower for the Board would be taken at the
earliest and steps taken for creation and filling up of the same.
The Committee welcomes the following initiatives taken by the Board.
• Nation-wide survey-cum-study on the demand and supply of medicinal plants.
• Draft notification under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1990 requiring the
Pharmaceutical Industries to maintain and furnish information on the raw material used
by them and source thereof.
Besides SMPBS, the work of monitoring and evolution of all projects out sourced to
M/s Agriculture France Corporation Ltd.
Action Taken
Department is taking steps to fill up the posts at the earliest. Recruitment Rules for all the
posts have already been approved by Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) and referred
to Union Public Service Commmission (UPSC). Matter is being pursued with UPSC and meetings
have already been organized for early finalization of recruitment rules.
As a further follow up of suggestion contained in report of M/s JPS Consultants, matter
has been taken up with Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for conducting study of
National Medicinal Plants Boards workload by the Staff Inspection Unit for creation of additional
posts as recommended by the Consultant
Action is also being initiated to engage Consultants on contract for attending to the work
till the regular posts are filled.
Recommendations/Observations
9.16 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in pursuing liquidation of
UCs with sincerity and the Department’s efforts in this direction have borne fruit which is reflected
in the liquidation of UCs gaining some momentum during the years 2006-07 and 2007-08. The
Committee exhorts the Department to continue to pursue the matter without any let-up.
Action Taken
The point has been noted.
MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH IN NATIONAL HEALTH CARE
Recommendations/Observations
9.19 While welcoming the measures taken by the Department, the Committee takes note of the

20
Secretary’s submission that Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu have taken innovative measures
for propagating AYUSH health delivery. The Committee would like the other States to emulate these
innovative measures. The Committee accordingly suggests the Department to circulate the A YUSH
health care delivery models adopted by Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu to the other States
so that AYUSH can be integrated at tertiary health delivery level all over the country.
Action Taken
The good work done by these states have been taken to other states also by the Programme
officers/Area officer of Department of Ayush in different Regional Meetings
Recommendations/Observations
9.22 The Committee has been given to understand that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of
Hospitals and Dispensaries is being revised in the light of an evaluation study conducted by
M/s A.F. Ferguson & Co. The Committee welcomes the step and hopes that the difficulties
encountered in the implementation of the Scheme would be ironed out by the Department within
a short span of time. The Committee would, however, like the Department to expedite revision of
the Scheme in the light of the recommendations of M/s A F. Ferguson & Co.
Action Taken
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Hospitals and Dispensaries is being revised in the light
of the recommendation of M/s A.F. Ferguson & Co. The note for approval of EFC has been
circulated to all the concerned agencies for appraisal. They are being reminded to expedite the
same.
STANDARDISATION AND QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendations/Observations
10.10 The Committee is happy to note that this Scheme aims at establishing synergy between the
traditional medical knowledge and science. The Committee is convinced that this Scheme will
produce results of immense value in the long run. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
financial constraints should not be allowed to come in the way of operation of this Scheme. At
the same time, the Committee would like to impress upon the Department to see to it that the
standardization/safety/toxicity studies of the remaining 18 formulations are got completed by the
CSIR within the shortest possible time.
Action Taken
Out of 18 formulations the dossier on chemical analysis, safety/ toxicity studies and
biological activities of 5 formulations will be completed by June, 2008 and dossier of 3
formulations will be completed by August, 2008. The work on another 12 formulations is under
process.
QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendations/Observations
10.13 The Committee welcomes this new initiative of the Department because lack of adequate
number of AYUSH drug testing laboratories has been a big impediment in ensuring quality A YUSH
drugs in the country. The Committee sincerely hopes that this revised scheme will not only lead

21
to improvement in safety and quality standards, but also encourage more and more drug
manufacturing units being Good Manufacturing Practices compliant. The Committee would like to
be enlightened about the impact made by the revised Scheme.
Action Taken
Impact made by the revised scheme will be available after commencing of at least of year
of operation of the scheme. Committee will be apprised thereafter. The scheme has been advertised
through newspapers, departmental website and stakeholder consultations with the Industry has been
held during National Campaign on Quality Assurance of ASU&H medicines organized by the
Department of AYUSH in June, 2008.
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON FACILITIES FOR AYUSH INDUSTRY CLUSTERS
Recommendations/Observations
10.20 The Committee observes that owing to prolonged procedure of approval, a scheme of such
vital importance has been delayed by almost a year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
now that the Scheme has been approved, the Department deals with the matter with a sense of
urgency and the proposals received under the scheme be scrutinized in a time-bound manner and
the grants are released promptly.
Action taken
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for ‘Development of AYUSH Industry Clusters’ has been
launched with the approval of the Competent Authority. Since, this new and innovative Scheme,
it took some time to put the component of the Scheme across the industry. The Department
conducted number of stakeholders consultations in different parts of the country to explain the
Scheme. As a result of the concerted ef forts of the Department, three proposals were granted ‘in
principle’ approval in the financial year 2007-08. One Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Thrissur
Cluster is likely to be put before the Scheme Monitoring Committee by end of the month of
July, 2008. M/s IL&FS CDI Ltd. has been appointed as Project Management Consultant for
implementation of the Scheme. It may be mentioned here that the Department has already received
five new Concept Notes from different parts of the country for setting up of the common facilities
for AYUSH industry. So far as the implementation of the Scheme is concerned, because of the
concerted efforts of the Department, eight proposals have already been received against a target
of ten fixed by the Planning Commission for first 2-3 years. The expenditure will pick-up once
the DPRs are received and approved in the Department in a time-bound manner.
DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
11.3 The Committee observes that without maintaining high standards of AYUSH education,
quality education will continue to languish, which will ultimately impinge on efficacy of AYUSH in
health care delivery system. The Committee, therefore, supports the enhanced allocation for
development of AYUSH institutions in BE 2008. However, the Committee is constrained to observe
that 70 to 80 Government/Government aided teaching hospitals of ISM & H were targeted to be
renovated and strengthened during the Tenth Plan period but only 35 could be renovated and
strengthened during the said Plan. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons of the
shortfall in this regard. The Committee recommends that the remaining hospitals should be
renovated and strengthened at the earliest and it may be appraised of the progress made in this
regard.

22
The Committee was given to understand that Sowa-Rigpa (Amchi System of Medicine) is
not only being practiced in Trans Himalayan region but also in other parts of the country.
Department has got some scheme in place for strengthening of local health traditions under which
the Sowa-Rigpa would be taken care of. Besides, the proposal for recognition of Tibetan system
of Medicine is also under consideration of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The
Committee recommends that all possible support/assistance should be provided to such traditional
system of medicines.
Action Taken
The Department of AYUSH has set up a high level Committee headed by Dr. Nityanand,
Former Director, CDRI, Lucknow for suggesting recommendations on reorganization, restructuring
of institutes and R&D activities of CCRAS. The Committee has recommended upgrading the
institute as Central Research Institute for Sowa-Rigpa at Leh which is approved by HFM. The
Department of AYUSH and CCRAS has taken the initiative for upgradation of the Sowa-Rigpa
Research Centre as Central Research Institute. The Council has submitted a detailed project report/
working draft is prepared and is under consideration. A new building of this institute is under
construction. A herbal garden is already established.
Recommendations/Observations
11.6 The Committee welcomes the new initiatives for development of institutions and fully
concur with the Department’s view that the proper development of the AYUSH systems will not
be possible without creation of Centres of Excellence. The Committee notes from the Outcome
Budget-2008-09 that 80 Colleges have been targeted to be benefited under this Scheme
during 2008-09. The Committee further notes that the new Scheme also envisages financial
assistance to private AYUSH institutions.
Action Taken
Revised Centrally Sponsored Scheme for development/upgradation of AYUSH institutions has
provision for financial assistance to private AYUSH institutions by giving interest free loan.
Proposals from private institutions are awaited.
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
Recommendations/Observations
12.2 The Committee finds that the seminars/exhibitions/melas/camps, audio/video campaigns and
the publications have so far not been fully successful in spreading the positive impact of A YUSH
systems of medicine. The Committee is of the view that vigorous and sustained campaign is
required to be carried out at different levels. The Committee hopes that in the revised scheme, all
the problem areas must have been taken care of. The Committee also strongly feels that along with
propagation of positive impact of AYUSH systems, public should be cautioned about the quacks
posing as votaries of the age-old systems of medicine.
Action Taken
For overall dissemination of AYUSH Systems, following activities were performed under the
revised IEC Scheme:—
1. Rs.25 lakhs was released to Government of Andhra Pradesh for organizing State-Level
Arogya Mela at Nellore during 26th -27th April, 2008. The Department also participated
through its Research Councils.

23
2. National level campaigns on “Mother and Child Health” and “Geriatric Care” were
organized by CCRH and CCRAS respectively with the active support of this
Department. For Geriatric care campaign, Rs.10.00 lakhs was released to CCRAS.
3. Rs.77.01 lakhs were released to 18 State Health societies for organizing campaigns on
Ksharsutra. Accordingly, Rs.55.00 lakhs was released to 11 State Health Societies for
organizing campaigns on “Mother and Child Health” .
In this regard it is informed that action is to be taken separately. This will be taken care
of along side spread of Ayush Systems alongwith an element of caution regarding quacks etc.

24
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Budgetary Allocation
2.7 The Committee notes that as many as eight Schemes/projects have been launched for
implementation during the Eleventh Plan and their allocation and utilization pattern during 2007-08
is as follow:—
Rs. in crores (As on 29-2-2008)
Scheme BE RE Utilization
Acquisition, Cataloguing, Digitization 2.00 2.00 1.70
Upgradation to Centres of Excellence 7.00 3.00 3.00
Revitalization of Local Health 3.00 1.00 54 Lakhs
Traditions
Scheme for Public Health Initiatives 2.00 2.00 66 Lakhs
Scheme for Ro TP/CME 2.00 2.00 1.10
Development of AYUSH Industry 27.00 9.00 In principle approved for 3
Clusters clusters projects and clusters
advised to prepare DPRs
Additional component in A YUSH Scheme yet to be sanctioned
Hospitals and Dispensaries Schemes for
setting up of Specialty Clinics/IPDS
in AYUSH hospitals in PPP mode
New Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Scheme yet to be sanctioned
Promotion, Cultivation and Setting up
of Medicinal Plants Processing Zone
Recommendations/Observations
2.8 The Committee is distressed to observe that out of the above eight schemes launched for
implementation during Eleventh Plan period, financial achievement in respect of as many as six
schemes is much below the desired level in the first year of their implementation and two are yet
to be sanctioned. As can be seen from the above table, BE in respect of three schemes, namely,
Upgradation of Centres of Excellence, Revitalization of Local Health Traditions and Development of
AYUSH Industry Clusters has to be drastically reduced at the RE stage and even this reduced RE
allocation could not be utilized fully in respect of revitalization of Local Health Traditions and
Development of AYUSH Industry Clusters. Similarly, provisions made in RE 2007-08 in respect of
other schemes, except Upgradation to Centres of Excellence, could not be utilized optimally. The
Committee feels that had the Department done the proper planning and preparatory exercise in respect
24

25
of these new Schemes, the utilization status would not have been so discouraging. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Department to ensure that such a situation does not arise in 2008-09
and the funds earmarked for the intended purposes are fully utilized during the current fiscal year.
Action Taken
The newly launched Central Sector Schemes namely, ACDP, COE, PHI and LHT were
approved during the year 2007-08. Mainly, the schemes were for NGOs/Non Profit Organizations.
These organizations were not familiar with the scheme and therefore the Department could not get
good proposals. During the year, the schemes were advertised in the newspapers and workshops
of Stake Holders were organized. Moreover, the Department has to check credential of the NGOs
and obtain a number of certificates/undertakings/bonds and other documents from them before
sanctioning funds. Since it was first year of the implementation of the schemes, BE provisions
could not be utilized fully in respect of LHT and PHI Schemes. Now, Nodal Officers of the
schemes have been advised to make more efforts for implementation of these schemes. All efforts
are being made to ensure utilization of funds for theses schemes in the year 2008-09.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the reasoning advanced by the
Department that being the first year of the implementation of the schemes, the B.E.
provisions could not be utilized fully in respect of Local Health Traditions and Public Health
Initiatives Schemes. The Committee feels that merely stating that all efforts are being
made to ensure utilization of funds for these schemes in the year 2008-09 does not carry
conviction in the absence of any elaborate action plan to realize the targets. The
Committee, therefore, once again impresses upon the Department to work out a meticulous
action plan for the speedy implementation of the schemes and the resultant enhanced
utilization of the DE provisions.
Recommendations/Observations
2.13 The Committee is not happy about the dismal performance of the Department in utilization
of the allocated funds for the North East. It is very disturbing to note that the provisions made
could not be utilized fully even in respect of a single scheme. Keeping in view the fact that an
efficient and affordable health care delivery system has a key role to play in the socio-economic
and political integration of the people of North East, the Committee recommends that the
Department should work out modalities in consultation with all the stakeholders including the
concerned State Governments to ensure that the utilization of funds in 2008-09 does not suffer
from the same inadequacies as faced in 2007-08 and registers a marked improvement during
2008-09.
Action Taken
Provision earmarked for NE area could not be utilized fully due to non-receipt of the
proposals from NE States. However, two institutions have been established in Meghalaya and
Arunachal Pradesh respectively. Further, Area Officers of the NE area have been advised to obtain
proposals from these States. Substantial funds are likely to be utilized during the year 2008-09.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to note the ad-hoc approach of the Department in such
a serious matter which is evident from the fact that instead of institutionalizing a process

26
for submission of proposals from N.E. States, the Department is relying on half and ad-hoc
measures like advising Area Officers of the N.E. region to obtain proposals from these
States. The Committee feels that such a measure may yield results in the short term, but
can never be a solution to the problem in the long run. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the Department put in a place a mechanism to ascertain the underlying
causes of non-submission of proposals by the NE States and take corrective action
accordingly.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, JAIPUR
Recommendations/Observations
3.4 The Committee notes that the issue of reservation for OBC has since been cleared by the
Supreme Court and now the NIA, Jaipur will have to implement the reservation for OBC from the
ensuing academic year by increasing seats at both UG and PG level. The Committee, therefore
recommends that adequate funds are made available for the purpose so that financial constraints
do not come in the way of implementation of reservation for OBCs. The Committee is also not
aware about the status of approval of the competent Authority for the payment of arrear NPAs to
Faculty. The Committee would appreciate if the pending projects as well as the new projects to
be taken up are completed in a time-bound manner.
Action Taken
OBC Reservation and Payment of Arrears of Non Practicing Allowance (NPA): The Institute
has already submitted the proposal for OBC Reservation and now with the clearance of Hon’ble
Supreme Court, orders have been received to increase the Admission Capacity in UG, PG and
Diploma Courses which is being implemented from this year onwards. Necessary approval is under
consideration with regard to other added infrastructure and staff facilities and also adequate
financial sanction for OBC Reservation.
As regards NPA arrears to Teachers, this is still under consideration.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes with concern that more than nine months have elapsed since
the Committee presented its Report, but little headway seems to have been made towards
making payment of the arrear NPAs to the faculty of National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.
The Committee observes that at a time when the public sector institutes, in general, are
not only facing fresh talent crunch but also losing their faculty members to their private
sector counterparts, such languid pace in decision making is deplorable. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a decision on the payment of arrear NPAs to the faculty of NIA
be taken expeditiously.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
Recommendations/Observations
3.13 The Committee expresses its concern over such a large number of vacant posts both in
teaching and non-teaching cadres. Not only this, percentage of Guest-Faculty and contract
appointments is also quite high. The Committee observes that the shortfall would be further
accentuated as a result of the latest Supreme Court judgment upholding 27% reservation for Other
Backward Classes (OBCs). The Committee feels that the steps taken to tide over the problem of

27
shortfall in the teaching and the non-teaching cadre posts by way of engaging guest faculty,
outsourcing etc. is a short-term measure which can never be a substitute for filling up the posts
on a permanent basis. Since the amended Recruitment Rules have been submitted to the Minister
of H&FW for his approval, the Committee is hopeful that these will be notified shortly. However,
the Committee would like to observe that the NIH is an autonomous organization of national
importance and all care needs to be exercised to ensure that its autonomy does not get eroded in
any way by the revised Recruitment Rules. The Committee would also like to recommend that the
Department set in motion the process of completing other remaining formalities so that the
recruitment does not only get started immediately after notification of the Recruitment Rules but
is also taken to its logical conclusion within a specified time-frame.
Action Taken
The amendments in the Recruitment Rules have been approved. The advertisement for filling
posts in being given. As and when the regular posts are filled up, the guest faculty/visiting faculty
and the people working through contract outsourcing shall be correspondingly reduced. However,
it may not be possible to phase out all the guest faculties/visiting faculties because NIH being the
premier institute in Homoeopathy, specialized teaching/training/clinical exposures to the students
from different branches of medicine is required and also due to the fact that full time faculty for
all these branches are not possible/required. All the posts are likely to be filled up shortly.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that though the Recruitment Rules have been approved, the
reply of the Department is silent about whether or not the autonomous character of the
NIH has been kept intact. The Committee feels that before drawing any conclusions in this
regard, a perusal of the revised Recruitment Rules would be pertinent. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a copy of the Recruitment Rules be furnished to it.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE (NIUM), BANGALORE
Recommendations/Observations
3.20 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that so many targets have not been achieved, which
would not only have an adverse impact on the vision of developing the NIUM as a model Post
Graduate Teaching Training and research institution in the Unani System, but also undermine the
Institute’s future demand for enhanced allocation.
Action Taken
National Institute of Unani Medicine is evolving as a model post-graduate teaching and
research institute and non-achievement/under achievement of some of the targets by NIUM is just
due to teething troubles. It is hoped that with a strict monitoring and constant review, NIUM will
achieve its full potential in the 11th Plan with the help of Ministry of Finance in sanctioning of
requisite posts for new PG courses.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that the Department’s reply implies that the National Institute
of Unani Medicine achieving its full potential in the Eleventh Plan is contingent upon the
Ministry of Finance sanctioning requisite posts for new PG courses. The Committee concurs
with the Department’s views in the matter and lends its support to sanctioning of requisite
posts for new PG courses. The Committee would like the Department to apprise the

28
Ministry of Finance of the Committee’s views in the matter so that the demand for
sanctioning of requisite posts to new PG courses gets invested with Parliamentary support.
Recommendations/Observations
3.22 The Committee is all for the enhanced allocation but at the same time, it would like to
exhort the Department to ensure that the monitoring mechanism is streamlined in such a way that
the possibility of unspent funds is obviated in 2008-09.
Action Taken
In keeping with this recommendation only realistic targets would be fixed in succeeding
years. The monitoring mechanism would be streamlined and the progress would be monitored on
quarterly basis as suggested by the committee.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that though the Department has assured to streamline the
monitoring mechanism and monitor the progress on a quarterly basis, no tangible step,
taken or contemplated to be taken towards accomplishing the goals in this regard, has been
indicated. Merely stating that the monitoring mechanism would be streamlined and the
progress would be monitored on a quarterly basis is too simplistic an answer to be a realistic
solution. The Committee would therefore, like the Department to indicate a specific action
plan to realize the above targets.
STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF INDIAN MEDICINE (CCIM), NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
4.3 A perusal of the above table reveals that out of 21 States, only five States have informed
about updation of their register upto 31-3-2007 and one State has intimated about updation of its
Register upto 31-12-2007. In respect of remaining States, either pendency is more, or status not
known. Another disturbing aspect noticed is that although State Registers have been updated,
information in this regard is either reaching CCIM after considerable time or simply not received.
Inclusion of information from State Register in the Central Register also seems to be a very time-
consuming process. The Committee is unable to reconcile itself with this state of affairs and
advises the Department to take up the matter with the concerned State Councils and State
Governments. Though the Committee notes that at least some forward movement has been reported
in the matter but urges upon the Department not to be complacent and continue its efforts towards
expediting the process of updation.
Action Taken
Department is pursuing the matter with the CCIM to expedite the updation of Central
register of Indian Medicine. In this context CCIM has been asked to expedite the ATR in the matter.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to note that merely stating that the Department is
pursuing the matter with CCIM to expedite the updation of Central Register of Indian
Medicine is too routine a reply to deserve appreciation. The Committee would like to be

29
apprised of the specific steps taken by the Department to impress upon the CCIM the
imperative need for updation of the Register under reference.
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF HOMOEOPATHY (CCH), NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
4.7 The Committee notes that Health is a State subject and the State Boards have been
constituted as per the State Acts and they do not come under the administrative control of the
Department of AYUSH. However, since the CCH is mandated to maintain the Central Register of
Homoeopathy, the Department is duty bound to leave no stone untumed to persuade the concerned
State authorities to take steps for updation of the State Registers, which will ultimately have a
bearing on the updation of the Central Register. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should have an interface with the State authorities at regular intervals for the timely
submission of the State Registers which would result in updation of the Central Register.
Action Taken
A meeting of Registrars of few defaulting States was held in the Department on 27/5/08.
In the meeting it was decided that the Central Council shall maintain a Physical Register of
Homoeopathy and the States shall take steps to computerize the State Registers and submit it to
the Central Council. This will reduce the long delay in updation.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Though the Committee is happy to note that in a meeting held on 25/7/08, it has
been decided that the States shall take steps to computerize the State Registers of
Homoeopathy and submit it to the Centre Council. However, what the Committee is
concerned about is that no modalities seem to have been worked out to translate this
decision into action. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should
proactively pursue the matter with the concerned States so that the necessary modalities
are worked out promptly and glitches, if any, are sorted out and such an important decision
does not remain on paper only but leads to positive results.
Recommendations/Observations
4.9 The Committee observes that despite there being a provision in the IMCC Act, 1970
mandating the State Boards to submit updated register of practitioners as on 1st April every year,
there has been delay in submission of the State registers. This clearly indicates that the existing
legal provisions suffer from certain inadequacies. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the
proposal mooted by the CCH to make the State Registration Regulations in conformity with the
Central Registration Regulations deserves serious consideration. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to deal with the proposal submitted by CCH with a fair amount of
promptitude and report to it the progress made in the matter.
Action Taken
A review of this aspect was taken and found that the major fault lie with the Central
Council as they sit on judgment on the details submitted by the States. It was also noted that the
Central Council of Homoeopathy is yet to maintain a Physical Register of Central Register. These
were pointed out to the Council and they were asked to prepare a physical Central Register with
the details submitted by the States within a period of 4 months failing, which the grant would be
withheld. However, every State is being asked to prepare the state Register on the basis of the
format of the Central Council in order to prepare the information in a uniform manner.

30
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee views with serious concern the work culture prevailing in the Central
Council as pointed out by the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised about
the compliance status with regard to the Physical Register of Central Council.
Recommendations/Observations
4.10 Informing of the status of the notification of the Central Register in the Gazette of India,
the Department has furnished the following information:—
Sl. No. Name of the State Period up to which Updating of the State
Central Register is Registers as informed by the
Notified S tate Authorities in the
meeting of State Health
Secretaries
1. Andhra Pradesh Upto 31.12.2003 Awaited
2. Assam Upto 31.12.1996 2006
3. Arunachal Pradesh NA 31.6.2007
4. Bihar Upto 31.12.2005 Awaited
5. Chhattisgarh New State 12.12.2007
6. Chandigarh (UT) New Register 12.11.2007
7. Delhi Upto 31.12.2005 24.1.2007
8. Goa New Register 14.02.2008
9. Gujarat Upto 31.12.2005 10.1.2007
10. Haryana Upto 31.12.2005 31.3.2007
11. Himachal Pradesh Upto 31.12.2005 31.5.2007
12. Karnataka Upto 31.12.2003 4.3.2008
13. Kerala Upto 31.12.2004 Awaited
14. Madhya Pradesh Upto 31.12.2005 4.12.2006
15. Maharashtra Upto 31.12.1993 7.12.2007
16. Meghalaya Upto 31.12.2004 31.12.2006
17. Orissa Upto 31.12.2003 Awaited
18. Punjab Upto 31.12.1990 31.12.2007
19. Rajasthan Upto 31.12.2005 31.3.2007
20. Tamil Nadu Upto 31.12.2005 Awaited
21. Uttar Pradesh Upto 31.12.2007 Awaited
22. West Bengal Upto 31.12.2005 30.11.2006

31
Recommendations/Observations
4.11 A perusal of the above table reveals that there is a gap between States updating their
registers and the Central Council of Homoeopathy updating the Central Register of Homoeopathy
of the concerned States on that basis. The Committee also finds that though Delhi, Karnataka, West
Bengal, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya have furnished the updated
State Registers, the same is not reflected in the Central Register.
Action Taken
This was reviewed in a meeting held by the Secretary (AYUSH) on 4/6/08 and the Council
has been asked to complete within four months.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made subsequent to the
review meeting held by the Secretary (AYUSH).
Recommendations/Observations
4.12 The Committee is constrained to observe that though the Department has been arguing that
the delay in updation of the Central Register is occasioned by its inability to procure the requisite
information from the State Councils/Boards timely, the facts and circumstances of the case lead the
Committee to the inescapable conclusion that the CCH has also not shown the requisite urgency in
updating the Central Register incorporating the information already furnished by some of the State
Councils/Boards. Committee’s attention has been drawn by the following physical achievements with
regard to maintenance of Central Register of Homoeopathy during the Tenth Plan:
• 4th CRH containing the name of 14228 practitioners from U.P. (part A), Karnataka
(Part I+II), Chandigarh (Part II) and Haryana mainly were sent to the press for
publication in Gazette on 21.6.2004. Though it was published on 9.10.04 but received
in the Council only in October, 2006.
• The renewal work of CRH published in 1996 was started in 2004 which is still
continuing.
• Central Register Published in 1993 was updated and renewed Central Register of
Homeopathy sent to Government Press for publication on 8.9.06
• 5th part of Central Register of Homoeopathy containing the names of 4262
practitioners from Gujarat, U.P., and Karnataka sent to Government Press for publication.
• The names of about 43,500 practitioners published in 1993 are to be removed from
the Central Register of Homoeopathy and particulars of these names have been given
to computer agency for feeding data entry in computer before sending them to Press
for publication.
The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to expeditiously incorporate the
available information in the Central Register for the purpose of its updation and apprise it of the
measures taken to rectify the mismatch referred to above.
Action Taken
This was also reviewed in the meeting on 4/6/08 and the Council has been asked to
complete the work on time bound manner.

32
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee recommends that the forward movement made in the matter since
4/06/08 be communicated to it so that an objective assessment of the efficacy of the efforts
could be made.
Recommendations/Observations
4.13 The Committee notes that the work of renewal of 43500 names of practioners published
in the Central Register of Homoeopathy was targeted to be achieved during 2007-08. However the
same could not be achieved during the said period. The timeline for achieving the above target has
now been shifted to 2008-09. However, the Committee is not sanguine about the Department’s
ability to meet the targets even during 2008-09 in view of the Department’s own admission that
the Council has just 3-4 employees working on the Central Register including its maintenance/
renewal and that despite IWSU’s recommendation for additional staff, the Central Government has
not sanctioned it.
Action Taken
These are time bound works and the Council has been asked to get the work completed
within four months. The council is a statutory body and could do such work through outsourcing
of manpower.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is not happy with the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee
is aware that the Central Council of Homoeopathy is a statutory body and competent to
outsource the required manpower. However, in the event of the Council failing to carry out
its mandate, the Department has to take a pro-active role. The Committee would therefore,
emphasize that the Department relentlessly pursue with the Council the task of renewal of
the Central Registers.
Recommendations/Observations
4.14 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is a typical case of procrastination. In this
era of outsourcing, such reasoning is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee, therefore,
urges upon the Department with all the emphasis at its command to explore all ways and means of
achieving the targets of renewal of names of 43500 practioners published in the C.R.H.
Action Taken
Already the Council has been asked to out source resources and complete the work.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is happy to note that taking a cue from the Committee’s
recommendation, the Department has asked the Central Council of Homoeopathy to
outsource the resources and complete the work. However, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the achievements made in this regard.
RESEARCH COUNCILS
Recommendations/Observations
5.2 There are 55 ongoing Projects under Extra-Mural Research Scheme, out of which 19 relate
to Homoeopathy, 18 relate to Ayurveda, 9 relate to Yoga and 10 relate to Unani Medicine. The

33
Committee notes that these Research Projects are being handled by different agencies/individuals.
Varying amount of funds has been released to all of them. The Committee observes that these
Research Projects deal with efficacy of AYUSH drugs and line of treatment/therapy of major
diseases and also mental health/disorder. The Committee is aware that findings of these Research
Projects can prove to be very beneficial in the control of increasing problem areas of physical and
mental health in the modem world. The Committee hopes that there is an effective monitoring
mechanism in place for ensuring timely completion of such projects. The Committee also strongly
feels that there is a need for a centralized cell working in co-ordination with all the Research
Councils for propagating the positive impact of such research studies. The Committee also
recommends that adequate financial allocation be extended to the four Research Councils to equip
their research labs and if need be, more funds be allotted to them at RE 2008-09 stage.
The Committee also recommend the Department, to streamline functioning of the Extra
Mural Project Screening Committee comprising the experts and Scientists from different streams
so that evaluation of the projects is done on their merits. Besides there should be a close
monitoring of the progress of all the sanctioned projects for getting the desired results as well as
to avoid misuse of funds.
Action Taken
The Department has constituted a centralized cell consisting of Adviser (Ay.), Adviser
(Homoeo.), Deputy Adviser (Unani) and Director (MN) for the purpose of effective monitoring of
EMR projects and dissemination of research findings.
The constituted centralized cell will work in co-ordination with Directors of research
councils to not only monitor the progress of EMR projects but also to propagate the positive
impact of such research projects through research journals as well as electronically.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee welcomes the setting up of a centralized cell for the purpose of
effective monitoring of EMR projects and dissemination of research findings. The
Committee hopes that this cell has become fully operational.
YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
Recommendations/Observations
6.4 The Committee expresses its displeasure over under utilization of the funds allocated for
Yoga and Naturopathy particularly by the MDNIY . The Committee would like to be apprised of the
underlying causes for the under utilization. The Committee would also like to impress upon the
Department the imperative need for optimal and judicious utilization of funds allocated for a crucial
sector like health. The Committee has always been responsive to the genuine needs of the
Department and has been supporting its case for higher allocation in terms of the inherent powers
of the Committee. However, if the Department time and again defaults in ensuring optimal utilization
of the allocated funds, it will weaken its own case. The Committee would, therefore, even at the
cost of repetition, like to stress that the Department take necessary remedial measures to ensure
that the funds allocated in BE 2008-09 are utilized optimally and strictly as per the action plan.
Action Taken
The Budget Estimates for MDNIY for 2007-08 were finalized on the assumption that the planned
expansion of the Institute’s activities would take place as envisaged. In particular, two research

34
centres were to be established – an Advanced Centre for Yoga Therapy and Research in Mental
Health and Neuro Sciences at NIMHANS, Bangalore and an Advanced Centre for Yoga Education,
Therapy and Research in Cardiovascular Diseases and Diabetes Mellitus at JIPMER, Puduchery.
Yoga therapy centres were to be set up in the ESI hospitals in Delhi and in Tertiary care hospitals
in Delhi. However, the research centre at NIMHANS, Bangalore could only be started during the
4th quarter of year and the opening of the research centre at JIPMER, Puduchery was postponed
to 2008-09. In addition to this, the ESI authorities after initially setting up the centres in their
hospitals, subsequently decided to disband these units. As a result of all these unanticipated
problems, the grants earmarked for these projects could not be spent in full.
Action has already been initiated to ensure that allocated funds are utilized optimally by the
MDNIY.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has time and again been impressing upon the need to complete all
preparatory exercises and work out meticulous details before embarking on new projects.
The Committee is pained to observe that this is yet another case of shoddy planning
resulting in under-utilization of funds sanctioned by Parliament. The Committee trusts the
Department’s assurance that action has been initiated to ensure optimal utilization of
allocated funds by MDNIY. The Committee would, however, like to be apprised of headway
made in the matter.
Recommendations/Observations
6.16 The Committee feels that the Department has to playa pro-active role in such matters. A
Grievance Redressal Cell can be activated at the Department to which wide publicity may be given.
In this way, victims of so called ‘Yoga Camps’ can be compensated. Such a move will also
indirectly lead to curbing of such activities. At the same time, there is also a need for verifying
the good work being done by genuine Yoga practitioners and giving wide publicity to their work
so as to extend their reach to general masses.
Action Taken
Complaints received regarding Yoga camps will be looked into promptly. It will also be
necessary to educate the general public about the appropriate manner in which Yoga practices
should be conducted.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that though the Department has assured to look into the
complaints received regarding yoga camps and also to educate the general public about the
appropriate manner in which yoga classes should be conducted, the reply is deficient to the
extent it fails to indicate the modalities through which the above goals are to be realized.
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to communicate to it the
mechanisms put in place to achieve the objectives stipulated above.
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
Recommendations/Observations
8.6 The Committee observes that though the Department claims that with the appointment of

35
the Nodal Officer, some headway has been made towards opening of new AYUSH dispensaries; the
ground realities do not reflect the claims of the Department.
Action Taken
Efforts are being made with the Department of Health to create the posts.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that AYUSH dispensaries are gaining popularity day-by-day.
However, their expansion in CGHS dispensaries is not keeping pace with their demand and
one of the factors responsible for their slow expansion is that the required posts are not
being created. What is more deplorable is that the inter-departmental differences seem to
have come in the way of creating the new posts. The Committee exhorts the Department
to sort out the matter with the Department of Health and Family Welfare expeditiously and
pave the way for expansion of dispensaries in CGHS.
Recommendations/Observations
8.7 Establishment of AYUSH dispensaries at Delhi, Kanpur, Chandigarh, Jabalpur and Bhopal
was originally targeted to be achieved during 2006-07.  Two years have elapsed since then, but no
tangible progress has been reported in the matter. The Committee, feels that more vigorous efforts
on the part of the Department are called for in materializing the establishment of A YUSH
dispensaries at the designated places. The Committee, also, urges upon the Department to take
urgent steps to get the proposal of creation of additional posts approved by the Cabinet at the
earliest.
Action Taken
The Department of Health has been requested to create necessary posts for the Dispensaries
as the Directorate of CGHS is under that Department. The Department shall extend necessary
financial assistance only and all other administrative procedures have to be done by Department of
Health.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to observe the snail’s pace of progress in the matter.
It seems that the matter of creation of additional posts required for opening more A YUSH
dispensaries in CGHS has got bogged down due to procedural delays and indecisiveness on
the part of the Department of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Secretary of both  the Departments should sit together to resolve the
bottlenecks, if any, in creation of additional posts at the earliest.
AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
8.13 From a scrutiny of the sanctioned strength and vacancy position it is crystal clear that the
ratio between the sanctioned strength and the vacant posts is too alarming to be ignored. Now the
duality of control of the Ayurveda Hospital has been removed. The Committee therefore hopes that
it would provide a fillip to filling up of the vacant posts at the earliest. The Committee would like
to be enlightened about the progress made in this regard.

36
Action Taken
The Department of AYUSH had placed a requisition with UPSC for appointment of 23
Medicinal Officer (Ay.) for posting in CGHS units and Lodhi Road Hospital. The UPSC accordingly
held written test for 57 nos. of MO(Ay.) incl uding 23 MO (Ay .) of D/o AYUSH The
case unfortunately got embroiled in litigation and the Supreme Court in case No. SLP(C)1255-
1290/2005, SLP (C) Nol. 26430/2005 and SLP (C) No. 1347/2005 had stayed the declaration of
the results of the written exam held on 11/12/2005 by the UPSc. The case has finally been decided
by the Supreme Court and UPSC is stated to have received orders for declaring the results. The
UPSC will then have to conduct interviews and make the final selection. Once the panel is received
from the UPSC action will be taken to post doctors in the Lodhi Road Hospital.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee hopes that the panel of selected candidates must have been received
from UPSC by now and the required number of doctors would have joined the Lodhi Road
Ayurveda Hospital. If not, the Committee would appreciate if the Department takes a pro-
active role in this long pending matter.
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendations/Observations
9.11 The Committee feels that these measures would to be very useful in strengthening the
NMPB so as to enable to carry out its mandate successfully. The Committee would appreciate if
action is initiated at the earliest for restructuring of the five Committees of the Board on the
subjects of cultivation, research, demand and supply, patent/IPR and import/export as suggested by
the M/s JPS Consultants.
The Committee was informed that above 200 and odd different Jari butis are available in
the forests of Shivpuri in Madya Pradesh which are presently being exploited by the Adivasis. But
they are not getting their due share due to nexus of middlemen. The Committee therefore
recommends the Department to send its task force to that area to work on it in consultation with
the local M.P.
Action Taken
The details of committees constituted is given in Annexure-I. As regards the matter of 200
and odd different Jari buties found in the forests of Shivpuri region of Madhya Pradesh, a reference
has been made to the Government of Madhya Pradesh requesting them to prepare a blue print for
development of medicinal plants in Shivpuri region in consultation with the MP and submit the same
for consideration of NMPB. Subsequently, if required, a team will be deputed from the Department
to Shivpuri for preparation of proposal for development of medicinal plants in the region.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that development of medicinal plants in Shivpuri region
assumes added significance in view of the fact that it entails paying fair remuneration to
Adivasis. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should not be
content by making a reference to the State Government and instead proactively pursue the
matter with the concerned State Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made in the matter.

37
Recommendations/Observations
9.14 The committee also feels that the condition specified for farmers to submit their UCs after
verification by CAs as required under the general Financial Rules needs to be looked into, as it
seems to be a very impractical proposition. Some alternative mechanism needs to be put in place.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department to take up the matter with the
Ministry of Finance with a view to evolve a more practicable provision and communicate to it the
decision taken in the matter.
Action Taken
The matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance and outcome will be reported to the
Committee as suggested.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to  note the lethargic attitude of the Department in the
matter. While pointing out the practical difficulties in submission of Utilization Certificates
by the farmers after verification by a Chartered Accountant, the Committee had expected
the Department to pursue the matter vigorously. However, the fact that the Department is
yet to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance even after a lapse of almost nine
months speaks of the cavalier fashion with which the Department has treated the matter.
The Committee, therefore, once again exhorts the Department to pursue the matter with
a sense of urgency and let the Committee know the outcome, thereof.
MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH IN NATIONAL HEALTH CARE
Recommendations/Observations
9.24 The Committee observes that main streaming of AYUSH is of immense importance in the
sense it will help to deliver health care facilities to the most marginalized and impoverished
households in the rural areas of the country. Given the enormous shortfall in health facilities and
the pathetic condition of public health utilities in rural areas, this Scheme is a sterling initiative,
though it will only address a miniscule part of the health needs of the rural poor, leaving out large
swathes of India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should draw an
action plan to ensure that the targets set for 2008-09 are achieved fully.
Action Taken
The integration of AYUSH medical and health services with mainstream modern medicine or
“mainstreaming” as it is generally known would result in good proportion of the presently
underserved population being able to obtain health services. The necessity for such mainstreaming
has been recognized and this is one of the objectives of the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM).
Under the NRHIM, AYUSH facilities are being co-located in allopathic health institutions. NRHM
also provides funds for the engagement of AYUSH physicians on contract basis to man these
facilities. Funds for the creation of infrastructure in these co-located AYUSH facilities, the
procurement of drugs, contingencies, etc. are provided from the Hospitals and Dispensaries
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the Department of A YUSH. The convergence of funding from the
NRHM and the Hospitals and Dispensaries Centrally Sponsored Scheme ensures that AYUSH
facilities are created in allopathic health institutions and these facilities are properly set up and
manned. The achievements in the main streaming of AYUSH in the NRHM are given in the
Annexure-IV.

38
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that it has made a pointed recommendation to ensure that the
target set for 2008-09 under the scheme of mainstreaming of AYUSH in NRHM is achieved
fully. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that a action plan be
drawn to meet the targets set for 2008-09.
QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendations/Observations
10.14 The Committee is concerned over the fact that State Drug Testing Laboratories have not
become functional in many major States as pointed out by the Secretary. The Committee observes
that drugs are used for saving valuable human lives and if adequate mechanism is not available with
the State Governments to regulate quality of ASU&H drugs, then it is a very serious situation. The
Committee has been given to understand that the Central Council of Health and Family Welfare
comprising Chief Ministers of all the States and chaired by the Health and Family Welfare Minister,
has passed a Resolution on the need for the States to utilize the assistance given by the Central
Government for upgradation of State Drug Testing Laboratories and strengthening of the drug
enforcement machinery. The Committee, therefore, desires the Department, to once again take up
the matter with all the Chief Secretaries of the States apprising them of the Committee’s concern
in the matter.
Action Taken
The matter has been taken up with the State Chief Secretaries.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee would however like to be apprised of the outcome of talks with State
Chief Secretaries and whether the talks remained fruitful in revival of some of SDT
laboratories.
Recommendations/Observations
10.16 The Committee supports the budgetary provisions made for the Scheme. However, the
Committee has no idea whether any monitoring mechanism is in place to ensure that the funds
placed at the disposal of the States and the ASU&H manufacturing units will be spent for the
specified purposes. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Department to devise an
effective monitoring mechanism to ensure proper utilization of funds allocated for the purpose. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the number of UCs pending under this Scheme and
the amount involved therein.
Action Taken
As far as assistance to ASU&H manufacturing units in the revised schemes is concerned,
there is an in-built monitoring mechanism as the subsidy of 30% on expenditure (subject to a
maximum of Rs.30.00 lakhs) is a back-ended subsidy and the money would be released through
the bank from which the unit has availed loan facility. The release of further funds is subject to
certification by PLIM/PHARMEXCIL that the stated unit has indeed upgraded itself as envisaged
under the scheme. As far as funding to the State Governments is concerned, funds would be
released only as a reimbursement of the expenditure already incurred on testing in NABL accredited
laboratories and this is subject to States having functional DTL and support enforcement
mechanism in place. The No. of pending UCs is 105 under the scheme.

39
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that the Department has skirted the issue of the amount
involved in pending Utilization Certificates (UCs). The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the requisite information on the amount involved in pending UCs under the Scheme
under reference be intimated to it.
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON FACILITIES FOR AYUSH INDUSTRY CLUSTERS
Recommendations/Observations
10.19 The Committee observes that as per the Department’s own admission, development of
common facilities for AYUSH industry clusters is of immense importance as it is envisaged to fill
in the critical gaps in the AYUSH Sector , especially raw material standardization, quality control and
productivity improvement compliances etc. However, the progress made in the matter is not
commensurate with the expected results. The Committee is pained to observe that due to languid
pace of approval of the Scheme, budgetary provisions made in BE 2007-08 could not be utilized,
which has resulted in reduced allocation in BE 2008-09.
Action Taken
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for ‘Development of AYUSH Industry Clusters’ has been
launched with the approval of the Competent Authority. Since, this is new and innovative Scheme,
it took some time to put the component of the Scheme across the industry. The Department
conducted number of stakeholders consultations in different parts of the country to explain the
Scheme. As a result of the concerted ef forts of the Department, three proposals were granted ‘in
principle’ approval in the financial year 2007-08. One Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Thrissur
Cluster is likely to be put before the Scheme Monitoring Committee by August, 2008. M/s IL&FS
CDI Ltd. has been appointed as Project Management Consultant for implementation of the Scheme.
It may be mentioned here that the Department has already received five new Concept Notes from
different parts of the country for setting up of the common facilities for AYUSH industry. So far
as the implementation of the Scheme is concerned, because of the concerted efforts of the
Department, eight proposals have already been received against a target of ten fixed by the Planning
Commission for first 2-3 years. The expenditure will pick-up once the DPRs are received and
approved in the Department in a time-bound manner.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Though the Committee is happy to note that a good number of proposals have been
received by the Department, it is not sure as to how many DPRs would materialize. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department thrash out the appropriate policy
matrix for the purpose of facilitating speedy submission of the DPRs.
DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
11.7 The Committee, therefore exhorts the Department to put in a place a transparent,
accountable and effective mechanism to ensure that not only are the targets for the year 2008-09
met substantially, but the financial assistance provided to both the Government as well as to private
institutions, is also utilized judiciously. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings
of the Expert Committee on AYUSH education and the Department’s reaction thereto and also the
number of UCs pending and the amount involved therein under this Scheme.

40
Action Taken
Transparency, Accountability and effective mechanism shall be maintained for
implementation for the scheme. Department will hold regional meetings with states to make the
scheme effective and more useful. The Area Officers have been advised to get the pending UCs
cleared.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that the Department on its own ought to have issued
instruction to the Area Officers to get the pending Utilization Certificates cleared without
waiting for the Committee to pursue the matter. Now that the Area Officers have been
advised to do the needful in this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in the matter.
MISCELLANEOUS
Recommendations/Observations
14.1 The Committee notes that a panel of Experts under the Chairmanship of Director, Institute
of High Tibetan Studies, Sarnath, V aranasi has been constituted for examination of the status,
strength and association of Tibetan system of Medicine with Ayurveda. The expert panel has also
been requested to examine the contribution of different institutions under the Tibetan system of
Medicines in the country and the necessity of funding them for their further development. The
Committee would appreciate if the Report is expedited and follow-up action taken thereon.
Action Taken
The Department of AYUSH has constituted a Committee under the chairmanship of
Prof. G.N. Samten, Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, Varanasi to assess the status, strength and
association of Sowa Rigpa with Ayurveda and its reorganization. The Committee has extremely
reviewed the issue and submitted a detailed report with the following summary of
recommendations. The Department of AYUSH has initiated the action.
• Considering the status, strength and association with Ayurveda, Sowa-Rigpa system
deserves to be recognized as a traditional health care system like other existing
systems in India.
• In Sowa-Rigpa practicing regions. Amchis may be considered for appointment in all
local health scheme and Government hospitals.
• The status of existing Sowa-Rigpa colleges is very poor, they may be brought at par
with Ayurveda and Siddha colleges applying all norms of CCIM.
• A separate committee may be constituted to redraft the Sowa-Rigpa graduate’s syllabus
to make it comprehensive like that of Ayurveda to produce professionally competent
graduates.
• Good Manufacturing Practice may be made compulsory for all Sowa-Rigpa
Manufacturing Units.
• A separate cell may be created in C.C.R.A.S. for translation of Sowa-Rigpa Tibetan
medical literature into Hindi and English.
• Sowa-Rigpa representative may be accommodated in C.C.I.M. like that of Siddha and
Unani.

41
• The financial assistance may be provided to Sowa-Rigpa colleges to make them at par
with other traditional medicine colleges.
• Collaborative research in Sowa-Rigpa may be promoted. The Department of A YUSH
and CRAS has initiated action to promote the system.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that the Expert Committee has submitted its Report on the
Tibetan System of Medicine – Sowa Rigpa but the Department has not indicated its reaction
to the findings of the Expert Committee. The Committee had asked the Department to
apprise it of the follow-up action on the recommendations of the Expert Committee. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to indicate its response to the
recommendation of the Expert Committee and follow up action if any, taken thereon.

42
CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–Nil–
42

43
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the reasoning advanced by the
Department that being the first year of the implementation of the schemes, the B.E.
provisions could not be utilized fully in respect of Local Health Traditions and Public Health
Initiatives Schemes. The Committee feels that merely stating that all efforts are being
made to ensure utilization of funds for these schemes in the year 2008-09 does not carry
conviction in the absence of any elaborate action plan to realize the targets. The
Committee, therefore, once again impresses upon the Department to work out a meticulous
action plan for the speedy implementation of the schemes and the resultant enhanced
utilization of the BE provisions. (Para 2.8)
The Committee is constrained to note the ad-hoc approach of the Department in such
a serious matter which is evident from the fact that instead of institutionalizing a process
for submission of proposals from N.E. States, the Department is relying on half and ad-hoc
measures like advising Area Officers of the N.E. region to obtain proposals from these
States. The Committee feels that such a measure may yield results in the short term, but
can never be a solution to the problem in the long run. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the Department put in a place a mechanism to ascertain the underlying
causes of non-submission of proposals by the NE States and take corrective action
accordingly. (Para 2.13)
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (NIA), JAIPUR
The Committee notes with concern that more than nine months have elapsed since
the Committee presented its Report, but little headway seems to have been made towards
making payment of the arrear NPAs to the faculty of National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.
The Committee observes that at a time when the public sector institutes, in general, are
not only facing fresh talent crunch but also losing their faculty members to their private
sector counterparts, such languid pace in decision making is deplorable. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a decision on the payment of arrear NPAs to the faculty of NIA
be taken expeditiously. (Para 3.4)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
The Committee notes that though the Recruitment Rules have been approved, the
reply of the Department is silent about whether or not the autonomous character of the
NIH has been kept intact. The Committee feels that before drawing any conclusions in this
regard, a perusal of the revised Recruitment Rules would be pertinent. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a copy of the Recruitment Rules be furnished to it.  (Para 3.13)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE (NIUM), BANGALORE
The Committee notes that the Department’s reply implies that the National Institute
of Unani Medicine achieving its full potential in the Eleventh Plan is contingent upon the
43

44
Ministry of Finance sanctioning requisite posts for new PG courses. The Committee concurs
with the Department’s views in the matter and lends its support to sanctioning of requisite
posts for new PG courses. The Committee would like the Department to apprise the
Ministry of Finance of the Committee’s views in the matter so that the demand for
sanctioning of requisite posts to new PG courses gets invested with Parliamentary support.
(Para 3.20)
The Committee notes that though the Department has assured to streamline the
monitoring mechanism and monitor the progress on a quarterly basis, no tangible step,
taken or contemplated to be taken towards accomplishing the goals in this regard, has been
indicated. Merely stating that the monitoring mechanism would be streamlined and the
progress would be monitored on a quarterly basis is too simplistic an answer to be a realistic
solution. The Committee would therefore, like the Department to indicate a specific action
plan to realize the above targets. (Para 3.22)
STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF INDIAN MEDICINE (CCIM), NEW DELHI
The Committee is constrained to note that merely stating that the Department is
pursuing the matter with CCIM to expedite the updation of Central Register of Indian
Medicine is too routine a reply to deserve appreciation. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the specific steps taken by the Department to impress upon the CCIM the
imperative need for updation of the Register under reference. (Para 4.3)
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF HOMOEOPATHY (CCH), NEW DELHI
Though the Committee is happy to note that in a meeting held on 25/7/08, it has
been decided that the States shall take steps to computerize the State Registers of
Homoeopathy and submit it to the Centre Council. However, what the Committee is
concerned about is that no modalities seem to have been worked out to translate this
decision into action. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should
proactively pursue the matter with the concerned States so that the necessary modalities
are worked out promptly and glitches, if any, are sorted out and such an important decision
does not remain on paper only but leads to positive results. (Para 4.7)
The Committee views with serious concern the work culture prevailing in the Central
Council as pointed out by the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised about
the compliance status with regard to the Physical Register of Central Council. (Para 4.9)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made subsequent to the
review meeting held by the Secretary (AYUSH). (Para 4.11)
The Committee recommends that the forward movement made in the matter since
4/06/08 be communicated to it so that an objective assessment of the efficacy of the efforts
could be made. (Para 4.12)
The Committee is not happy with the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee
is aware that the Central Council of Homoeopathy is a statutory body and competent to
outsource the required manpower. However, in the event of the Council failing to carry out
its mandate, the Department has to take a pro-active role. The Committee would therefore,
emphasize that the Department relentlessly pursue with the Council the task of renewal of
the Central Registers. (Para 4.13)

45
The Committee is happy to note that taking a cue from the Committee’s
recommendation, the Department has asked the Central Council of Homoeopathy to
outsource the resources and complete the work. However, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the achievements made in this regard. (Para 4.14)
RESEARCH COUNCILS
The Committee welcomes the setting up of a centralized cell for the purpose of
effective monitoring of EMR projects and dissemination of research findings. The
Committee hopes that this cell has become fully operational. (Para 5.2)
YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
The Committee has time and again been impressing upon the need to complete all
preparatory exercises and work out meticulous details before embarking on new projects.
The Committee is pained to observe that this is yet another case of shoddy planning
resulting in under-utilization of funds sanctioned by Parliament. The Committee trusts the
Department’s assurance that action has been initiated to ensure optimal utilization of
allocated funds by MDNIY. The Committee would, however, like to be apprised of headway
made in the matter. (Para 6.4)
The Committee notes that though the Department has assured to look into the
complaints received regarding yoga camps and also to educate the general public about the
appropriate manner in which yoga classes should be conducted, the reply is deficient to the
extent it fails to indicate the modalities through which the above goals are to be realized.
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to communicate to it the
mechanisms put in place to achieve the objectives stipulated above. (Para 6.16)
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
The Committee observes that AYUSH dispensaries are gaining popularity day-by-day.
However, their expansion in CGHS dispensaries is not keeping pace with their demand and
one of the factors responsible for their slow expansion is that the required posts are not
being created. What is more deplorable is that the inter-departmental differences seem to
have come in the way of creating the new posts. The Committee exhorts the Department
to sort out the matter with the Department of Health and Family Welfare expeditiously and
pave the way for expansion of dispensaries in CGHS. (Para 8.6)
The Committee is constrained to observe the snail’s pace of progress in the matter.
It seems that the matter of creation of additional posts required for opening more A YUSH
dispensaries in CGHS has got bogged down due to procedural delays and indecisiveness on
the part of the Department of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Secretary of both the Departments should sit together to resolve the
bottlenecks, if any, in creation of additional posts at the earliest. (Para 8.7)
AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
The Committee hopes that the panel of selected candidates must have been received
from UPSC by now and the required number of doctors would have joined the Lodhi Road
Ayurveda Hospital. If not, the Committee would appreciate if the Department takes a pro-
active role in this long pending matter. (Para 8.13)

46
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
The Committee feels that development of medicinal plants in Shivpuri region
assumes added significance in view of the fact that it entails paying fair remuneration to
Adivasis. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should not be
content by making a reference to the State Government and instead pro actively pursue the
matter with the concerned State Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made in the matter. (Para 9.11)
The Committee is constrained to note the lethargic attitude of the Department in the
matter. While pointing out the practical difficulties in submission of Utilization Certificates
by the farmers after verification by a Chartered Accountant, the Committee had expected
the Department to pursue the matter vigorously. However, the fact that the Department is
yet to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance even after a lapse of almost nine
months speaks of the cavalier fashion with which the Department has treated the matter.
The Committee, therefore, once again exhorts the Department to pursue the matter with
a sense of urgency and let the Committee know the outcome, thereof. (Para 9.14)
MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH IN NATIONAL HEALTH CARE
The Committee notes that it has made a pointed recommendation to ensure that the
target set for 2008-09 under the scheme of mainstreaming of AYUSH in NRHM is achieved
fully. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that a action plan be
drawn to meet the targets set for 2008-09. (Para 9.24)
QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
The Committee would however like to be apprised of the outcome of talks with State
Chief Secretaries and whether the talks remained fruitful in revival of some of SDT
laboratories. (Para 10.14)
The Committee notes that the Department has skirted the issue of the amount
involved in pending Utilization Certificates (UCs). The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the requisite information on the amount involved in pending UCs under the Scheme
under reference be intimated to it. (Para 10.16)
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON FACILITIES FOR AYUSH INDUSTRY CLUSTERS
Though the Committee is happy to note that a good number of proposals have been
received by the Department, it is not sure as to how many DPRs would materialize. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department thrash out the appropriate policy
matrix for the purpose of facilitating speedy submission of the DPRs. (Para 10.19)
DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INSTITUTIONS
The Committee feels that the Department on its own ought to have issued
instruction to the Area Officers to get the pending Utilization Certificates cleared without
waiting for the Committee to pursue the matter. Now that the Area Officers have been
advised to do the needful in this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in the matter. (Para 11.7)
MISCELLANEOUS
The Committee notes that the Expert Committee has submitted its Report on the

47
Tibetan System of Medicine—Sowa Rigpa but the Department has not indicated its reaction
to the findings of the Expert Committee. The Committee had asked the Department to
apprise it of the follow-up action on the recommendations of the Expert Committee. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to indicate its response to the
recommendation of the Expert Committee and follow up action if any, taken thereon.
(Para 14.1)

MINUTES

51
III
THIRD MEETING
(2009-10)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 12th November, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’,  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ashok Argal
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
11. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
12. Shri N. Kristappa
13. Dr. Tarun Mandal
14. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
15. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
17. Shri M.K. Raghavan
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Shrimati Meena Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting. The Committee then considered the draft 36th and 37th Reports on
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) furnished by the Departments of AYUSH and Health Research on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 28th and 29th Reports on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of those Departments. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports.

52
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the 35th, 36th and 37th Reports may be
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the
25th November, 2009. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his
absence Shrimati Viplove Thakur and Dr. Radhakant Nayak to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha
and Dr. Tarun Mandal and in his absence Dr. Jyoti Mirdha to lay the Reports on the Table of the
Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

53
ANNEXURES

54

55
ANNEXURE-I
Para-9.11
The NMPB was constituted vide Cabinet Resolution notified on 24th November, 2000,  with approval of  Cabinet. This included
setting up of five Committees as under:
(i) Committee on Cultivation of Medicinal Plants including Conservation of rare and endangered species
• Commissioner (Horticulture), D/o Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture Convenor
• Representative of Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy Member
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests Member
• Representative of Department of Rural Development Member
• Representative of DBT Member
• Representative of ICAR Member
• Representative of Ministry of T ribal Affiars/TRIFED Member
• Representative of CSIR Member
(ii) Committee on Research
• Adviser, Department of  Bio-Technology Convenor
• Representative of Department of Science and Technology Member
• Representative of Department of ISM and Homoeopathy Member
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests Member
• Representative of ICAR Member
• Representative of ICMR Member
• Representative of  CSIR Member
(iii) Committee on Demand and Supply
• Adviser (Ay.), Department of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy Convenor
• Representative of Ministry of Commerce Member
• Representative of Department of Chemicals and Petro-chemicals Member
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests Member
• Representative of Department of Small Scale Industries Member
• Representative of Ministry of T ribal Affairs/TRIFED Member

56
• Representative of Ayurvedic Drugs Manufactures Association, Member
Mumbai and 4 industries selected on regional basis by the Chairman
(iv) Committee on Patents/IPR
• Director, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion or nominee Convenor
• Representative of Department of Science and Technology Member
• Representative of Department ISM and Homoeopathy Member
• Representative of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation Member
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests Member
• Representative of CSIR Member
• Representative of NIC Member
(v) Committee on Export/Import
• Ministry of Commerce (nominee) Convenor
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests Member
• Representative of Department of ISM and Homoeopathy Member
• Representative of CHEMEXCIL, Mumbai Member
• Representative of EXIM Bank Member
• Representative of export agencies of Central/State Government Member
• 4 Representatives of Industry on regional basis as decided by the Chairman Members
However the Committees have since been almost Non-functional. It has been pointed out in the report of M/s JPS Consultant also.
One of the main reasons attributed to this is the fact that all the Committees except the Committee on “demand and supply”, hav e
officers/representatives from other Ministries/Departments as their convenors. The experience suggests that other Ministries/De partments
rarely take the interest due to their preoccupation with their own work. Also, the Departments/Ministries who have been made as
Convenors, are also required to provide administrative/technical support for functioning of the committees. This is operational ly problematic
as the other Ministries/Departments would not take responsibility for organizing a meeting pertaining to the Department of AYUS H.
Considering above proposal has been processed to reconstitute these committees as under:
Committee on Cultivation of Medicinal Plants including Conservation of rare and endangered species—
• Additional Secretary In-charge of Horticulture, – Chairman
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
• Representative of Department of A YUSH – Member

57
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests – Member
• Representative of Department of Rural Development – Member
• Representative of DBT – Member
• Representative of ICAR – Member
• Representative of Ministry of T ribal Affairs/TRIFED – Member
• Representative of CSIR – Member
• CEO, NMPB – Member Secretary
Committee on Research
• Senior/Principal Advisor of DBT – Chairman
• Representative of Department of Science and Technology – Member
• Representative of Department of ISM and Homoeopathy – Member
• Representative of ICAR – Member
• Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests – Member
• Representative of ICMR – Member
• Representative of CSIR – Member
• CEO/Director-cum-Dy. CEO, NMPB – Member Secretary
Committee on Demand and Supply
• CEO, NMPB – Chairman
• Advisor (Ayurveda) – Member
• Director-cum-Dy. CEO – Member Secretary
• Advisor (Ay.), Department of A YUSH – Member
• Representative of Ministry of Commerce – Member
As regards the matter of 200 and odd different Jari buties found in the forests of Shivpuri region of Madhya Pradesh, a referen ce
has been made to the Government of Madhya Pradesh requesting them to prepare a blue print for development of medicinal plants i n
Shivpuri region in consultation with the MP and submit the same for consideration of NMPB. Subsequently, if required, a team wi ll be
deputed from the Department to Shivpuri for preparation of proposal for development of medicinal plants in the region.

58
ANNEXURE-II
Status of Central Register of Indian Medicine
Sl. Name of the Period up to which Status of updation of State Remarks
No. State Central Register was Registers as informed by the
notified Stat e Secretaries in the
meeting of Health Secretaries on 2-4-08 on 30-4-08 on 4-6-08
as on as on on 12-12-2007
31-3-07 2-4-08
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Andhra Upto Up to
Pradesh March, March,
1994 2004
2. Assam Upto 1986 Upto
and From 1986
Dec. 1999- and
August, From
2004 Dec.
1999-
August,
2004
Updated up to 31.3.2006
A commitment was given that
the updation will be completed
by 31-3-2008.
A Commitment was given that
the updation will be completed
by 31-3-2008.
This updated
Register has
been received
by CCIM on
21-3-07.
Screening is
being done by
CCIM.
Registers from
31-3-2006 to
18-7-2006 sent
for Notification
on 18 Feb., 08.
Registers from
January, 1987 to
December, 1999
and Sept., 04 to
March, 06 were
not recieved by
CCIM.
English typing
is over and
Hindi typing is
in progress.
Notified in the
Government of
India Gazette
by the CCIM.
Reminder sent
during last
week
(1) Comparison
work in
progress. Can
be sent to
press by the
end of this
month.
(2) 1-4-07 to
31-3-08 not
received. Letter
issued.
Reminder sent

59
3. Bihar Upto March Upto
1997 March
2005
4. Chhattisgarh Newly From
created 1-4-2002
Board on to
5-2-05 28-2-06
5. Delhi Upto Upto
March March
2001 2001
6. Goa Upto Upto
March, March,
2004 2004
Updated 31.3.2007
A commitment was given that
the updation will be completed
by 31-3-2008.
Updated upto 31.3.2007
Updated upto 30.9.2006
This updated
Register has
been received
by CCIM on
15-10-07.
Registers are
expected at any
moment from
the State
Government.
Updated Register
for Ayurveda
from April, 2002
to April, 2006
has been
received by
CCIM on
27-3-08.
This updated
Register has
been received
by CCIM on
20-3-07
Screening has
been done. Some
Discrepancies
were found, sent
back to Bihar
for correction
during the last
week.
Register are
expected at any
moment from
the State
Government
Typing and
Screening is in
progress.
Typing and
Screening is in
progress.
Corrected version
not received.
Spoken to the
Registrar on
2-6-08.
1-4-07 to
31-3-08 due.
Registers upto
31-3-07 received.
Typing is in
progress.
Ready to send
for publication
by 30-6-08.
Ready to send
for publication
by 30-6-08.
Registers are
due
 from
1-4-04 to
31-3-08.
Reminder issued
(Board was
defunct for
more than two
years.)

60
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
7. Gujarat Upto Upto
December, March
1999 2005
8. Haryana Upto Upto
March March
2005 2005
  9. Himachal Upto Upto
Pradesh March March
2005 2005
10. J & K Upto Upto
March, March,
1983 1983
Ayu. Register updated up to
31.12.2006 Unani-Pending
Updated 31.3.2007
Updated up to 31.3.2007
Board remained defunct from
30-4-1985 to 30-11-1995
This updated
Register has
been received by
CCIM on 19-3-07.
This updated
Register has
been received
by CCIM on
29-5-07.
Preparation of
the Draft.
Central Register
under process.
This updated
Register has not
been received
by CCIM.
Latest reminder
from CCIM to
the State Board
was sent on
14-1-2008.
Updated Register
upto October,
2005 received
by CCIM
on 22-10-07.
Typing over.
Comparison is
going on. It
was informed
by CCIM that
they can send
this to press for
Notification
around 20-4-08.
English Typing
is over and
Hindi is in
progress
Going to Press
by 1st week of
May, 08.
To be taken up
with the
Registrar.
Sent for
Notification to
Government of
India Press last
week.
Typing over.
Comparison is
in progress.
Already sent to
Press.
No response.
Reminder sent
on 22-5-08.
Draft checked.
Expected from
the Press at
any moment.

61
11. Kerala Upto Upto
February, February,
2005 2005
12. Karnataka Upto Upto
March, March,
2004 2004
13. Madhya Upto Upto
Pradesh March, March,
2004 2004
A commitment was given that
the updation will be completed
by 31-3-2008.
Upto 31.3.2006 updated.
Upto 31.3.2007 updated.
Registers not
received for the
period from
1-3-2005
onwards.
Updated Register
from 1-4-2004
to 31-3-2006
received by
CCIM on 30-4-06
Registers not as
per
requirement.
Discrepencies
were
communicated
on 11-6-07 by
CCIM F.No.
20-8/2006-SR
(Kar) to State
Board of
Karnataka and
the latest on
4-2-08.
Updated
Registers from
1-4-2004 to
31-3-2007
received on
7-6-07.
Screening of
the above
Registers under
progress.
Received upto
31-3-08.
Corrected one
received upto
31-3-08.
Visiting on
5-5-08.
Screening is in
progress.
Typing is in
progress.
Discrepancies
are many
Matter taken
up with
P .S.(H) and
Registrar on
5-5-2008.

62
14. Maharashtra Upto Upto
March, March,
1992 1992
15. Orissa Upto Upto
May, May,
2004 2004
  16. Punjab Upto Upto
December, February,
1998 2006
17. Rajasthan Upto Upto
March, Dec.,
2002 2006
Up to 31.12.2007 updated
Up to 30.6.2006 updated.
State Register
from April,
1992 onwards
received by
CCIM without
the names of
the degree
awarding
Universities and
hence the
Executive
Committee
decided on
24-2-2008 to
send them
back.
Updated
Registers from
1-6-2005 to
30-6-2006
received on
20-3-07 by the
CCIM.
Updated
Register from
1-3-06 onwards
not received by
CCIM.
1-1-07 to 31-3-
08 due.
To be visited.
Corrected
version not
received.
English over,
Hindi due.
To be taken up
with the
Registrar.
Met the R.O.
and Registrar
on 22-5-09.
Updation is in
full swing.
Comparison
over. Redy to
send for
publication.
Spoken to the
Registrar on
19-5-08.
Registrar
informed that
updation is in
progress.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

63
18. Tamil Nadu Upto Upto
March, March,
2002 2002
19. Uttar Pradesh January, January,
1998- 1998-
March, March,
2000 2000
20. Uttarakhand Newly April,
constituted 2001 to
on 25-5-01 March,
2006
Updated up to 31.12.2006
Up to 31.3.2006
Updated
Registers of
Siddha, Unani
and Ayurveda
from 1-1-03 to
31-12-06
received by
CCIM on 9-10-
07.
Updated State
Register from
1-4-2000 to
31-3-02 has
been received
and English
Typing
completed,
Hindi typing
under progress.
To notify this,
CCIM requires
another 3 more
months.
1-4-06 to
31-3-08 due to
be taken up
with the
Registrar.
English over,
Hindi due. Can
be sent to
G .O.I. Press by
first week of
June, 2008.
English over,
Hindi due.
1-4-06 to
31-3-08 due to
be taken up
with the
Registrar.
Comparison
over. Can be
sent to Press
at any
moment.
Comparison is
in progress.
Notified for the
period from
1-4-2006 to
31-3-2008.

64
21. West Bengal Upto Upto
March, March,
2004 2004
Updated up to 31.12.2006 Updated
Register from
1-4-2004 to
1-1-2007 has
been received
by CCIM on
18th June, 07.
English Typing
completed,
Hindi typing
under progress.
To notify this
CCIM requires
another 3 more
months.
Comparison in
progress can be
sent to Press
during June,
2008.
Ready to sent
to Press.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

65
ANNEXURE-III
The major findings of the Nityanand Committee are as follows:
1. Though CCRAS and its units have some significant contributions in the area of pharmacopoeial work and observatory clinical tr ials
for validating single and compound classical drugs and development of some new coded drugs, there is a need for restructuring
and consolidating of peripheral units of CCRAS.
2. CCRAS and its institutions as they are structured and functioning today leave much to be desired. In their present status and  set
up, these laboratories are not likely to be able contribute much to achieve their avowed objectives.
3. At this stage 10 to 12 of its better staffed and equipped research institutes be chosen and developed into National Institute s
in specialized areas, staffed adequately and equipped well with a focused R&D mandate. Research personnel spread over 37
peripheral units who are desirous of pursuing quality research work may be relocated to these 10 to 12 centres. The remaining
units may be allowed to continue with staff who do not wish to relocate providing OPD and IPD services in the area of their
operation and carrying out limited research work under the supervision of these 10 to 12 national research centre.
4. The Nityanand Review Committee Report has suggested the upgradation of 12 CRIs/RRIs to National Research Centres with a
specific mandate.
Process of implementation on the recommendations of the Committee has been initiated and consultation with the staff of the
Council has been initiated so as to remove the misgivings that certain units are being closed. The need based re-deployment of the staff
is being worked out and will be implemented in the phases.

66
ANNEXURE-IV
Achievements under mainstreaming of AYUSH in NRHM
Sl. No. Name of the State Year Fund released No. of PHCs/ Purpose
(Rs.in lakhs) CHCs
1. Andhra Pradesh 2006-07 624.505 Establishment of ISM&H facilities
127
2. Andhra Pradesh 2006-07 635.495
3. Assam 2006-07 1247.25 125 Establishment of Sp. Clinic
4. Rajasthan 2006-07 366.505 Establishing AYUSH Wing @ Rs.3.00 lakh
334
5 Rajasthan 2006-07 635.495
6 Tripura 2006-07 290 29 Establishment of Sp. Clinic
7 Gujarat 2006-07 552 552 Establishment of Sp. Clinic
8 Gujarat 2006-07 1656 552 Establishment of Sp. Clinic
TOTAL: 6007.25 1719

67
ANNEXURE-V
Modalities of the Scheme for Grant-in-Aid to Non-Profit/Non-Governmental AYUSH Organizations/Institutions for
Revitalization of Local Health Traditions, Midwifery Practices etc.
The Scheme has mainly five core objectives viz.,
a. Systematic participatory documentation of Local Health Traditions (LHT) related to one or more of the following aspects
(i) Home remedies.
(ii) food and nutrition.
(iii) midwifery
(iv) bone setting
(v) other specialized local health practices
(vi) ethno veterinary practices.
b. Rapid assessment of selected health practices, prioritized by local communities, based on literature review.
c. Design and implementation of participatory clinical trials for high priority Local Health Practices (LHP) in the local commun ity.
d. Promotion via a participatory process, of sound LHPs, in the community, in order to enhance health security of rural communities.
The additional optional objectives may be one or more of the following:
■ Preparation of Inventory of Medicinal Plants, duly protected from misuse under the biodiversity act,
■ Undertaking pharmacological studies on high priority local health practices,
■ Supporting capacity building activities of folk healer associations,
■ Any other relevant objective conceived by the applicants.
Eligibility for application under the scheme:
1. The applicant should provide evidence of having previously interacted with local health traditions in any part of the country .
2. The applicant should have had previous organizational experience in executing an All India or regionally coordinated program related
to community health or a major community based research program in the health sector.

68
3. The applicant should possess adequate core staff including medical professionals experienced in community outreach.
4. Any institution that has obtained funding from any other Central Government Ministry/Department for the same purpose in the l ast
five years shall not be eligible for funding under this scheme.
5. Applicant shall have to make information available regarding any assistance taken from any State/Central Agency in the last 5  years.
Selection process :
1. The applicant should send a two page concept note containing information on
(a) Clear objectives as per the Scheme
(b) Geographical spread of the proposal
(c) Previous experience
(d) Potential partners and
(e) Broad budget estimate for a five year program.
The proposals are appraised by the Project Appraisal Committee and the proposals which are found suitable as per the provisions
of the scheme are placed before the Project Screening Committee chaired by Secretary (AYUSH) for approval.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.