Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
69
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the
Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the
Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. L IST OF A CRONYMS ................................................................................................................ (v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—20
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 21—25
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 27—33

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Sixty-Ninth Report of the Committee on the Demand for Grants (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, for the year
2013-14.
2. The Committee held one sitting, on 5
th April, 2013 for examination of Demands for Grants
of the Department of Health Research and heard the Secretary (Health Research) and other Officers
thereon.
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the
following documents:–
(i) Address by the President of India to both Houses of Parliament assembled together on
21st February, 2013;
(ii) Speech of Finance Minister on 28 th February, 2013 while presenting the Union Budget
2013-14;
(iii) I mplementation of Budget Announcements 2012-13;
(iv) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Department of Health Research for the year 2013-14;
(v) Annual Report of the Department for the year 2012-13;
(vi) Outcome Budget of the Department for the year 2013-14;
(vii) Detailed Explanatory Note on Demands for Grants of the Department of Health
Research for the year 2013-14;
(viii) Physical and financial targets fixed and achievements made during the Eleventh Plan
period;
(ix) Projection of outlays for the schemes to be undertaken by the Department during the
Twelfth Five Year Plan;
(x) Details of under-utilization of the allocations made under different heads during the last
three years;
(xi) Written replies furnished by the Department to the Questionnaires sent to them by the
Secretariat; and
(xii) Presentation made by the Secretary (Health Research) and other concerned officers;
(xiii) W ritten clarifications furnished by the Department, on the points/issues raised by the
Members during the deliberations of the Committee.

4. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
23rd April, 2013.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Vaisakha 3, 1935 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(iv)

(v)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ACTREC – Advanced Centre for Treatment Research and Education
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
BMHRC – Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre
DHR – Department of Health Research
DBT – Department of Bio-Technology
DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
JIPMER – Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Eucation and Research
JWG – Joint Working Group
MRUs – Multi-Disciplinary Health Research Units
MRHRU – Model Rural Health Research Unit
NGO – Non-Government Organisation
NIF – National Innovation Foundation
PPP – Public Private Partnership
RMRC – Regional Medical Research Centre
RDB – Rapid Diagnostic Kit
RTI – Reproductive Tract Infections
STI – Sexually Transmitted Infections
TRU – Translational Research Unit

1
REPORT
I. Introduction
1.1 The Department of Health Research was created in the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare in 2007 and became functional in November, 2008 with appointment of the first Secretary,
who is also the DG, Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR).
The following work has been allocated to the Department of Health Research:
1. Promotion and co-ordination of basic, applied and clinical research including clinical
trials and operational research in areas related to medical, health, biomedical and
medical profession and education through development of infrastructure, manpower
and skills in cutting edge areas and management of related information thereto.
2. Promote and provide guidance on research governance issues, including ethical issues
in medical and health research.
3. Inter-sectoral coordination and promotion of public-private-spartnership in medical,
biomedical and health research related areas.
4. Advanced training in research areas concerning medicine and health, including grant of
fellowships for such training in India and abroad.
5. International co-operation in medical and health research, including work related to
international conferences in related areas in India and abroad.
6. Technical support for dealing with epidemics and natural calamities.
7. Investigation of outbreaks due to new and exotic agents and development of tools for
prevention.
8. Matters relating to scientific societies and associations, charitable and religious
endowments in medicine and health research areas.
9. Coordination between organizations and institutes under the Central and State
Governments in areas related to the subjects entrusted to the Department and for the
promotion of special studies in medicine and health.
10. Administering and monitoring of Indian Council of Medical Research.
1.2 The Department has informed that the work relating to Indian Council of Medical Research
(ICMR) was the only on-going scheme to have been transferred to the Department and other nine
functions are new.
1.3 As per the information given in the Outcome Budget 2013-14, five new schemes have been
formulated so as to fulfill the mandate and work entrusted to the Department and efforts are
underway to secure mandatory clearances for them:–
The Schemes are:–
(i) Human Resource Development for Health Research
(ii) Grants-in-Aid Scheme for Inter-sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues

2
(iii) Establishment of Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Government Medical
Colleges under the initiative of Infrastructure Development for Health Research
(iv) Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs) in the States Colleges
under the initiative of Infrastructure Development for Health Research
(v) Establishment of a network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics and Natural
Calamities.
II. Budgetary Allocation
2.1 The Committee was informed that against the approved plan outlay of Rs. 4496.08 crore
by the Planning Commission for the Eleventh Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12), the actual allocation to
the Department of Health Research was to Rs. 2116.65 crore and the actual expenditure was
Rs. 1933.00 crore. The year-wise budgetary allocations and actual expenditure under plan
component during the Eleventh Plan are as follows:–
Plan
(Rs. in crores )
Financial Year B E RE Actual Remarks on actual
Expr. expenditure
2007-08 176.15 176.15 144.15 Excludes expenditure of
Rs.32.05 crores in NER.
2008-09 420.00 420.00 350.18 Excludes expenditure of
Rs.40.00 crores in NER
2009-10 420.00 400.00 359.50 Excludes expenditure of
Rs.40.00 crores in NER
2010-11 500.00 530.00 515.12
2011-12 600.00 588.00 564.05
T
OTAL: 2116.15 2114.15 1933.00
2.2 For the Twelfth Plan an outlay of Rs. 10029.00 crore has been approved for the
Department, though the projected demand of the Department was Rs. 15,500.00 crore. Out of
Rs. 10029.00 crore, Rs. 5229.00 crore has been earmarked for the new schemes/projects of the
Department and Rs. 4770.00 crore for the schemes/projects of ICMR. The scheme-wise allocation
for the Twelfth Plan is as follows:–
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Schemes of Department Scheme-wise Projected Allocation
No. of Research bifurcation of requirement for
Twelfth Plan for 2013-14 2013-14
allocation
(2012-17)
12 3 4 5
1. Human Resource Development 812.00 123.00 45.00
for Health Research

3
12 3 4 5
2. Infrastructure Development for 1118.00 363.00 60.00
Promotion, Coordination and Health
Research involving Establishment/
Strengthening of Multi-disciplinary
Research Units in State Medical
Colleges and the Research Institutes.
3. Establishment of Model Rural Health 246.00 53.00
Research Units in the States
4. Establishment of a Network of 1084.00 367.00 45.00
Laboratories of Managing Epidemics
and Natural Calamities
5. Grant-in-aid for Inter-Sectoral 1953.00 283.00 40.00
Convergence and Promotion and
Guidance on Research Governance
Issues and trans disciplinary and
Integrative Research
6. Grant-in-aid to ICMR 4770.00 1086.00 531.00
7. Governance and departmental expenses 46.00 8.00 5.00
T
OTAL: 10029.00 2283.00 726.00
2.3 As is evident from the above table against the projected demand of Rs. 2283.00 crore under
the plan head for the year 2013-14, the actual allocation is Rs. 726.00 crore only.
2.4 On being asked about the updated status of the Schemes, the Department has informed that
the latest status of the scheme is as follows:–
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Status Road Map for implementation
12 3 4
1. Human Resource The EFC meeting Subject to the clearance of the
Development for is yet to be held. scheme by the EFC/Cabinet, it is
Health Research expected to be rolled out sometime
in early part of 2013-14. 3500
fellowships/scholarship are targeted
to be awarded.
2. Infrastructure
Development for
Health Research
(i) Establishment of The EFC meeting It is expected to be rolled out
Multi-Disciplinary was held on sometime in early part of 2013-14.
Health Research 22.3.2013 and the 150 medical colleges were
Units in Medical scheme was proposed. However, EFC approved
Colleges approved. EFC only 80 medical colleges under
approved the Scheme.
Rs. 503.83 crore

4
12 3 4
(ii) E stablishment of The EFC meeting It is expected to be rolled out
Model Rural Health was held on sometime in early part of 2013-14.
Research Units in the 22.3.2013 and the 50 units were targeted to be
States Scheme was established but the EFC approved
approved. EFC only 15 units.
approved Rs.67.66
crore.
3. Establishment of a The EFC meeting It is expected to be rolled out
Network of Laboratories was held on sometime in early part of 2013-14.
for Managing Epidemics 22.3.2013 and the It was proposed to establish 6
and Natural Calamities. scheme was Regional + 48 State + 200 Medical
approved. EFC College Labs. The EFC approved
approved Rs.646.83 10 Regional + 30 State + 200
crore. Medical College Labs.
4. Grant-in-aid Scheme for The EFC meeting Subject to the clearance of the
Inter-Sectoral Convergence is yet to be held. scheme by the EFC/Cabinet, it is
and coordination for expected to be rolled out sometime
Promotion and Guidance in 2013-14.
on Health Research
2.5 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that the expenditure vis-v-vis the Plan
allocation made for the Department during 2012-13 is as follows:–
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. Scheme BE RE Actual exp.
No. 2012-13 2012-13 March, 2013
12 3 45
1 Secretariat expenditure 8.00 0.83 0.05
2 Human Resource Development 22.00 4.02 0.00
for Health Research
3 Infrastructure Development for Health Research
(i) Establishment of Multi-
Disciplinary Health
Research Units in Medical
Colleges 44.00 6.62 0.06
(ii) Establishment of Model
Rural Health Research Units
in the States
4 Establishment of a Network of 34.00 6.4 0.00
Laboratories for Managing
Epidemics and Natural
Calamities.

5
12 3 45
5 Grant-in-aid Scheme for Inter- 34.00 6.13 0.06
Sectoral Convergence and
coordination for Promotion and
Guidance on Health Research
6 Indian Council of Medical 518.00 440.00 460.14
Research
T
OTAL: 660.00 464.00 460.31
2.6 The Committee observes that the five new schemes/projects of the Department of
Health Research could not be made operational even during 2012-13 due to lack of
approvals, though the Department had come into existence in 2007 and become functional
in 2008 with the appointment of its first Secretary. The Committee is unable to comprehend
the reasons for not getting the required approvals even after a lapse of five years since the
creation of the Department, which has resulted in massive financial underperformance vis-
à-vis the approved outlay of Rs. 4496.08 crore for the Eleventh Plan. The Committee has
been exhorting the Department to pay focused attention for completing all pre-project
formalities and obtaining necessary approvals on time so that the budgeted funds are not
locked up for want of approvals and surrendered later. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that little attention seems to have been paid to its advice in this regard
which has resulted in persistent and substantial under-utilisation of budgeted funds. The
first year of the Twelfth Plan Period has already elapsed and the current year is the 2nd
year of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee notes that the EFC approval for the three new
Schemes were accorded, albeit belatedly, on 22.03.2013. Two of the five new schemes have
not been approved as yet. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
make more rigorous efforts and proactively pursue approval of the remaining two schemes
with the agencies concerned. The Committee desires to be apprised of the updated status
in this regard. The Committee also recommends that a roadmap be chalked out to
implement the Schemes and progress of their implementation be monitored at highest level
in the Department so that the desired outcomes are achieved. The Committee desires that
all the approved schemes should be made operational at least during current financial year.
Approvals to the remaining schemes may be accorded at the earliest so that they may also
become operational during the current year.
2.7 The Committee notes that there is significant variation between the Budget
Estimates and the actual expenditure incurred in respect of the five new schemes of the
Department. Persistent mismatch between the Budget Estimates and the actual expenditure
indicates that budget formulation is being done without applying proper financial yardsticks.
The Committee feels that there is an imperative need to minimize the huge mismatch
between the Budget Estimates and the actual expenditure so as to observe the fiscal norms
in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that corrective measures be
initiated and implemented for realistic projection of fund requirements of the Department
in future.
2.8 Highlighting the reduced allocation of Rs. 726.00 crore under plan head for 2013-14 against
the projected demand of Rs. 2283.00 crore, the Department has stated that this reduction in the
allocation will affect almost all the on-going as well as new schemes. While the ICMR will not be
able to approve new extramural projects at desired level and will have to delay initiation of the new
programmes for which SFC/EFC have already been approved or under progress, physical targets

6
of the new schemes of the DHR will have to be curtailed quantitatively to nearly 40 per cent. The
Department has informed that it proposes to request for adequate funds at the RE stage.
2.9 The Secretary during the course of his deposition before the Committee reiterated the fact
that the reduced allocation for 2013-14 would adversely affect the physical targets proposed in the
five new schemes of DHR and result in curtailment of several on-going and new intramural and
extramural research programmes of ICMR. Specifying the activities to be affected adversely due
to the less allocation for 2013-14, the Secretary stated the following:–
• Setting up/strengthening of various centers of ICMR (EFC approved/in process).
• New Research Programmes in gap areas including bone health, allergy, mental health,
oral health, socio-behavioural health.
• Research on Tribal, Marginalized/ unprivileged population.
• Special Programmes for Medical Colleges and strengthening infrastructure.
• Research on issues related to Bhopal gas tragedy.
2.10 The Committee observes that scientific knowledge generated through health and bio-
medical research is used to develop drugs, diagnostics, vaccines and devices that ultimately
find place in the health care systems of the country. It is also worth mentioning that health
research has a vital role to play in the discovery and development of indigenous health
products. Taking all these factors into account, the Committee apprehends that allowing the
new schemes to be plagued with under-funding from the very beginning would prove
detrimental to generation of new knowledge in the area of health research. The Committee,
therefore, lends its support for enhancement of funds for the schemes at the RE stage. The
Committee, simultaneously, recommends to the Department to pay focused attention to
more efficient deployment of the available resources.
2.11 In reply to a question, the Department has informed that out of the approved outlay of
Rs. 10029.00 crore (against the projected demand for Rs. 15,500.00 crore), for the Twelfth Plan,
an allocation of Rs. 5229.00 crore has been earmarked for new schemes/programmes of the
Department and that this would by and large suffice to meet the requirements for implementation
of the 5 new schemes.
2.12 As regards the programmes of ICMR, there will be curtailment of some of its Plans such
as establishment of new Centres in gap areas (many of which are at advanced stages of processing
for seeking approvals) and also extramural grants to various medical and research institutions. The
Department will request for more money after the appropriate mid-term review of the progress of
its programmes and activities.
2.13 The Committee observes that the ICMR is the main technical wing of the
Department of Health Research and is responsible for formulation, coordination and
promotion of bio-medical research in the country. The Committee, therefore, notes with
serious concern the likely adverse impact of the funds crunch on the intramural and
extramural research priorities of ICMR. The Committee desires that Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance may reconsider the allocation for ICMR for the Twelfth Plan after
making a fair assessment.
III. Indian Council of Medical Research
3.1 As per the information given in the Annual Report of the Department, the ICMR
concentrates on knowledge generation and affordable technology development and serves as the
fulcrum of the Department.

7
3.2 On being asked about the achievements of ICMR during the Eleventh Plan, the Secretary,
Department of Health Research during the course of his deposition before the Committee on the
5
th April, 2013 submitted the following:–
• Establishment of New Institutes
• National Institute for Research in Environmental Health, Bhopal
• National Institute for Disease Informatics and Research, Bangalore
• Takeover Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre (BMHRC), Bhopal by
ICMR
• School of Public Health, Chennai
• Establishment of disease specific labs for research on Indoor Air Pollution at Chennai,
Cancer Genetics and Genomics at ACTREC, Mumbai, Pharmacogenomics, JIPMER,
Reverse Pharmacology in Traditional Medicine, Mumbai, Yoga and Neurophysiology at
Bangalore, Evidence Based medicine at Vellore and Chandigarh; Neonatology at AIIMS
etc.
• Development of indigenous reagents for testing for JE and Dengue.
• Development of testing reagents and vaccines to combat Influenza A – H1N1
Pandemic.
• Establishment of 1st BSL-IV Lab at Pune.
• Establishment of 16 new (14 BSL-II and 2 BSL-III) Labs for viral diseases and
Tuberculosis.
• Identified 75 leads of potential public health importance for development and evaluation
of affordable diagnostics, including indigenously developed tests for diabetes; several
other infections and cancer.
• Four flagship programmes on Health Research viz., Tribal Health Research Forum,
Vector Science Forum, Special support to medical colleges and Translational Research
have been initiated during this plan.
• 15 Centres for Advanced Research were established in addition to 283 multi-centres
Task force studies and 623 ad-hoc research projects.
• Creation of New Infrastructure
• New field station of RMRC Port Blair at Car Nicobar, Kamorta, Nancowry.
• New field stations of RMRC Bhubaneshwar at Rayagada and Kalahandi.
• Model Rural Health Research Unit at Ghatampur was strengthened so as to
develop it as a model of partnership with states for transfer of technology to end
users.
• Technology Development and Translational Research
• Indigenous production of monoclonal antibodies PfHRPII and pLDH achieved for
improved diagnostics for malaria.
• JE kit developed and supplied for national programme.
• New rapid molecular methods and DNA fingerprinting for detection of resistance
TB developed.

8
• Development of PCR based method to detect food borne pathogens.
• Rapid Diagnostic kit (RDB) for the detection of β-thalassemia syndromes.
• A cyclic lipopeptide of Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis (VCRC B471) with potential
to kill mosquito stages.
• PCR assay detection kit for Kala-Azar.
• Cancer screening device, Magnivisualizer.
• Technologies of double fortified salt (DFS) and fortification of wheat Atta with
iron and other essential nutrients transferred to the industry.
• 12 different clinical trials undertaken for Cholera V accine, MDT (Leprosy),
Filariasis, Male Contraceptive, Eclampsia, Female Reproductive Disorders,
Neurocysticercosis etc.
Guidelines developed
• National Guidelines developed for Prevention, Management and control of Reproductive
Tract Infections including Sexually Transmitted Infections (RTIs/STIs).
• Guidelines for Management of Diabetes were developed.
• Guidelines for management of three type of cancers (oral, buccal and stomach)
developed.
• Guidelines for revised standards for nutritional standards.
• Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnea.
• Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases in MIC affected population.
Human Resource Development
• ICMR Awards/Prizes, MD-Ph.D. Programme, International Senior and Junior
Fellowship, Centenary Post-doctoral Fellowship scheme, Indo-German Science Centre
for Infectious Diseases fellowships, Advanced trainings under cross cutting areas like
Genomics, Proteomics, Health Informatics etc.
• Number of Scientists benefitted-900.
3.3 The Committee places on record its appreciation for the achievements of ICMR
during the Eleventh Plan. However, in view of the dynamic international health research
scenario and the current and future health challenges of the country, the ICMR has an
uphill task to accomplish and milestones to achieve. The Committee would, therefore, like
the ICMR to collaborate with internationally acclaimed institutions in the field of Health
research in order to facilitate a vibrant and relevant health research system in the
country.
3.4 In reply to a question, the Department has informed that a High Power independent
Committee has been constituted by the Hon’ble Minister of Health and Family Welfare to evaluate
the research activity of the Council. The High Power Committee has already met thrice to review
the activity of the ICMR for Eleventh Plan Period and two more meetings have been scheduled for
March, 2013. The recommendations of the Committee shall be sent to the Department of Health
Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

9
3.5 The Committee welcomes the on-going evaluation of the research activities of ICMR
by an independent Committee. The Committee would impress upon the Department to
expedite submission of the recommendations of the independent Committee and place them
in the public domain. The Committee desires to be apprised of the composition, findings of
the independent Committee and the follow-up action taken thereon. The Committee would
also like to know if it is possible to involve reputed scholars of developed countries in the
evaluation of the research projects of ICMR.
3.6 As per the information given in the Outcome Budget 2013-14, the ICMR with Plan budget
of Rs. 477.40 crore for 2013-14, will accord priority to the important scientific activities under
the following heads:–
(a) Translational Programmes
(b) Programmes on Health Systems Research and Social and Behavioral Research
(c) Programmes on Reproductive and Child Health
(d) Programme on Communicable Diseases
(e) Programme on Non-Communicable Diseases
(f) Strengthening of the existing ICMR infrastructure to enable the Institutes/Regional
Centres/Units to enable them to handle the challenges of the on-going epidemiological
and demographic transition as emerging and new areas of research.
(g) Strengthening International Cooperation
(h) Tribal Health
(i) Human Resources Development
(j) New Research Programme
(k) Specilised Centres
(l) Establishment of new centres
(m) Outbreak/Disaster Response Fund.
3.7 The Committee notes that some very important research activities/projects in varied
areas are targeted to be undertaken/continued during the year 2013-14. The Committee
would like to be apprised in due course of time, of the quantifiable and specific
achievements made vis-à-vis targets set for the year 2013-14.
3.8 In reply to a specific query about the steps taken by the Department to orient research
activities towards developing indigenous pharma products and medical devices and the outcome
thereof, the Department has stated that seventy five top priority programmes/technologies have
been identified/ and are being carried out in the institutes of ICMR which are now in different
phases of development and evaluation. These technologies are on development of new tools for
vector control, diagnostic methods for cancer, diabetes mellitus and various infectious diseases
including dengue and chikungunya, lung fluke, tuberculosis; new treatment methods to improve the
treatment of tuberculosis, leprosy, cancer, malaria, diabetes mellitus, prevention of occupational
hazards etc. and vaccines for different infectious diseases.
3.9 Shedding light on the expected outcome, the Department has submitted that thirty
technologies are targeted to be ready by 2014. Twenty seven translational research cells are
targetted at ICMR’s Institutes/Centres and a translational research unit (TRU) at ICMR

10
Headquarters alongwith the IPR unit facilitates in carrying forward these technologies for their
implementation into the health care system/clinical practice. A separate review mechanism has been
established and fresh guidelines for funding of the research projects on a fast track basis finalised.
Further, a committee has been constituted to identify the leads emerging out of the completed
extramural projects which may be pursued on priority basis for translation.
3.10 The Committee notes that a number of outcomes have been projected for the year
2013-14. The Committee recommends that the desired outcomes be achieved within the
targeted time-frame. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the achievements made
vis-à-vis  the targets set. The Committee observes that it takes time to translate the
research leads into tangible health products or in application of the knowledge generated
through research and a lot of work remains to be done to bridge the gap between ‘what is
known’ and ‘what is done’. Concerted efforts are required to be made to bring research
outcomes into application in the better interest of the public. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised of the finding of the Committee constituted to identify the
leads from the completed extramural research projects. The Committee would also like to
be intimated of the specific health products/processes accruing from the above research
projects.
3.11 On being asked about the major research project undertaken by ICMR on traditional
medicine and follow-up action for bringing the achievements thereof in the mainsteam for the
benefit of public and the updated status of such on-going projects, the department in a written
submission has stated the following:–
3.12 ICMR promotes research in the area of traditional medicine through intramural and
extramural programs.
(A) Intramural Research
3.13 Intramural research is being pursued through Regional Medical Research Center, Belgaum
which is focusing on: (a) scientific validation of Herbal Medicine, (b) role of herbal medicine in
treating diseases in the region; (c) preparation of database of ethno-medicinal plants of Western
Ghats; (d) strengthening human resource in the area of herbal and traditional medicine;
(e) collaboration with traditional and herbal medicine practitioners in the region to create awareness,
promote scientific temperament, collect, collate and disseminate relevant scientific information in
the area of herbal medicine. The center is successful in: (a) preparation of database, establishment
of museum and herbal garden of ethno medicinal plants of Western Ghats and creating awareness
among visitors regarding traditional medicine system in the region; (b) providing services to
neighboring research institutes and NGOs in respect of identification and authentication of medicinal
plants and information on collection, cultivation and utility of medicinal plants; (c) establishment of
molecular and microbiology laboratory for testing of herbals against highly resistant bacteria.
(B) Extramural Research
3.14 Extramural research in traditional medicine is supported through Center for advanced
research, ad hoc  research schemes and fellowships as well as through inter-agency programs:
(i) Centre for Advanced Research -  Following Centres for Advanced Research have
been established:
• Centre for Advanced Research in Yoga and Neurophysiology at Swami
Vivekananda Yoga Research Foundation, Bangalore. Studies demonstrated the
overall neurophysiological correlates of meditation offer objective support for

11
meditation as therapy and as an effective strategy to perform better in cognitive
tasks and to organize higher brain functions specific to education in children and
adults. The centre has produced 7 Ph.D thesis and 8 MSc dissertations and four
Annual month long training programs and 7[1 international] short term research
training were conducted. Three booklets are published and 1 being finalized, a
Training Video and a website on science of meditation are also established.
• Advanced Centre of Reverse Pharmacology in Traditional Medicine, Kasturba
Health Society, Mumbai. Studies demonstrated that Curcuma longa and curcumin
have proliferative effects in the hippocampal neural progenitors in aged rats, with
cognitive improvement. Nyctanthes abor-tristis showed antimalarial efficacy and
safety in vitro and in vivo . W. somnifera showed good tolerability and strength-
enhancement in human volunteers.
(ii) Fellowship projects:- Presently 40 fellowship projects are ongoing in traditional
medicine.
(iii) Ad hoc  projects- Presently 44 ad hoc  research projects are ongoing in the area
(iv) Inter-agency programmes:–
(a) ICMR-NIF joint collaborative programme in traditional practices :
3.15 ICMR desires to enhance the rate of herbal drug discovery as the 21
st century belongs to
this area. One of the ways that it can achieve this objective is to include outstanding traditional
practices which can be validated through the research efforts of the individual researchers engaged
in validating exercise in national laboratories as well as in various universities in the country. In
order to reduce the cost of discovering leads ICMR felt that it can enter into a long term
collaboration with organizations like National Innovation Foundation (NIF). NIF is engaged in the
scouting of traditional practices and grassroots innovations which has resulted in a database of
approximately 80,000 traditional herbal practices from over 540 districts of India. It has been
noticed that sometimes traditional knowledge holders develop successful health solutions, which
many times are not optimal. Thus, ICMR noticed that there is a gap between the world’s formal
and informal knowledge production systems. In order to set the agenda, coordination and
arrangements of formal scientific institutions and adequate resources are required to add value to
or scale-up local knowledge after blending it with modern scientific technologies.
3.16 ICMR entered into a MoU with NIF for a period of five years on 23
rd June, 2006. A task
force discussed the plan and formulated the structure of the proposal to be submitted to ICMR so
that scientific validation and value addition in traditional knowledge can help solve many day-to-day
problems of people. Under the scheme, value will be added by ICMR Labs and other scientific
institutions recognized by it to outstanding traditional herbal knowledge and innovations to generate
useful leads and share the benefits. The promising leads among the noncodified herbal practices will
be developed as marketable products. The MoU was further extended for a period of next five
years by DG, ICMR and is operative till 23
rd June, 2016. Under ICMR-NIF collaboration evaluation
of anti-typhoid and anti-diarrheal activities of medicinal plants claimed by traditional healers have
been undertaken. It is proposed to evaluate about 800 practices during Twelfth plan for which a
proposal with an estimated cost of Rs. 17.0 crores has been submitted.
Meanwhile, ICMR has established following facilities at National Innovation Foundation,
Ahmedabad:–
• Non-codified plant mini-repository of medicinal value practiced by traditional healers.
The objectives of the repository are: (a) Phased manner collection of Noncodified

12
plants for establishing herbarium; (b) Collection of Non-codified plants samples claimed
to have theraupetic value for establishing repository; (c) Storage of crude drugs and
plant extracts of therapeutic nature; (d) Establishment of exclusive herbarium and
repository for 5000 non-codified plants; e) fingerprinting at chemical and DNA level
for elite materials through outsourcing to referral labs.
• Augmentation of SRISTI laboratory capacity by expanding the facilities for relevant
microbial testing: Objectives are: (a) To expand the SRISTI Lab facilities for relevant
pathogenic microbial strains culture and preservation; (b) To establish the facilities for
handling pathogenic microbial strains and their safe disposal; (c) To establish the
facility for herbal extraction and fractionation of extract; (d) To establish the facility
for isolation and purification of herbal extract. SRISTI is the only lab in India
dedicated to work on the practices of grassroots innovators and traditional knowledge
where basic microbiological facilities exist. The facilities for relevant pathogenic
microbial screening against different plants extract created.
(a) Collaboration with Department of AYUSH: This collaboration aims at scientific
validation of traditional and other herbal formulations for HIV/AIDS cases. Under this
collaboration following facilities have been set up:
• Standardisation and Quality Control of traditional formulations at National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Mohali and SASTRA,
Thanjavur.
• In-vitro screening of the formulations for their anti HIV activity at National AIDS
Research Institue (NARI), Pune.
• Preclinical Pharmacology and Safety testing of the formulations at National
Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad.
• Monitoring of the clinical trials at Central Bio-statistical Monitoring Unit at
National Institute of Epidemiology (NIE), Chennai.
3.17 The Committee observes that no single system of health care has the capacity to
solve all of the country’s health care needs. It is in this context that promotion of research
in the area of traditional medicines including Ayurveda, Naturopathy, Tibbia, Sowa-Rigpa and
Homoeopathy becomes vital for the public health care system. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the research projects on traditional medicines be pursued vigorously and
the innovations accruing therefrom be introduced into public health service within a
designated time-frame. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the success achieved
in this regard.
IV. Programmes for the North East
4.1 The Department in a written submission has informed that as per Government policy, it is
mandatory to earmark 10% of total plan budget for the North Eastern Region. The provision of
Rs.42.40 crores in RE 2012-13 and Rs.72.60 crores in BE 2012-13 for N.E. Region reflects the
10% provision of the total budgetary provisions in these years.
4.2 In the Outcome Budget 2013-14, it has been informed that the projected outcomes of the
health research projects for 2013-14 of the North East Region are as follows:–
Department of Health Research (DHR)
(i) To take up schemes for Human Resources Development for Health Research in the
North East.

13
(ii) To take up projects for Research including in coordination with other agencies.
(iii) To take up schemes for infrastructure development in Medical colleges and Model
Rural/Health Research Units.
(iv) To take up the scheme for managing epidemics and natural calamities.
ICMR
(i) Ongoing intramural and extramural projects will be supported. Fifty one new proposals
have been received from Medical Colleges/Institutes in the NE States for funding.
(ii) Initiation of new research projects will be taken up as in the past.
(iii) Initiation of Construction of Research Units at Guwahati and Agartala.
(iv) A joint working Group meeting between ICMR and DBT to identify new proposals.
(v) Other new initiatives include new research centres on Communicable and Non-
communicable diseases, health system research.
4.3 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department to undertake
studies and projects specific to North Eastern Region and exhorts that focused attention be
paid to the implementation of the above projects by way of streamlined monitoring so that
tangible outcomes could be achieved and benefits emerging therefrom percolate down to the
people.
V . Human Resource Development for Health Research
5.1 The Committee has been informed by the Department that a major constraint in the current
scenario in the country is the lack of adequate and properly trained human resources for the health
research. The Department plans to strengthen human resource base of the country by organizing
focused training programs within and outside India, for midcareer professionals in medical colleges
and other academic establishments. About 3500 personnel are proposed to be trained (in 5 years)
in various programmes mentioned below. Improving the career path for young researchers,
expanding the number of specialized researchers and then providing good initial support in the form
of startup grants are planned as a part of this programme. Activities proposed in this regard are:–
(a) Fellowships for training: Researchers in identified advanced fields.
(b) Scholarships at PG level: Support for producing human resources in newer areas.
(c) Young researcher program: To encourage young students for research.
(d) Special training programs: In specified areas, this also includes support to selected
institutions for training.
(e) Mid-career research fellowships: Faculty development for medical colleges.
(f) Women Scientists who have had break in career.
5.2 During 2013-14, it is planned to train over 700 mid-career/other seniors and young
investigators; 2/3 from medical colleges and provide start up grants for the faculty trained. Apart
from these schemes, it is also proposed to establish an online teaching and learning facility for
the promotion of biomedical research, with components for supporting workshops. Much of the
biomedical research being carried out in the country today is confined to a few medical Colleges/
institutions of the country. It is important that this research is encouraged in other parts of the

14
country, especially rural and remote areas. One of the reasons for the limited reach has been the
lack of knowledge and support for research. This programme will help prospective institutions and
individuals to access resources-both financial and technical on research and promote research
across the country.
5.3 The Committee has also been informed that the EFC Note has been circulated for the
comments of the appraisal agencies and subject to the clearance of the Scheme by the EFC/
Cabinet, it is expected to be rolled out in the early part of 2013-14.
5.4 An allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore (plan) has been made in BE 2013-14 for the above head,
though the projected demand was to the tune of Rs. 123.00 crore. BE 2012-13 allocation was
Rs. 44.00 crore which was drastically reduced to Rs. 4.02 crore at the RE stage but the actual
expenditure was nil due to the fact that the schemes could not take off for lack of necessary
approvals.
5.5 The Committee observes that much delay has already taken place in implementing
the schemes pertaining to Human Resource Development which resulted in the surrender
of the entire budgeted funds for 2012-13. The Committee would expect the Department to
avoid recurrence of such a situation and get the EFC clearance at the earliest. The
Committee would also like the Department to complete other pre-project activities within
the shortest possible time. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the developments
in this regard.
VI. Grant–in–Aid Schemes for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues
6.1 An allocation of Rs. 40.00 crore has been made for the above scheme in BE 2013-14,
though the actual expenditure for 2012-13 was Rs. .06 crore only vis-à-vis allocation of Rs. 34.00
crore.
6.2 The Committee gathers from the information furnished that the Grant-in-Aid
Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on Research
Governance Issues is yet to be cleared by the EFC/Cabinet. The Committee, in the earlier
part of the Report, has commented about proactively pursuing for approval of various
Schemes with the agencies concerned and completing all pre-project formalities well in time.
The Committee recommends here also to take similar action in respect of the above
Scheme as well.
6.3 Grant-in-Aid scheme for projects requiring inter-sectoral coordination, translation
specially in PPP mode and IT enabled governance, trans-disciplinary as well as
implementation research.  As per the information furnished by the Department this includes the
budget heads for Inter-sectoral co-ordination in medical, biomedical and health research, matters
relating to scientific societies and associations, charitable and religious endowments in medicine and
health research areas and Coordination with Government/organizations/institutions.
6.4 The Department has also informed that while several science departments are significantly
contributing to innovation related to different aspects of biomedical research, it is recognized that
translation process and further implementation research is not as strong as is needed and DHR
plans to focus on these aspects. In order to strengthen research effort in which the partnership
of different government agencies, NGOs and Industry is required, the Department has planned to
provide support in the form of grant-in-aid to selected projects; create awards, dedicated funding
for translation of innovations and their implementation and support to professional associations etc.
for developing guidelines and priority setting. Thus there will be special focus on encouraging
innovation, their translation and implementation by collaboration and cooperation with other

15
agencies by laying special stress on implementation research so that there is a better utilization of
available knowledge.
6.5 The DHR proposes to fund activities/ projects identified by an Inter-Departmental
Committee on Biomedical and Health Research around medical/health priorities such as tuberculosis;
Viral infections with potential for outbreaks; Zoonotic diseases; Maternal and Child Health including
gender issues in health; Nutrition and Food safety; diseases preventable through measures like
vaccines, environmental interventions, public health education etc.;  Diabetes, cardiovascular, mental
and chronic neurological disorders; Affordable health care technologies (diagnostics, therapeutics,
devices etc.); Innovation in health care delivery; Rural healthcare; mental health and ageing-related
diseases such as dementia, Parkinson’s Disease, etc.; Urban health; especially the emerging triple
disease burden due to communicable and non-communicable diseases and trauma; mechanisms to
provide information/guidance on healthy life style; Gender issues specially in the provision of health
services, domestic and sexual violence against women, setting up of district research stations, etc.
Projects will be identified and supported in partnerships with other science agencies/departments –
those mainly involved in basic science and or innovation on one hand ( e.g., DST, DBT, CSIR/
DSIR, DRDO etc.) to those with major application on epidemiology, public health ( e.g., ICMR).
The focus would be on (i) establishing mechanisms to evaluate technologies for improving health
care at individual and public health level; (ii) fostering academia-Industry link: creating processes
and cell to link developers with industry for translation of leads into products/processes; and
(iii) establishment of a rapid clearing house mechanism for evaluation of health research
technologies including the commercial applications In addition, agencies/departments having
complementary activities with DHR such as, DIT, ICAR/DARE, Social Justice, Environment and
Forests, Women and Children; Water resources; other user departments of Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare etc.  are proposed to be engaged in the process. International collaborations of
scientific and strategic mutual interest will be a priority.
6.6 The Committee observes that very important activities are envisaged to be
accomplished under the Grant in Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion
and Guidance on Research Governance Issues. The Committee in its 56
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Health Research had observed that the
accomplishment of targets set under the Scheme would require involvement of a number of
agencies/organizations and recommended creation of an institutional coordination
mechanism for synergizing the core competencies of the different organizations/agencies.
The Committee is not aware whether such a dispensation has come into existence or not.
The Committee, therefore, would like to be updated in this regard.
6.7 (ii) Promotion and Guidance on Research Governance Issues
• A proposal for the enactment of an Ethics Bill and the establishment of the National
Bioethics Authority is under processing. The bill has been drafted and is being
processed.
• A Bill for Regulation of Assisted Reproductive Technology has been drafted.
• A Bill on Alternate systems of medicine has been drafted and is being process for
introduction in Parliament.
• Systems for establishing mechanisms for mapping of health research institutions,
accreditation; Knowledge management policy, Health Research Policy etc. are being
finalised.
6.8 The DHR plans to focus on programmes aimed at making health care affordable for the
poor/marginalized groups/communities. The DHR will set up Technology Assessment Board

16
consisting of economists, social scientists, public health professionals and other specialists (similar
to the Offices of Health./Medical Technology Assessment systems in some countries) whereby new
technologies can be scientifically assessed for cost efficacy before introduction/procurement for
affordable health care. The Working Group of Twelfth Plan Document has recommended to set up
a Medical Technology Development Board to promote development of indigenous medical
technologies .
6.9 The Committee recommends that early action be taken for setting up MTDB which
will go a long way in promoting development of indigenous medical technologies.
VII. Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research
7.1 As per the information given in the Outcome Budget 2013-14, development of infrastructure
for research has been taken up as a major activity of Department of Health Research. During
2013-14 it is proposed to establish about 60 Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRU) in medical
colleges and 10 model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRU); 10-15 specialized research
laboratories in cutting edge areas as well as trans-disciplinary aspects involving agencies like
AYUSH, NKN etc.
7.2 (i) Establishment of Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs)
• Medical colleges are the backbone of both teaching as well as providing specialized
services to patients in India. It is also expected that medical colleges will also set the
trends in thinking process and innovation to improve our understanding of the
disease(s) and their management.
• Over the years it has been seen that majority of our medical colleges are just confining
to routine patient care and also teaching based on conventional methods. This is
thought to be basically because of lack of appropriate facilities and even lack of
adequate attempt to create such new facilities e.g. modern biology units in the medical
colleges. As a result, medical colleges even do not think of including the new methods
of investigation for understanding the patho-biology, diagnosis, treatment and/or
monitoring the progress of cases for better management practices. The Department of
Health Research plans to pay special attention to development of infrastructure in
medical colleges by establishing multi-disciplinary research units (around 150 units in
Twelfth Plan) at least in all the Government medical colleges. These units will provide
the modern technology infrastructure which will improve the quality of the specialized
care, training of doctors and other health care professionals and then research as per
the needs of the population. About sixty medical colleges have applied/been identified
by State Governments and these Units are planned to be established in 2013-14 after
completing the formalities.
7.3 Development of infrastructure for research has been taken up as a major activity of
Department of Health Research. During 2013-14 it is proposed to establish about 60 Multi-
disciplinary Research Units (MRU) in medical colleges. The Committee was given to understand
that the Department of Health Research’s Technical Committee has shortlisted 31 Medical Colleges
in 14 different States for establishing Multi-Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs). However, not a
single MRU is being set up in Bihar, inspite of the fact that Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital
had submitted a proposal for the same .
7.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposal of Darbhanga Medical
College and Hospital for establishing MRU may also be considered for approval and a MRU
be set up there at the earliest.

17
(ii) Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRU):
7.5 There is a wide gap between the available specialized health care technology and the
technology being developed vis-a-vis their utilization in the State health systems. This is particularly
true for rural health settings. It is generally felt that technology application needs specialized
infrastructure and can be done only in urban settings. In order to develop models for transfer of
such technology to the end care users, the Department has planned to establish model rural health
research units in all the States (about 50); one in smaller States and more than one in larger States)
where technology transfer and the research targeting health interventions will be done in partnership
with the States. It has been planned to establish 10 units by the end of 2013-14.
7.6 The Committee observes that though first year of the Twelfth Plan has already
elapsed and the 2
nd Year has started, no MRU or MRHRU has been set up till date. From
the information furnished by the Department, the Committee gathers that the EFC/Cabinet
clearance for the above schemes is yet to be received, which would entail further delay.
Considering the fact that around 150 MRUs and 50 MRHRUs are targeted to be set up
during the Twelfth Plan, the Committee apprehends that it would be difficult to achieve the
targets set, which would also lead to budgeted funds remaining unutilized and therefore
concerted action may be taken in this regard. It is, therefore, imperative on the part of the
Department to vigorously pursue the matter and get the necessary clearances in the right
earnest and well in time. The Committee desires to be kept apprised regularly of the
progress made towards setting up of MRUs and MRHRUs.
VIII. Managing Epidemics and National Calamities
Setting up a Laboratory Network for Research on Viral and other Infectious Diseases.
8.1 As per the information furnished by the Department, India continues to have outbreaks/
epidemics due to various infectious pathogens. Currently national apex institutes like NCDC, New
Delhi and NIV , Pune are mandated to undertake the investigations that results in heavy burden
affecting their real referral role. The resultant delay in diagnosis/detection and adequate/incomplete
data about these outbreaks significantly impacts the response time for interventions. Significantly,
avoidable delays in both short and long terms strategies for prevention, treatment through vaccine
production/introduction and up-gradation of infra-structure etc. The Department has planned to
establish about 250 laboratories (total in 3-4 years) of three grades on infectious pathogens which
will work under the overall guidance of apex institutions like NIV, NCDC through appropriate
linkages and networking. During 2013-14 it is planned to establish 2 regional BSL-III; 14 State level
labs and 70 district level labs.
8.2 The Committee observes that viral diagnosis has emerged as a major health
challenge. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should draw up an
action plan for timely implementation of the scheme for setting up of laboratory network
for research on viral and other infections. Efforts may be made to achieve physical and
financial targets.
IX. International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research
9.1 The Plan allocation for International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research was
Rs. 5.00 crore in BE 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs. 1.02 crore in RE 2012-13. Asked about
the reasons for this reduction, the Department has informed that the reduction in allocation of
funds in RE 2012-13 was because of non-approval of Grant-in-Aid scheme under which
International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research is also covered. On being asked about the

18
number of international conferences held on medical and health research during 2012-13, the
Department in a written submission has informed that an expenditure of Rs. 6.00 lakh has been
incurred on foreign travel expenses and no expenditure has been incurred on holding international
conferences from this head. The Department has, however submitted that during 2013-14, the
proposed activities under this head will be implemented.
9.2 The Committee observes that though adequate budgetary provisions had been made
in BE 2012-13 for the above head, no international conference could be organised so far. The
Committee is of the view that international conference involving eminent scientists and
erudite scholars help in sharing and dissemination of knowledge. The Committee would
therefore, advise the Department to initiate action for organising international conferences
and symposia during 2013-14 and also ensure that sharing of knowledge and expertise could
lead to finding some solutions to health challenges of the country.
9.3 On being asked about the details of the projects likely to be funded with the allocation of
Rs. 5.00 crore made in BE 2013-14, the Department has informed that the following activities are
proposed to ensure utilization of the budgeted amount:–
(a) Contributions to international organisations – Besides the support to TDR, GFHR,
contributions to other international organization like DNDi, NAM, SAARC, Africa
Council etc. will be made as a part of the scheme.
(b) Participation in conferences abroad (non-ICMR) : As a part of this activity financial
assistance will be provided for presenting research papers, chairing the session or
delivering a keynote address in international scientific event (conferences/seminars/
symposia/workshop) to non-ICMR biomedical scientists both young as well as senior
scientists.
(c) Organising international conferences in India – DHR will allocate money for supporting
international conferences in India.
(d) DHR delegations to international bodies, WHO etc. : DHR officials will be included in
Indian delegations to various bilateral/multilateral discussions and Joint Working Groups
(JWGs)
(e) Supporting Indian component of research studies under bilateral and multilateral
programmes.
(f) Hosting foreign delegations: The DHR will promote and host international delegations
for sharing of the experiences to deal with various emerging and re-emerging
challenges. This will share the expertise with neighbouring and developing countries for
transfer of technology, training in cutting edge of science. Such deliberations/
exchange will be focused on direct benefits to the health of the people of India/
international agenda of Government of India.
9.4 The Committee is happy to note that one of the activities proposed for 2013-14 inter-
alia talks of sharing the expertise of developed and developing countries for transfer of
technology and training in cutting edge of science. The Committee also desires to be
informed of the achievements made so far.
X. Manpower Requirements of Department of Health Research
10.1 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that the latest status regarding sanctioned
strength of the Department and the number of posts filled are as under:–

19
Sl. Name of Post No. of posts No. of Total No. of posts
No. transferred additional sanctioned filled
from posts strength
MoH&FW created
1. Joint Secretary 1 1 2 2
2. Director/DS 1 1 2 1
3. Scientist ‘E’ – 1 1 –
4. Under Secretary 1 1 2 1
5. Scientist ’C’ – 2 2 –
6. Section Officer 1 2 3 1
7. Assistant 1 4 5 2
8. Private Secretary – 2 2 1
9. Stenographer – 2 2 1
10. LDC 1 – 1 1
T
OTAL: 6 16 22 10
10.2 The Department has further informed that after its creation as a separate Department in
2007, the Department is still functioning with a very small complement of staff transferred from
the Department of Health and Family Welfare. Most of the 16 additional posts in different grades
created with the approval of Department of Expenditure. The position of filling up of posts as
follows:
1. Joint Secretary: An officer of Indian Forest Service has been selected by Department
of Personnel and Training (DoPT). He will report for duty on 7
th March, 2013.
2. Scientists: For the post of Scientist ‘C’ and Scientist ‘E’, the posts can be filled only
after the Recruitment Rules are approved by the DoPT and UPSC.
3. Secretariat Posts: The Central Secretariat posts have been encadered by the Department
of Personnel and Training in July, 2012, against some posts, postings of which are yet
to be made by the DoPT. Moreover, the cadre controlling authority for the DHR is the
Department of Health and Family Welfare and, therefore, actual posting of officers are
first made by the DoPT to that department thereafter the officers are posted by that
Department to the DHR. Department of Health and Family Welfare has been reminded
in September, 2012 and January, 2013 for early posting of requisite staff in the DHR
against the sanctioned posts. However, as a stop gap arrangement, two Consultants
(one Retired Director and One Retired Under Secretary) have been engaged for
handling the important work, including the work relating to the schemes.
10.3 The Committee notes that despite coming into existence of DHR as a separate
Department in 2007, the cadre-controlling authority for the DHR is the Department of
Health and Family Welfare. The purpose being served by having such an arrangement is
beyond the comprehension of the Committee. The Committee feels that such an
arrangement would only delay the process of filling up of vacant posts and should,
therefore, be dispensed with. The Committee would therefore, like the Department of
Health Research to bring the above observation to the notice of the authorities concerned

20
for an appropriate decision. The Committee desires to be apprised of the response of
Department of Health and Family Welfare in this regard.
10.4 The Committee also expresses its concern over a large number of posts lying vacant
vis-à-vis the sanctioned strength, which is certain to impinge on the smooth functioning of
the Department. The Committee would recommend that the matter should be pursued at
the highest level with the concerned authorities for expeditious filling up of the vaccines at
the earliest. A Department cannot function with so many vacancies. If the government did
not create a separate Department, things would have been different. But now that the
Government has created the Department, all the commitments should be fulfilled. An early
action may be taken in this regard.

21
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. Budgetary Allocation
The Committee observes that the five new schemes/projects of the Department of
Health Research could not be made operational even during 2012-13 due to lack of
approvals, though the Department had come into existence in 2007 and become functional
in 2008 with the appointment of its first Secretary. The Committee is unable to comprehend
the reasons for not getting the required approvals even after a lapse of five years since the
creation of the Department, which has resulted in massive financial under-performance
vis-a-vis the approved outlay of Rs.4496.08 crore for the Eleventh Plan. The Committee has
been exhorting the Department to pay focused attention for completing all pre-project
formalities and obtaining necessary approvals on time so that the budgeted funds are not
locked up for want of approvals and surrendered later. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that little attention seems to have been paid to its advice in this regard
which has resulted in persistent and substantial under-utilisation of budgeted funds. The
first year of the Twelfth Plan Period has already elapsed and the current year is the 2
nd year
of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee notes that the EFC approval for the three new Schemes
were accorded, albeit belatedly, on 22.03.2013. Two of the five new schemes have not been
approved as yet. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to make more
rigorous efforts and proactively pursue approval of the remaining two schemes with the
agencies concerned. The Committee desires to be apprised of the updated status in this
regard. The Committee also recommends that a roadmap be chalked out to implement the
Schemes and progress of their implementation be monitored at highest level in the
Department so that the desired outcomes are achieved. The Committee desires that all the
approved schemes should be made operational at least during current financial year.
Approvals to the remaining schemes may be accorded at the earliest so that they may also
become operational during the current year. (Para 2.6)
The Committee notes that there is significant variation between the Budget
Estimates and the actual expenditure incurred in respect of the five new schemes of the
Department. Persistent mismatch between the Budget Estimates and the actual expenditure
indicates that budget formulation is being done without applying proper financial yardsticks.
The Committee feels that there is an imperative need to minimize the huge mismatch
between the Budget Estimates and the actual expenditure so as to observe the fiscal norms
in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that corrective measures be
initiated and implemented for realistic projection of fund requirements of the Department
in future. (Para 2.7)
The Committee observes that scientific knowledge generated through health and bio-
medical research is used to develop drugs, diagnostics, vaccines and devices that ultimately
find place in the health care systems of the country. It is also worth mentioning that health
research has a vital role to play in the discovery and development of indigenous health
products. Taking all these factors into account, the Committee apprehends that allowing the
new schemes to be plagued with under-funding from the very beginning would prove
detrimental to generation of new knowledge in the area of health research. The Committee,
therefore, lends its support for enhancement of funds for the schemes at the RE stage. The
21

22
Committee, simultaneously, recommends to the Department to pay focused attention to
more efficient deployment of the available resources. (Para 2.10)
The Committee observes that the ICMR is the main technical wing of the
Department of Health Research and is responsible for formulation, coordination and
promotion of bio-medical research in the country. The Committee, therefore, notes with
serious concern the likely adverse impact of the funds crunch on the intramural and
extramural research priorities of ICMR. The Committee desires that Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance may reconsider the allocation for ICMR for the Twelfth  Plan after
making a fair assessment. (Para 2.13)
III. Indian Council of Medical Research
The Committee places on record its appreciation for the achievements of ICMR
during the Eleventh Plan. However, in view of the dynamic international health research
scenario and the current and future health challenges of the country, the ICMR has an
uphill task to accomplish and milestones to achieve. The Committee would, therefore, like
the ICMR to collaborate with internationally acclaimed institutions in the field of Health
research in order to facilitate a vibrant and relevant health research system in the country.
(Para 3.3)
The Committee welcomes the on-going evaluation of the research activities of ICMR
by an independent Committee. The Committee would Impress upon the Department to
expedite submission of the recommendations of the independent Committee and place them
in the public domain. The Committee desires to be apprised of the composition, findings of
the independent Committee and the follow-up action taken thereon. The Committee would
also like to know if it is possible to involve reputed scholars of developed countries in the
evaluation of the research projects of ICMR. (Para 3.5)
The Committee notes that some very important research activities/projects in varied
areas are targeted to be undertaken/continued during the year 2013-14. The Committee
would like to be apprised in due course of time, of the quantifiable and specific
achievements made vis-à-vis targets set for the year 2013-14. (Para 3.7)
The Committee notes that a number of outcomes have been projected for the year
2013-14. The Committee recommends that the desired outcomes be achieved within the
targeted time-frame. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the achievements made
vis-a-vis  the targets set. The Committee observes that it takes time to translate the
research leads into tangible health products or in application of the knowledge generated
through research and a lot of work remains to be done to bridge the gap between ‘what is
known’ and ‘what is done’. Concerted efforts are required to be made to bring research
outcomes into application in the better interest of the public. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised of the finding of the Committee constituted to identify the
leads from the completed extramural research projects. The Committee would also like to
be intimated of the specific health products/processes accruing from the above research
projects. (Para 3.10)
ICMR – NIF joint collaborative programme in traditional practices
The Committee observes that no single system of health care has the capacity to
solve all of the country’s health care needs. It is in this context that promotion of research
in the area of traditional medicines including Ayurveda, Naturopathy, Tibbia, Sowa-Rigpa and
Homoeopathy becomes vital for the public health care system. The Committee, therefore,

23
recommends that the research projects on traditional medicines be pursued vigorously and
the innovations accruing therefrom be introduced into public health service within a
designated time-frame. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the success achieved
in this regard. (Para 3.17)
IV. Programmes for the North East
The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department to undertake
studies and projects specific to North Eastern Region and exhorts that focused attention be
paid to the implementation of the above projects by way of streamlined monitoring so that
tangible outcomes could be achieved and benefits emerging therefrom percolate down to the
people. (Para 4.3)
V . Human Resource Development for Health Research
The Committee observes that much delay has already taken place in implementing
the schemes pertaining to Human Resource Development which resulted in the surrender
of the entire budgeted funds for 2012-13. The Committee would expect the Department to
avoid recurrence of such a situation and get the EFC clearance at the earliest. The
Committee would also like the Department to complete other pre-project activities within
the shortest possible time. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the development
in this regard. (Para 5.5)
VI. Grant-in-Aid Schemes for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance
on Research Governance Issues
The Committee gathers from the information furnished that the Grant in Aid
Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on Research
Governance Issues is yet to be cleared by the EFC/Cabinet. The Committee, in the earlier
part of the Report, has commented about proactively pursuing for approval of various
Schemes with the agencies concerned and completing all pre-project formalities well in time.
The Committee recommends here also to take similar action in respect of the above
Scheme as well. (Para 6.2)
Grant-in-Aid scheme for projects requiring inter-sectoral coordination, translation
specially in PPP mode and IT enabled governance, trans-disciplinary as well as
implementation research.
The Committee observes that very important activities are envisaged to be
accomplished under the Grant in Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion
and Guidance on Research Governance Issues. The Committee in its 56
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Health Research had observed that the
accomplishment of targets set under the Scheme would require involvement of a number of
agencies/organizations and recommended creation of an institutional coordination
mechanism for synergizing the core competencies of the different organizations/agencies.
The Committee is not aware whether such a dispensation has come into existence or not.
The Committee, therefore, would like to be updated in this regard. (Para 6.6)
Promotion and Guidance on Research Governance Issues
The Committee recommends that early action be taken for setting up MTDB which
will go a long way in promoting development of indigenous medical technologies. (Para 6.9)

24
VII. Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research Establishment of
Multi-disciplinary Research Units (MRUs)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposal of Darbhanga Medical
College and Hospital for establishing MRU may also be considered for approval and a MRU
be set up there at the earliest. (Para 7.4)
Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs)
The Committee observes that though first year of the Twelfth Plan has already
elapsed and the 2
nd Year has started, no MRU or MRHRU has been set up till date. From
the information furnished by the Department, the Committee gathers that the EFC/Cabinet
clearance for the above schemes is yet to be received, which would entail further delay.
Considering the fact that around 150 MRUs and 50 MRHRUs are targeted to be set up
during the Twelfth Plan, the Committee apprehends that it would be difficult to achieve the
targets set, which would also lead to budgeted funds remaining unutilized and therefore
concerted action may be taken in this regard. It is, therefore, imperative on the part of the
Department to vigorously pursue the matter and get the necessary clearances in the right
earnest and well in time. The Committee desires to be kept apprised regularly of the
progress made towards setting up of MRUs and MRHRUs. (Para 7.6)
VIII. Managing Epidemics and National Calamities
Setting up a Laboratory Network for Research on Viral and other Infectious Diseases.
The Committee observes that viral diagnosis has emerged as a major health
challenge. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should draw up an
action plan for timely implementation of the scheme for setting up of laboratory network
for research on viral and other infections. Efforts may be made to achieve physical and
financial targets. (Para 8.2)
IX. International Cooperation in Medical and Health Research
The Committee observes that though adequate budgetary provisions had been made
in BE 2012-13 for the above head, no international conference could be organised so far. The
Committee is of the view that international conference involving eminent scientists and
erudite scholars help in sharing and dissemination of knowledge. The Committee would
therefore, advise the Department to initiate action for organising international conferences
and symposia during 2013-14 and also ensure that sharing of knowledge and expertise could
lead to finding some solutions to health challenges of the country. (Para 9.2)
The Committee is happy to note that one of the activities proposed for 2013-14 inter-
alia talks of sharing the expertise of developed and developing countries for transfer of
technology and training in cutting edge of science. The Committee also desires to be
informed of the achievements made so far. (Para 9.4)
X. Manpower Requirements of Department of Health Research
The Committee notes that despite coming into existence of DHR as a separate
Department in 2007, the cadre-controlling authority for the DHR is the Department of
Health and Family Welfare. The purpose being served by having such an arrangement is
beyond the comprehension of the Committee. The Committee feels that such an
arrangement would only delay the process of filling up of vacant posts and should,

25
therefore, be dispensed with. The Committee would therefore, like the Department of
Health Research to bring the above observation to the notice of the authorities concerned
for an appropriate decision. The Committee desires to be apprised of the response of
Department of Health and Family Welfare in this regard. (Para 10.3)
The Committee also expresses its concern over a large number of posts lying vacant
vis-a-vis the sanctioned strength, which is certain to impinge on the smooth functioning of
the Department. The Committee would recommend that the matter should be pursued at
the highest level with the concerned authorities for expeditious filling up of the vaccines at
the earliest. A Department cannot function with so many vacancies. If the Government did
not create a separate Department, things would have been different. But now that the
Government has created the Department, all the commitments should be fulfilled. An early
action may be taken in this regard. (Para 10.4)

MINUTES

IX
NINTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Friday, the 5 th April, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
7. Shri D. Raja
8. Shri H. K. Dua
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
11. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
12. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
13. Dr. Monazir Hassan
14. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
15. Shri Mahabal Mishra
16. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
20. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
21. Shri P.T. Thomas
22. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
29

30
Department of AYUSH
1. Dr. V .M. Katoch, Secretary and Director General, ICMR
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
3. Shri S.K. Rao, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. H. Nagesh Prabhu, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati Dharitri Panda, Sr. Financial Advisor, ICMR
6. Shri T.S. Jawahar, Sr. Deputy Director General, ICMR
7. Dr. Shakuntla, Chief Controller of Accounts
***
***
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about
the agenda of the meeting i.e., examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the *    *    *
and taking of oral evidence of the Secretary of the Department of Health Research *   *   * in
the afternoon session.
II. Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health Research
3. The Secretary, Department of Health Research made a power-point presentation and
acquainted the Committee with the various functions of the Department such as (i) Work related
to ICMR viz. intramural and extramural programmes of ICMR; (ii) Work relating to Department of
Health Research other than ICMR comprising Schemes viz. (a) Human Resources Development for
Health Research, (b) Grant-in-aid scheme for inter-sectoral convergence and promotion and
guidance on research governance issues, (c) Managing epidemics and national calamities, and
(d) Development of Infrastructure for promotion of Health Research-MRU&MRHRU; (iii) outlay of
Eleventh Plan and actual expenditure incurred; (iv) Financial Performance (Non-Plan) in Eleventh
Plan; (v) Physical Achievements during the Eleventh Plan Period; (vi) Twelfth Plan outlay for the
Department and Twelfth Plan schemes; (vii) Status of preparedness to roll out the new schemes
(viii) Activities proposed to be taken up by ICMR in 2013-14 such as translational research,
intramural and extramural research programmes and establishment of new centres for research;
(ix) Proposed/approved budget 2013-14; (x) Summary of Budget (2013-14); (xi) Impact of reduced
allocations on ongoing and new activities, etc. Members sought clarifications on the activities and
achievements of the Department and deliberated on the adequacy or otherwise of the budgetary
allocation under different heads of the Department, reasons of under-utilization of funds, main
achievements of the Eleventh Plan vis-a-vis the targets set, on-going scheme of DHR and delay
in approval of the five schemes proposed by the Department; on-going research projects as
compared to that planned; discovery of new TB drugs etc. The Secretary of the Department replied
to some of the queries raised by the Members. He was then directed by the Chairman to furnish
detailed written replies to the remaining queries, which remained unanswered, soon.
III. ***
*** Relates to other matter.

31
(The Committee then adjourned at 2.00 P.M. for lunch to meet again at 2.30 P.M.)
IV. ***
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

32
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23 rd April, 2013 in Room No. ‘67’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
7. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of *  *  * and Draft 67
th, 68 th, 69 th and
70th Reports on Demands for Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Departments of Health and Family
Welfare, AYUSH, Health Research and AIDS Control, respectively. He invited Members to share
their specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports.
II. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the five draft Reports mentioned above. A
few changes were suggested by Members for incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion,
the Committee adopted all the five Reports with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter,
32
*** Relates to other matter.

33
decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Friday, the 26 th April, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence,
Shri D. Raja and Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Sanjay
Jaiswal, and in his absence, Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok
Sabha.
III. S tudy visit
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.