3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
THIRD   REPORT
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2004-2005 (DEMAND NO.48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH    AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26TH    AUGUST, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
 
1.             COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
               
 
2.            PREFACE
 
3.            REPORT
4.            OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                              
5.            MINUTES                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
                                   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004)
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                ¾            Chairman
             MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur           
3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
 *6.   Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
8. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
9. Shri Lalmingliana
**10.   Shri M.A.M. Ramaswamy
11.       Vacant

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
 
LOK SABHA
 
12. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
13. Shri M.H. Ambareesh
14. Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
15. Dr. M. Baburao
16. Dr. R.C. Dome
17. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
18. Smt. Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
19. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
20. Dr. Chinta Mohan
21. Shri Rasheed Masood
22. Ms. Archana Nayak
23. Shri D.B. Patil
24. Shri Nakul Das Rai
25. Shri Rajendra Kumar
26.  Smt. K. Rani
27. Md. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Uday Singh
30. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
31. Shri Kailash Nath Yadav
32. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
           Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Smt. Shashilekha Nair, Committee Officer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31
st August, 2004
      ** Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2004
 
 
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health &Family Welfare,
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Third Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.48) of the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2004-2005.
2.         The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the Department of
Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary
and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 13
th August, 2004.
3.                  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  24th August 2004.
 
NEWDELHI;
August24,2004
Bhadrapada 2, 1926 (Saka)
AMARSINGH
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
on Health and Family Welfare
           
REPORT
 
I.         INTRODUCTION
1.1       The Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy which was set up by the Government of India
as an independent department in March, 1995, under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was renamed as
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November, 2003.   The
main objective of the Department is to provide focused attention for the proper development and propagation of
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homoeopathy, Yoga and Naturopathy and to fully utilize the potentials of these systems.
 
1.2       Thrust areas of the Department are: -
i)
                    Improvement and up-gradation of standards of education in AYUSH;
ii)                   Quality Control and Standardization of drugs;
iii)                 Ensuring sustained availability of raw materials, i.e. medicinal plants, metals, minerals and materials of
animal origin etc;
iv)                 Research & Development on the efficacy of the systems;
v)                  Participation of AYUSH in the National Health Care Delivery System & National Health & Family Welfare
Programme;
vi)                 Information, Education and Communication.
 
1.3       Over the years, there has been a steady growth in infrastructure.   At present, number of practitioners of AYUSH
in the country is 6,95,024.   There are 443 teaching institutions which include 4 Post-Graduate colleges imparting only
Postgraduate education.   Number of drug manufacturing units in the country is 9,257 and there are 3100 Hospitals.
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1       The Plan allocation for the Department in BE 2004-05 is Rs. 181.00 crores.   The Committee notes that Plan
allocation of Rs. 150.00 crores in BE 2003-04 was reduced to Rs. 135.00 crores at the RE stage due to the cuts imposed
by the Ministry of Finance.   The Committee was informed that funds amounting to Rs. 133.95 crores were utilized
during 2003-04 due to an overwhelming response received under some of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes like
Development of Institutions, Hospitals and Dispensaries etc.
2.2       The Committee was given to understand that higher allocation has been provided to the Department for 2004-05
in view of   almost all Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Department having taken off well as also additional funds
required for the on-going research projects, strengthening the infrastructure of various autonomous bodies under the
Department.   The Committee is, however, not inclined to fully accept Department’s contention that almost all Centrally
Sponsored Schemes have taken off well in 2003-04.   The Committee would like to emphasise that it has taken years to
get started these Schemes.  Following Schemes were started during the Ninth Plan, some of them in the second year of
the Plan period, token funds continue to be allocated therefor: -
i)
                    ISM Polyclinic with regimental therapy, Panchkarma, Yoga and Naturopathy
ii)                   Opening of Speciality Clinics of ISMH in Govt. Hospitals
iii)                 Ayurvedic Park/Panchkarma in hotels.
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
2.3       The Committee is constrained to note that allocation for the first two years of Tenth Plan for these Schemes
remains unutilized due to prolonged procedure of approval/appraisal. What is more disturbing is that the Scheme,
Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in Hotels could not take off in 2003-04 for want of approval by SFC.   A provision of Rs. 1
crore for this Scheme was made in 2000-01, which continues to be provided with variations since then.   The Committee
apprehends that this Scheme will continue to be in a formulative stage during the Tenth Plan also with a token provision
of Rs. 1 lakh being made in 2004-05, the third year of Tenth Plan.
2.4       The Committee also observes that a number of Schemes under the Drug Quality Control have been started in
2002-03 with some allocation of funds which could not be utilized as the Schemes were in the formulation stage.  
Position was the same in 2003-04.    The Committee apprehends that there is no likelihood of any
improvement during 2004-05 also in view of the token provision being made for these Schemes for this year. The
Committee is of the view that Drug Quality Control is very vital for Indian Systems of Medicine  specially in view of 
maintaining their credibility both in the country and abroad.   The Committee would like to emphasise that prior to
launching a new scheme and keeping a provision therefor, all required procedural aspects should be taken care of.   The
Committee feels that necessary steps need to be taken for streamlining this procedure.
 
2.5       The Committee observes that against an initial Plan allocation of RS. 266.35 crores during the Ninth Plan,
subsequently raised to Rs. 364.43 crores, utilisation of funds was only Rs. 293.71 crores.   Plan allocation for the Tenth
Plan stands at Rs. 775.00 crores, more than double the allocation for Ninth Plan.   The Committee, however, notes that
during the first two years of Tenth Plan, utilisation can not be said to be satisfactory.    Against an allocation of Rs.
145.00 crores in BE 2003-04, reduced to Rs. 105.00 crores at RE stage, expenditure was Rs. 89.78 crores.   But, during
2003-04, the BE allocation of Rs. 145.00 crores, reduced to  Rs. 135.00 crores at RE stage, could be utilized. This year
2004-05 being the third year of the Tenth Plan, the Committee is of the view that this is the right time for an
appraisal/review of both existing and new schemes and taking necessary measures so as to have optimum and judicious
utilisation of allocated funds during the Tenth Plan.
 
IIICENTRAL PHARMACY COUNCIL FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
3.1       The Committee observes that the Department proposes to set up a Central Pharmacy Council for Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy, a statutory body.  As per the Action Plan for 2004-05, the proposed Bill after getting
Cabinet approval is to be passed by both the Houses of Parliament and in the third quarter of the year, the Act is to be
enacted.   The Bill is yet to be passed by Parliament and the Committee finds only an Ad Hoc Council is proposed to be
set up in the last quarter of 2004-05.  The Committee is constrained to point out that the action for setting up a
Pharmacy Council started in mid-
Ninth Plan i.e. 2000-01 with token provision of Rs. 10.00 lakh each for setting up two separate  Councils – Indian
Homoeopathy Pharmacy Council and ISM  Pharmacy Council.  Subsequently, it seems that a decision was  taken to
have only one Council – Central Pharmacy Council  of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy in 2003-04 with a provision
of Rs. 19 lakhs therefor.   An allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore has been proposed for this purpose in Tenth Plan.   2004-05 is
the third year of Tenth Plan and not even a token allocation has been made in this year.  
 
3.2       The Committee expresses its serious concern over the progress made on such a vital issue and recommends that
the Department should make concerted efforts for getting the Bill passed during the Winter Session and  enacted during
2004-05 only and make a necessary allocation therefor at the RE stage. 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
 
(IV)            RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
4.1       The four Research Councils, viz. (i) Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS); (ii)
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), (iii) Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy
(CCRH) and (iv) Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy (CCRYN) are the apex bodies for research in the
concerned systems of medicine.
 
4.2       The Committee notes that all the Research Councils are continuing to initiate and guide, develop and co-ordinate
scientific research in different aspects of respective systems, both fundamental and allied.   The Committee is happy to
observe that all these Councils have achieved the Physical targets of different research Programmes and allied matters,
in some cases exceeding the assigned targets.   The Committee, however, finds a disturbing trend.   A combined
building complex for all the Research Councils which were set up in 1978, was established in 1995.    Against an
allocation of Rs. 7.10 crores in Ninth Plan,  expenditure was only Rs. 4.16 crores.   During the first year of Tenth Plan
i.e. 2002-03, against an allocation of Rs. 1.10 crore, there was a saving of Rs. 13.20 lakhs, due to  the pending court 
decision of property tax issue.   The Committee is surprised to note
that during 2003-04, allocated funds of Rs. 1.20 crore could not be utilized for no evident justification.   The Committee
is apprehensive about the fate of funds (Rs. 1.50 crores) allocated for 2004-05.  The Committee strongly feels that the
Research Councils carrying out works having a far-reaching impact need to be housed in a well-maintained building.  
The Committee emphasizes that the Department should make concerted efforts to get resolved all the pending issues so
that funds meant for the maintenance of the building for Research Councils being judiciously utilized. 
 
(V)            AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, LODHI ROAD, NEW DELHI
5.1       The Committee notes that on its recommendations, the administrative control of the CGHS Ayurveda Hospital,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi was transferred to the Department of AYUSH in August, 2002 to streamline its functioning. 
However, the budget allocation of Rs. 50.00 lakhs for this Hospital could be made only in 2003-04.   Eeven that
allocation had to be drastically reduced to RS. 10.00 lakhs at the RE stage as the possession of building from civic
authorities was delayed.
 
5.2       The Committee, in the absence of any further explanation as to why the possession of building was delayed,
safely surmises that procedural formalities may be the main culprit behind the delayed possession of the building.
  Since the plan allocation for BE 2004-05 has been restored at Rs. 50 lakhs, the Committee hopes that the proposed
allocation will be fully utilized.
5.3       The Committee notes that in the absence of a regular Medical Superintendent, one of the Advisors of the
Department has been officiating as MS in addition to his normal duties.   What is more disturbing is that against the
sanctioned strength of 64 posts for the Hospital, only 32 posts are in position.   Details of Action Plan proposed by the
Department for this Hospital for 2004-05 clearly indicate that this year would not be sufficient to have the required staff
for   the Hospital.   The Committee enjoins upon the Department to take all the required measures without any delay for
making the Hospital fully functional.   The Department must not forget that the Hospital was transferred under its
administrative control for improving its functioning.
 
(VI)            SURVEY ON USAGE AND ACCEPTABILITY OF AYUSH (ISMH)

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
            The objective of this Scheme is to collect the information on availability of facilities in the CGHS dispensaries
under AYUSH and level of utilisation/non-utilisation of   AYUSH services by the CGHS beneficiaries and also survey
of selected teaching hospitals under AYUSH for collecting information on available facilities and perception of
indoor/outdoor patients.  The Committee notes that this survey continued during Ninth Plan but not on a regular basis.  
What is more surprising is that during 2002-03, the first year of Tenth Plan, out of an allocation of Rs. 60 lakhs, only
Rs. 7.60 lakhs could be spent, the reason being non-approval of first survey, second survey being approved for Rs.7.60
lakhs.   During 2003-04, situation deteriorated as only Rs. 5.70 lakhs could be utilized against a meagre allocation of Rs.
12.00 lakhs due to delay in the finalisation of the survey instruments and consequently survey programme being
delayed.  Allocation of only Rs. 6.00 lakhs in 2004-05 clearly indicates the level of importance being given to this
survey programme.   The Committee is of the view that surveys are meant to be completed in a time-bound manner
otherwise the very purpose of undertaking them gets defeated.   The Committee therefore recommends that this survey
should be expedited so that assessment results could be put to use for expansion of AYUSH system of medicine.
 
(VII)             EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS.
7.1            Expansion of AYUSH (ISMH) Dispensaries in CGHS was another new Scheme proposed during Ninth
Plan.   The Scheme remained conceptual as only a  token allocation of Rs. 6.00 lakhs was made which could not be
utilized.   Position was the same in 2002-03 with the provision of Rs. 50 lakhs remaining unutilized.  The Committee  is
surprised to note that out of  an allocation of Rs. 86.00 lakhs for 2003-04 and  in spite of Director, CGHS being
authorized to utilize this amount out of the Budget head of Department of AYUSH for opening of 2 Ayurveda, 2
Homoeopathic, one Unani and one Siddha dispensaries and one Yoga Centre in  the premises of existing Allopathic
CGHS dispensaries only the location could be identified for opening of these dispensaries,  
Ayurveda & Homoeopathic at Trivandrum and Guwahati and Unani, Siddha & Yoga at Delhi.   The Committee is
constrained to note that whereas dispensaries at Trivandrum and Delhi are expected to start functioning, more time is
required for starting the Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic dispensaries at Guwahati.  
 
7.2       The Committee is not prepared to accept that non-availability of manpower was the reason for the allocation
remaining unspent.   The Committee finds it hard to believe that in a country like India, so well endowed in terms of its
human resources, the Department could not find suitable manpower, resulting in delayed  opening of dispensaries.  The
Committee is not satisfied with the temporary measures undertaken by the Department by  transferring senior level
Medical Officers  of concerned system and posting them to each of the locations and also hiring  the services of a
second doctor  and the Pharmacist in each of these dispensaries.    As the Plan allocation for BE 2004-05 has been
substantially increased to Rs. 1 crore 30 lakhs, the Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary
steps so that the proposed expansion/opening of AYUSH dispensaries in CGHS can actually take place during the
current financial year.  
 
(VIII) NATIONAL  AYURVEDIC HOSPITAL IN DELHI
8.1       Setting up of a National Ayurvedic Hospital in Delhi was one of the new Schemes proposed  in Ninth Plan for
which a nominal provision of Rs. 5.00 lakhs was made in 2000-01  which could not be utilized.   However, during 2001-
02, the last year of Ninth Plan against an allocation of Rs. 1 lakh only, expenditure incurred was Rs. 2.18 lakhs.  During
the Tenth Plan, against an allocation of RS. 2.00 crores and Rs.1.00 crores in 2002-03 and 2003-04, expenditure
incurred is only Rs. 12.60 lakhs and Rs. 15.00 lakhs respectively.   The Committee is surprised to note that it has taken

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
four years to purchase the required land and getting in-principle approval of Ministry of Finance for setting up the
Hospital in Govt. sector which could be received on 3 rd October, 2003.   The Committee  apprehends that this Hospital
will perhaps remain on paper during Tenth Plan also.     Out of Rs. 15.00 crores earmarked for this Project in 
 
Tenth Plan, allocation  of only Rs. 1.00 crore has been  proposed  for 2004-05.  Activities planned for 2004-05 in Action
Plan confirm Committee’s apprehension.  As indicated by the Department, they have to seek additional land from DDA
in accordance with  CCIM norms of 10 acre land area of establishment  of new UG/PG Ayurved College/Institute.  
EFC approval would be dependent upon release of land by DDA.  
 
8.2       The Committee is constrained to note that only noteworthy achievement in this ambitious Project is the change
in the name from National Ayurvedic Hospital to All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi.    The Committee
apprehends that by the time all the necessary formalities are completed, initial cost of the Project would become
meaningless.   The Committee would like to emphasise that the Department should take all the required steps to
expedite this Project.  
 
(IX) NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
9.1       The National Medicinal Plants Board was established in the year 2000 with the  primary objectives of
establishing an agency which would be responsible for co-ordination of all matters relating to medicinal plants,
including  drawing up policies and strategies for conservation, proper harvesting, cost-effective cultivation, marketing of
raw material in order to protect, sustain and develop this sector.
 
9.2       The Committee notes that 31 State Medicinal Plants Boards have been set up in 26 States and 5 UTs.   So far 32
medicinal plants which are in great demand both  in domestic and international markets have been identified at national
level for cultivation, conservation and development. The Committee was informed that during the last three years, the
Board has sanctioned 1066 projects worth Rs. 41.34 crore covering 25,500 acres of land under cultivation and 28,500
acres of land under conservation.
 
9.3       The Committee observes that the Department is  also implementing a Central Scheme for Development and
Cultivation of Medicinal Plants whereunder  financial assistance is provided for Govt./Semi-Govt
organizations/autonomous/statutory bodies/scientific institutions including the agriculture/horticulture Universities for
setting
up of medicinal plant gardens and developing Agri-techniques of  medicinal plants.   The Committee finds that during
2003-04, out of an allocation of  Rs. 1.00 crore, funds amounting Rs. 95.65 lakhs could not be utilized.   The
Committee   was given to understand that  the scheme was put on hold for review and restructuring as it was not giving
expected results.   During the Ninth Plan, out of allocation of Rs. 8.40 crores, only Rs. 6.96 crores – could be utilized.  
The Committee strongly feels that with the setting up of a Medicinal Plant Board, there is no need for running a separate
Scheme and the existing Scheme should be administered by the Board after making the required changes.   The
Secretary gave the impression during the course  of deliberation  with the Committee   that such a decision had already
been taken by the Department.   The Committee however, is surprised to note that a provision of RS. 50 lakhs has been
proposed for 2004-05 and a proper Action Plan has been also drawn for administering that Scheme.   The Committee is
of the view that the Department should take a proper decision on this issue without any further delay.
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
9.4       The Committee is in agreement with the Department’s view that it is necessary to strengthen the Board with
appropriate infrastructure and logistic support.  The Committee is aware that additional allocation for professional
achievements and captive cultivation of medicinal plants will be required.   The Committee would like to point out that
the idea of having a Board of Medicinal Plants  come into  place with a token grant of Rs. 1.00 lakh in  1999-2000, the
mid-year of Ninth Plan, and 2004-05 is the mid-term of the next Plan and still the Board lacks proper infrastructure. 
The Committee feels that the Department should give priority improving the infrastructure of the Board.
 
(X)            STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
10.1     PLIM and HPL at Ghaziabad are the two Laboratories running for a number of years.  One of the main tasks
assigned to these Laboratories is to maintain quality control of such drugs.  The Committee, however, finds the
expenditure phase very discouraging.   During the Ninth Plan, against an allocation of Rs. 7.20 crores, expenditure
figures stand
at Rs.  2.72 crones only.   During 2002-03, there was under-utilisation of funds at PLIM due to non-creating of posts.  
Position did not improve in the second year and the reasons may be the same – non-creation of posts.  
 
10.2     The Committee is perturbed to note that even after such a considerable time, proper infrastructure is still not
there.  The Committee strongly feels that required action   has to be taken at the earliest for creating and filling up of
posts.
XI            QUALITY CONTROL
11.1            Committee’s attention has been drawn by a number of Fake herbal products and Ayurvedic products and
medicines claiming cure of a number of diseases readily available in the country.   On a specific query about the
preventive action taken by the Department  in this regard, the Committee was informed that the Drugs & Cosmetics Act,
1940 and Rules  thereunder regulate the quality standards of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy drugs. 
Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani medicines are manufactured under a valid Drug Manufacturing license  which is renewed
every three years.  Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) under Schedule T of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act which  call
for hygienic conditions, proper manufacturing processes and quality assurance of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs  
have become mandatory with effect from June 2002.
 
11.2     The Committee was informed that pharmacopoeial standards of 324 Ayurvedic and 45 Unani drugs have been
published by Government of India and it is obligatory for the manufacturers to comply with these standards.
 
11.3     The Committee notes that licensing and registration of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs is done by the State
Licensing Authorities.  Govt. of India provides maximum of Rs. 1 crore each to State Drug Testing Labs as well as State
Pharmacies of ISMH for the component of renovation of building procurement of   modern equipments and assistance
for human resource for State Drug Testing Labs on contractual basis.  The Committee was informed that 21 State Drugs
Testing Labs and 37 State Pharmacies have been assisted so far and an amount of RS. 45.62 crore has been released so
far as grants-in-aid.
11.4     The Committee   observes that following other schemes are listed under Drugs Quality Control: -
i)
                  Use of modern technology and biotechnology;
ii)                Scheme for Acquisition of ISO Quality Control Certification for ISMH industry;
iii)               Scheme for introduction for ASU mark for quality certification.

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
iv)              Regulation of health food supplements;
v)                Support to ISMH industry for creation of labs/quality control facilities;
vi)              Strengthening of enforcement mechanism for quality control; and
vii)             Assistance to units obtaining GMP certification.
 
11.5     The Committee notes that for all these schemes indicated above, BE allocation, token or otherwise during 2002-
03 was either reduced or totally withdrawn.   Position was the same during 2003-04.    Schemes simply continue to exist
on paper.   The Committee apprehends that during 2004-05 also, the Department does not anticipate their taking off   as
provision has been made in respect of only the following schemes: -
 i)              Use of    technology - Bio-technology                       -  Rs. 100 lakhs
ii)         Support of ISMH industry for creation of Labs/Quality                   - Rs. 150 lakhs control – facilities.
 
iii)          Strengthening of enforcement mechanism for      -  Rs. 50 lakhs
  quality control
iv)              Assistance for units obtaining GMP certification             - Rs.100 lakhs
 
The Committee emphasizes that schemes should be launched only when all the exercise/requisite formalities have been
completed and also after exploring the   feasibility of the scheme thereof.   The Committee hopes that the Department
will make concerted efforts   to start these schemes during the current year itself.
 
11.6
          The Committee was given to understand that there is no separate body constituted
exclusively to provide accreditation to medicinal claims.   Any claim received for Ayurvedic and Siddha medicine is
forwarded to the Central Council for Research of Ayurveda and Siddha for verification which has developed a format to
verify such claims.   If the Council finds substance in the claim, the documents supplied by the claimant are analysed
and the claim put up to the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Council.  If required, clinical trial is conducted.
 
11.7     The Committee expresses its serious concern about the variety of drugs of ISMH, particularly Ayurveda easily
available in the country.   It seems that manufacturers of such drugs and also doctors prescribing such drugs have
nothing to fear.   The Committee would like to mention that, in its 143
rd  Report presented to the House in December,
2003, the Committee had drawn the attention of the Department to advertisements by a doctor from Rishikesh claiming
to treat and cure epilepsy.  At that time too, the Department had justified their  action saying that the clinical data had
not been made available to  the Department for verification.  The Committee had then drawn the attention of the
Department to a specific Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question 3718 dt. 24.4.2000. As per the reply, to the Question, a team
of doctors was deputed by IMA to Rishikesh in 2000.  IMA found that Dr. R.K. Gupta was prescribing aurvedic
medicines, having no proven effect on  the patients of  epilepsy.  The Central Council of Ayurvedic Medicines took up
the matter with the Controller, Bhartiya Chikitsa Parishad, Lucknow.  The Committee was subsequently informed that
the State Government of Uttaranchal was asked to investigate the matter and take appropriate action under the Drugs      
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act vide a letter dated 3
rd June, 2003.  Thereafter, a reminder was sent on
10th September, 2003.
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
11.8     The Committee expresses its serious concern on the pace of investigation in this particular case.  It is an example
of the lack of seriousness on the part of the Department towards such a sensitive issue which has a far-reaching impact. 
It has taken four and a half years to initiate legal action against a person who was playing with the lives of a very large
number of people by prescribing toxic and dangerous
 
drugs.  This could be possible only after the matter was highlighted through a Rajya Sabha Question which drew the
attention of the Committee on HRD.  The Committee believes that things would not have moved, had the matter not
been reported by it and pursued with the Department.  The Committee is of the view that the Department should take the
initiative in the event of such cases coming to its notice, by media or otherwise by taking up with the concerned State
Government and monitoring the outcome of the investigation if any initiated by the State authorities.                             
 
(XII) INDIAN MEDICINES PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION LIMITED (IMPCL) MOHAN (ALMORA),
UTTARANCHAL
12.1     Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd. is a Central Public Sector Undertaking  under the
administrative control of the Department having Registered Office & Factory at Mohan, Distt. Almora, Uttaranchal.
  The primary objective  of the Company is to  manufacture & supply authentic quality Ayurvedic & Unani medicines to
the CGHS and other Govt. Hospitals/dispensaries.   The company also sells its products to certain related Departments
of State Govts.  and other institutions and also in the open market.
12.2     The Committee was informed that a provision of Rs. 2.00 crore  was made in BE 2003-04 for investment in
IMPCL as it was expected that the first phase of modernization would be  completed and further funds were provided
for  taking up the second phase of modernization.   The Committee was given to understand that  implementation of the
first phase for  which an amount of Rs. 1.00 crore shared by the Central  and State Govt. of  Uttranchal  at  51.49 ratio
and given in March, 2001 got delayed due to sudden resignation of the then MD.   The situation was reviewed at RE
stage and it was found that IMPCL would not be in a position to utilize the funds meant for the second phase of
modernization during the year 2003-04.   Therefore, the allotted amount was reduced to a token amount of Rs. 1 lakh. 
The Department further informed that an amount of Rs. 0.51 crore has been kept for BE 2004-05 for IMPCL
accordingly.   As the first phase of modernization has been completed after joining of the new MD, it  has been planned
to take up the second phase of modernization during the current financial year. 
12.3     The Committee finds the explanation given by the Department for non-utilisation of funds meant for
expansion/strengthening of IMPCL, a public sector undertaking unreasonable.   The Committee is not inclined to
believe that the post of MD lying vacant can result in bringing the activities of a company to a standstill.    The
Committee finds it unprecedented and ridiculous that the expenditure of a Government of India undertaking is so much
dependent upon one official and that his absence has caused complete non-utilisation of funds by it.   This the
Committee feels is the worst that could happen to an institution of public importance and recommends that such
situation should not recur in future.
 
(XIII)            INTEGRATION WITH THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
13.1            Integration of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy (ISM&H) in health care delivery system and
National Programmes to ensure optimal use of the vast infrastructure of hospitals, dispensaries and physicians has been
outlined as one of the basic objectives of the National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine& Homoeopathy. 
Accordingly, the Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is making efforts to integrate AYUSH systems with the

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
modern medicare institutions and education syllabus. The matter has been pursued in a meeting of the Core Group on
Social Sector.  As a follow-up of Core Group's meeting held on 19th February, 2004, instructions have been issued to all
the State/UT Governments to make efforts to create AYUSH wings in all existing hospitals/dispensaries.  It is pointed
out to State Chief Secretaries that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is making efforts to fill up vacant posts of
doctors in PHCs and elsewhere with posting of AYUSH doctors.  The diagnostic facilities should be used commonly by
all systems and action should be taken for wider use of certain AYUSH mechanisms effective in RCH particularly
anaemia programme.  Some of the other specific steps taken by the Department of AYUSH to achieve optimum
integration with the Health care system in India are as follows: -
(i)
                 A Golden Triangle partnership for collaborative research on traditional drugs is being initiated involving
the Department of AYUSH, CSIR and ICMR.
(ii)                Scientific organizations like ICMR, DBT, DST etc., are being given R&D projects for AYUSH.
(iii)              Seven Ayurvedic and Five Unani medicines have been introduced in the National RCH Programme.
(iv)              Thirteen institutions of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) & other National laboratories are
developing standardized manufacturing processes, pharmacopoeial standards and have undertaken shelf
life studies for AYUSH drugs.
 
13.2          The Committee notes that nine States (Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Rajashthan, Kerala,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Chhtisgarh and Tamil Nadu) and four cities have been included under the scheme. 
While seven Ayurvecdic drugs have been included under RCH Programme in thes nine States, Five Unani Drugs
form part of RCH in four cities, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Aligarh and Delhi. 
13.3
           The Committee welcomes all the initiatives taken by the Departments for the integration of AYUSH with the
Health care system.  The Committee would like to have the feed back about the success achieved in the
implementation of these projects.
 
XIV MISCELLANEOUS
14.1          Home Remedy Kit Schemes:
The Home Remedy Kits Scheme was to be implemented as a pilot project during the last phase of Ninth Plan. 
One district each in 21 States was to be covered under the Scheme.  The number of kits to be distributed in each
district/State was 400.  Pharmacies in the Government or cooperative sector were to supply the Kits on receipt of
payments from the States concerned for which each State was given 50% of the allocation in advance.
 
14.2
          The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1.14 crore was allotted to all the
States together towards 50% advance in the year 2002. The Committee was informed that the response to the scheme is
not uniform as all the States have not placed funds for supply of Home Remedy Kits with the assigned pharmacies.  The
Committee feels that the Department should pursue with the State Govts. for reviving Home Remedy Kits Scheme.
 
(XV)    YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
15.1     On a specific query, the Committee was informed that the lower budget provision for Yoga and Naturopathy, is
because of lesser number of institutions/stakeholders under these systems.  Yoga and Naturopathy though gaining
increasing popularity, are yet to be regulated legally like Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy.  The number of
educational institutions that provide for specialized training for Yoga and Naturopathy is very small.  Depending upon

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
the requirements, the budgetary provisions for promotion of yoga and naturopathy may be enhanced.
 
15.2     The Committee feels that there is a need for focusing more attention on Yoga and Naturopathy.  The Committee
is of the view that the Department should initiate required action for legal regulation of these two systems.
 
(XVI)            SCHEME FOR FELLOWSHIP EXPOSURE VISIT ABROAD
16.1     The Objective of the scheme is to meet the demand for nominating officers for fellowship/exposure visits
abroad.  The Committee was informed that the scheme has already been circulated to all the embassies/MEA and other
stakeholders.  It has been placed on the website of the Department also.   
 
16.2     The Committee observes that despite publicity, no realistic proposals could be received during the previous
Financial Years and funds could not be utilized. The Committee was informed that a few proposals are at present under
examination for deputation of experts to USA, West Indies, Hungary and Sri Lanka. Once their Governments approve
the proposals, the experts will be sent and funds under the
scheme will be utilized.  The Committee feels that the Department should actively pursue the proposals with the
concerned foreign Governments so that our experts are benefited from International exposure.
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee was given to understand that higher allocation has been provided to the Department for 2004-05
in view of   almost all Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Department having taken off well as also additional funds
required for the on-going research projects, strengthening the infrastructure of various autonomous bodies under the
Department.   The Committee is, however, not inclined to fully accept Department’s contention that almost all Centrally
Sponsored Schemes have taken off well in 2003-04.   The Committee would like to emphasise that it has taken years to
get started these Schemes.  Following Schemes were started during the Ninth Plan, some of them in the second year of
the Plan period, token funds continue to be allocated therefor: -
iv)
                ISM Polyclinic with regimental therapy, Panchkarma, Yoga and Naturopathy
v)                  Opening of Speciality Clinics of ISMH in Govt. Hospitals
vi)                Ayurvedic Park/Panchkarma in hotels.   (Para 2.2)
 
The Committee is constrained to note that allocation for the first two years of Tenth Plan for these Schemes
remains unutilized due to prolonged procedure of approval/appraisal. What is more disturbing is that the Scheme,
Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in Hotels could not take off in 2003-04 for want of  approval by  SFC.   A provision of Rs.
1 crore for this Scheme was made in 2000-01, which continues to be provided with variations since then.   The
Committee apprehends that this Scheme will continue to be in a formulative stage during  the Tenth Plan also with a
token provision of  Rs. 1 lakh being made in 2004-05, the third year of Tenth Plan. (Para 2.3)
 
The Committee also observes that a number of Schemes under the Drug Quality Control have been started in
2002-03 with some allocation of funds which
could not be utilized as the Schemes were in the formulation stage.   Position was the same in 2003-04.    The

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
Committee apprehends that there is no likelihood of any improvement during 2004-05 also in view of the token
provision being made for these Schemes for this year. The Committee is of the view that Drug Quality Control is very
vital for Indian Systems of Medicine specially in view of maintaining their credibility both in the country and abroad.  
The Committee would like to emphasise that prior to launching a new scheme and keeping a provision therefor, all
required procedural aspects should be taken care of.   The Committee feels that necessary steps need to be taken for
streamlining this procedure. (Para 2.4)
 
The Committee observes that against an initial Plan allocation of RS. 266.35 crores during the Ninth Plan,
subsequently raised to Rs. 364.43 crores, utilisation of funds was only Rs. 293.71 crores.   Plan allocation for the Tenth
Plan stands at Rs. 775.00 crores, more than double the allocation for Ninth Plan.   The Committee, however, notes that
during the first two years of Tenth Plan, utilisation can not be said to be satisfactory.    Against an allocation of Rs.
145.00 crores in BE 2003-04, reduced to Rs. 105.00 crores at RE stage, expenditure was Rs. 89.78 crores.   But, during
2003-04, the BE allocation of Rs. 145.00 crores, reduced to Rs. 135.00 crores at RE stage, could be utilized. This year
2004-05 being the third year of the Tenth Plan, the Committee is of the view that this is the right time for an
appraisal/review of both existing and new schemes and taking necessary measures so as to have optimum and judicious
utilisation of allocated funds during the Tenth Plan.       (Para 2.5)
IIICENTRAL PHARMACY COUNCIL FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the progress made on such a vital issue and recommends that
the Department should make concerted efforts for getting the Bill passed during the Winter Session and enacted during
2004-05 only and make a necessary allocation therefor at the RE stage.  (Para 3.2)
 
 (IV)            RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that all the Research Councils are continuing to initiate and guide, develop and co-ordinate
scientific research in different aspects of respective systems, both fundamental and allied.   The Committee is happy to
observe that all these Councils have achieved the Physical targets of different research Programmes and allied matters,
in some cases exceeding the assigned targets.   The Committee, however, finds a disturbing trend.   A combined
building complex for all the Research Councils which were set up in 1978, was established in 1995.    Against an
allocation of Rs. 7.10 crores in Ninth Plan,  expenditure was only Rs. 4.16 crores.   During the first year of Tenth Plan
i.e. 2002-03, against an allocation of Rs. 1.10 crore, there was a saving of Rs. 13.20 lakhs, due to  the pending court 
decision of property tax issue.   The Committee is surprised to note that during 2003-04, allocated funds of Rs. 1.20
crore could not be utilized for no evident justification.   The Committee is apprehensive about the fate of funds (Rs. 1.50
crores) allocated for 2004-05.  The Committee strongly feels that the Research Councils carrying out works having a
far-reaching impact need to be housed in a well-maintained building.   The Committee emphasizes that the Department
should make concerted efforts to get resolved all the pending issues so that funds meant for the maintenance of the
building for Research Councils being judiciously utilized.  (Para 4.2)
(V)            AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, LODHI ROAD, NEW DELHI
The Committee, in the absence of any further explanation as to why the possession of building was delayed,
safely surmises that procedural formalities may be the main culprit behind the delayed possession of the building.  
Since the plan allocation for BE 2004-05 has been restored at Rs. 50 lakhs, the Committee hopes that the proposed
allocation will be fully utilized. (Para 5.2)
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
The Committee notes that in the absence of a regular Medical Superintendent, one of the Advisors of the
Department has been officiating as MS in addition to his normal duties.   What is more disturbing is that against the
sanctioned strength of 64 posts for the Hospital, only 32 posts are in position.   Details of Action Plan proposed by the
Department for this Hospital for 2004-05 clearly indicate that this year would not be sufficient to have the required staff
for   the Hospital.   The Committee enjoins upon the Department to take all the required measures without any delay for
making the Hospital fully functional.   The Department must not forget that the Hospital was transferred under its
administrative control for improving its functioning. (Para 5.3)
 
(VI)            SURVEY ON USAGE AND ACCEPTABILITY OF AYUSH (ISMH)
            The objective of this Scheme is to collect the information on availability of facilities in the CGHS dispensaries
under AYUSH and level of utilisation/non-utilisation of   AYUSH services by the CGHS beneficiaries and also survey
of selected teaching hospitals under AYUSH for collecting information on available facilities and perception of
indoor/outdoor patients.  The Committee notes that this survey continued during Ninth Plan but not on a regular basis.  
What is more surprising is that during 2002-03, the first year of Tenth Plan, out of an allocation of Rs. 60 lakhs, only
Rs. 7.60 lakhs could be spent, the reason being non-approval of first survey, second survey being approved for Rs.7.60
lakhs.   During 2003-04, situation deteriorated as only Rs. 5.70 lakhs could be utilized against a meagre allocation of Rs.
12.00 lakhs due to delay in the finalisation of the survey instruments and consequently survey programme being
delayed.  Allocation of only Rs. 6.00 lakhs in 2004-05 clearly indicates the level of importance being given to this
survey programme.   The Committee is of the view that surveys are meant to be completed in a time-bound manner
otherwise the very purpose of undertaking them gets defeated.   The Committee therefore recommends that this survey
should be expedited so that assessment results could be put to use for expansion of AYUSH system of medicine. (Para
6.1)
 
(VII)             EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS.
The Committee is not prepared to accept that non-availability of manpower was the reason for the allocation
remaining unspent.   The Committee finds it hard
 
21
 
to believe that in a country like India, so well endowed in terms of its human resources, the Department could not find
suitable manpower, resulting in delayed opening of dispensaries.  The Committee is not satisfied with the temporary
measures undertaken by the Department by transferring senior level Medical Officers of concerned system and posting
them to each of the locations and also hiring the services of a second doctor and the Pharmacist in each of these
dispensaries.    As the Plan allocation for BE 2004-05 has been substantially increased to Rs. 1 crore 30 lakhs, the
Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary steps so that the proposed expansion/opening of
AYUSH dispensaries in CGHS can actually take place during the current financial year. (Para 7.2)
 
(VIII) NATIONAL AYURVEDIC HOSPITAL IN DELHI
During the Tenth Plan, against an allocation of RS. 2.00 crores and Rs.1.00 crores in 2002-03 and 2003-04, expenditure
incurred is only Rs. 12.60 lakhs and Rs. 15.00 lakhs respectively.   The Committee is surprised to note that it has taken
four years to purchase the required land and getting in-principle approval of Ministry of Finance for setting up the
rd

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
Hospital in Govt. sector which could be received on 3  October, 2003.  (Para 8.1)
 
The Committee is constrained to note that only noteworthy achievement in this ambitious Project is the change
in the name from National Ayurvedic Hospital to All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi.    The Committee
apprehends that by the time all the necessary formalities are completed, initial cost of the Project would become
meaningless.   The Committee would like to emphasise that the Department should take all the required steps to
expedite this Project.   (Para 8.2)
 
(IX) NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
The Committee strongly feels that with the setting up of a Medicinal Plant Board, there is no need for running a
separate Scheme and the existing Scheme should be administered by the Board after making the required changes.   The
Secretary gave the impression during the course of deliberation with the Committee   that such a decision had already
been taken by the Department.   The Committee however, is surprised to note that a provision of RS. 50 lakhs has been
proposed for 2004-05 and a proper Action Plan has been also drawn for administering that Scheme.   The Committee is
of the view that the Department should take a proper decision on this issue without any further delay. (Para 9.3)
The Committee is in agreement with the Department’s view that it is necessary to strengthen the Board with
appropriate infrastructure and logistic support.  The Committee is aware that additional allocation for professional
achievements and captive cultivation of medicinal plants will be required.   The Committee would like to point out that
the idea of having a Board of Medicinal Plants come into place with a token grant of Rs. 1.00 lakh in 1999-2000, the
mid-year of Ninth Plan, and 2004-05 is the mid-term of the next Plan and still the Board lacks proper infrastructure. 
The Committee feels that the Department should give priority improving the infrastructure of the Board. (Para 9.4)
 
(X)            STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
The Committee is perturbed to note that even after such a considerable time, proper infrastructure is still not
there.  The Committee strongly feels that required action   has to be taken at the earliest for creating and filling up of
posts. (Para 10.2)
 
XI            QUALITY CONTROL
The Committee notes that licensing and registration of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs is done by the State
Licensing Authorities.  Govt. of India provides maximum of Rs. 1 crore each to State Drug Testing Labs as well as State
Pharmacies of ISMH for the component of renovation of building procurement of   modern equipments and assistance
for human resource for State Drug Testing Labs on contractual basis.  The Committee was informed that 21 State Drugs
Testing Labs and 37 State Pharmacies have been assisted so far and an amount of RS. 45.62 crore has been released so
far as grants-in-aid. (Para 11.3)
The Committee notes that for all these schemes indicated above, BE allocation, token or otherwise during 2002-
03 was either reduced or totally withdrawn.   Position was the same during 2003-04.    Schemes simply continue to exist
on paper.   The Committee apprehends that during 2004-05 also, the Department does not anticipate their taking off   as
provision has been made in respect of only the following schemes: -
 
 i)              Use of    technology - Bio-technology                       -  Rs. 100 lakhs
ii)         Support of ISMH industry for creation of Labs/Quality                   - Rs. 150 lakhs control – facilities.
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
iii)          Strengthening of enforcement mechanism for      -  Rs. 50 lakhs
  quality control
iv)              Assistance for units obtaining GMP certification             - Rs.100 lakhs
The Committee emphasizes that schemes should be launched only when all the exercise/requisite formalities have been
completed and also after exploring the   feasibility of the scheme thereof.   The Committee hopes that the Department
will make concerted efforts   to start these schemes during the current year itself.    (Para 11.5)
 
The Committee expresses its serious concern on the pace of investigation in this particular case.  It is an example
of the lack of seriousness on the part of the Department towards such a sensitive issue which has a far-reaching impact. 
It has taken four and a half years to initiate legal action against a person who was playing with the lives of a very large
number of people by prescribing toxic and dangerous drugs.  This could be possible only after the matter was
highlighted through a Rajya Sabha Question which drew the attention of the Committee on HRD.  The Committee
believes that things would not have moved, had the matter not been reported by it and pursued with the Department. 
The Committee is of the view that the Department should take the initiative in the event of such cases coming to its
notice, by media or otherwise by taking up with the concerned State Government
and monitoring the outcome of the investigation if any initiated by the State authorities. (Para 11.8)                             
 
(XII) INDIAN MEDICINES PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION LIMITED (IMPCL) MOHAN (ALMORA),
UTTARANCHAL
            The Committee finds the explanation given by the Department for non-utilisation of funds meant for
expansion/strengthening of IMPCL, a public sector undertaking unreasonable.   The Committee is not inclined to
believe that the post of MD lying vacant can result in bringing the activities of a company to a standstill.    The
Committee finds it unprecedented and ridiculous that the expenditure of a Government of India undertaking is so much
dependent upon one official and that his absence has caused complete unutilisation of funds by it.   This the Committee
feels is the worst that could happen to an institution of public importance and recommends that such situation should not
recur in future. (Para 12.3)
 
(XIII)            INTEGRATION WITH THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
The Committee notes that nine States (Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Rajashthan, Kerala, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhtisgarh and Tamil Nadu) and four cities have been included under the scheme.  While seven
Ayurvecdic drugs have been included under RCH Programme in thes nine States, Five Unani Drugs form part of RCH
in four cities, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Aligarh and Delhi.  (Para 13.4)
The Committee welcomes all the initiatives taken by the Departments for the integration of AYUSH with the
Health care system.  The Committee would like to have the feed back about the success achieved in the implementation
of these projects. (Para 13.5)
 
XIV MISCELLANEOUS
Home Remedy Kit Schemes:
The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1.14 crore was allotted to all the States together towards 50%
advance in the year 2002. The Committee was informed that the response to the scheme is not uniform as all the States
have not placed funds for supply of Home Remedy Kits with the assigned pharmacies.  The Committee feels that the

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
Department should pursue with the State Govts. for reviving Home Remedy Kits Scheme. (Para 14.2)
 
(XV)    YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
The Committee feels that there is a need for focusing more attention on Yoga and Naturopathy.  The Committee
is of the view that the Department should initiate required action for legal regulation of these two systems. (Para 15.2)
 
(XVI)            SCHEME FOR FELLOWSHIP EXPOSURE VISIT ABROAD
The Committee observes that despite publicity, no realistic proposals could be receipt during the previous
Financial Years and funds could not be utilized. The Committee was informed  that a few proposals are at present under
examination for deputation of experts to USA, West Indies, Hungary and Sri Lanka. Once their Governments approve
the proposals, the experts will be sent and funds under the scheme will be utilized.  The Committee feels that the
Department should actively pursue the proposals with the concerned foreign Governments so that our experts are
benefited from International exposure.  (Para 16.2)
 
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
 
III
 
THIRD MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 13 th August, 2004 in Committee Room “A” Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh                ¾            Chairman
2. Smt. Maya Singh
3.      Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Shri Lalmingliana
 
LOK SABHA
 
5. Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
6. Dr. M. Baburao
7. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
8. Shri Uday Singh
9. Shri Kailash Nath Yadav
10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Smt. Momin George, Director
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Smt. Shashilekha Nair, Committee Officer
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT Of AYUSH
1.            Shri Palat Mohandas                                Secretary (AYUSH)
2.            Shri Tara Datt                                              Joint Secretary
3.         Dr. S.K. Sharma                                  Adv. (Ayurveda)
4.  Dr. S.P. Singh                  Adv. (Homoeopathy)
5.Prof. A.S. Ansari   Adv. (Unani)
 
 
2.         At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of AYUSH and requested
the Secretary to make a brief presentation on the Demand for Grants 2004-05 of the Department.  The Secretary made
the visual presentation of the activities undertaken during the last year and achievements of the Department.  The
Secretary briefly explained the budgetary allocations of the different heads for the year 2004-05. The Members sought
clarifications on the activities and achievements of the Ministry and deliberated on the budgetary allocation on different
heads of the Department.   The Secretary replied to the queries raised by the Members.
 
2.2.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
3.         The Committee then adjourned at 5:00 p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                      (VANDANA GARG)
13
th August, 2004                                                                           JOINT SECRETARY
 
 
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
 
IV
FOURTH MEETING
 
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 24
th  August, 2004 in Committee Room “A” Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh                ¾            Chairman
2. Smt. Maya Singh
3.      Shri Tariq Anwar
 

3rd Report of COmmittee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/3rdreport.htm[29-06-2016 14:37:52]
LOK SABHA
 
4. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
5. Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
6. Dr. M. Baburao
7. Dr. R.C. Dome
8. Smt. Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
9. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
10. Shri Rajendra Kumar
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
12. Shri Uday Singh
13. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
14. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Smt. Shashilekha Nair, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 1
st,2nd and 3rd  draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 2004-
2005 of Departments of Health, Family Welfare and
 
AYUSH, and adopted the same after some minor modifications.
3.         The Committee decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Thursday, the 26 th August, 2004.  The Committee authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Smt. Maya
Singh and in her absence        Shri Tariq Anwar to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri  Uday Singh and in
his absence Dr. R.C. Dome to lay the Reports on the table of Lok Sabha. 
 
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.00 p.m.
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                       (MOMRAJ SINGH)
24th   August 2004                                                                         UNDER SECRETARY