PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 57
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMAND FOR GRANTS 2012-13 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF AIDS CONTROL
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 APRIL, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 APRIL, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2012/VAISHAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)APRIL, 2012/VAISHAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs- chfw@sansad.nic.in

39
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMAND FOR GRANTS 2012-13 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF AIDS CONTROL
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 TH APRIL, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 TH APRIL, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2012/VAISHAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—17
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 18—25
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 27—31
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 33—36

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
#2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
*3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
@S. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shrimati B. Jayashree
10. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
26. Shri M. K Raghavan
27. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
# Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 27 th January, 2012 and re-nominated to the Committee on 2 nd February, 2012.
* Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012.
@ Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9 th March, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Fifty-Seventh Report of the Committee on the Demand for Grants (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year
2012-13.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary
and other officials of the Department on the said Demand for Grants (2012-13) in its meeting held
on 10
h April, 2012.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
23rd April, 2012.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman
23rd April, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Vaishakha 3, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare

1
REPORT
I. Introduction
India has the third largest number of people living with HIV/AIDS. As per the 2008-09 HIV
estimates, there are an estimated 23.9 lakh people currently living with HIV/AIDS in India with an
adult prevalence of 0.31 per cent in 2009. The epidemic is concentrated among high risk group
population and is heterogeneous in its spread.
1.1 Prima facie , a look at the communicable and non-communicable disease burden profile of
the country suggests there could be more pressing issues which could have been the prioritized
over HIV/AIDS, and yet the Ministry in its wisdom went on to create a separate Department for
it. While the committee understands that HIV/AIDS is a genuine health problem which requires
timely addressal, it fails to understand the reason why the Ministry went on to create a dedicated
Department to take care of the issue. The Committee also appreciates the fact that while resource
constraint is a reality given our circumstances, it, at the same time mandates more prudence while
allocating national priorities. During evidence, the Committee queried the Department to justify this
act, and to the Committee’s dismay no satisfactory answer was provided. Further, a post-evidence
written query was made and the Department forwarded the same to the Ministry to be replied.
Answer to this is still awaited till the compilation of this Report. The Committee takes serious view
of this delay on part of the Ministry as time crunch at the time of DFGs is to be anticipated as
is prompt response. The Committee recommends that the response be communicated to them in
detail at the time of presentation of the ATN within the stipulated three months from the date of
presentation of this Report in the Parliament.
1.2 The National AIDS Control Programme (NACP) has been implemented as a comprehensive
programme for prevention and control of HIV/AIDS in India since 1992 when it was launched with
support from the world bank. With improved understanding of the complex HIV epidemic in India,
substantial changes have been made in the policy framework and approaches of NACP. The focus
has shifted from raising awareness to behaviour change from national response to a more
decentralized response and to increasing involvement of NGO and network of People Living with
HIV/AIDS (PLHAs).
1.3 The Secretary in his presentation apprised the Committee about the achievements of the
Department under the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP) Phase-III (2007-12), which are
as follows:
PREVENTION
• Scale-up of prevention services and goods to cover 76% of core High Risk Grps
• Scale up of Counseling & Testing Services to 161 lakh persons through 9,459 centres
• Scale up of STI treatment services (in partnership with NRHM) from 25.9 lakh
episodes in 2007-08, to 100.2 1akh episodes in 2010-11, & 74.57 lakh episodes in
2011-12 (till Jan., 2012)
• Ensured supply of safe blood in majority of districts
• Focused IEC on behaviour change and demand generation through intensive multi-
media approach
• Under CSMP, 42.9 crore condom pieces sold/distributed in 2011-12 (till Jan., 2012)

2
1.4 The Secretary during oral evidence categorically mentioned that 2/3rd spending on
prevention and 1/3 rd on treatment was the norm and nations like Brazil got derailed in
implementation of their HIV/AIDS Programme when they reversed this proportion and focused
more on treating those already infected. However, a closer look at the Brazil model shows the
contrary (citation 1, Lancet article).
http://www .thelancet.com/journals/lance/articie/PIISO140-6736(09)61316-7/fulltext
(Annexure)
It seems Brazil’s story on AIDS treatment is of immense political will and of acting against world
bank advice who thought developing countries should invest in HIV prevention, not AIDS
treatment. It was the first developing country to make AIDS drugs and provide treatment in
the 90s.
1.5 The Committee recommends that treatment should be recognized as a cornerstone of
prevention activities explicitly by Department of AIDS Control. Outcomes of recent
scientific studies show that if an HIV-positive person adheres to an effective antiretroviral
therapy regimen, the risk of transmitting the virus to their uninfected sexual partner can
be reduced by 96%. Studies suggest that antiretroviral therapy reduces the sexual
transmission of HIV in generalized epidemics, especially among sero-discordant couples.
There is also growing evidence of the impact of ART on community-level HIV transmission,
both, in generalized and concentrated epidemics including among injecting drug users. Most
importantly the availability of Treatment for Prevention will not only empower people to get
tested for HIV , but also to disclose their HIV status, but significantly contribute to reducing
the stigma and discrimination surrounding HIV . Therefore, it is crucial for Department of
AIDS Control to recognise and use antiretroviral drugs as a prevention tool to control the
epidemic in India. The Committee feels that to capitalize on the scientific evidence,
continued investment in ART treatment is necessary in the coming five years to prevent
new infections.
CARE, SUPPORT AND TREATMENT
• Scale up of treatment services with over 13 lakh registered for treatment and nearly
4.9 lakh persons receiving free treatment.
• Second line treatment initiated and Plans underway to make it available to all those who
need it, in a phased manner.
1.6 The Committee notes that diagnosis and treatment of co-infections like drug-resistant TB,
Hepatitis and Kala-azar (specific to Bihar) are neglected and should be prioritized to reduce mortality
among people living with HIV/AIDS (PLHIVs). HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C share common
modes of transmission. People living with HIV who are also living with viral hepatitis are at increased
risk for serious, life threatening complications. Co-infection with hepatitis may also complicate the
management and treatment of HIV infection. But with the under-recognized hepatitis-associated
disease burden in this country, this co-infection is often overlooked Department of AIDS Control and
opportunities for diagnosis and management of Hepatitis co-infection, are often neglected in PLHIVs.
The Committee recommends all persons living with HIV should be offered and counseled to
test for Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C by Department of AIDS Control. As a next step, clear
guidelines, resources and training for the testing of Hepatitis in ICTCs and management of
the Hepatitis co-infection should be provided to ART centres. Costs of Hepatitis drugs alone
should not be a factor to refuse treatment of this co-infection that can cause liver cirrhosis.
Efforts to boost local production of Hepatitis drugs and a variety of measures such as bulk
procurement and health safeguards in the Patent law should be used to reduce prices.

3
1.7 TB co-infection is the leading cause of death among people living with HIV . The growing
number of drug-resistant tuberculosis (DR-TB) cases in India, lends greater urgency to solve major
problems surrounding the treatment of TB, regulation of TB drugs in the country’s private market,
and infection control. The Committee clearly recommends that Department of AIDS Control
strengthen TB infection control in ART centres to prevent transmission of TB among people
living with HIV. The Committee also clearly recommends that with new tests that can detect
DR-TB in less than two hours, it’s a perfect time for Department of AIDS Control to take
immediate action to boost diagnosis of DR TB in people living with HIV . At ART centres
implementation of intensified TB case findings (active TB screening) has been abjectly
neglected despite clear WHO recommendations. HIV+ patients often arrive in health
facilities in very bad condition and even die before their DR TB treatment can be diagnosed
and appropriated treatment can be started. The Committee feels that Intensified case
finding with access to culture/DST  testing can increase access to early treatment of DR-TB
for people living with HIV in the public programme with appropriate drug regimens. Usually
people living with HIV have already been treated in the private sector with inappropriate
TB drug regimens. The Committee notes that recent studies in scientific journals like PLoS
have documented the proliferation of TB formulations in the private market coupled with
the casual over-the-counter sale of antibiotics, of which some are used for DR TB
treatment, is fuelling the development of drug resistance, which is also affecting people
living with HIV. There is an urgent need for Department of AIDS Control to work with
RNTCP and the DCGI’s office for regulatory control of sale and administration of TB drugs
in the private sector in order to address the growing incidence of severe forms of DR-TB
in India.
1.8 In Bihar, where HIV and visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) interact and co-infection
is a problem, the Committee recommends as a first step-in areas that are endemic for kala-
azar — Department of AIDS Control should consider actively screening people living with
HIV for this life-threatening disease. Co-infected patients should then be given
antiretrovirals as soon as possible after starting anti-kala-azar therapy.
PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING
• NACP implementation structures decentralised to district level and capacities
strengthened
• Strengthened systems for programme monitoring, data management and evidence-based
planning.
II. Budgetary Allocation
XI. Plan
2.1 Against a projection of Rs.2466.00 crore by the Department of AIDS Control, a plan outlay
of Rs.1700.00 crore has been allocated by the Planning Commission. The BE, RE and AE during
2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 are as under:
(Rs. in crore )
Year Allocation at BE stage RE Actual Exp.
2009-10 1100.00 980.15 938.06
2010-11 1435.00 1400.22 1167.21
2011-12 1700.00 1500.00 1304.96

4
2.2 The Committee notes from the above that BE of Rs.1435.00 crore for the year 2010-11 was
revised downward to Rs.1400.22 crore at the RE stage with actual expenditure of Rs.1167.21
crore. On the reasons for downward revision of the allocation at the RE stage, the Department has
informed that savings occurred due to delayed implementation of activities in some States and
consequently allocation and release of funds to these States had to be revised downward due to
slow pace of utilization by these States. Further, funds allocation for planned procurement could
also not be fully utilized due to inability of the procurement agent to complete planned procurement
on schedule. A new procurement agent was contracted and there were same initial problems until
their system was streamlined for effective and timely delivery of services.
2.3 The Budgetary allocation made in 2011-12 was Rs.1700.00 crore which was reduced to
Rs.1500.00 crore at RE stage. The Department has informed that the cuts were imposed in the
plan allocation in the RE of the Department. Savings in actual expenditure occurred due to slow
implementation of the programme in North Eastern areas where 10% of the total provision is to
be mandatorily reserved for utilization.
2.5 The Committee notes that during 2010-11 and 2011-12 the pace of utilization of funds
allocated at RE stage was not very satisfactory and as a result thereof Rs. 233.00 crore and
Rs. 195.00 crore, respectively remained unspent at the end of each year.
2.6 The Committee notes with serious concern the continuance of this trend of under-
utilization of the budgeted funds and feels that the Department seriously needs to put in
place a rigorous monitoring mechanism for ensuring financial discipline and optimal
utilization of the budgeted amount.
2.7 As per the information supplied by the Department regarding unspent balances available with
the State AIDS Control Societies (SACS), the opening balance amounting to Rs.117.24 crore was
available with SACS as on 1
st April, 2010, which increase to Rs.206.32 crore in the opening balance
at the beginning of 2011-12. A comparative analysis of State wise figures during 2010-11 and
2011-12 indicates that the status regarding the main defaulter States remained unchanged. Following
details are self explanatory:-
(Rs. in crore )
SACS 2010-11 2011-12
Opening Balance Opening Balance
Andhra Pradesh SACS 5.39 15.45
Delhi SACS 4.08 8.54
Karnataka SACS 8.93 19.20
Madhya Pradesh SACS 7.46 13.98
Maharashtra SACS 6.14 19.81
Orissa SACS 6.23 9.71
Tamil Nadu SACS 7.09 7.51
Uttar Pradesh SACS 8.02 9.37
2.8 The Committee was informed that outstanding cash balance of Rs.189.83 crore constitutes
20% of the State allocation for the year 2011-12 and 14% of total expenditure of the Department
in 2011-12. The Committee, from the information furnished by the Department, gathers that for
the years 2012-13, an amount of Rs.850.71 crore has been allocated under different heads which

5
is 50% of the total budgeted allocation to be undertaken by various State AIDS Control Societies
including those funding in the North Eastern States for implementing various components of the
programme. The table referred to above indicates that a considerable amount is outstanding as
opening balance with the defaulting societies.
2.9 The Committee was informed that the Department made the following efforts to introduce
stricter monitoring mechanism and financial discipline in order to liquidate accumulation of unspent
balances with the SACS:
(i) monitoring of resources utilization by SACS is conducted through a computerized
Project Finance Management System (CPFMS);
(ii) Annual Action Plan sanctions are being issued well in time before close of financial
year and are placed on website to ensure that there is no delay in taking up activities
to achieve targets set for the new financial year;
(iii) Releases to State are being done through e-transfer to reduce transit delay;
(iv) Improvement in staffing and capacity building;
(v) Alignment of Budget with project goals and priorities of activities;
(vi) e-payment of salaries to staff of peripheral units like Anti Retroviral Treatment (ART)
Centre, Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre (ICTC), Blood Banks, Sexually
Translated Infection (STI) clinics; and
(vii) implementation of system and procedure for regular periodic adjustment of advances
as opposed to one-time special efforts for clearing advances.
2.10 The Committee notes that with focused intervention of NACO, there is a
considerable decline in unspent balances available with the societies. The Committee would,
however, like to point out that availability of unspent balances with some SACS like Andhra
Pradesh SACS (Rs.17.59 crore), Karnataka SACS (Rs.21.09 crore), Madhya Pradesh SACS
(Rs.15.02 Crore) and Tamil Nadu SACS (Rs.14.68 Crore) is still quite high. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Department to introduce stricter monitoring mechanism and
financial discipline so that funds do not get accumulated and remain unutilized. The
Committee also impresses upon the Department to ensure fixing of responsibility to ensure
proper accountability in utilization of funds.
2.11 As regards the reduction in the allocation of Grants to SACS from Rs.940.42 (BE) crore
to Rs.657.59. crore in RE in 2011-12, the Department has stated that this is on account of pace
of utilization by States and opening cash balances in compliance with General Financial Rules. The
allocation for grants to SACS in BE 2012-13 has been proposed at Rs.722.12 crore in view of the
level of activities proposed. The Committee was informed that during 2012-13 States would have
to take over 190 Targeted Interventions (IT) projects that were being directly implemented by
various development partners during NACP III.
2.12 The Committee would, however, like to point out that the efforts need to be
sustained till the elimination of all the problems areas being faced by different States. The
Committee is constrained to observe that there was downward revision of funds at the RE
stage during 2011-12. The Committee does not find any merit in the justification put forth
by the Department that the board cut resulted in the downward revision of funds. In the
Committee’s opinion, opening balance of Rs. 206.32 crore at the beginning of 2011-12 seems
to be the main reason for reduction of allocated funds during the year. The Committee
would like to point out that various components under NACP deserve to be pursued

6
vigorously and any cut in funds for the same would severely hamper the ongoing fight
against the deadly disease.
2.13 According to the details provided by the Department, the Global Fund is the pre-dominant
funder of integrated counseling/testing and ART treatment in developing countries including India.
In 2011, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria (GFATM) has announced it won’t be
accepting any grant applications to support treatment programmes because of a catastrophic drop
in donor funding. The Committee would like to know what measures has the Department
taken to ensure this decline in GFATM funds does not further affect the expansion and
improvement of the treatment program for HIV . This is particularly important as the
Department of AIDS Control’s TRG on ART has recommended earlier treatment with
better drugs that will keep patients alive longer and reduce new infections. This is in line
with the latest studies that show that people under treatment not only benefit as
individuals, but they are also less likely to transmit the virus to others-in effect,
protecting the community.
XII Plan
Quoting from the written replies to queries over the status of the Twelfth Plan document
and the subsequent EFC/CCEA clearances:
“Summary of NACP IV in the Twelfth Plan has been submitted to  the Planning Commission
for their examination and inclusion in the  Twelfth Plan document.” Also,
“Pending formal approval of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, existing activities are being
continued. Requisite approvals for the scheme in the Twelfth Five Year Plan will be
processed as per guidelines of Ministry of Finance issued vide their OM. NO.1 (3)/PF .II/
2011 dated 14.12.2011 for continuation of on-going Schemes from Eleventh to Twelfth Plan.”
“The Department is awaiting the approval of the sectoral allocation and plan outlay for
the scheme by the Planning Commission, before initiating the process for seeking approval
of EFC/CCEA for the scheme in the Twelfth Plan.”
2.14 Taking into view the above comments, the Committee is perturbed to note that the
Twelfth Plan outlay of the Department is yet to be approved and conveyed to them by the
Planning Commission. Perforce therefore, pending formal approval of the Twelfth Plan the
Department is carrying on with their existing activities. Furthermore, the Department is
also not in a position to initiate the process of seeking formal EFC/CCEA approval of
schemes in the Twelfth Plan in the absence of approval of Sectoral and Plan allocation. The
Committee is of the strong view the process of approvals and clearances need to be
streamlined with the view to cut delays in decision-making. It therefore, recommends the
Government to hasten the approval of Twelfth Plan related approvals so that the
Department is able to complete all the other formalities incidental to planning process and
start implementation of its schemes in right earnest without any further loss of time.
III. Role of NGOs
3.1 The Committee understands that the NGOs/Community Based Organisations (CBOs)
implementing the Targeted Interventions (TI) projects collect field level data based on the reporting
formats developed by NACO which forms a part of national monitoring and Evaluation framework.
As per the information provided by the Department regarding updated status of the discontinued
NGOs, unspent balances recovered from them till date and still available with them, the Committee
notes that 27 NGOs have been discontinued and Rs.221.5 lakh which constitutes 63% of total

7
unspent balance has been recovered as on March, 2012 and Rs.131.08 lakh still remain to be
recovered from 14 NGOs.
3.2 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has not been able to
recover the unspent balances available with the discontinued NGOs. There appears to be
some slackness on the part of the Department and other implementing agencies. The
Committee, therefore, recommends imposing severe penalties on the NGOs which indulged
in fraud or financial embezzlement. If need be the Department should sound the law
enforcement agencies of the concerned States to proceed with action against such NGOs as
fraud or financial embezzlement comes within the domain of penal offences requiring
expertise and wherewithal of law enforcement agencies.
IV. Setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs)
4.1 The Committee notes that the progress made during the Eleventh Plan period under the
target of setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units has been discouraging. As per the
information available, the Committee was informed that in the beginning of NACP-III, there was
a target of setting up new BCSUs in 80 tertiary care hospitals in addition to the existing 82 BCSUs.
Till March 2011, 73 out of proposed 80 centres were running as BCSUs in the country and other
7 facilities were either in the process of being given license or installation of equipment provided
through NACP III. Further, as on date, March, 2012, 77 out of the proposed 80 centres are
functional and 3 facilities are in the process of licensing which is at its final stages. The
Department has also stated that the establishing and functioning of the same has been delayed due
to constraints in infrastructure availability, manpower recruitment and installation of equipment
before which license can not be applied for. The Department has stated that the targets have been
achieved with efforts of close follow up of the the programme, in-site allocation by the State,
equipment installation, allocation of funds as per pattern of assistance, follow up with the office
of DCG(I) for Central license at all stages. The year wise breakup of the targets/achievements for
the last four years is given below:
Target Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement
NACP III 2008-09 2008-09 2009-10 2009-10 2010-11 2010-11 2011-12 2011-12
80 40 19 40 28 12 26 7 4
4.2 The Committee appreciates that the targets set by the Department under NACP-III
for setting up of BCSUs have been achieved more or less. The Committee would, however,
like to be updated regularly of the targets set and success achieved by these units.
4.3 The Committee notes that not only quantity but also quality matters. Blood
transfusion is life-saving treatment in many situations. But transfusions can also be a quick
and easy route for the transmission of infectious agents such as HIV, HBV , HCV, and
malaria. NACO has been entrusted the task of setting up and expanding blood banks across
the country. Several studies reviewing the current scenario in transfusion medicine (TM) in
India indicates an urgent need for restructuring the blood transfusion services with extreme
variations in management and quality. These studies note that compliance with quality
assurance and GMP is not ensured. A large number of blood banks are unlicensed. The
committee feels that since quality of blood banks is regulated under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, under schedule ‘F’, Department of AIDS Control and the DCGI should
jointly come up with a plan to urgently address the issue of quality of blood banks in the
private and public sector.

8
V. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks
5.1 The Committee is given to understand that during the year 2012-13, 786 district level blood
banks would be covered with the support of NACO. During NACP-III, 39 newly created districts
were identified which did not have blood banks. NACO has taken the initiative with the concerned
State Health Departments for setting up a Blood Bank in each of these districts.
5.2 In the phase of NACP III, it was proposed that every district in the State would have at
least one blood bank which would be supported under the programme. Accordingly, 39 districts
with no blood bank were identified in the States of Bihar, U.P., Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Kerala,
Karnataka, Mizorom and Uttarakhand. The year-wise break up of the targets/achievements under
NACP-III is given below:
Target 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
NACP
Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve Target Achieve-
ment ment ment ment ment
3 9 3343 8467 2 2 8
5.3 The Committee notes that against the target of setting up of 39 Blood banks during
the Eleventh Plan, only 25 Blood Banks could be set up. When enquired about the reasons
for non-completion of 14 blood banks, the Department has stated this was on account of
various factors like non-completion of infrastructure, in-adequate man-power, lack of
equipments and non-acquisition of license etc. But the Committee feels that the reasons
illustrated by the Department are frivolous. It appears that the Department has not made
sincere efforts to achieve the physical targets. The Committee desires that the Department
should make concerted efforts to complete the processes as mentioned above by December,
2012, so that the new time line set by NACP-III is adhered to.
5.4. The Committee also recommends to the Department to take special cognizance of the
underserved districts of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand. The Committee further
recommends that the Department should keep assessing the requirements of Blood Banks
based on the actual needs in various States due to migration and other factors.
5.5 The Committee is given to understand that a provision of Rs.8.00 crore has been made for
2012-13 for establishing four Metro Blood Banks in 4 Metro cities, i.e. Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and
Chennai as Centres of Excellence. These banks will have State of the Art facilities with 100%
V oluntary Blood Donation, 100% blood components preparation, and capacity to process more than
100,000 units of blood annually.
5.6 As per the information provided by the Department regarding the progress made towards
setting up of four Metro Blood Banks, the process of land allotment by the respective State
Governments could be completed only in November, 2011 and the DPR-2 has been approved by
the Steering Committee for the sites of Metro Blood Banks viz. Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. That
is why the allocated fund could not be spent as per the timelines. The actual utilization of funds
during 2011-12 was only on account of professional services paid to the selected Architects to the
tune of Rs.17.9 lakh. Now, during the current financial year, construction is proposed to be
started. As such, to meet the requirement for release of first installment to be paid for construction
purposes and other professional fee, an allocation of Rs 8.00 crore has been made.
5.7 The Committee is surprised that in spite of the Committee’s recommendation made
in its 42
nd Reporfon Demands for Grants (2010-11), the Department has moved at a snail’s

9
pace which is evident from the fact that it has managed only to get the land allotted in
November, 2011 for the four metro blood banks. The Committee is dismayed by the utter
callousness on the part of the Department to disregard its recommendation to have a
targeted approach in making the four metro blood banks functional at the earliest. The
Committee expresses its displeasure at this sorry state of affairs and recommends that the
Secretary of the Department should take personal interest to ensure completion of the four
Metro Blood Banks at the earliest. The States concerned may be asked at the ministerial level
for completion of all the processes and starting the blood banks
VI. Integrated Counselling and Testing Centres (ICTCs)
6.1 The Committee notes that Department is making efforts to upscale the Counselling and
Testing Services in the country. Presently 4475 stand-alone ICTCs in the Medical colleges, district
hospitals and CHCf sub district level health facilities, 4071 facility integrated ICTCs in integration
with NRHM and 902 PPP (Public Private Partnership) model ICTCs, where the existing staff of
the facility performs counselling and testing, are functional in the country.
6.2 As per information provided by the Department, a total of 1012 facility integrated ICTCs
in integration with NRHM and 175 PPP model have been established in the vulnerable States such
as Gujarat, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh Bihar, Orissa,
Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi. All the vulnerable States in the country are in the watch
list of the Department for this purpose. As a result, the Department has been able to counsel and
test the people more vulnerable to HIV/AIDS.
6.3 The Committee notes that the Eleventh Plan target under this component of the National
AIDS Control Programme was 75 lakh pregnant women who were to be counseled and tested per
year. However, the target during the Plan Period could not be achieved as is evident from the
following table:
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement
70.15 61.20 86.49 66.38 90.00 70.87
lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs
6.4 It was clarified that the annual targets are fixed in consultation with SACS depending on
the achievements of the previous year, expansion plans for the current year and overall capacity.
It was further stated that the targets for counseling and testing of pregnant women have been
substantially achieved. The Committee is at a loss to understand the rationale on the basis
of which the Department, in the first place fixes the target and fails to achieve the same
year after year. A plain reading of the target set vis-a-vis the achievement shows that the
Department is not following its own yardstick of fixing of target each year on the basis of
achievement of the previous year, which shows poor foresight of planning by the
Department. The Committee, therefore, enjoins upon the Department to seriously set
realistic and achievable targets. Once targets are fixed, all efforts should be made to
achieve them.
6.5 Also, testing of pregnant women raises several ethical questions. The Committee
feels these ethical issues have to be addressed at the time of rolling out routine testing of
pregnant women under NRHM. Testing with counseling is key. Support services for domestic
violence and discrimination within the family and community are also crucial. Treatment
needs of women who test positive should also be the top priority. Absence of these
components will have an adverse impact on the uptake of ante-natal services if they are

10
identified with routine HIV testing of pregnant women. The committee feels that a detailed
study on the testing of women who are pregnant – their treatment and the discrimination
they face – must be immediately undertaken and should be used to shape a more sensitive
and humane testing programme for pregnant women.
VII. Persons to be counseled and tested at ICTCs (Target of 220 lakh per year)
7.1 The Committee is given to understand that the overall target of 220 lakh people/year to be
counseled and tested in ICTCs comprises of all clients who came to an ICTC including pregnant
women. The overall target was 220 lakh people/year to be counseled and tested in ICTCs at the
end of NACP-III i.e. March, 2012. Following is the achievement level under the component during
the Eleventh Plan.
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement
155.34 143.87 198.20 161.83 210.00 161.39
lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs
7.2 As per information submitted by the Department, it has set a overall target of 220
lakh people per year (including pregnant women) to be counseled and tested in ICTCs at
the end of NACP-III i.e. March, 2012. However, a plain reading of the figures furnished by
the Department, reveals that the Department has not been able to achieve its scaled down
targets. Further, as per information furnished by the Department, total approved number
of posts of counsellors in ICTCs is 4992 whereas the actual strength is 4774. Similarly the
sanctioned strength of the post of lab technicians in ICTCs is 4702 whereas the actual
strength is 4352. The Committee expresses displeasure that the Department has not been
able to fulfill even its scaled down targets. However, the Committee supports any endeavour
by means of which the Department would be able to achieve the targets fixed by it. If need
be, it would support the Department to seek additional funds from the Finance Ministry/
Planning Commission so as to augment the manpower as well as number of stand-alone
ICTCs with the rider that the Department makes serious efforts to achieve its yearly
targets.
7.3 In a detailed written reply to a question on Methodology for Estimation of HIV Prevalence
and Incidence the Department says, “Regarding the infections below age of 15, the basic
assumption here is that this population is not sexually active and hence is not exposed to that kind
of risk Hence, all the cases for children living with HIV are calculated as resulting from Mother
to Child transmission.” The Committee finds these are fleeting statements based on
assumptions. Street children for example are sexually active at a very young age. New
studies also establish that assumptions that young people below 15 years are not sexually
active are not accurate. Interventions for young people are necessary to address the risk
of STDs, HIV and Hepatitis and the Committee recommends that the Department make
appropriate provision for capturing this risk group. Another scenario was presented before
the officials during oral evidence- a long-haul truck driver/migrant labourer (the two
highest risk-groups) contracting infection from a sex-worker and passing it on to his wife
back in the village-chances of the wife thus getting infected and becoming pregnant and
being captured as a new case? The Committee for want of a satisfactory answer
recommends that the Department take a very serious view of this critical gap in data
generation as it feels that given the poor accessibility to health care in rural areas the
chances of such cases being captured in data collection would be truly grim. The Committee
feels that citing international norms and a one-size-fits-all kind of approach is neither

11
adequate nor acceptable while capturing data in a truly diverse country like India. The
Department must come up with more innovative solutions after consulting the various
stakeholders so a more realistic picture is available for dealing with the HIV menace. The
examples quoted are only illustrative and not exhaustive. The Committee would like to be
kept apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
7.4 The Committee observed that HIV , Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C share common modes
of transmission. The committee recommends, the technical feasibility of ICTC centres
expansion to test and counsel for Hepatitis in a phased manner should be undertaken
immediately. This is important as many experts feel that there is a significant but
under-recognized hepatitis-associated disease burden in this country. Despite that India does
not have a Hepatitis disease registry, or information on the disease burden. For example,
a Professor & Head of Gastroenterology at AIIMS, has stated studies reported from various
parts of India estimate that about 20 million Indians are Hepatitis B carriers and about 8
to 10 million may have silent Hepatitis C virus infection. These individuals do not know
that they have these infections and not only are at risk of transmitting this disease but also
cannot access early treatment preventing late stage liver cirrhosis and liver cancer.
VIII. A ntiretroviral Treatment (ART) Centre
8.1 The Committee is given to understand that as on January, 2012, there were 14.86 lakhs
people living with HIV/AIDS (PLHIV) who are registered in the Antiretroviral Treatment (ART)
centres across the country. Out of them 4,86,173 could be found and given free ART. Further, the
Department has stated that 4208 AIDS cases are provided second line ART on account of
complicated and drug resistant cases. The provision of second line ART for such patients with
treatment failure was started in the year 2008 and is presently provided at 10 Centres of Excellence
and 20 ART Plus centres across the country.
8.2 The Committee notes that required mtdicines are available for PLHIV in 342 ART centres
across the country. Nearly 5,00,000 PLHIV are currently assessing ART through these centres.
Further, 685 Link ART centres (LLAC) have been established to provide drugs near to the patient’s
residence.
8.3 While responding to a query on the procurement agency and the underutilization of the
available funds, the Department mentions: “The performance of Rail India Technical and Economic
Services (RITES) was reviewed after one year and was found satisfactory.” The Committee notes
that stock outs of ART medicines were reposted throughout 2011 in many States including
UP, Bihar, Maharashtra, Manipur etc. The Committee fails to understand that how
performance of RITES has been called satisfactory in such circumstances. The Committee
recommends that the Department take a more serious note of such lapses and have closer
monitoring mechanism in place since such gaps in supply only add to drug resistance apart
from the obvious inconvenience.
8.4 The Committee has noted that throughout 2011, there have regular interruptions of
stock outs of HIV drug (first, second and pediatric doses) in different States, which has
been reported by different PLHIV networks. The Committee feels that this is serious issue
since, stock outs mean drug interruptions which can lead to increased public health risks
of HIV drug resistance. The Committee recommends that an investigation and report be
undertaken to list the numbers of stock outs and to document the reasons for the stock
outs. NACO should also outline to this Committee what measures have been planned to
prevent and to deal with incidents of stock outs. The role of the PLHIV Networks should
be to continue this good work of monitoring HIV treatment at ART centres and reporting
problems like stock outs to NACO. PLHIV networks should be further encouraged to

12
continue reporting such incidents. Stock outs are related to inefficiencies such as poor
planning, incorrect projections of local requirements, poor distribution and supply at
treatment facilities, expiry of medicines as the stock that was received earlier is not
distributed first. The Committee recommends that NACO immediately reform the
pharmaceutical supply management system for HIV medicines as it is an important element
in treatment programmes.
8.5 The Committee feels that the slow rate of scale up of ART treatment over the last
decade has forced patients into the private sector where inappropriate HIV drug regimens
are often prescribed, leading to a long term public health problem of drug resistance. Many
economic and bureaucratic barriers have been noted in the eligibility criteria for enrolling
in the programme for those needing alternative first line or second line HIV drugs. As a
result, patient groups have had to approach the Supreme Court. These barriers must be
addressed and must not be created for patients who will need third line HIV medicines.
Currently the proportion of HIV patients who have failed to the second-line treatment is
probably very small. The programme must start planning for ART Centres of Excellence to
take in these few patients. This will control drug resistance. Cost alone should not the only
criteria. Failure to procure the third line drugs will have future public health complications
as PLHIVs could develop a very resistance HIV which could prove costly. Planning and
treating third line in a few patients will build capacity and experience of public health
facilities classified as centres of excellence by Department of AIDS Control.
8.6 The Committee feels it would be in the fitness of things to upgrade the Link centres
to ART centres in order to increase the number of patients who can avail treatment as well
as procure drugs near their residence which would go a long way in decreasing the
staggering figures of patients who cannot avail treatment due to inaccessibility to the
existing ART centres in the country.
8.7 On being asked as to why Stavudine has not been phased out despite the fact that almost
two years have elapsed since the WHO recommended in July, 2010 to phase it out due to its
toxicity and the resultant side effects like sunken cheeks and buffalo humps, the representatives
of the Department of AIDS control during his oral evidence before the Committee on the 10
th April
2012 stated that the annual Plan of 2012-13 has a road map for phasing out Stavudine and no new
patient will be put on Stavudine from 2012-13. The Committee is constrained to observe that
the Department has not treated the matter of phasing out Stavudine with the urgency and
seriousness it deserves. The Committee feels that the inordinate delay on the part of the
Department in this regard is a sad commentary on the working of the Department and calls
for introspection. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should start
phasing out of Stavudine in a time bound manner. The Committee desires to be kept
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
IX. New Initiatives
(i) Setting up of National Blood Transfusion Authority (NBTA)
9.1 The Committee was given to understand that a proposal was initiated for setting up of
National Blood Transfusion Authority during the year 2008-09 under NACP Phase-III. A draft
cabinet note was prepared and sent to various departments such as Departments of Expenditure &
Economic Affairs, under Ministry of Finance, Department of Health & Planning Commission in
September 2009 for comments. The Committee was informed that the comments from the
Department of Expenditure were still awaited. The original timeline for setting up of NBTA was
April, 2010. However, due to non receipt of the comments from all the Departments the revised
draft was delayed. The Committee was further apprised that the Ministry of Finance has not

13
supported the proposal for setting up of a National Blood Transfusion Authority due to lack of clear
mandate in this regard.
9.2 The Committee expresses its dismay over the fact that the Department of
Expenditure has not sent its comments so far. Though the original timeline for starting NBT
A was April, 2010, there is still no ray of hope of its being set in near future. The
Committee condemns such procrastinating attitude of the government. The Committee
impresses upon the Department that in order to ensure setting up of a National Blood
Transfusion Authority, it is imperative that immediate steps should be taken to remove the
legal infirmities raised by the Ministry of Finance along with seeking replies from
respective Departments without further delay in view of the fact that the scheme which was
to take wings in the Eleventh Plan is yet to take off.
(ii) Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre (PFC)
9.3 The Committee has been given to understand that the proposal for setting up of a Plasma
Fractionation Centre was one of the approved activities under NACP Phase-III. As informed by the
Department, a revised proposal was submitted to EFC and then to the Cabinet for approval. The
Department has stated that Tamil Nadu Government has provided the land for establishing the PFC
at New Avadi Road, Anna Nagar, and Chennai. The direct benefit of implementation of this project
is to ensure access of plasma derivatives to the needy patients at affordable costs. This would also
reduce country’s dependence on imported products saving valuable foreign exchange. The plasma
fractionation would undergo much more stringent norms and approval processes which have
serious cost implications as well as sustainability.
9.4 The Committee is disappointed by the snail’s pace to set up Plasma Fractionation
Centre which is still bogged down in bureaucratic red-tapism even though the Eleventh Five
Year Plan has come to an end. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department
to make all out efforts for setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre without any further
delay.
X. Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
10.1 The Committee has been given to understand that after the suspension of AEP in some
states, the material on Adolescence Education Programme was reviewed by an expert committee
constituted by NACO in consultation with Ministry of Human Resource Development and NCERT
during 2007-08. The revised prototype material was disseminated to the States in a consultation
held in July, 2008 and all the States were requested to adopt and contextualize the material further
to suit the local needs of the students. Simultaneously the material was uploaded on NACO website
for general public opinion and feedback. The States have adopted and contexualised the material
in consultation with local experts and stakeholders.
10.2 The Committee also notes that during 2009-10, Kerala, Rajasthan and Gujarat resumed the
programme. Further, despite NACO’s continuous advocacy efforts with the concerned State
Governments for resuming the programme, using the revised material so as to prevent new
infections among the student and youth, the programme continues to be suspended in five States
including Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and UP. However, Rajasthan and
Karnataka have made notable progress in integration of the contents on HIV prevention in
curriculum of in-school students through other ongoing programmes such as school health program
under NRHM. Gujarat has started the program implementation through NGOs in selected schools.
10.3 The Committee is impressed that with consistent efforts of the Department, the
programme is running in most of the States. The  Committee feels that the Department
should vigorously take up with the States where the programme is still under suspension,

14
the reasons for the  delay in implementation of the programme and resolve their
apprehensions  in this regard without any further delay, in view of the fact that HIV/AIDS
is a hydra headed monster which usually attacks the vulnerable adolescent population due
to lack of awareness of the devastating effects the disease could have on them. The states
that have suspended should also reconsider their decision.
XI. New Strategies
(i) Setting up of District AIDS Prevention and Control Unit (DAPCU)
11.1 The Committee notes that DAPCUs were to be established in all A & B Category districts
as per the categorization of districts. Only in 3 districts (2 in UP- Etawah and Deoria and 1 in
Assam, Sonitpur) where such units could not be established have since been established. DAPCUs
have been established in both districts Deoria (September’2010) and Etawah (February’2011) of UP.
The location of unit was shifted from Sonitpur district to Kamrup in Assam as per the suggestion
by Assam SACS based on severity of HIV epidemic. DAPCU in Kamrup district was established
in August’2010.
11.2 As per the information furnished by the Department, there are 189 DAPCUs in which 886
participants were provided training. Further, Refresher and Mop up training was provided in 41
DAPCUs in which 103 participants took part.
11.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Department to train the
staff posted in different DAPCUs throughout the country. However, it feels that keeping in
view the severity of the disease, there is a pressing need to provide training to more staff
in order to ensure more focus on the preventive aspect of the disease control programme.
The Committee emphasizes that the Department should not only strive to achieve the
target fixed but depending on the requirement and situation, may also enhance both
financial and physical targets.
(ii) Scheme of link workers in rural areas of category A and B districts
11.4 The Link Worker Scheme (LWS) is a rural outreach programme established during NACP-
III to reach out to rural HRGs, their partners and other vulnerable groups and to link them with
HIV/AIDS services. In addition, the Scheme will also cover young people. It is being implemented
in identified priority districts of the country. The objective of the Scheme is to “Reach out to HRGs
and vulnerable men and women in rural areas with information, knowledge, skills on STI/HIV
prevention and risk reduction.” During the year 2011-12, the mandate under the Link Worker
Scheme was to cover 219 Districts across 20 States.
11.5 As informed by the Department, during 2011-12, the Link Worker Scheme was implemented
in 209 out of 219 planned districts. This includes 163 high prevalence and highly vulnerable
districts including 42 new districts in which the LWS was initiated in 2011-12 under GFATM VII.
The selection of these Districts was based on the fact that these Dictricts were “Source Migrant”
Districts where the vulnerability of HIV is increasing.
11.6 It may be recalled that in its previous Report on the Demands for Grants 2010-11,
the Committee has recommended to increase the reach of the scheme to cover all the
States in the country. However, as per information received from the Department in the
context of the Demands for Grants 2012-13, the Department has covered only 209 Districts.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendations that the Department
needs to assess the scheme so as to cover the remaining Districts and closely monitor the
schemes as the success of this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal of halting and
reversing the epidemic of AIDS.

15
(iii) Preferred private provider scheme for management of sexually infections among high
risk groups
11.7 As per information provided by the Department, there are 3942 preferred providers
currently providing services to HRG through Targeted Interventions (TI) NGO. All of them are
trained in syndromic case management of STI and guidelines pertaining to STI/RTI service delivery
for HRG. During 2011-12, a total of about 1 million HRG have accessed services. So far, about
22.6 lakh clinic visits have been made by HRG and 14.3 lakh regular medical checkups have been
conducted. Free colour coded STI drug kits are provided to HRG, which are centrally procured
and supplied. About 7 lakhs syphilis screening tests have been performed; the positivity rate is
0.65%. Declining trends of STI prevalence among HRG has been observed from 11.8% to 8.4%
in the first three quarters of 2011-12.
11.8 The Committee notes that the efforts made by the Preferred Private provider are
successful in bringing about decline of STI prevalence among high risk group from 11.8%
to 8.4% in the first three quarters of 2011-12. However, the Committee feels that there is
a need to speed up management under this scheme as the figure of 8.4% is still on the
higher side and much more efforts need to be undertaken on this front. The Committee
would like to be regularly apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee also
feels that these private providers should be trained in the rational prescription of antibiotics
as this will address drug resistance issues in the long run.
XII. National Pediatric Initiative
12.1 As per information received from the Department, an active task force on Children Affected
by HIV/AIDS (CABA) that included FHI 360, UNICEF, USAID, HIV and AIDS Alliance and Clinton
Health Access Initiative (CHAI), along with NACO and Ministry of Women and Child Development,
was formed. A “National Scheme on Children Affected by HIV and AIDS” was started to enable
the children living with and affected by HIV to gain access to a minimum package of services that
would address their overall developmental needs. The package of services for CABA included
Psychosocial counseling, food security interventions, linkages with social protection schemes,
nutritional assessments and growth monitoring, linkage with formal and non - formal education,HIV
testing, pre ART screening, OI prophylaxis and treatment.
12.2 The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Department of AIDS
Control in conjunction with the Ministry of Women and Child Development to start the
scheme namely “National Scheme on Children affected by HIV and AIDS”, would like to be
apprised about the number of children targeted to be covered under the said scheme and
the financial and physical targets set under the Programme during the Twelfth Plan.
XIII. Information Education and Communication (IEC)
13.1 The Committee notes that the Red Ribbon Express campaign conducted during 2009-10 also
focused on addressing the myths associated with HIV/AIDS. Under this project, a special exhibition
train travelled across the country covering 152 stations in 22 States. The train and its outreach
activities directly covered over 80 lakh people. In addition exhibition vans, campaigns through folk
theatre in rural areas, mass media campaigns on TV and radio also have been covering the myths
related to HIV/AIDS. The key message disseminated was “AIDS is not curable but is manageable
and a person detected HIV positive should get registered at the ART centre for treatment”.
13.2 As per the information provided during the meeting, the Department has scheduled to cover
162 stations across 23 States in one year. The Department has covered 37 stations in 8 States
(Delhi, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra & Goa) under Red Ribbon Express.

16
Further, the Department has stated that under National Folk Media Campaign, it has covered 476
districts in 23 States through 30,330 performances.
13.3 The Committee notes that during the year 2011-12, the expenditure till date against allocation
of Rs.62.50 crore is Rs.48.40 crore under the said programme. An allocation of Rs.65.00 crore
has been made in BE 2012-13. The Committee is constrained to note that the Department
could not utilize allotted fund during 2011-12 and as a result thereof it has not been able
to do full justice to the programme. The Committee, impresses upon the Department to
ensure that funds allocated during the current year be fully utilized as dissemination of
knowledge for creating awareness about the disease is a sin-qua-non for eliminating it.
IV. HIV/AIDS Bill
14.1 The Committee has been given to understand that an International Policy Makers
Conference on HIV/AIDS jointly organized by NACO, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
and International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (IAVI) was held in May, 2002 in New Delhi which was
attended by Parliamentarians and senior bureaucrats from eight countries. At the end of the
conference, all the countries pledged to “strengthen legislation and regulatory systems” to fight the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. As a follow up to the conference, a working group of experts on policy, legal,
gender, ethics and technical matters was set up to advise on various HIV/AIDS prevention, care
and treatment issues. NACO and ICMR were also part of the group. The group and the then Law
Minister, requested Lawyers Collective’s HIV/AIDS Unit (LCHAU) to undertake the task of
preparing a draft law on the subject. The draft of the HIV/AIDS Bill 2006 prepared in consultation
with key stakeholders at national and regional level was submitted to NACO on 30th June 2006
by the Lawyers Collective.
14.2 As per the information made available to the Committee, since 2006, when the draft Bill was
brought, the nature of the epidemic in India and the Government’s response thereto have undergone
significant changes. The third phase of the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP III) was
launched during 2007-12. This brought about a large scale up of the programme for providing
nation-wide prevention, treatment, care and support services. The scaled up efforts have also
yielded some very positive results in the duration of this programme. For example, the incidence
of HIV has come down, documented as 50% reduction in new infections over the last decade. The
mortality rate due to HIV/AIDS has declined. the Integrated Counselling and Testing Centers
(ICTCs) providing free counselling and testing services; free first line and second line ART
treatment is now available to all those who require it in the country.
14.3 The Committee was informed that the response to the evolving HIV epidemic necessitated
some contextual changes from the initial proposal. Accordingly, the draft of the Bill was recast and
referred to Ministry of Law and Justice in September 2011 and again in December, 2011 for
vetting. As advised by Ministry of Law & Justice, a note along with the draft of the Bill has been
prepared which was circulated in March, 2012, to various Ministries for their comments. Their
comments are awaited. After receipt of the comments, other procedural steps would be required
to be taken before introduction of the bill in the Parliament. Accordingly, the Department has
expressed its inability to indicate the date for introduction of the Bill in Parliament.
14.4 The Committee expresses its displeasure on inordinate delay in bringing about HIV/
AIDS Bill even though six years have lapsed since it was first drafted in 2006. The reasons
given by the Department are not acceptable and frivolous and clearly indicate the manner
in which it continue to sideline this crucial law that is aimed at not only protecting the
rights of people living with HIV and marginalized populations but also to protect public
health. The cases of discrimination in healthcare, education and within their families have
not gone down and in fact continue to endanger the lives of millions of HIV+, while the

17
Department delays action. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take urgent measures to speed up the process for introduction of the Bill as soon
as possible, keeping in view the nature of the disease.

18
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee recommends that treatment should be recognized as a cornerstone of
prevention activities explicitly by Department of AIDS Control. Outcomes of recent
scientific studies show that if an HIV-positive person adheres to an effective antiretroviral
therapy regimen, the risk of transmitting the virus to their uninfected sexual partner can
be reduced by 96%. Studies suggest that antiretroviral therapy reduces the sexual
transmission of HIV in generalized epidemics, especially among sero-discordant couples.
There is also growing evidence of the impact of ART on community-level HIV transmission,
both, in generalized and concentrated epidemics including among injecting drug users. Most
importantly the availability of Treatment for Prevention will not only empower people to get
tested for HIV , but also to disclose their HIV status, but significantly contribute to reducing
the stigma and discrimination surrounding HIV . Therefore, it is crucial for Department of
AIDS Control to recognise and use antiretroviral drugs as a prevention tool to control the
epidemic in India. The Committee feels that to capitalize on the scientific evidence,
continued investment in ART treatment is necessary in the coming five years to prevent
new infections. (Para 1.5)
The Committee recommends all persons living with HIV should be offered and
counseled to test for Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C by Department of AIDS Control. As a next
step, clear guidelines, resources and training for the testing of Hepatitis in ICTCs and
management of the Hepatitis co-infection should be provided to ART centres. Costs of
Hepatitis drugs alone should not be a factor to refuse treatment of this co-infection that
can cause liver cirrhosis. Efforts to boost local production of Hepatitis drugs and a variety
of measures such as bulk procurement and health safeguards in the Patent law should be
used to reduce prices. (Para 1.6)
The Committee clearly recommends that Department of AIDS Control strengthen TB
infection control in ART centres to prevent transmission of TB among people living with
HIV . The Committee also clearly recommends that with new tests that can detect DR-TB in
less than two hours, it’s a perfect time for Department of AIDS Control to take immediate
action to boost diagnosis of DR TB in people living with HIV . At ART centres
implementation of intensified TB case findings (active TB screening) has been abjectly
neglected despite clear WHO recommendations. HIV+ patients often arrive in health
facilities in very bad condition and even die before their DR TB treatment can be diagnosed
and appropriated treatment can be started. The Committee feels that Intensified case
finding with access to culture/DST testing can increase access to early treatment of DR TB
for people living with HIV in the public programme with appropriate drug regimens. Usually
people living with HIV have already been treated in the private sector with inappropriate
TB drug regimens. The Committee notes that recent studies in scientific journals like PLoS
have documented the proliferation of TB formulations in the private market coupled with
the casual over-the-counter sale of antibiotics, of which some are used for DR TB
treatment, is fuelling the development of drug resistance, which is also affecting people
living with HIV. There is an urgent need for Department of AIDS Control to work with
RNTCP and the DCGI’s office for regulatory control of sale and administration of TB drugs
18

19
in the private sector in order to address the growing incidence of severe forms of DR-TB
in India. (Para 1.7)
In Bihar, where HIV and visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) interact and co-infection
is a problem, the Committee recommends as a first step-in areas that are endemic for  kala-
azar - Department of AIDS Control should consider actively screening people living with
HIV for  this life-threatening disease. Co-infected patients should then be given
antiretrovirals as soon as possible after starting anti-kala-azar therapy. (Para 1.8)
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes with serious concern the continuance of this trend of under-
utilization of the budgeted funds and feels that the Department seriously needs to put in
place a rigorous monitoring mechanism for ensuring financial discipline and optimal
utilization of the budgeted amount. (Para 2.6)
The Committee notes that with focused intervention of NACO, there is a
considerable decline in unspent balances available with the societies. The Committee would,
however, like to point out that availability of unspent balances with some SACS like Andhra
Pradesh SACS (Rs.17.59 crore), Karnataka SACS (Rs.21.09 crore), Madhya Pradesh SACS
(Rs.15.02 Crore) and Tamil Nadu SACS (Rs.14.68 Crore) is still quite high. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Department to introduce stricter monitoring mechanism and
financial discipline so that funds do not get accumulated and remain unutilized. The
Committee also impresses upon the Department to ensure fixing of responsibility to ensure
proper accountability in utilization of funds. (Para 2.10)
The Committee would, however, like to point out that the efforts need to be
sustained till the elimination of all the problems areas being faced by different States. The
Committee is constrained to observe that there was downward revision of funds at the RE
stage during 2011-12. The Committee does not find any merit in the justification put forth
by the Department that the board cut resulted in the downward revision of funds. In the
Committee’s opinion, opening balance of Rs. 206.32 crore at the beginning of 2011-12 seems
to be the main reason for reduction of allocated funds during the year. The Committee
would like to point out that various components under NACP deserve to be pursued
vigorously and any cut in funds for the same would severely hamper the ongoing fight
against the deadly disease. (Para 2.12)
The Committee would like to know what measures has the Department taken to
ensure this decline in GFATM funds does not further affect the expansion and improvement
of the treatment program for HIV . This is particularly important as the Department of
AIDS Control’s TRG on ART has recommended earlier treatment with better drugs that will
keep patients alive longer and reduce new infections. This is in line with the latest studies
that show that people under treatment not only benefit as individuals, but they are also less
likely to transmit the virus to others-in effect, protecting the community. (Para 2.13)
Taking into view the above comments, the Committee is perturbed to note that the
Twelfth Plan outlay of the Department is yet to be approved and conveyed to them by the
Planning Commission. Perforce therefore, pending formal approval of the Twelfth Plan the
Department is carrying on with their existing activities. Furthermore, the Department is
also not in a position to initiate the process of seeking formal EFC/CCEA approval of
schemes in the Twelfth Plan in the absence of approval of Sectoral and Plan allocation. The
Committee is of the strong view the process of approvals and clearances need to be
streamlined with the view to cut delays in decision-making. It therefore, recommends the

20
Government to hasten the approval of Twelfth Plan related approvals so that the
Department is able to complete all the other formalities incidental to planning process and
start implementation of its schemes in right earnest without any further loss of time.
(Para 2.14)
III. ROLE OF NGOs
The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has not been able to
recover the unspent balances available with the discontinued NGOs. There appears to be
some slackness on the part of the Department and other implementing agencies. The
Committee, therefore, recommends imposing severe penalties on the NGOs which indulged
in fraud or financial embezzlement. If need be the Department should sound the law
enforcement agencies of the concerned States to proceed with action against such NGOs as
fraud or financial embezzlement comes within the domain of penal offences requiring
expertise and wherewithal of law enforcement agencies. (Para 3.2)
IV. SETTING UP OF NEW BLOOD COMPONENT SEPARATION UNITS (BCSUs)
The Committee appreciates that the targets set by the Department under NACP-III
for setting up of BCSUs have been achieved more or less. The Committee would, however,
like to be updated regularly of the targets set and success achieved by these units.
(Para 4.2)
The Committee notes that not only quantity but also quality matters. Blood
transfusion is life-saving treatment in many situations. But transfusions can also be a quick
and easy route for the transmission of infectious agents such as HIV, HBV , HCV, and
malaria. NACO has been entrusted the task of setting up and expanding blood banks across
the country. Several studies reviewing the current scenario in transfusion medicine (TM) in
India indicates an urgent need for restructuring the blood transfusion services with extreme
variations in management and quality. These studies note that compliance with quality
assurance and GMP is not ensured. A large number of blood banks are unlicensed. The
committee feels that since quality of blood banks is regulated under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, under schedule ‘F’, Department of AIDS Control and the DCGI should
jointly come up with a plan to urgently address the issue of quality of blood banks in the
private and public sector. (Para 4.3)
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS
The Committee notes that against the target of setting up of 39 Blood banks during
the Eleventh Plan, only 25 Blood Banks could be set up. When enquired about the reasons
for non-completion of 14 blood banks, the Department has stated this was on account of
various factors like non-completion of infrastructure, in-adequate man-power, lack of
equipments and non acquisition of license etc. But the Committee feels that the reasons
illustrated by the Department are frivolous. It appears that the Department has not made
sincere efforts to achieve the physical targets. The Committee desires that the
Department should make concerted efforts to complete the processes as mentioned above
by December, 2012, so that the new time line set by NACP-III is adhered to. (Para 5.3)
The Committee also recommends to the Department to take special cognizance of the
underserved districts of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand. The Committee further
recommends that the Department should keep assessing the requirements of Blood Banks
based on the actual needs in various States due to migration and other factors. (Para 5.4)

21
The Committee is surprised that in spite of the Committee’s recommendation made
in its 42nd Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11), the Department has moved at a snail’s
pace which is evident from the fact that it has managed only to get the land allotted in
November, 2011 for the four metro blood banks. The Committee is dismayed by the utter
callousness on the part of the Department to disregard its recommendation to have a
targeted approach in making the four metro blood banks functional at the earliest. The
Committee expresses its displeasure at this sorry state of affairs and recommends that the
Secretary of the Department should take personal interest to ensure completion of the four
Metro Blood Banks at the earliest. (Para 5.7)
VI. INTEGRATED COUNSELLING AND TESTING CENTRES (lCTCs)
The Committee is at a loss to understand the rationale on the basis of which the
Department, in the first place fixes the target and fails to achieve the same year after year.
A plain reading of the target set vis-a-vis the achievement shows that the Department is not
following its own yardstick of fixing of target each year on the basis of achievement of the
previous year, which shows poor foresight of planning by the Department. The Committee,
therefore, enjoins upon the Department to seriously set realistic and achievable targets.
Once targets are fixed, all efforts should be made to achieve them. (Para 6.4)
Also, testing of pregnant women raises several ethical questions. The Committee
feels these ethical issues have to be addressed at the time of rolling out routine testing of
pregnant women under NRHM. Testing with counseling is key. Support services for domestic
violence and discrimination within the family and community are also crucial. Treatment
needs of women who test positive should also be the top priority. Absence of these
components will have an adverse impact on the uptake of ante-natal services if they are
identified with routine HIV testing of pregnant women. The committee feels that a detailed
study on the testing of women who are pregnant — their treatment and the discrimination
they face — must be immediately undertaken and should be used to shape a more sensitive
and humane testing programme for pregnant women. (Para 6.5)
VII. PERSONS TO BE COUNSELED AND TESTED AT ICTCs (TARGET OF 220 LAKH PER
YEAR)
As per information submitted by the Department, it has set a overall target of 220
lakh people per year (including pregnant women) to be counseled and tested in ICTCs at
the end of NACP-III i.e. March, 2012. However, a plain reading of the figures furnished by
the Department, reveals that the Department has not been able to achieve its scaled down
targets. Further, as per information furnished by the Department, total approved number
of posts of counselors in ICTCs is 4992 whereas the actual strength is 4774. Similarly the
sanctioned strength of the post of lab technicians in ICTCs is 4702 whereas the actual
strength is 4352. The Committee expresses displeasure that the Department has not been
able to fulfil even its scaled down targets. However, the Committee supports any endeavour
by means of which the Department would be able to achieve the targets fixed by it. If need
be, it would support the Department to seek additional funds from the Finance Ministry/
Planning Commission so as to augment the manpower as well as number of stand-alone
ICTCs with the rider that the Department makes serious efforts to achieve its yearly
targets. (Para 7.2)
The Committee finds these are fleeting statements based on assumptions. Street
children for example are sexually active at a very young age. New studies also establish that
assumptions that young people below 15 years are not sexually active are not accurate.

22
Interventions for young people are necessary to address the risk of STDs, HIV and
Hepatitis and the Committee recommends that the Department make appropriate provision
for capturing this risk group. Another scenario was presented before the officials during
oral evidence- a long-haul truck driver/migrant labourer (the two highest risk-groups)
contracting infection from a sex-worker and passing it on to his wife back in the village-
chances of the wife thus getting infected and becoming pregnant and being captured as a
new case? The Committee for want of a satisfactory answer recommends that the
Department take a very serious view of this critical gap in data generation as it feels that
given the poor accessibility to health care in rural areas the chances of such cases being
captured in data collection would be truly grim. The Committee feels that citing
international norms and a one-size-fits-all kind of approach is neither adequate nor
acceptable while capturing data in a truly diverse country like India. The Department must
come up with more innovative solutions after consulting the various stakeholders so a more
realistic picture is available for dealing with the HIV menace. The examples quoted are only
illustrative and not exhaustive. The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard. (Para 7.3)
The Committee observed that HIV , Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C share common modes
of transmission. The committee recommends the technical feasibility of ICTC centres
expansion to test and counsel for Hepatitis in a phased manner should be undertaken
immediately. This is important as many experts feel that there is a significant but
under-recognized hepatitis-associated disease burden in this country. Despite that India does
not have a Hepatitis disease registry, or information on the disease burden. For example,
a Professor and Head of Gastroenterology at AIIMS, has stated studies reported from
various parts of India estimate that about 20 million Indians are Hepatitis B carriers and
about 8 to 10 million may have silent Hepatitis C virus infection. These individuals do not
know that they have these infections and not only are at risk of transmitting this disease
but also cannot access early treatment preventing late stage liver cirrhosis and liver cancer.
(Para 7.4)
VIII. ANTIRETROVIRAL TREATMENT (ART) CENTRE
The Committee notes that stock out of ART medicines were reposted throughout
2011 in many States including UP, Bihar, Maharashtra, Manipur etc. The Committee fails to
understand that how performance of RITES has been called satisfactory in such
circumstances. The Committee recommends that the Department take a more serious note
of such lapses and have closer monitoring mechanism in place since such gaps in supply
only add to drug resistance apart from the obvious inconvenience. (Para 8.3)
The Committee has noted that throughout 2011, there have regular interruptions of
stock out of HIV drug (first, second and pediatric doses) in different States, which has been
reported by different PLHIV networks. The Committee feels that this is serious issue since,
stock out mean drug interruptions which can lead to increased public health risks of HIV
drug resistance. The Committee recommends that an investigation and report be
undertaken to list the numbers of stock out and to document the reasons for the stock
outs. NACO should also outline to this Committee what measures have been planned to
prevent and to deal with incidents of stock outs. The role of the PLHIV Networks should
be to continue this good work of monitoring HIV treatment at ART centres and reporting
problems like stock outs to NACO. PLHIV networks should be further encouraged to
continue reporting such incidents. Stock outs are related to inefficiencies such as poor
planning, incorrect projections of local requirements, poor distribution and supply at
treatment facilities, expiry of medicines as the stock that was received earlier is not

23
distributed first. The Committee recommends that NACO immediately reform the
pharmaceutical supply management system for HIV medicines as it is an important element
in treatment programmes. (Para 8.4)
The Committee feels that the slow rate of scale up of ART treatment over the last
decade has forced patients into the private sector where inappropriate HIV drug regimens
are often prescribed, leading to a long term public health problem of drug resistance. Many
economic and bureaucratic barriers have been noted in the eligibility criteria for enrolling
in the programme for those needing alternative first line or second line HIV drugs. As a
result, patient groups have had to approach the Supreme Court. These barriers must be
addressed and must not be created for patients who will need third line HIV medicines.
Currently the proportion of HIV patients who have failed to the second-line treatment is
probably very small. The programme must start planning for ART Centres of Excellence to
take in these few patients. This will control drug resistance. Cost alone should not the only
criteria. Failure to procure the third line drugs will have future public health complications
as PLHIVs could develop a very resistance HIV which could prove costly. Planning and
treating third line in a few patients will build capacity and experience of public health
facilities classified as centres of excellence by Department of AIDS Control. (Para 8.5)
The Committee feels it would be in the fitness of things to upgrade the Link centres
to ART centres in order to increase the number of patients who can avail treatment as well
as procure drugs near their residence which would go a long way in decreasing the
staggering figures of patients who cannot avail treatment due to inaccessibility to the
existing ART centres in the country. (Para 8.6)
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has not treated the
matter of phasing out Stavudine with the urgency and seriousness it deserves. The
Committee feels that the inordinate delay on the part of the Department in this regard is
a sad commentary on the working of the Department and calls for introspection. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should start phasing out of
Stavudine in a time bound manner. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action
taken in this regard. (Para 8.7)
IX. NEW INITIATIVES
(i) Setting up of National Blood Transfusion Authority (NBTA)
The Committee expresses its dismay over the fact that the Department of
Expenditure has not sent its comments so far. Though the original timeline for starting
NBTA was April, 2010, there is still no ray of hope of its being set in near future. The
Committee condemns such procrastinating attitude of the Government. The Committee
impresses upon the Department that in order to ensure setting up of a National Blood
Transfusion Authority, it is imperative that immediate steps should be taken to remove the
legal infirmities raised by the Ministry of Finance along with seeking replies from
respective Departments without further delay in view of the fact that the scheme which was
to take wings in the Eleventh Plan is yet to take off. (Para 9.2)
(ii) Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre (PFC)
The Committee is disappointed by the snail’s pace to set up Plasma Fractionation
Centre which is still bogged down in bureaucratic red-tapism even though the Eleventh Five
Year Plan has come to an end. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department
to make all out efforts for setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre without any further
delay. (Para 9.4)

24
X. ADOLESCENCE EDUCATION PROGRAMME (AEP)
The Committee is impressed that with consistent efforts of the Department, the
programme is running in most of the States. The Committee feels that the Department
should vigorously take up with the States where the programme is still under suspension,
the reasons for the delay in implementation of the programme and resolve their
apprehensions in this regard without any further delay, in view of the fact that HIV/AIDS
is a hydra headed monster which usually attacks the vulnerable adolescent population due
to lack of awareness of the devastating effects the disease could have on them. The States
that have suspended should also reconsider their decision. (Para 10.3)
XI. NEW STRATEGIES
(i) Setting up of District AIDS Prevention and Control Unit (DAPCU)
The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Department to train the
staff posted in different DAPCUs throughout the country. However, it feels that keeping in
view the severity of the disease, there is a pressing need to provide training to more staff
in order to ensure more focus on the preventive aspect of the disease control programme.
The Committee emphasizes that the Department should not only strive to achieve the
target fixed but depending on the requirement and situation, may also enhance both
financial and physical targets. (Para 11.3)
(ii) Scheme of link workers in rural areas of category A and B districts
It may be recalled that in its previous Report on the Demands for Grants 2010-11,
the Committee has recommended to increase the reach of the scheme to cover all the
States in the country. However, as per information received from the Department in the
context of the Demands for Grants 2012-13, the Department has covered only 209 Districts.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendations that the Department
needs to assess the scheme so as to cover the remaining Districts and closely monitor the
schemes as the success of this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal of halting and
reversing the epidemic of AIDS. (Para 11.6)
(iii) Preferred private provider scheme for management of sexually infections among high
risk groups
The Committee notes that the efforts made by the Preferred Private provider are
successful in bringing about decline of STI prevalence among high risk group from 11.8%
to 8.4% in the first three quarters of 2011-12. However, the Committee feels that there is
a need to speed up management under this scheme as the figure of 8.4% is still on the
higher side and much more efforts need to be undertaken on this front. The Committee
would like to be regularly apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee also
feels that these private providers should be trained in the rational prescription of antibiotics
as this will address drug resistance issues in the long run. (Para 11.8)
XII. NA TIONAL PEDIATRIC INITIATIVE
The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Department of AIDS
Control in conjunction with the Ministry of Women and Child Development to start the
scheme namely “National Scheme on Children affected by HIV and AIDS”, would like to be
apprised about the number of children targeted to be covered under the said scheme and
the financial and physical targets set under the Programme during the Twelfth Plan.
(Para 12.2)

25
XIII. INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (lEC)
The Committee is constrained to note that the Department could not utilize allotted
fund during 2011-12 and as a result thereof it has not been able to do full justice to the
programme. The Committee, impresses upon the Department to ensure that funds allocated
during the current year be fully utilized as dissemination of knowledge for creating
awareness about the disease is a sin-qua-non for eliminating it. (Para 13.3)
XIV. HIV/AIDS Bill
The Committee expresses its displeasure on inordinate delay in bringing about HIV/
AIDS Bill even though six years have lapsed since it was first drafted in 2006. The reasons
given by the Department are not acceptable and frivolous and clearly indicate the manner
in which it continue to sideline this crucial law that is aimed at not only protecting the
rights of people living with HIV and marginalized populations but also to protect public
health. The cases of discrimination in healthcare, education and within their families have
not gone down and in fact continue to endanger the lives of millions of HIV+, while the
Department delays action. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take urgent measures to speed up the process for introduction of the Bill as soon
as possible, keeping in view the nature of the disease. (Para 14.4)

MINUTES

29
IX
NINTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10 th April, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Balbir Punj
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Shri Ashok Argal
9. Shri Datta Meghe
10. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
11. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
12. Shri M.K. Raghavan
13. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
14. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
***
Department of AIDS Control
1. Shri Sayan Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
3. Ms. Aradhana Johri, Additional Secretary
4. Dr. S. Venkatesh, Dy. Director General
5. Dr. Neeraj Dhingra, DDG (T)
6. Dr. Mohd. Shaukat, ADG
*** Relate to other matters.

30
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, Member of the
Committee was elected to the Chair. At the outset, he welcomed Members of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e., taking of oral evidence of the Secretaries of
the Departments of * *  * AIDS Control in connection with examination of Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
3. * * *
4. * * *
(The Committee then adjourned at 3.39 
P.M. for tea break to meet again at 4.00 P.M.)
5. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Department of AIDS Control on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to the Department.
6. At the outset, the Secretary made a power-point presentation and highlighted issues such
as the activities undertaken, achievements of the Department during the last year and plans for the
current year on various schemes and programmes for preventing and reducing HIV/AIDS, strategic
approach & key achievements, population-wise distribution of TI projects & coverage, Link Worker
Scheme, Integrated Counseling and Testing Services, achievements under NACP III, proposed
targets under NACP IV , etc. Members sought clarifications on the activities and achievements of
the Department, reasons for delay in phasing out drug Stavudine owing to its serious side effects,
etc. and deliberated on the adequacy or otherwise of budgetary allocations under different heads,
manpower and infrastructure available with the Department. The Secretary and other officers of
the Department replied to the queries raised by the Members and assured to furnish detailed written
replies to those queries, which remained unanswered.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 5.10 
P.M. to meet again on the 11 th April, 2012.
*** Relate to other matters.

31
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 23 rd April, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shri Balbir Punj
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shri M.K. Raghavan
6. Shri Ashok Agral
7. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
9. Shri P. Lingam
10. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of draft 54
th, 55 th, 56 th and 57 th
Reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of Health and Family Welfare,
AYUSH, Health Research and AIDS Control, respectively. He invited Members to share their
specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports.
3. The Committee then discussed the four draft Reports. A few changes were suggested by
Members for incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the
four Reports with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 25
th April,
2012. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Balbir Punj and
Dr. Prabhakar Kore to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Jyoti Mirdha, and in her
absence, Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
31

ANNEXURE

35
ANNEXURE
AIDS treatment in Brazil : success beyond measure?
The Politics and History of AIDS Treatment in Brazil
Amy Nunn
Springer, 2009
Foreword by Brazilian President Fernando Cardoso. ISBN-978-0-387-09617-9
Pp 188. £49·99. ISBN-978-0-387-09617-9
Studying public health, we were taught to worship at the altar of evidence-based policy. Working
as epidemiologists in HIV/AIDS, my colleagues and I diligently generated evidence and packaged
it up for policy makers. The evidence showed that giving clean needles to drug injectors cut HIV
infection rates. The evidence showed that if brothel owners were punished if sex workers didn’t
use condoms, condom use shot up and HIV infections fell. The evidence showed that in southern
Africa, HIV was spreading in middle-aged men who had sex with teenage girls. The evidence
showed that most policy makers in most developing countries didn’t give a damn what the evidence
showed. They weren’t going to use public money to do nice things for sex workers, gay men,
or drug injectors. They weren’t going to tell their middle-aged voters not to have sex with teenagers.
There has been an endless poring over the data from Uganda, Senegal, Thailand, Cambodia—the
few early HIV prevention “success stories” in the developing world. Was it the condoms that made
the difference or did people have fewer sexual partners? Is working with sex workers more
effective than working with pimps? But few studies have asked the arguably more important
question: how did governments get away with spending money on politically unpopular programmes
for politically marginal groups?
Brazil rates as a success story for a different reason: it was the first low-income country to make
expensive antiretroviral treatment for HIV freely available to anyone in need of it. Treatment is
always more popular than prevention. Everyone seems to agree that we have a moral duty to save
or prolong the life of a sick person; we don’t seem to feel a similar obligation to help people avoid
getting sick in the first place. But still, spending tax money on fearsomely expensive drugs for
people who got infected with HIV by doing things that many voters disapprove of was an
extremely bold move, especially back in 1990.
Amy Nunn’s book The Politics and History of AIDS Treatment in Brazil  maps the political
landscape that led to this landmark in public health policy, and the subsequent growth of Brazil’s
AIDS treatment programme into one of the largest and most equitable in the world. Although the
book is ploddingly written, the story Nunn tells is absolutely fascinating.
AIDS surfaced in Brazil at much the same time as democracy. The military dictatorship that ruled
the country from 1964 to 1985 had little time for the left-leaning health technocrats who had
begun, by the late 1970s, to agitate for “sanitary reform” in part as a way of fighting for greater
social equity. By the time AIDS began to surface among gay men in São Paulo in the mid-1980s,
many of these “sanitaristas” were in positions of influence. Their voice was recorded in the first
post-authoritarian constitution, which in 1988 committed the state to supporting the good health of
all Brazilians.
Although many sanitaristas worked inside the health ministry, they were often frustrated by
bureaucratic inertia and tight budget lines. They found natural bed-fellows in an increasingly vocal

36
non-government sector, including high profile AIDS activists such as well-connected sociologist
Herbert José de Souza, who was known as Betinho. Together, these groups used the courts to
challenge the government to do their constitutional duty and provide HIV treatment. While the
activists never lost a case, they still found it difficult to get Congress to fund drugs on the scale
they needed. So they upped their game, shamelessly exploiting personal connections, using the
press as a weapon against the bureaucracy, using development loans to subsidise activism, and
playing the nationalist card in trade negotiations related to patented drugs. Eventually, these
strategies combined to turn support for AIDS treatment into a badge of honour for senior
politicians in Brazil. Once that was achieved, there was no turning back.
The most interesting parts of this book are verbatim passages from the many interviews Nunn did
while unpicking a complex fabric of personal relationships, political favours, and shifting vested
interests. Here, Eduardo Cortes, then AIDS programme manager, describes his first ever meeting
with then Health Minister Alceni Guerra, who, in 1990, was about to face a press briefing
requested by AIDS activists:
“I was not a career bureaucrat…so I told it like it was…The minister said ‘What’s going on with
AIDS medicines?’ And I said ‘Look, we really don’t have any. They weren’t appropriated by
Congress.’ And the minister said ‘ We don’t have any drugs for AIDS patients? ’ I replied ‘no’. The
minister retorted ‘Which drugs?’ and I replied: ‘Minister, there is a whole list!’ The minister was
astounded. He asked if I had done any forecasting and I told him that it would cost US$132 million
but that it was cheaper than hospitalising AIDS patients. The minister gave a pained look, paused
and thought for a moment and said ‘We’re going to have to provide those medicines, aren’t we?’
and I said ‘Yes, we are.’ And the minister said ‘If we give any, we’re going to give them all.’
And he walked out to talk to the press.”
It is hard to exaggerate the importance of Guerra’s announcement, minutes later, that all AIDS
patients in Brazil would get free antiretroviral treatment. The decision annoyed technocrats at the
World Bank, who thought developing countries should invest in HIV prevention, not AIDS
treatment. It struck both joy and horror into the hearts of executives at drug companies. If poor
countries treated AIDS patients, their market would swell by millions. But they rightly predicted
that Brazil would use political pressure and trade law to stamp down the price of drugs. The
decision to give free antiretrovirals to all AIDS patients changed the landscape for AIDS treatment
globally. It was not made on the basis of evidence and careful analysis. It was made on a whim.
Nunn’s book reminds us that historical happenstance, political self-interest, personal relationships,
and impulse are often more important in shaping health policy than epidemiological evidence. This
is depressing for epidemiologists. But it should be depressing, too, for those people who round
international success stories up into reports with titles like “Lessons Learned”. The lesson we learn
from Brazil’s experience with AIDS treatment is that it is not readily replicable in other developing
countries. We learn that success is driven by indigenous technocrats who are dedicated to social
equity but prepared to work for the government. We learn that those technocrats must have the
political nouse to subsidise activists, co-opting them as weapons against a sclerotic bureaucracy.
Despite the current fashion for strengthening of health systems, we learn that vertical, single-
disease programmes that pay their staff at consultant rates can achieve things that broader and
more entrenched parts of the health system cannot. And we learn that treatment is easier to rally
around than prevention.
Brazil was the first developing country to make a political virtue out of support for AIDS treatment.
As numbers on treatment rise and more people switch to expensive second and third line therapies,
the need to prevent new HIV infections grows more acute. Brazil does invest in prevention, but
the country has been so busy campaigning for HIV/AIDS treatment that it has done little to
measure prevention success. Ironically, one of the casualties of the country’s treatment success has
been the evidence base itself.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.