Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
271
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st December )21 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )21 2018st December
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and Schemes administered
by the Ministry of Culture

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

40
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and Schemes administered
by the Ministry of Culture
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(v)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (vi i)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi ii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-14
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 15-20
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 21-31
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 33-38

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
8. Kumari  Selja
9. Shri Rajeev Shukla
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ram Charitra
12. Shri Vinod Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
14. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan
16. Shri P . Kumar
17. Faizal P. P. Mohammed
18. Yogi Aditya Nath
19. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
22. Shri P . Srinivasa Reddy
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
24. Shri Prathap Simha
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shri Mukul Roy   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Kumari  Selja
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri P . Kumar
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
19. Yogi Aditya Nath
20. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri P . Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Derek O’Brien    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Praful Patel
5. Kumari  Selja
6. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
*9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
#10. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
18. Shri P . Kumar
19. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
20. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C.  Venugopal
(iii)
* Nominated on 2nd June, 2018
# Nominated on 2nd June, 2018

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Derek O’Brien    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Kumari  Selja
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
19. Shri P . Kumar
20. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. V enugopal
(iv)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer
Ms. Vunglunmoi Hangzo, Assistant Research Officer
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present
this Two Hundred and Seventy First Report on “Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and
Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture”.
2. The Committee heard the views of the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Culture on the subject
on 24th November, 2015. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on
the subject on 15th May, 2018. The Committee further heard the views of the representatives of
the State Governments of Haryana and Punjab and Union Territory of Chandigarh and Union
Ministry of Culture on the subject ‘Financial assistance for development of Art and Culture in
Haryana and Punjab’ on 14th July, 2018.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture for placing
before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for
clarifying the points raised by the Members.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19th December,
2018.
DEREK O’ BRIEN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
19 December , 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 28,  1940 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.
(vii)

                  ACRONYMS
CBI : Central Bureau of Investigation
CCRT : Centre for Cultural Resources and Training
CFPG : Cultural Function and Production Grant
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CGST : Central Goods and Services Tax
CTSSS : Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme
ESI : Employees, State Insurance
FIR : First Information Report
FoI : Festivals of India
F Y : Financial Year
GFR : General Financial Rules
IGST : Integrated Goods and Services Tax
IT : Information Technology
M E A : Ministry of External Affairs
MoC : Ministry of Culture
NGOs : Non-Governmental Organizations
PFMS : Public Financial Management System
RE : Revised Estimate
RTGS : Real Time Gross Settlement
SPOCS : Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science
TCC : Tagore Cultural Complexes
UTs : Union Territories
(viii)

1
REPORT
FELLOWSHIPS, SCHOLARSHIPS, GRANTS, PENSIONS AND SCHEMES ADMINISTERED
BY THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Since time immemorial, India has been home to a plethora of vibrant and distinct cultures.
Many of these cultures vanished in our transition to the modern times, yet many hundreds of years
old art forms and cultures still persist and are an essential part of our identity. With rapid industrialisation
and globalization in the recent past, it has become more and more important to proactively preserve
our rich cultural history and traditions. This is not possible without the involvement of the general
public which continues to pass on its cultural traditions to the future generations. Some individuals
stand out with their extensive contribution to this cause, sometimes dedicating their entire lives in
the pursuit of keeping our culture alive. In many cases, it is not possible for such cultural artistes
to earn a living from their activities, especially in their old age. Thus, it becomes the duty of the
Government to encourage such people and organizations who exhibit excellence in the field of art
and culture with monetary support in the form of Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and
Schemes, in order to further the cause of preservation of our cultural and artistic heritage.
2. Considering the important role played by the Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and
Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture in the betterment of the lives of artistes and the
preservation of our cultural heritage, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants,
Pensions and Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’ for consideration. In this connection,
the Committee heard the views of the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Culture in its meeting held
on 24th November, 2015; and the Secretary, Ministry of Culture in its meeting held on 15th May,
2018. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of State Governments of Haryana
and Punjab and Union Territory of Chandigarh and Union Ministry of Culture on the subject
‘Financial assistance for development of Art and Culture in Haryana and Punjab’ in its meeting held
on 14th July, 2018.
3. As per the background note furnished by the Ministry of Culture to the Committee, the
Ministry of Culture administers the following Schemes for the pursuance of preservation of intangible
cultural heritage of India:
I. Scheme of Financial Assistance for Promotion of Art and Culture:-
This Scheme has five components -
(a) Repertory Grant:
This grant is aimed at promotion and dissemination of art and culture of the country
by funding the training of artistes by their Gurus on a regular basis. The guidelines state
that the Group Ensembles to be assisted for Repertory Grant will be expected to have
a repertoire of adequate number and quality and should have given performances on an
All India basis. Repertory grant is considered and recommended by the Expert Committee
constituted for the purpose.

2
(b) Financial Assistance to Cultural Organizations with National Presence:
This grant provides financial assistance to reputed cultural organizations with national
presence for dissemination and propagation of art and culture of the country by organizing
various cultural activities at National/International level. The guidelines for this Scheme
state that the applicant Organization should, in order to qualify for the grant, have a
properly constituted managing body or governing body or governing council with its
powers, duties and responsibilities clearly defined and laid down in the form of written
constitution. The grant is given based on the appraisal of applications/proposals received
under the grant by the Steering Committee and thereafter by the administrative approval
of the competent authority in the Ministry of Culture.
(c) Cultural Function and Production Grant (CFPG):
The objective of this Grant is to provide financial assistance to ‘not-for-profit’ organizations,
NGOs, Societies, Trusts, Universities and individuals for supporting their activities meant
for promotion of art and culture such as Seminars, Conference, Research, Workshops,
Festivals, Exhibitions, Symposia, Production of Dance, Drama-Theatre, Music etc. and
small research projects on different aspects of India Culture.
(d) Financial Assistance for Preservation and Development of Cultural Heritage of the Himalayas:
This Scheme aims to promote and preserve the cultural heritage of the Himalayas. The
grants shall be provided for undertaking Study and research on cultural heritage, Preservation
of old manuscripts, literature, art and crafts and documentation of cultural activities/
events like music, dance, etc., Dissemination through audio-visual programmes of art
and culture and Training in Traditional and Folk Art in the States falling under the
Himalayan region i.e. Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and
Arunachal Pradesh.
(e) Financial Assistance for Development of Buddhist/Tibetan Arts and Culture:
This Scheme provides financial assistance to the voluntary Buddhist/Tibetan organizations
including Monasteries engaged in the propagation and scientific development of Buddhist/
Tibetan Culture and tradition and research in related fields such as IT upgradation,
transport facilities, construction of classrooms, school buildings and training centres etc.
II. Scheme for Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes:-
The objective of this Scheme is to improve the financial and socio-economic status of old
artistes and scholars with significant contribution in the fields of arts, letters etc. in their
active age or who are still contributing in these fields but due to old age they have to live
in penury. The Scheme also has provision to provide medical aid facility to these artistes and
their spouse by covering them under a convenient and affordable health insurance Scheme of
the Government for treatment of diseases involving hospitalization through an identified network
of health care providers.
III. Scheme of Scholarship and Fellowship for promotion of Art and Culture:-
This Scheme has the following three components -

3
(a) Award of Senior/Junior Fellowships to Outstanding Artistes in the Fields of Culture:
Junior/Senior Fellowships are awarded to outstanding persons in the age group of 25
to 40 years (Jr.) and above 40 years (Sr.) in different cultural fields at ` 10,000/- and
` 20,000/- per month respectively for the period of 2 years.
(b) Award of Scholarships to young artistes in different cultural fields:
Under this Scheme financial assistance is given to young artistes of outstanding promise
in the age group of 18-25 years for advanced training within India in the field of Indian
Classical Music, Indian Classical Dance, Theatre, Mime, Visual art, Folk, Traditional and
indigenous Arts and Light Classical Music etc. at ` 5,000/- p.m. for 2 years.
(c) Tagore National Fellowship for Cultural Research Component:
The Scheme has been introduced in order to invigorate and revitalize the various institutions
under the Ministry of Culture (MoC) and other identified cultural institutions in the
country, by encouraging scholars/academicians to affiliate themselves with these institutions
to work on projects of mutual interest.
IV . Scheme of Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure:-
This Scheme has the following two components -
(a) Financial Assistance for Building Grants including Studio Theatres:
This grant is provided to support voluntary not-for-profit cultural organisations and
Government-aided cultural organisations in their efforts to create appropriately equipped
training, rehearsal and performance spaces for artistes which includes provision of
facilities like electrical, air conditioning, acoustics, light and sound systems and other
items of equipment such as musical equipments, costumes, audio/video equipment, furniture
and stage material that may be required for a studio theatre, auditorium, rehearsal hall,
classroom etc.
(b) Financial Assistance for Tagore Cultural Complexes (TCC):
Under this Scheme, financial assistance is provided to State Government/UTs, Central/
State Government agencies/bodies, Universities, Municipal Corporations, reputed not-for-
profit organizations etc. for creation of various Cultural Spaces such as Tagore Cultural
Complexes, Auditorium, Rabindra Bhawans, Rangshalas, Multipurpose Cultural Complexes
etc. as well as to restoration, renovation, extension, alteration, upgradation, modernization
of existing Tagore auditoria etc. that were built in 1960s and 1970s in various parts of
the country to mark Tagore s Birth Centenary.
V. Museum Grant Scheme:-
The objective of the Scheme is to provide financial assistance to the State Governments,
Autonomous bodies, Local Bodies, Societies and Trusts registered under the Societies Act for
setting up of new Museums as well as for development of existing museums, digitization of
art objects in the museums across the country for making their images/catalogues available
over the website and capacity building of Museum professionals.

4
VI. Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science:-
Ministry of Culture sets up Science Cities, Science Centres, and Innovation Hubs across the
country for popularization of science and creating a scientific temper in society. The projects
under the Scheme are considered by the Ministry after the State Government/UT administration
concerned undertakes to provide infrastructure facilities viz. land, road, telecommunication
facilities etc. as well as financial and other commitments as per the Scheme.
VII. Scheme for Promotion of International Cultural Relations:-
This Scheme has two components –
(a) Festivals of India abroad:
Ministry of Culture organises Festivals of India (FoI) through the Indian missions in
foreign countries for spreading Indian culture abroad and enhancing people to people
contact. Events in FoI include dance and music performances, folk art performances,
exhibitions, food festival, literary festival, film festival, Yoga etc.
(b) Indo-Foreign Friendship Societies Scheme:
Under this Scheme, Indian Ambassadors send proposals requesting grant for Cultural
Societies based in their respective countries for supporting that activities relating to
promotion of Indian culture. After administrative and financial approvals, grant is issued
as authorization to the Indian mission through MEA which is thereafter given by the
mission to the societies.
VIII. Scheme for “Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions
of India”:-
The Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India
was formulated in November, 2013 with the objective of reinvigorating and revitalizing various
institutions, groups, individuals, identified non-MOC institutions, non-Government organisations,
researchers and scholars so that they may engage in activities/ projects for strengthening,
protecting, preserving and promoting the rich intangible cultural heritage of India.
IX. Scheme of Financial Assistance under Seva Bhoj Yojana:-
Under this Scheme, Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) and Central Government’s share
of Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) paid on purchase of specific raw food items
by Charitable/Religious Institutions for distributing free food to public shall be reimbursed as
Financial Assistance by the Government of India.
4. During the examination of the subject, some of the major points discussed by the Committee
are:
(i) Safeguards in the selection process of beneficiaries of various Schemes;
(ii) Equitable representation of cultures from all States in various Schemes of the Ministry;
(iii) Sensitizing the State Governments to encourage more applications for the Schemes;

5
(iv) Transparency in the implementation of Schemes;
(v) Proper utilisation of funds;
(vi) Need for more beneficiaries of Scholarships and Schemes;
(vii) Annual review of present Schemes;
(viii) Ease of process of application;
(ix) Complaint redressal mechanism regarding Grants and Fellowships;
(x) Taking suo moto  cognizance in extraordinary cases; and
(xi) Scheme specific recommendations.
SAFEGUARDS IN THE SELECTION PROCESS OF BENEFICIARIES OF V ARIOUS SCHEMES
5. In a developing economy like India, financial constraints mean that the number of people and
organizations that can be supported for preservation of our artistic and cultural heritage is rather
limited. Further, the number of diverse cultures and art forms which India is home to, is also large.
The need to ensure that the funds reach the deserving hands is, thus, of utmost importance.
6. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture that the beneficiaries recommended
for grants under the Schemes implemented / monitored by it are selected as per the prescribed
procedure laid down in the guidelines for the Schemes. The Ministry, in response to specific
queries, informed that there are enough safeguards to ensure that selection procedures are not
manipulated. Funds are disbursed through Public Finance Management System (PFMS) to ensure
that grants are received by the beneficiary directly in their bank accounts. Utilization Certificates
are sought from the grantees (both individual and organizations) in respect of grants duly certified
by Chartered Accountants as stipulated in General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017 to ascertain that
funds have been utilized for the stated purpose.
7. In response to the Committee s apprehensions about favoritism in the selection of artistes for
the Schemes of the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry informed the Committee that each Expert
Committee for various Schemes, comprises of both official and non-official members. While the
official members are from within the Ministry, the non-official members are chosen by the Minister
of Culture from among renowned experts in the fields to which each Scheme caters.
8. The Committee appreciates the elaborate guidelines that have been prepared by the Ministry
of Culture for the selection procedure of beneficiaries of the grants provided by the Ministry. The
Committee recommends that in order to ensure that the funds are being utilized for the
intended activities, the progress of activities performed by the beneficiaries should be monitored
closely and at frequent intervals. Digital records may be kept of the activities performed
by the beneficiaries wherever possible, in the form of photographs, videos etc.
9. The guidelines should prescribe such safeguards in a way that ensures that no hassle
is caused to the beneficiaries. The monitoring of the Schemes should be done by the
Ministry in such a way that the beneficiaries can submit the required information easily and
assistance can be readily made available to them with regard to complying with the guidelines.

6
Effective measures should be taken to ensure that favoritism does not affect the selection
of the beneficiaries.
EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION OF CULTURES FROM ALL STATES IN V ARIOUS SCHEMES
OF THE MINISTRY
10. The Committee observes that the distribution of funds for Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants,
Pensions and Schemes of the Ministry of Culture is skewed in favour of a select few States.
10A. The table given below shows the State/UT-wise details of artistes recommended for financial
assistance by an Expert Committee in a meeting held during 2017-18 (31st July, 2017 – 2nd
August, 2017) in order to clear backlog of pending applications:-
State T otal Number of applications recommended by Expert
applications   Committee for grant of financial assistance
considered
Centre Quota Centre-State Quota Total
Andhra Pradesh 264 71 5 76
Assam 12 11 0 11
Haryana 2 2 0 2
Jharkhand 8 8 0 8
Karnataka 726 79 43 122
Kerala 254 59 64 123
Madhya Pradesh 24 13 5 18
Maharashtra 508 251 93 344
Manipur 17 17 0 17
Nagaland 2 2 0 2
Odisha 464 279 156 435
Puducherry 1 1 0 1
Rajasthan 8 4 1 5
Tamil Nadu 254 55 31 86
Telangana 495 317 26 343
Tripura 6 3 0 3
Uttar Pradesh 8 8 0 8
West Bengal 21 20 1 21
Total 3074 1200 425 1625

7
11. The Committee notes that out of the 1625 artistes selected for financial assistance, 1122
artistes i.e.,  69% of the selected artistes are from three States viz.,  Odisha, Maharashtra and
Telangana. The acceptance ratio ( i.e., number of applications recommended from a State against
the number of applications of that State that are considered) also differ drastically.
12. Regarding the uneven distribution of the number of applications recommended among the
States, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture that the beneficiaries under the
Artistes Pension Scheme are selected on the basis of the due procedure as prescribed in the
Scheme guidelines. One of the conditions prescribed in the Scheme guidelines is that the applications
should be recommended by the State Government who provide at least `500/- as pension to the
applicant artistes. During the year under consideration i.e., 2017, the number of applicants recommended
by the State Government of Odisha was higher than the number recommended by the State
Government of Karnataka. Hence, more artistes were selected for pension from the State of
Odisha.
13. The Ministry of Culture further informed that as per recent data, out of the total beneficiaries
of 5507, the number of artistes from Karnataka is 866 and form the second largest group among
all the States and that the total number of beneficiaries from Odisha is 735. It was informed that
efforts are being made to increase the awareness about the Scheme in far flung areas including
North-Eastern States so as to increase their representation under the Scheme.
14. The Committee notes that effective steps must be taken in order to ensure uniform
representation of the whole country. India is an amalgamation of many distinct cultures and
the allocation of the majority of the Grants of the Ministry to artistes and organizations of
only a few States goes against the spirit of such Schemes wherein funds are allocated in the
first place. The culture of each State is equally important and this should reflect in the
efforts that must be put in to ensure their conservation.
15. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should ensure equitable
allocation of funds to States for Grants, Fellowships, Pensions and Schemes. In case of lack
of adequate representation of artistes / organizations from a State in a particular year, the
reasons behind the lack of representation should be looked into and necessary remedial
action may be taken without delay.
16. The Committee recommends that a part of the funds should be allocated to spreading
awareness among artistes about the Schemes they are eligible for. Cultural events of the
Ministry should project and display information about various Schemes of the Ministry to
the people attending the events. Easy to grasp advertisements should be published in newspapers
in local languages, laying out the eligibility criteria for the different Grants of the Scheme.
The selection of artistes for grant of pension in each Scheme should be free from any
manipulation and favouritism and should be decided in a transparent manner as per the
procedure laid out for the Scheme.
SENSITIZING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS TO ENCOURAGE MORE APPLICATIONS FOR
THE SCHEMES
17. The Committee could understand that the biggest reason for the lack of representation
of the vast majority of States in the various Schemes of the Ministry is the inaction and

8
indifference shown by the State Governments. The Committee strongly feels that deserving
artistes and beneficiaries should not suffer for no fault of theirs. The Committee, therefore,
urges the Ministry of Culture to impress upon the State Governments to show more interest
in getting the artistes their due benefits. The Committee is working towards facilitating
greater cooperation between the Ministry of Culture and State Governments. Improvement
in Centre-State and intra-State dialogue will ensure the performance of State Governments
through shared learnings and collaborations for overcoming challenges.
18. The Committee recommends that the importance of preserving and celebrating our
different cultures should be communicated to the State Governments. The Ministry of Culture
may drive home to the State Governments, the positive impact of the richness of a culture
on the tourism prospects of a State. A detailed plan should be evolved in order to encourage
better participation of the State Governments. Incentivizing the State Governments having
good participation by highlighting the work of the artistes from such States on the Ministry’s
website, should be considered and implemented suitably.
TRANSPARENCY IN THE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS
19. One of the most widely accepted methods of ensuring efficient utilisation of funds is public
scrutiny. This can be enabled by placing all the records of financial assistance provided to beneficiaries
in public domain, most suitably on the website of the Ministry of Culture itself.
20. The information displayed on the website should be linked with the disbursal of funds done
through the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) so as to ensure that the records displayed
on the website are not outdated. This will also ensure that the quantum of funds being granted to
beneficiaries is available in public domain.
21. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a section of the website
specially meant for showing information related to beneficiaries viz., the amount of grant
received, previous works of the beneficiary, status of monitoring of the utilization of the
grant etc. The information thus available should be in an easy to decipher format and
searchable, so as to allow better public scrutiny. The cases where a higher amount is given
as grants under exceptional circumstances should also be available on the website, along
with justification for awarding the higher amount to the beneficiary. Information on State-
wise representation in terms of number of artistes should also be available on the website,
so that lethargy on the part of a lot of State Governments gets pointed out. This would act
as a call to action for the State Governments to reach out to their artistes and ensure their
adequate representation.
22. The works of the artistes and organisations, wherever possible, should be uploaded on
the website of the Ministry of Culture. This will make the public aware of the cultural
activities being performed by the artistes / organizations and display the richness of our
cultures. Also, digitizing the works would preserve these for the future.
PROPER UTILISATION OF FUNDS
23. The details of the amount allocated and expenditure incurred under various Schemes of the
Ministry are mentioned in Annexure I.

9
24. Prime facie , the amount of funds allocated for the various Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants
and Pensions of the Ministry of Culture do not seem enough, given the vast varied cultures in the
country that are in dire need of financial support to stay alive. The judicious utilization of the funds
available thus, becomes a necessity.
25. The Committee notes that the “Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and
Diverse Cultural Traditions of India” has been formulated with the objective of reinvigorating and
revitalizing various institutions, groups, individuals, identified non-Ministry of Culture institutions,
non-Government organizations, researchers and scholars so that they may engage in activities/
projects for strengthening, protecting, preserving and promoting the rich intangible cultural heritage
of India. The Committee feels that the preservation of the heritage in question is much more
difficult since it is intangible in nature. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for encouraging
specialized institutions and groups engaged in such preservation.
26. The statement showing the amount allocated and expenditure incurred under various
Schemes of the Ministry of Culture (Annexure I) shows that the total funds allocated to
various Schemes of the Ministry has increased from ````` 236.07 crores in Financial Year (FY)
2016-17 to ````` 318.73 crores in FY 2018-19, which is an increase of about 35%.  Y et, the
amount allocated to the “Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and
Diverse Cultural Traditions of India” remains stagnant at ````` 3.50 crores and has not seen
a commensurate increase. Moreover, even out of the paltry ````` 3.50 crores allocated to this
Scheme, the Ministry was able to spend only ````` 0.65 crores in the FY 2016-17. This points
to a huge gap between the on-paper plans of the Ministry for this Scheme and its execution
thereof.
27. In this regard, the Committee desires that the Ministry of Culture should analyze the
reasons for under utilization of funds for this Scheme. The Committee is of the view that
the damage dealt to intangible cultural heritage is irreparable and hence, the Ministry
should ensure proper utilization of funds for the implementation of this Scheme.
28. The Committee observes a pattern of underutilization of funds for the “Scheme of
Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure” in Financial Years 2016-17 and
2017-18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should look into the matter and
come up with ways and means to properly utilize the allocated funds for this Scheme.
29. The Committee notes that the “Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science” in
Financial Y ear 2017-18 could only utilize ````` 32.60 crores out of the ````` 39.00 crores that were
allocated to the Ministry. Given the gradual decline of interest among the students of our
country in Science and Technology and the sheer contribution of scientific research in the
overall development of the country, the Scheme is crucial for igniting the interest of our
young generation and for development of a scientific temper and curiosity in their minds.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should look into the reasons for
underutilization of funds for this Scheme during last year and that utmost care must be
taken for proper utilization of the available funds for this Scheme in future.
30. The Committee is of the view that a practical and effective monitoring mechanism lies
at the core of ensuring the proper utilization of funds for any Scheme. Such a mechanism

10
should be framed with inputs from the artistes and beneficiaries so as to keep a check on
fraudulent claims, while minimizing the trouble caused to the beneficiaries in complying
with the monitoring mechanism.
31.  The Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Committee of a new Scheme on Cultural
Mapping wherein details of all artistes would be put into a database. The database would then be
used to develop a marketing strategy wherein contact details of the artistes can be accessed by
anyone interested in organizing a programme featuring those artistes.
32. The Committee feels that such a central database would also aid in ensuring proper
utilization of allocated funds and keep a check on frauds. In pursuance of the same, the
Committee recommends that the work on the central database should be expedited and that
it should include information on the beneficiaries of all Schemes, along with the records of
their work.  A system should then be put in place which makes use of this data and checks
for any redundancies to ensure that an artiste/organization does not get benefits under
multiple Schemes. Rules should be framed to restrict the award of Grants to a beneficiary,
say, only under one Scheme at a time, or only a certain number of times in their lifetime.
This will ensure that the reach of the funds is maximized over time.
33. The Committee takes note of the Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme (CTSSS) scam
of around ` 50 lakhs that was done by an employee of the Ministry of Culture. With regard to
the same, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture that in September, 2017 Centre
for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) started receiving complaints regarding non-receipt of
payments in the respective bank accounts from a number of guardians / parents of the scholarship
holders, though the money was already debited from the accounts of CCRT. An inquiry was
conducted through the Accounts and Scholarship Section of CCRT, which revealed fraudulent act
of an ex-contractual employee of CCRT who was dealing with all IT related matters. The said
employee took benefit of the introduction of the new mode of payment through Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS), whereby the details of the scholarship holders i.e., their names, bank details,
scholarship amounts, guardianship details, ID, etc. are sent by the scholarship section to the
accounts section and thereafter, in a routine process from the accounts section to the concerned
bank located in the CCRT office complex itself, in the form of soft copy through registered official
e-mail ID. Dy. Director (Finance) was authorised to send the details of the Scholarship holders to
Canara Bank. The said employee, after obtaining his e-mail and password, manipulated the actual
details of selected candidates and fraudulently inserted the details of himself, his wife, mother and
other known persons as claimants of scholarship holders. CCRT approached the concerned Bank
authorities to freeze the accounts of persons to which the Government money was illegally transferred.
The internal Fact Finding Inquiry conducted by CCRT to assess the amount of funds misappropriated
as well as to suggest ways and means to stop such illegal acts in future, found ` 50 lakhs
approximately misappropriated. An FIR was lodged in the Cyber Crime Cell (Economic Offences
Wing) of the Delhi Police by CCRT. The matter is presently being investigated by the Crime Branch
of Delhi Police. The Deputy Director (Finance) was placed under suspension and has been served
with a Memorandum of Charges. A decision has been taken to refer the case to CBI for detailed
investigation in the matter.
34. The Committee notes that the involvement of other employees in the scam should be

11
looked into since a scam of this scale could possibly involve the connivance of several
employees and officers. The occurrence of such a scam indicates loopholes in the supervisory
mechanism for funds distribution. The Committee recommends revamping of the entire
fund distribution in view of the lessons learnt from the scam.  The Committee recommends
that a training session may be held for the employees of the CCRT in view of the fraud
detected in the system. Software solutions may be developed to help CCRT to prevent such
frauds in future. Proactive steps may be taken by the Ministry to ensure that no scam
occurs in the future. A system to monitor and audit the financial transactions should be put
into place so as to catch any leakages or scams at an early stage.
NEED FOR MORE BENEFICIARIES OF FELLOWSHIPS AND SCHEMES
35. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the ‘Scheme for Pension and
Medical Aid to Artistes’ covers 5507 Pensioners as of October, 2017. The ‘Award of Senior / Junior
Fellowships to Outstanding Artistes in the Field of Culture’ and ‘Award of Scholarships to Young
Artistes in Different Cultural Fields’ was awarded to 666 fellows and 283 scholars in 2016-17.
36. The Committee strongly feels that these figures are not satisfactory keeping in mind
the vast and varied artistic community in our country. Many deserving artistes are not
getting the benefits of these schemes. Therefore, the Committee recommends that effective
measures may be taken by the Ministry of Culture to increase the number of artistes and
organizations supported by its Schemes. The Ministry should explore the option of lowering
the eligibility criteria for Schemes that are not garnering enough response from the artistes
so that besides seasoned artistes, upcoming artistes also get adequate support from the
Ministry.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF PRESENT SCHEMES
37. Preservation of tangible and intangible cultural heritage is a process in which the end results
are often not quantifiable. Thus, it becomes all the more necessary to have a periodic review on
the performance of the Schemes of the Ministry since it can provide useful insights into the
Schemes with regard to the requirement for funds, possible updation in the guidelines and eligibility
criteria for those Schemes that are not performing upto the mark.
38. The Committee is of the considered view that annual review of the Schemes can help
arrive at conclusions regarding the possible future course of action for the Schemes. This
becomes all the more important given the fact that the Ministry of Culture is short on
funds and therefore, only Schemes having the desired impact at ground level should be
continued.
39. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct annual review of the
performance and achievements of its Schemes. The feedback received on the existing Schemes
should be analyzed to update/modify the Schemes at regular intervals to maximize their
impact and to explore the possibility of the initiation of new Schemes which could help the
Ministry to reach out to more deserving artistes and organizations. The outcome of such
review should be made public so as to allow constructive criticism and collection of feedback
thereon which can then be reflected in streamlining the Schemes further.

12
EASE OF PROCESS OF APPLICATION
40. On this issue, the representative of the Ministry of Culture deposed before the Committee that
the process of applying for various Schemes has been automated and that any artist from India
can register for it online from any part of the country. Information about the required documents
and eligibility is available on the website. The option for applying via hard copies is also present.
41. The Committee notes that as is the case with most Government Schemes, applying for any
of the various Schemes of the Ministry of Culture involves a lot of paperwork and knowledge of
the requirements to be satisfied in order to meet the eligibility. In many cases, the people for whom
these grants and funds are intended are not able to understand all the requirements and documents
that need to be submitted since the guidelines are often very technical and cumbersome.
42. The Committee strongly feels that no eligible artist should be left out of availing
financial assistance because of their lack of understanding of the intricacies involved in the
process. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary assistance should be readily
available to artistes and organisations. Contact details of officials to be contacted in case
of queries should be provided in the Schemes section of the website of the Ministry and in
the advertisements published for creating awareness about the Schemes. The Committee
desires that the Ministry should ensure that no application is rejected for trivial reasons
and that rejected applications should provide specific reasons for the rejection, so that
deserving candidates can re-apply if they fulfill the criteria, but were left out, because of
ignorance of the relevant rule.
COMPLAINT REDRESSAL MECHANISM REGARDING GRANTS AND FELLOWSHIPS
43. Given the large number of Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture, complaints are
bound to arise in the allocation of funds for the Schemes, distribution of the funds and in the
selection process for the various Schemes. A proper redressal of the complaints thus received from
artistes or from the general public must be ensured since it could change the lives of some artistes /
organizations while keeping alive a vibrant culture.
44. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture that in case any complaint is
received, prompt action is initiated and further necessary action as per the provisions of General
Financial Rules (GFR) is taken on priority basis. The Ministry further informed that complaints
alleging irregularities in the selection procedure or regarding disbursement of Grants etc. are promptly
examined and follow up action taken to address the issues. In the process, proper enquiries are
held and once the irregularity is established, necessary action is taken to blacklist the grantee.
45. The Committee noticed that no information is present on the website of the Ministry of Culture
with regard to registering a complaint on the website of the Ministry or whom to contact in order
to do so. The Committee recommends that the details on the procedure to be followed in
order to register a complaint regarding the Schemes of the Ministry should be available and
prominently visible on the Schemes section of the website of the Ministry. Name, designation
and contact details of the officer in charge of handling such complaints should also be made
available. The progress of the action taken to address such complaints should also be
uploaded on the website. Wherever possible, the list of complaints received should be available
publicly in order to ensure transparency.

13
TAKING SUO MOTO  COGNIZANCE IN EXTRAORDINARY CASES
46. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that there are many deserving artistes who are
living in conditions of extreme poverty in their old age. Awareness campaigns seldom percolate
down to old artistes who are often disconnected from such campaigns. The Committee recommends
that targeted campaigns should be run to reach old artistes since the Pension Scheme of
the Ministry can provide them the dignified life that they deserve.
47. It is relevant to state here that the dismal living conditions of a famous musician was brought
to the attention of the Committee. In its reply on the matter, the Ministry informed the Committee
that it is administering Artistes Pension Scheme under which financial support is provided to old
age artistes who are in penury.
48. The Committee feels that this is not an isolated case since such news keep appearing
in the media from time-to-time. This points to the poor living conditions faced by a vast
section of the artistes community in our country once they reach old age and to the fact
that the Ministry’s Pension Scheme is not reaching the intended recipients.
49. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should be proactive and suo motu  extend
its Artistes Pension Scheme whenever a case comes to the light, where an artist with
significant contribution to our cultural heritage is found to be living in penury. The reasons
for which such deserving artistes got left out in the first place should be looked into by the
Ministry and the Artistes Pension Scheme should be updated accordingly to ensure a dignified
life to all deserving artistes. If need be, the Ministry should allocate more funds to this
Scheme since financial assistance is direly needed by artistes in the later stage of their life.
SCHEME SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
50. The Scheme for Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes which aims to improve the financial and
socio-economic status of the old artistes, covers those artistes whose monthly income does not
exceed ` 4,000/-.  The Committee recommends that the eligibility criteria for availing the
Scheme for Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes should be revised periodically, keeping in
mind the rising cost of living. Similarly, the amount paid to the artistes should also be
revised periodically.
51. The Committee recommends that the artistes/fellows eligible for the medical aid should
be covered under some medical insurance Scheme with broad coverage like CGHS/ESI.
52. The Committee notes that the newly introduced ‘Scheme of Financial Assistance under
Seva Bhoj Y ojna’ reimburses the Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST)/ Integrated Goods
and Services Tax (IGST) for only those religious institutions that serve food to at least 5000
people in a calendar month. While the Committee appreciates the introduction of this new
Scheme, the Committee fails to understand the reason for this eligibility criterion since
smaller religious institutions are more likely to be in need of this Scheme. Moreover,
ascertaining the number of people to whom food is served by a religious institution in a
month is difficult and could lead to religious institutions in actual need of the support being
left out. The Committee, thus, recommends that this eligibility criterion should be reconsidered
by the Ministry.

14
53. The Committee notes that the guidelines for the ‘Scheme of Financial Assistance
under Seva Bhoj Yojna’ state that inspection would be carried out by Ministry officials or
its authorized representatives every year at least in 5% of the cases. The Committee feels
that the proper utilization of funds is very important in the implementation of all Schemes
and this Scheme could be maliciously exploited for getting reimbursement of taxes by
commercial food outlets. Considering this fact, the Committee feels that the minimum
inspection limit of 5% of the cases seems very low and might not have a deterring effect
on the organizations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the inspection should be
carried out by the officials of the Ministry in at least 10% of the cases.
54. The Committee recommends that whole-hearted efforts should be made by the Ministry
to increase the awareness about different Schemes of the Ministry in remote areas of the
country, especially North-Eastern areas, so that artistes from these areas may increase their
representation under various Schemes.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
55. During the study visit of the Committee to Chandigarh in July, 2018 the representatives of
State Governments of Haryana & Punjab and Union Territory of Chandigarh; and Union Ministry
of Culture apprised the Committee that the Scheme for financial assistance to artistes was started
by the Government of Haryana in 1995 and that the number of artistes benefitting from the scheme
is increasing every year. The Committee was informed that the artistes are paid through Digital
Paper System and that the Culture Policy of Punjab and Haryana are in consonance with the
Central Policy.
56. In this regard, the Committee would like to point out the need to have Zonal Cultural
Centres in Punjab and Haryana and the need to give more attention to the Central Schemes
of financial assistance to artistes. The Committee suggests that theatre culture may be
developed in the country so as to provide a platform for recognition of small artistes and
artisans.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
SAFEGUARDS IN THE SELECTION PROCESS OF BENEFICIARIES OF V ARIOUS SCHEMES
The Committee recommends that in order to ensure that the funds are being utilised
for the intended activities, the progress of activities performed by the beneficiaries should
be monitored closely and at frequent intervals. Digital records of the activities perf ormed
by the beneficiaries may be kept wherever possible, in the form of photographs, videos
etc. (Para 8)
The guidelines should prescribe such safeguards in a way that ensures that no hassle
is caused to the beneficiaries. The monitoring of the Schemes should be done by the
Ministry in such a way that the beneficiaries can submit the required information easily and
assistance can be readily made available to them with regard to complying with the guidelines.
Effective measures should be taken to ensure that favoritism does not affect the selection
of the beneficiaries. (Para 9)
EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION OF CULTURES FROM ALL STATES IN V ARIOUS SCHEMES
OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes that effective steps must be taken in order to ensure uniform
representation of the whole country. India is an amalgamation of many distinct cultures and
the allocation of the majority of the Grants of the Ministry to artistes and organizations of
only a few States goes against the spirit of such Schemes wherein funds are allocated in the
first place. The culture of each State is equally important and this should reflect in the
efforts that must be put in to ensure their conservation. (Para 14)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should ensure equitable
allocation of funds to States for Grants, Fellowships, Pensions and Schemes. In case of lack
of adequate representation of artistes / organizations from a State in a particular year, the
reasons behind the lack of representation should be looked into and necessary remedial
action may be taken without delay. (Para 15)
The Committee recommends that a part of the funds should be allocated to spreading
awareness among artistes about the Schemes they are eligible for. Cultural events of the
Ministry should project and display information about various Schemes of the Ministry to
the people attending the events. Easy to grasp advertisements should be published in newspapers
in local languages, laying out the eligibility criteria for the different Grants of the Scheme.
The selection of artistes for grant of pension in each Scheme should be free from any
manipulation and favouritism and should be decided in a transparent manner as per the
procedure laid out for the Scheme. (Para 16)
SENSITIZING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS TO ENCOURAGE MORE APPLICATIONS FOR
THE SCHEMES
The Committee could understand that the biggest reason for the lack of representation
of the vast majority of States in the various Schemes of the Ministry is the inaction and
indifference shown by the State Governments. The Committee strongly feels that deserving
artistes and beneficiaries should not suffer for no fault of theirs. The Committee, therefore,
15

16
urges the Ministry of Culture to impress upon the State Governments to show more interest
in getting the artistes their due benefits. The Committee is working towards facilitating
greater cooperation between the Ministry of Culture and State Governments. Improvement
in Centre-State and intra-State dialogue will ensure the performance of State Governments
through shared learnings and collaborations for overcoming challenges. (Para 17)
The Committee recommends that the importance of preserving and celebrating our
different cultures should be communicated to the State Governments. The Ministry of Culture
may drive home to the State Governments, the positive impact of the richness of a culture
on the tourism prospects of a State. A detailed plan should be evolved in order to encourage
better participation of the State Governments. Incentivizing the State Governments having
good participation by highlighting the work of the artistes from such States on the Ministry’s
website, should be considered and implemented suitably. (Para 18)
TRANSPARENCY IN THE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a section of the website
specially meant for showing information related to beneficiaries viz., the amount of grant
received, previous works of the beneficiary, status of monitoring of the utilization of the
grant etc. The information thus available should be in an easy to decipher format and
searchable, so as to allow better public scrutiny. The cases where a higher amount is given
as grants under exceptional circumstances should also be available on the website, along
with justification for awarding the higher amount to the beneficiary. Information on State-
wise representation in terms of number of artistes should also be available on the website,
so that lethargy on the part of a lot of State Governments gets pointed out. This would act
as a call to action for the State Governments to reach out to their artistes and ensure their
adequate representation. (Para 21)
The works of the artistes and organizations, wherever possible, should be uploaded on
the website of the Ministry of Culture. This will make the public aware of the cultural
activities being performed by the artistes / organizations and display the richness of our
cultures. Also, digitizing the works would preserve these for the future. (Para 22)
PROPER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
The statement showing the amount allocated and expenditure incurred under various
Schemes of the Ministry of Culture (Annexure I) shows that the total funds allocated to
various Schemes of the Ministry has increased from ````` 236.07 crores in Financial Year (FY)
2016-17 to ````` 318.73 crores in FY 2018-19, which is an increase of about 35%.  Yet, the
amount allocated to the “Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and
Diverse Cultural Traditions of India” remains stagnant at ````` 3.50 crores and has not seen a
commensurate increase. Moreover, even out of the paltry ````` 3.50 crores allocated to this
Scheme, the Ministry was able to spend only `````  0.65 crores in the FY 2016-17. This points
to a huge gap between the on-paper plans of the Ministry for this Scheme and its execution
thereof. (Para 26)
In this regard, the Committee desires that the Ministry of Culture should analyze the
reasons for under utilization of funds for this Scheme. The Committee is of the view that

17
the damage dealt to intangible cultural heritage is irreparable and hence, the Ministry should
ensure proper utilization of funds for the implementation of this Scheme. (Para 27)
The Committee observes a pattern of underutilization of funds for the “Scheme of
Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure” in Financial Years 2016-17 and
2017-18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should look into the matter and come
up with ways and means to properly utilize the allocated funds for this Sch eme. (Para 28)
The Committee notes that the “Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science” in
Financial Y ear 2017-18 could only utilize `````32.60 crores out of the `````39.00 crores that were
allocated to the Ministry. Given the gradual decline of interest among the students of our
country in Science and Technology and the sheer contribution of scientific research in the
overall development of the country, the Scheme is crucial for igniting the interest of our
young generation and for development of a scientific temper and curiosity in their minds.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should look into the reasons for
underutilization of funds for this Scheme during last year and that utmost care must be
taken for proper utilization of the available funds for this Scheme in future. (Para 29)
The Committee is of the view that a practical and effective monitoring mechanism lies
at the core of ensuring the proper utilisation of funds for any Scheme. Such a mechanism
should be framed with inputs from the artistes and beneficiaries so as to keep a check on
fraudulent claims, while minimizing the trouble caused to the beneficiaries in complying
with the monitoring mechanism. (Para 30)
The Committee feels that such a central database would also aid in ensuring proper
utilization of allocated funds and keep a check on frauds. In pursuance of the same, the
Committee recommends that the work on the central database should be expedited and that
it should include information on the beneficiaries of all Schemes, along with the records of
their work.  A system should then be put in place which makes use of this data and checks
for any redundancies to ensure that an artiste/organization does not get benefits under
multiple Schemes. Rules should be framed to restrict the award of Grants to a beneficiary,
say, only under one Scheme at a time, or only a certain number of times in their lifetime.
This will ensure that the reach of the funds is maximized over time. (Para 32)
The Committee notes that the involvement of other employees in the scam should be
looked into since a scam of this scale could possibly involve the connivance of several
employees and officers. The occurrence of such a scam indicates loopholes in the supervisory
mechanism for funds distribution. The Committee recommends revamping of the entire
fund distribution in view of the lessons learnt from the scam.  The Committee recommends
that a training session may be held for the employees of the CCRT in view of the fraud
detected in the system. Software solutions may be developed to help CCRT to prevent such
frauds in future. Proactive steps may be taken by the Ministry to ensure that no scam
occurs in the future. A system to monitor and audit the financial transactions should be put
into place so as to catch any leakages or scams at an early stage. (Para 34)
NEED FOR MORE BENEFICIARIES OF FELLOWSHIPS AND SCHEMES
The Committee strongly feels that these figures are not satisfactory keeping in mind

18
the vast and varied artistic community in our country. Many deserving artistes are not
getting the benefits of these schemes. Therefore, the Committee recommends that effective
measures may be taken by the Ministry of Culture to increase the number of artistes and
organizations supported by its Schemes. The Ministry should explore the option of lowering
the eligibility criteria for Schemes that are not garnering enough response from the artistes
so that besides seasoned artistes, upcoming artistes also get adequate support from the
Ministry. (Para 36)
ANNUAL REVIEW OF PRESENT SCHEMES
The Committee is of the considered view that annual review of the Schemes can help
arrive at conclusions regarding the possible future course of action for the Schemes. This
becomes all the more important given the fact that the Ministry of Culture is short on
funds and therefore, only Schemes having the desired impact at ground level should be
continued. (Para 38)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct annual review of the
performance and achievements of its Schemes. The feedback received on the existing Schemes
should be analyzed to update/modify the Schemes at regular intervals to maximize their
impact and to explore the possibility of the initiation of new Schemes which could help the
Ministry to reach out to more deserving artistes and organizations. The outcome of such
review should be made public so as to allow constructive criticism and collection of feedback
thereon which can then be reflected in streamlining the Schemes further. (Para 39)
EASE OF PROCESS OF APPLICATION
The Committee strongly feels that no eligible artist should be left out of availing
financial assistance because of their lack of understanding of the intricacies involved in the
process. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary assistance should be readily
available to artistes and organizations. Contact details of officials to be contacted in case
of queries should be provided in the Schemes section of the website of the Ministry and in
the advertisements published for creating awareness about the Schemes. The Committee
desires that the Ministry should ensure that no application is rejected for trivial reasons
and that rejected applications should provide specific reasons for the rejection, so that
deserving candidates can re-apply if they fulfill the criteria, but were left out, because of
ignorance of the relevant rule. (Para 42)
COMPLAINT REDRESSAL MECHANISM REGARDING GRANTS AND FELLOWSHIPS
The Committee recommends that the details on the procedure to be followed in order
to register a complaint regarding the Schemes of the Ministry should be available and
prominently visible on the Schemes section of the website of the Ministry. Name, designation
and contact details of the officer in charge of handling such complaints should also be made
available. The progress of the action taken to address such complaints should also be
uploaded on the website. Wherever possible, the list of complaints received should be available
publicly in order to ensure transparency. (Para 45)

19
TAKING SUO MOTO  COGNIZANCE IN EXTRAORDINARY CASES
The Committee recommends that targeted campaigns should be run to reach old artistes
since the Pension Scheme of the Ministry can provide them the dignified life that they
deserve. (Para 46)
The Committee feels that this is not an isolated case since such news keep appearing
in the media from time-to-time. This points to the poor living conditions faced by a vast
section of the artistes community in our country once they reach old age and to the fact
that the Ministry’s Pension Scheme is not reaching the intended recipients. (Para 48)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should be proactive and suo motu  extend
its Artistes Pension Scheme whenever a case comes to the light, where an artist with
significant contribution to our cultural heritage is found to be living in penury. The reasons
for which such deserving artistes got left out in the first place should be looked into by the
Ministry and the Artistes Pension Scheme should be updated accordingly to ensure a dignified
life to all deserving artistes. If need be, the Ministry should allocate more funds to this
Scheme since financial assistance is direly needed by artistes in the later stage of their
life. (Para 49)
SCHEME SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee recommends that the eligibility criteria for availing the Scheme for
Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes should be revised periodically, keeping in mind the
rising cost of living. Similarly, the amount paid to the artistes should also be revised
periodically. (Para 50)
The Committee recommends that the artistes/fellows eligible for the medical aid
should be covered under some medical insurance Scheme with broad coverage like CGHS/
ESI. (Para 51)
The Committee notes that the newly introduced ‘Scheme of Financial Assistance under
Seva Bhoj Y ojna’ reimburses the Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST)/ Integrated Goods
and Services Tax (IGST) for only those religious institutions that serve food to at least 5000
people in a calendar month. While the Committee appreciates the introduction of this new
Scheme, the Committee fails to understand the reason for this eligibility criterion since
smaller religious institutions are more likely to be in need of this Scheme. Moreover,
ascertaining the number of people to whom food is served by a religious institution in a
month is difficult and could lead to religious institutions in actual need of the support being
left out. The Committee, thus, recommends that this eligibility criterion should be reconsidered
by the Ministry. (Para 52)
The Committee notes that the guidelines for the ‘Scheme of Financial Assistance
under Seva Bhoj Yojna’ state that inspection would be carried out by Ministry officials or
its authorized representatives every year at least in 5% of the cases. The Committee feels
that the proper utilization of funds is very important in the implementation of all Schemes
and this Scheme could be maliciously exploited for getting reimbursement of taxes by
commercial food outlets. Considering this fact, the Committee feels that the minimum

20
inspection limit of 5% of the cases seems very low and might not have a deterring effect
on the organizations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the inspection should be
carried out by the officials of the Ministry in at least 10% of the cases. (Para 53)
The Committee recommends that whole-hearted efforts should be made by the Ministry
to increase the awareness about different Schemes of the Ministry in remote areas of the
country, especially North-Eastern areas, so that artistes from these areas may increase their
representation under various Schemes. (Para 54)
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
In this regard, the Committee would like to point out the need to have Zonal Cultural
Centres in Punjab and Haryana and the need to give more attention to the Central Schemes
of financial assistance to artistes. The Committee suggests that theatre culture may be
developed in the country so as to provide a platform for recognition of small artistes and
artisans. (Para 56)

MINUTES

23
*** Relates to other matters.
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 24th November, 2015 in Committee Room
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
5. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan
7. Shri P. Kumar
8. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed
9. Shri Rajesh Pandey
10. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
13. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
1. Shri K. K. Mittal Additional Secretary
2 Shri Kumar Sanjay Krishna Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Shri Pramod Jain Joint Secretary
4 Shri Arvind Manjit Singh Joint Secretary
5. Shri Pankaj Rag Joint Secretary
6. Ms. Bandana Sharma Director
7. Ms. Mahalakshmi Ramakrishnan Director
** *

24
*** Relates to other matters.
NATIONAL COMPUTER SAKSHARTA MISSION AND ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF
INDIA
20. Dr. G.S. Rautela Director General
** *
2. * * *.
3. The Chairman, in his opening remarks, apprised the Members of the Committee and representatives
of the Institutions, Organizations and others present in the meeting that the purpose of this meeting
is to hear the views of the Ministry of Culture on the :-
(i) * * *;
(ii) * * *; and
(iii) Fellowships, Scholarships and Grants administered by the Ministry of Culture.
4. * * * .
Regarding the Fellowships, Scholarships and Grants administered by the Ministry of Culture, the
Chairman stated that the Committee is keen to know the number of such complaints, the Ministry
of Culture has received in the recent past and action taken by the Ministry in those cases where
irregularities were proved beyond doubt.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The Director General, Anthropological Survey of India who is also looking after the National
Council of Science Museums informed the Committee that the Mobile Science Exhibition is a rural
programme which is conducted as out-of-school programmes.
9. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised various issues such as:-
(i) reasons for subsuming the ‘Productions Grants Scheme’ and ‘Cultural Functions Grant
Scheme’;
(ii) propriety of making it mandatory for the theatre groups or the performing art groups
to get a certificate from the Station Master or Principal of a Railways Station or School
respectively, authenticating their participation in the Swachh Bharat Mission Campaign;
(iii) ‘pension scheme’ and ‘welfare fund’ for aged artists, number of applications received
thereunder and verification of such applications;
(iv) feasibility of setting up of Category-I new museums with ` 10 crores and Category-II
new museums with ` 5-10 crores;
(v) need for setting up of an internationally acclaimed museum;

25
(vi) procedure for translation into foreign languages;
(vii) setting up Branches of National School of Drama;
(viii) detailed time bound plan as to when the Branch of National School of Drama will be
opened in Kolkata;
(ix) possibility of having a major cultural activity at least once in a year at Kushinagar to
propagate the teachings and the lifestyle of Lord Buddha;
(x) probability of some exchange programmes that can be done between the Akademis; and
(xi) Budget allocation made by the Ministry of Culture for tangible and intangible cultural
heritage during 2015-16.
10. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
The Chairman requested them to furnish written replies, to the Secretariat within one week’s time,
to the queries that remained unanswered.
11. * * *
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The meeting was adjourned at 5.02 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 15th May, 2018 in Committee Room No.3,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extn. Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
9. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
10. Shri Rajesh Pandey
11. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Shri Raghvendra Singh Secretary
Shri Pranav Khullar Joint Secretary
Shri M.L. Srivastava Joint Secretary
Shri Shravan Kumar Joint Secretary
Ms. Bandana Sharma Director
Shri Arun Gupta Director
Shri Harish Kumar Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed that the
agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on the subject ‘Fellowships,
Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’.
26

27
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and requested him to
inform the Committee about the kinds of fellowships and grants being given by the Ministry. He
requested the Secretary to apprise the Committee of whether there are enough safeguards in place
to ensure that the funds meant for these grants and schemes reach the deserving artists. He further
enquired about the 48 lakh Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) scam that was
reported in many newspapers.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture made a Powerpoint presentation to provide information on
the various Schemes of Financial Assistance for Promotion of Art and Culture. The first component
of these Schemes is Repertory Grant. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Repertory
Grant is to provide financial support to all genres of performing arts like theatre, music, children
theatre or imparting training to artistes in line with guru-shishya parampara, and that the amount
of assistance under this scheme is 10,000 per guru and 1,000 to 6,000 per shishya. Regarding
Cultural Organizations with National Presence, the Committee was apprised that support for cultural
activities at a large scale, at the national and international level, was provided and that the quantum
of assistance under the Scheme is a maximum of 5 crores, under exceptional circumstances.
5. The Secretary stated that Cultural Function and Production Grant targets the NGOs, Societies
and Trusts, and covers seminars, exhibitions, subjects related to preservation, promotion of culture,
heritage etc. The maximum grant under this scheme is 5 lakhs but under exceptional circumstances,
it is 20 lakhs. He apprised the Committee that the scheme of financial assistance for Preservation
and Development of Cultural Heritage of the Himalayas aims to preserve old manuscripts, literature,
art and crafts and audio visual programmes related to art and culture etc. The quantum of
assistance is a maximum of 10 lakhs, which can be raised to 30 lakhs under exceptional circumstances.
As regards Development of Buddhist/Tibetan Arts and Culture, the Secretary elaborated that it
targets voluntary Buddhist/Tibetan organizations including Monasteries and it covers several activities
including salary of staff, renovation of the monasteries, research projects they undertake, purchase
of books etc. The quantum of assistance under this scheme is a maximum of 30 lakhs, which can
be raised to 1 crore under exceptional circumstances.
6. With regard to the Scheme for Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes, the Secretary stated that
the scheme aims at improving the financial and economic status of old artistes. The minimum age
of an artist to get this aid is 60 years and the pension amount is 4,000 per month. About Scheme
of Scholarship and Fellowship for Promotion of Art and Culture, he informed that it is awarded
to outstanding artistes in the field of culture, scholarships to young artistes and Tagore National
Fellowship for Cultural Research. Junior Fellows between 25 to 40 years of age get 10,000 per
month for a period of 2 years while Senior Fellows above 40 years of age are eligible for an aid
of 20,000 per month for a period of 2 years. The Secretary stated that the award of scholarships
in different cultural fields covers classical music, dance, theatre and the scholarship is 5,000 per
month for a period of 2 years and the age criteria is 18-25 years to a maximum of 400 scholars
in a batch. On the Tagore National Fellowship for Cultural Research, the Secretary stated that it
aims to encourage scholars/academicians to affiliate themselves with various institutions under the
Ministry of Culture to work on projects of mutual interest. A total of upto 15 Fellowships amounting
to 80,000 per month for a period of two years can be given, while up to 25 Scholarships of
50,000 per month for a period of 1 year can be given.

28
7. Thereafter, the Secretary elucidated upon the Scheme of Financial Assistance for Creation of
Cultural Infrastructure. The first such scheme is Financial Assistance for Building Grants including
Studio Theatres. The Secretary informed that NGOs, Trusts, Government Sponsored Bodies, Colleges
etc. can apply for this for creation of civil infrastructure and that there is provision of facilities
like electrical, air conditioning, acoustics, light and sound systems, purchase of musical equipment
and the amount of grant is up to 50 lakhs in metro cities and 25 lakhs in case of non-metro cities.
Regarding the Scheme of Financial Assistance for Tagore Cultural Complexes, the Committee was
informed that it is for creation of new cultural spaces, auditoriums etc. and for restoration,
renovation, extension and the amount can go from 15 crores to 50 crores, under exceptional
circumstances.
8. The Secretary then informed the Committee about the aims and objectives of Museum Grant
Scheme where assistance is provided for setting up of new museums and for modernizing the
existing museums, conserving the artefacts, for digitization of the objects and for capacity building
of the museum professionals. He further stated that Component A of the Museum Grant Scheme
covers Development and Establishment of Museums at the Regional, State and District level. In
Category I, existing museums of the Central/State Government in the State capitals are eligible for
a maximum assistance of up to 15 crores. In Category II, State Government owned museums can
get a maximum assistance of 10 crores if a new museum is being set up, or up to ‘8 crores for
development of an existing museum. Category III includes all other museums, with grants of up
to 5 crores in case of setting up new museums and 4 crores for development of existing museums.
Component B of Museum Grant Scheme is Digitization of Museum Collections where a maximum
assistance of 50 lakhs is provided for State owned museums and 25 lakhs for all other museums.
Similarly, Component C is Capacity Building and Training of Museum Professionals which provides
assistance of up to 30 lakhs to State owned museums and up to 25 lakhs for all other museums.
9. Regarding the Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science (SPOCS), the Secretary apprised
the Committee that Science Cities, Science Centres and Innovation Hubs are set up to develop
scientific culture and generate awareness amongst the youth. In case of a science city, the project
cost is borne on sharing basis between Centre and State, whereas to set up Science Centres, the
project cost can be borne 100% by Centre or State or on sharing basis between Centre and State.
The Secretary then apprised the Committee of the achievements in this regard, stating that a total
of 50 Science Cities and Centres under Category I, II & III have been set up in India and overseas
and work is ongoing in 12 Science Centres and 2 Science Cities.
10. The Secretary apprised the Committee about the Scheme for Promotion of International
Cultural Relations under which Indian festivals are conducted abroad and grants are given to Indo-
Foreign Friendship Cultural Societies. He stated that a Standing Committee selects countries for
holding festivals of India partly based on the recommendations by the Heads of Missions or the
MEA. He then explained the procedure for providing Grants-in-aid to Indo-Foreign Friendship
Cultural Societies stating that the recommendations of Indian Missions overseas are usually taken
into account and the maximum is 10 lakhs per annum per society, and wherever festivals are being
held, upto 25 lakhs is given.
11. The Secretary also apprised the Committee about the scheme for safeguarding the intangible
heritage and diverse cultural traditions. He stated that the idea behind it is to revitalize institutions

29
including NGOs, individuals etc. and undertake projects for protection and preservation of our
intangible heritage and the fund is released in three installments in 50:25:25 and up to 10 lakhs for
organizations and 5 lakhs for individuals.
12. The Chairman sought to know the reason for a big gap in certain States in the number of
applications received and selected for financial assistance of artists and whether the representation
of the smaller States was being ensured by the Ministry. The Chairman also sought information on
the plans in place to help the State level Akademis. The Committee then enquired on how the
Ministry ensured that the best get chosen for the various grants and schemes of the Ministry
without any other influence. The Committee further wanted to know if a Central database of the
recipients of various awards and scholarships under the Ministry of Culture is being maintained in
order to prevent the same people from getting the benefits several times. With regard to the Adopt
a Heritage Scheme of the Ministry for Tourism, the Committee desired to know whether the
Ministry of Culture was consulted in this regard.
13. Members of the Committee raised various other queries which were replied to by the witnesses.
The Chairman directed that written replies to the points not answered, may be sent within three
weeks.
14. * * *
15. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
16. The meeting was adjourned at 4:05 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19 th December, 2018 Committee Room
No.-62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O’Brien     —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
5. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
9. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Rajesh Pandey
13. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B.,  Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the Committee.
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the following Reports:-
(i) * * *;
(ii) * * *;
(iii) * * *; and
(iv) Draft Report on ‘Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and Schemes administered
by the Ministry of Culture’.
30
*** Relates to other matters.

31
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the above stated draft Reports and adopted them after
a brief discussion.
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on
21st December, 2018. The Committee, accordingly, authorised Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. and
in his absence, Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah, M.P. and in his absence Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati, M.P. to
present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Kumari Arpita Ghosh, M.P . and in her absence, Shri Rajesh
Pandey, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on
21st December, 2018.
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 10:23 A.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

ANNEXURES

35
ANNEXURE-I
STATEMENT SHOWING THE AMOUNT ALLOCATED AND EXPENDITURE INCURRED UNDER
V ARIOUS SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE
(` in crore)
Name of the Scheme Sl.No. Components of the                   2016-17                    2017-18                    2018-19
       Scheme Amount Expen diture Amount Expenditure Amount E xpenditure
allocated incurred allocated incurred allocated incurred
              1 2            3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. Repertory and 43.08 45.93
Production Grant
2. Scheme of Financial 3.37 4.60
Assistance to Cultural
organizations with 53.22
National Presence
3. Cultural Function 19.41 38.81
Production Grant 76.73
Scheme
I. Scheme of Financial 4. Scheme of Financial 1.25 1.10 2.59
Assistance for Promotion Assistance for the 98.50
of Art and Culture (* & $ Preservation and
2017-18 and 2018-19) Development of
Cultural Heritage of the
Himalayas
5. Scheme of Financial 7.25 10.54 10.00 11.24
Assistance for the
Preservation and

36
Development of
Buddhist/Tibetan
Organisations (#)
II. Scheme for Pension 6. Scheme for Pension and 18.00 13.17 14.95 15.30 25.00
and Medical Aid to Medical Aid to Artistes
Artistes
III. Scheme of Scholarship 7. Fellowship and 11.75 11.75 12.00 10.70 14.24
and Fellowship for Scholarship Scheme
promotion of Art and 8. Tagore National 0.50 0.14 0.50 0.35
Culture Fellowship for Cultural
Research Component
IV . Scheme of Financial 9. Financial Assistance for 1.50 0.77 3.00 2.21 3.75
Assistance for Creation of Building Grant
Cultural Infrastructure incl uding Studio
Theatres
10. Financial Assistance for 30.00 15.25 23.53 18.16 33.25
Tagore Cultural
Complex
V . Museum Grant Scheme 11. Museum Grant Scheme
@ 35.00 48.90 34.04 32.56 48.08
VI. Scheme for Promotion 12. Scheme for Promotion 39.00 44.54 39.00 32.60 47.90
of Culture of Science of Culture of Science @
VII. Scheme for Promotion 13. Festival of India** 23.00 16.42 24.53 23.24
of International Cultural 14. Grand in aid** 11.60 11.56 12.50 12.21 44.51
Relations
15. International Culture 0.50 0.00 0.01 -
Relations
              1 2            3 4 5 6 7 8 9

37
              1 2            3 4 5 6 7 8 9
VIII. Scheme for 16. Scheme for
Safeguarding the Safeguarding the
Intangible Cultural Intangible Cultural 3.50 0.65 3.50 - 3.50
Heritage and Diverse Heritage and Diverse
Cultural Traditions of Cultural Traditions of
India India
Grand Total 236.07 240.65 254.29 250.50 318.73 0.00
* and $ Total budgetary provision for Repertory Grant, CFPGS, National Presence and Himalayan Scheme
**These Schemes are now a component of the Scheme titled Scheme for Promotion of International Cultural Relations
formed by merging the FOI Scheme and the Scheme for grant in aid to Indo Foreign Friendship Cultural Societies
w.e.f. November, 2017
# Fund released more than RE due to availability of fund in umbrella Scheme in 2017-18
@ The additional amount was met out of the reappropriation of `15 crore done by P & B Division in 2016-17

ANNEXURE-II
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
24th November, 2015
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
1. Shri K. K. Mittal Additional Secretary
2. Shri Kumar Sanjay Krishna Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Shri Pramod Jain Joint Secretary
4. Shri Arvind Manjit Singh Joint Secretary
5. Shri Pankaj Rag Joint Secretary
6. Ms. Bandana Sharma Director
7. Ms. Mahalakshmi Ramakrishnan Director
** *
NA TIONAL COMPUTER SAKSHARTA MISSION AND ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
20. Dr. G.S. Rautela Director General
** *
15th May, 2018
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh Secretary
2. Shri Pranav Khullar Joint Secretary
3. Shri M. L. Srivastava Joint Secretary
4. Shri Shravan Kumar Joint Secretary
5. Ms. Bandana Sharma Director
6. Shri Arun Gupta Director
7. Shri Harish Kumar Director
38
*** Relates to other matters.