 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
‘Construction of Road 
Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads and Review of Road Survey 
(Present ed to the Rajya Sabha on 10 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August , 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
‘Construction of Road -Over-Bridges (ROBs), Road 
(RUBs), Service Roads and Review of Road Survey 
Guidelines etc.’ 
 
ed to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
354 
REPORT   
Bridges (ROBs), Road -Under-
(RUBs), Service Roads and Review of Road Survey 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT  
‘Construction of Road-Over-Bridges (ROBs), Road-Under-
Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads and Review of Road Survey 
Guidelines etc.’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-53 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   54-69  
6. ANNEXURES         70-83 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
84-114

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. (vacant )* 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Assistant Committee Officer  
 
*Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar w.e.f. 28.07.2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty-Fourth Repo rt on 'Construction of Road-Over-
Bridges (ROBs), Road-Under-Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads and Review of Road Survey 
Guidelines etc.’ 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representat ives of the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways, on the subject, on 25
th  April, 2023. The Committee also heard the 
views of the representatives of Bridges and Structu re Directorate of Research Designs & 
Standards Organisation (RDSO), Ministry of Railways ; and Indian Roads Congress (IRC), in 
its meeting held on 16 th  May, 2023. Further, the Committee heard the views of Save Life 
Foundation, NGO; TRAX, NGO; and Central Road Resear ch Institute (CRRI), on the 
subject, on 15 th  June, 2023. The Committee also took up the issue d uring its Study Visit to 
Goa on 7th  July, 2023 and held discussions with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways; 
National Highways Authority of India; and State Government of Goa.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways; National Highways Authority o f India; Bridges and Structure 
Directorate of Research Designs & Standards Organis ation, Ministry of Railways; State 
Government of Goa; Indian Roads Congress; Save Life  Foundation; TRAX; and Central 
Road Research Institute, for placing before the Com mittee, the material and information 
desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 9 th  
August, 2023.  
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
August 9, 2023                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Sravana 18, 1945 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AE  Authority’s Engineer 
AMC  Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation 
BG  Broad Gauge 
CAG   Comptroller and Auditor General 
CCEA   Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CFRP  Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer 
CMVR  Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
CNC  Computer Numerical Control 
COD  Commercial Operation Date 
CRIF  Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
CRRI  Central Road Research Institute 
CRRI   Central Road Research Institute 
CSIR  Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
DLP  Defect Liability Period 
FOB  Foot Over Bridge 
FRCM  Fortnightly Regional Coordination Meeting 
FRPs  Fiber-Reinforced Polymers 
FWD  Falling Weight Deflectometer 
GAD  General Arrangement Drawing 
GAD   General Arrangement Drawing 
GFRP  Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymer 
GIS  Geographic Information Systems 
GPR  Ground Penetrating Radar 
IE  Independent Engineer 
IIT/NIT  Indian Institutes of Technology / National Institutes of Technology 
IITs  Indian Institutes of Technology 
IR  Indian Railways 
IRC  Indian Roads Congress 
ITS  Intelligent Transportation Systems 
ITS   Intelligent Transportation Systems 
LA   Land Acquisition 
LiDAR  Light Detection and Ranging 
MBIU  Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit 
MIS  Management Information System 
MLA  Member of Legislative Assembly 
MLCs  Manned Level Crossings 
MoEF&CC  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MP  Member of Parliament 
MUTCD   Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
MVAA  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act 

iv 
 
NATPAC  National Transportation Planning and Research Centre 
NDT  Non-Destructive Testing 
NG  Narrow Gauge 
NGO  Non Governmental Oraganisation 
NHAI  National Highways Authority of India 
NHDP  National Highways Development Project 
NHIDCL  National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
NHs  National Highways 
NITs  National Institutes of Technology 
NSV  Network Survey Vehicle 
PMIS  Program Management Information System 
PPP  Public-Private Partnership 
PRAGATI  Pro-Active Governance and Timely Implementation 
PWDs  Public Works Departments 
R&D  Research and Development 
R&R  Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
RAMS  Road Asset Management System 
RDSO  Research Designs and Standards Organization 
ROBs  Road Over Bridges 
RUBs  Road under Bridges 
SHM  Structural Health Monitoring 
SHM  Structural Health Monitoring 
SuDS  Sustainable Drainage Systems 
TVU  Train Vehicle Unit 
UMLCs  Unmanned Level Crossings 
 

1 
 
 
Report  
 
 Road infrastructure  remains at the heart of a country's transportation system. It 
plays a pivotal role in connecting people, facilita ting trade and driving economic growth.  It forms 
the backbone of transportation networks, providing essential links between cities, towns, rural 
areas, and various economic centres. Good road infr astructure ensures faster connectivity and easy 
mobility. Reliable road networks reduce travel time , enhance accessibility, and open up new 
growth opportunities for individuals and communities.  
2. Additionally, road infrastructure plays a crucia l role in public safety and emergency 
response. Well-designed and well-maintained roads e nsure smooth and safe transportation, 
reducing the risk of accidents and improving overal l road safety. They enable timely access to 
emergency services, such as ambulances, fire trucks , and law enforcement, potentially saving lives 
and minimizing damage during critical situations.  
3. Road Over Bridges (ROBs), Road under Bridges (RU Bs) and service roads are key 
components of any road network. Ambitious expansion of road network in the country requires the 
construction of ROBs/RUBs on a large scale. ROB and  RUB are constructed for hassle-free 
movement of road and rail traffic in addition to im proving safety at level crossings. The 
Government has also embarked on a mission to elimin ate manned level crossings to improve 
mobility and safety in rail and road operations. Co st-effective construction of ROBs and their 
timely completion across the rail and road network have assumed enormous importance. 
Meticulous planning, adoption of state-of-the-art d esign and bridge engineering can help achieve 
the objective of safe and hassle-free mobility.  
4. Cognizant of these facts, the Committee decided to take up the subject ‘Construction of 
Road-over Bridges (ROBs), Road-under Bridges (RUBs) , Service Roads and Review of Road 
Survey Guidelines, etc’. The Ministry of Road, Tran sport and Highways, its attached office of the 
National Highways Authorities of India (NHAI) and M inistry of Railways are the nodal 
organizations concerned with the construction and management of ROBs, RUBs and service roads. 
During the course of examination, the Committee hea rd the Ministries of Road, Transport and 
Highways; NHAI; Railways; Bridges Directorate and Bridges & Structure Directorate of Research, 
Development & Standards Organization (RDSO); Indian  Roads Congress (IRC); Central Road 
Research Institute (CRRI); NGOs, namely, TRAX Socie ty and SaveLIFE Foundation in its 
meetings held on 25 th  April, 2023, 16 th  May, 2023 and 15 th  June, 2023, respectively. The 

2 
 
Committee also discussed the subject with the repre sentatives of the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways; NHAI; and the State Government of Goa  during its Study Visit to Goa on 7 th  July, 
2023.  
 
  

3 
 
I 
Construction of ROBs, RUBs and Service roads  
Guidelines for construction of ROBs/RUBs  
5. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways info rmed that other than the usual 
considerations/requirements involved in any civil e ngineering project, such as preparation of 
Detailed Project Report, administrative approval, p rocurement of contractor, construction, quality 
assurance & quality control, etc., ROBs and RUBs ha ve several special requirements as detailed 
below: 
6. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways seek s approval of General Arrangement 
Drawing (GAD) from the Ministry of Railways which g ives an overall view of the ROB as it will 
appear once constructed. GAD approval process is se cured through a portal of Railways called 
"Rail-Road Crossing GAD Approval System (RORACS)". There are several step-by-step actions 
by both officials of implementing agencies of MoRTH  and the Ministry of Railways, starting from 
uploading of the proposal, joint site visit, preparation and approval of the conceptual plan and final 
preparation of GAD and its approval by Chief Bridge  Engineer of Railways. The entire exercise 
gets completed in 70 days time period. After the po rtal was revamped in 2021, there has been 
considerable improvement in the approval process of GADs.  
7. The Railways normally require piers to be locate d outside railways Right of Way (RoW).   
Provision is kept for future tracks and other insta llations.  This results in long-span structures. As  
far as possible, standard spans as per RDSO design are adopted for spans above railway tracks. In 
case the site conditions warrant the use of girders  other than RDSO's standard drawings, reasons 
for doing so are recorded for approval of the Chief  Bridge Engineer. The design of nonstandard 
spans requires approval by the RDSO. Various strate gies are adopted to minimize skew angle as 
far as possible. Detailed design of ROB/RUB, includ ing drawings prepared by contractor, is proof 
checked by IIT/NIT before its approval by the Chief  Bridge Engineer of Railways. Fabrication of 
steel girders requires to be done by an approved ve ndor of RDSO after due approval from the 
Railways.  
The Quality Assurance Plan (QAP) and Welding Proced ure Specification Sheet (WPSS) prepared 
by the authorised vendor are approved by the Railwa ys before fabrication of steel girders. The raw 
materials procured by the contractor at the fabrica tion yard/workshop of the approved vendor are 
inspected and approved by the Railways officials be fore the commencement of the fabrication of 
steel girders. 
8. Master plate prepared by the vendor has to be ap proved by the Railways officials in advance. 

4 
 
The calibration of Computer Numerical Control (CNC)  machine is also approved by the Railways 
officials. Approval of welder qualification from th e Railways is also required before the 
commencement of fabrication. The Railways officials  undertake inspection of fabrication at the 
vendor fabrication yard/workshop to ensure process quality as per QAP & WPSS. It includes two 
major inspections, i.e. dimension check and post-we lding inspection. A Temporary Arrangement 
Drawing (TAD) for the launching steel girders and l aunching scheme must be approved by 
Principal Chief Engineer of Railways after series o f verifications and approvals at different levels, 
including the Chief Bridge Engineer of Railways. Fo r launching of girder and subsequent deck 
slab casting, approval for the block of the Railway line and reduction of speed of passing trains has 
to be obtained from Railways. Railways officials ca rry out inspection of launching work and there 
is a final inspection after launching of the girders. The additional approval procedure is involved in 
case there is a requirement for shifting of existin g Railway level crossing till completion and 
opening of the ROB/RUB and also in case of requirement of shifting of any railways utilities. 
Construction of ROBs and RUBs 
9. As per the Manual for 2/4/6 laning, existing lev el crossings on National Highways (NHs) 
must be replaced by ROB/RUB as part of the improvem ent and upgradation project of a section of 
NH. Similarly, wherever NH Greenfield project align ment crosses a railway line, ROB/RUB is 
required to be provided. ROBs/RUBs also replace Sta ndalone level crossings as per the Ministry's 
guidelines. The state-wise details of existing ROBs /RUBs on NHs and ROBs/RUBs under 
construction on NHs are given in Annexure-I. 
The details of the construction progress of ROBs/RUBs are given in the Table below.  
 
2009-2014 2014-2023 2023-24 
Total Number of  ROB/RUBs 
commissioned 3813 10867 65 
Annual average  progress(nos. 
of LCs) 763 1207 1100 
0
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
10000 
12000 
Progress of ROB/RUB works completed 

5 
 
10. The Committee appreciates the increase in annua l average progress in the number of 
Level Crossings (LCs) replaced with Road-Over-Bridg es and Road-Under-Bridges. 
However, it also notes that the target of replaceme nt of 1100 LCs set for 2023-24 is lower 
than the annual average of 1207 progress achieved d uring 2014-2023. The Committee is of 
the view that the target should be increased and th e pace of replacement of LCs with ROBs/ 
RUBs should be expedited in the interest of greater  safety and seamless mobility of the 
commuting public. 
Progress of projects under the Setu Bharatam Programme  
11. The Ministry informed that Government has taken  up construction of such ROBs/RUBs on 
National Highways under the ‘Setu Bharatam’ program me through its own implementing agencies 
such as State PWDs, NHAI, and National Highways and  Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited (NHIDCL).  Funds are provided for construct ing ROBs/RUBs like other National 
Highways Projects. ROBs/RUBs are sometimes construc ted as standalone projects and sometimes 
as part of an improvement project for a section of the National Highway. Hence, expenditure 
figures are not separately maintained for the const ruction of ROBs/RUBs under the Setu Bharatam 
programme. A total of 149 level crossings have been identified under the programme .  
 
 
The status of the progress of the ROB/RUB projects under the Setu Bharatam Programme is 
given below: 
Status of ROBs/RUBs under Setu Bharatam Programme No. of Projects 
Completed 37 
Under progress 68 
Estimates sanctioned but work to be physically 
commenced 
27 
Estimates to be sanctioned during 2023-24 17 
Total 149 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  Percentage-wise status of the projects is depicted below: 
 
12. The Committee notes that only 25% of ROB/RUB projects h ave been completed since 
the inception of the Setu Bharatam 
ROB/RUB projec ts indicates staggered growth. 
progress or have not been started 
makes concerted efforts to achiev 
needed, Ministry should increase the allocation of funds under this programme 
construction of ROBs/RUBs . Also, the Ministry should strive towards completi ng all 
pending ROBs/RUBs projects in a time 
traffic besides minimising road fatalities 
 Construction of Service Roads 
 
13. The requirement of Service Road 
"Ribbon Development along Highways and its Preventi on". 
relevance in limiting access to the main highway while simultaneously meeting the demands of the 
abutting land owners for ingress and egress. Such s ervice roads can prevent the congestion caused 
on the main highway due to purely local traffic. 
intersections which cause traffic hazards and reduc e the capacity. 
ribbon development has already taken place as well as along new bypasses where ribbon 
6 
wise status of the projects is depicted below:  
Committee notes that only 25% of ROB/RUB projects h ave been completed since 
Bharatam  scheme in March, 2016. The 
ts indicates staggered growth. The m ajority of the projects are either 
progress or have not been started  as yet. The Committee recommends 
achiev e the aims and targets of the Setu Bharatam 
needed, Ministry should increase the allocation of funds under this programme 
. Also, the Ministry should strive towards completi ng all 
projects in a time -bound manner to ensure safe and smooth flow of 
traffic besides minimising road fatalities . 
Construction of Service Roads  
The requirement of Service Road s along Highways is broadly specified in IRC: SP: 15 
"Ribbon Development along Highways and its Preventi on".  The concept of service r 
the main highway while simultaneously meeting the demands of the 
abutting land owners for ingress and egress. Such s ervice roads can prevent the congestion caused 
purely local traffic. At the same time, they reduce the number of 
intersections which cause traffic hazards and reduc e the capacity. Along all highways where 
ribbon development has already taken place as well as along new bypasses where ribbon 
 
Committee notes that only 25% of ROB/RUB projects h ave been completed since 
The construction of the 
ajority of the projects are either in 
yet. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
Bharatam  Programme. If 
needed, Ministry should increase the allocation of funds under this programme for timely 
. Also, the Ministry should strive towards completi ng all  the 
to ensure safe and smooth flow of 
along Highways is broadly specified in IRC: SP: 15 
The concept of service r oads has 
the main highway while simultaneously meeting the demands of the 
abutting land owners for ingress and egress. Such s ervice roads can prevent the congestion caused 
they reduce the number of 
Along all highways where 
ribbon development has already taken place as well as along new bypasses where ribbon 

7 
 
development is expected in the near future, service  roads should be insisted upon. It would be 
advantageous to acquire land for service roads suff iciently in advance, even though their 
construction may not come up for some time. The ser vice roads shall have a 7.5m/10.0m wide 
carriageway for four/six lane NH with raised footpath and separator on either side. 
14. CRRI suggested merging of Service Road with Pro ject Corridor at least 75 m away from the 
intersection influence area and allowing only a left turn of Service Road traffic. 
15. The Committee notes that Service roads are desi gned for a minimum 40 kmph designated 
speed. The acceleration and deceleration lane for i ngress and egress to and from the main 
carriageway has a minimum of 5.5 m width. It is des igned for a 60 kmph speed differential with a 
minimum 1:15 tapering. The pavement of the service road is designed for minimum of 10 ms 
traffic.  The "Manual of Specifications and Standar ds for two laning of Highways with Paved 
Shoulders" (SP: 73-2018) specifies that the Service  Road width shall preferably be 7.0 m. 
However, in the case of the RoW constraint, the width may be 5.5 m. The detailed status of service 
roads on National Highways is given in Annexure-II. 
The Table below gives the status of Service Roads: 
No. of  States Length of Service Roads (In Km) 
35 Single Lane Intermediate Lane 2-Lane 
Total 1614 4492 14505 
 
16. The Committee notes that the National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002 
provides for control of land within the National Hi ghways, right of way and traffic 
movement on the National Highways and also for remo val of unauthorized occupation 
thereon. 
17. The Committee while taking note of the utility of service roads recommends that NHAI 
should put up signboards along the service roads on the highway, indicating that the traffic on 
these roads is two-way and not one-way. City commut ers are under the impression that the 
traffic on the service roads is one-way.  This creates hurdles for those coming from the opposite 
direction. Service roads should have painted arrows directing two-way traffic on the stretch.   
Elimination of Level crossing 
 
18. The Ministry of Railways informed that level cr ossings are provided on the railway lines to 
pass the road traffic across the track .  Level crossings are a potential source of safety  hazard.  It is 
envisaged to eliminate LC on Indian Railways in an accelerated manner by the construction of 
ROBs/RUBs to improve safety in train operation and increase mobility. The Indian Railways have 
eliminated 100% of unmanned level crossings (UMLCs)  on broad gauge (BG) routes by January 

8 
 
2019. The status of Level Crossings on the Indian R ailway (as of 01.04.23) is provided below in 
tabulated form: 
Status of level Crossings on Indian Railway  
Type  BG  MG  NG  Total  
Manned Level 
Crossings 
(MLCs)  
17720  120  78  17918  
Unmanned Level 
Crossings 
(UMLCs)  
*  288  271  559  
Total  17720  408  349  18477  
 *All unmanned level crossings on Broad Gauge  
have been eliminated by 3 1.01.2019  
 
19. The Committee notes with satisfaction that all unmanned level crossings on Broad 
Gauge have been eliminated by January 2019. However , existence of 559 Unmanned Level 
Crossings in both Metre Gauge and Narrow Gauge need s to be replaced with ROB/RUB 
expeditiously in a focused and time bound manner. 
Policy for the elimination of Level crossing 
 
20. The Ministry informed that  100% cost of work relating to the elimination of le vel crossings 
is being borne by the Railways, except on National Highways (NH) and where State Government/ 
Road Owning Authority/ Local Authority wants to tak e  up the works at its cost. 
Rebuilding/replacement of existing ROBs/RUBs/public  FOBs on a condition basis may be 
sanctioned at Railways cost. All works are being executed on a single entity basis by the Railways. 
The portion of ROB/RUB within the railway land area  is being maintained by the Railways, and 
outside railway land, it will be maintained by Stat e Government/Road Owning Authority/ Local 
Authority at its own cost.  
21. With respect to the cost of land acquisition in volving private land, Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation (R&R) and utility shifting will be borne by:  
/square4 Railway if work is sanctioned at Railway Cost. 
/square4 State Government/ Road Owning Authority/ Local Authority is sanctioned at their own cost. 
/square4 LC elimination works already sanctioned on a cost-s haring basis are being examined for 
funding the entire project through Railways in case  of inadequate response/unwillingness of 
State Govt./Road Owning Authority. 
/square4 As a matter of policy, no new Level Crossings will be provided on existing lines. 

9 
 
 
22. The Committee observes that the waiting time, a t Level Crossings are high, leading to 
avoidable congestion in road traffic and consequent ial increase in commuting time. A classic 
example in this regard is the Bhola Talkies, Gumti and Muktapur in Bihar.   The Ministry of 
Railways submitted that Level Crossing gates are re quired to be closed to grant line clearance to 
the passing train. Level Crossing needs to be close d intermittently for train operation. If the Level 
Crossing is closed for a longer duration (due to hi gher rail traffic), then a rush of vehicles on the 
approach road takes time to clear. This adversely a ffects the train operation.  There is no 
prescribed scale regarding the seriousness of the c losure of the Level Crossing. The Railways does 
not maintain any record of detention of the road traffic at the level crossing.  
MoU between the Ministry of Railways and the Minist ry of Road, Transport and 
Highways regarding the construction of ROBs/RUBs on National Highways 
 
23. MoRTH/NHAI shall construct complete ROB/RUB (in cluding railway bridge portion) on 
National Highways, i.e. NH Corridors (NHDP & non-NH DP) in the country at their own cost on a 
single entity basis. The existing ROBS, if any, wil l be upgraded as and when required by 
MoRTH/NHAI. 
 
24. MoRTH/NHAI shall do the instrumentation in the railway super-structure across the railway 
bridge portion. MoRTH/NHAI shall not levy Supervisi on Charges, Departmental Charges, 
Maintenance Charges and Land Lease Charges where ra ilway track crosses National Highways in 
case of New Railway Line/Gauge Conversion. 
 
25. Along with the construction of ROB, MoRTH/NHAI shall construct a Subway to facilitate 
the movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic across the railway track to facilitate the closure of 
level crossing by Railways. Construction of the Sub way within Railway Portion should be done 
under the supervision of Railways without any super vision charges. If a subway is not possible, 
then a suitable Foot Over Bridge (FOB) with a ramp should be provided.  Wherever subway/FOB 
with a ramp is not feasible at the site, then in al l such cases suitable footpath of appropriate width  
along with a staircase should be provided on ROB. W herever footpath on ROB is provided then in 
all such cases, the height of the kerb of ROB shoul d be increased, so that in case of road accidents, 
chances of mounting off road vehicles on the kerb and falling on railway track could be avoided .  
26. The Ministry informed that 
Manned Level crossing elimination is being done at an 
average rate of 922 numbers per year (in the last 5  years). If work is carried on at the 

10 
 
same speed, it might take another 20 years for the complete elimination of level 
crossing, depending upon technical feasibility. 
27. In this regard, the Committee underscores the n eed for replacement of LCs with 
ROB/RUB on priority and recommends that the Ministr y should examine whether there is 
proper co-ordination between the Railways and Centr al/ State Governments in identifying, 
prioritizing and allocating resources to various ROB/RUB projects sanctioned. 
 
 Status of ROBs/RUBs/Level Crossings on National Highways 
28. The Zone-wise details of existing LCs on NHs, R OBs/RUBs under construction on NHs, 
General Arrangement Drawing (GAD) approved for cons truction of ROBs/RUBs but work not 
commenced, level crossings existing on NHs and yet to be proposed for ROBs/RUBs are appended 
as Annexure-III . 
 
The status of existing LCs on NHs, ROBs/RUBs under construction on NHs is given below: 
 LCs 
on 
NH 
Work 
complete 
d 
(LCNO 
T closed) 
Work in 
progress 
GAD  
approv 
ed but 
work 
not 
started 
GA 
D 
unde 
r 
prog 
ress 
Propos 
al yet 
to 
come 
from 
NHAI 
Diver 
sion 
plann 
ed by 
NHA 
I 
I
R 
405 24 105 102 6 135 33 
 
29. The Committee notes that out of total 405 Level  Crossings on NHs, only 24 have been 
completed, and around 213 LCs, the work is under pr ocess, or the GAD approval is awaited. 
The Committee also observes that in around 135 case s, approval is pending on the part of 
NHAI. The Committee takes note of the fact that onl y 6% of the LCs have been successfully 
replaced with ROB/RUB. The Committee suggests that a dedicated inter-agency co-
ordination mechanism involving railway authorities,  road transportation agencies, local 
governments, and other relevant stakeholders may be  put in place to ensure effective 
planning, fund allocation, and timely implementation of level crossing elimination projects in 
a time bound manner. 
 
30. The Committee recommends the Ministry/ NHAI to implement a robust monitoring 
and evaluation system to track the progress of leve l-crossing elimination projects. The 
Committee urges upon the Ministry/ NHAI to regularl y assess the effectiveness of 

11 
 
implemented measures and identify areas for further improvement. 
 
Status of Level Crossings (LCs) and Road over Bridg es/Road under Bridges 
(ROBs/RUBs) on Indian Railways 
31. The Ministry has submitted State/Railway Wise L evel Crossings (As of 01.04.2023) as given 
in Annexure IV.  
32. The Committee notes that there are still 427 Ma nned Level Crossings on National 
Highway (NH) and 954 on State Highways.  Given the unfinished task at hand, the pace of 
construction of ROBs/RUBs on Railway Level Crossing s needs to be accelerated to avoid 
accidents, clear congestion and ensure dependabilit y of road transportation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to expedite the progress of eliminating level Crossings in 
a time-bound manner. 
 
33. The Committee also discussed the subject with M oRTH, NHAI and State Government of 
Goa during its study visit to the State on 7 
th  July, 2023.  The Chief Engineer, MoRTH informed 
about the status of construction of the remaining 2  ROBs (out of the total of 12) at the level 
crossings; construction of service roads in 4 and 6  laning  projects ; and the progress of the 
remaining 4 NH projects (out of total of 10 NH proj ects), namely,  Zuari bridge Package II (NH-
66), Zuari bridge Package III (NH-66), MOPA Airport  link (NH-166S), Mandovi bridge (NH-66) 
and Port connectivity (NH-566). The Committee was i nformed that these were expected to be 
completed this year, i.e. 2023. 
 
34. The Committee raised the  following issues, nam ely, losses that a government faces if a 
project delays due to the escalation of project cos ts;  issues arising at the time of preparation of 
DPR; lack of coordination between the State Governm ent and concerned agencies during the 
construction of ROBs/RuBs leading to delay in const ruction of projects; need for expediting the 
construction of approach roads to Maharashtra -Karn ataka National Highway; lack of approach 
roads for villages due to lack of funds with Gram Panchayats; total number of projects delayed due 
to non clearance from Ministry of Environment, Fore st & Climate Change including number of 
projects halted due to the presence of forests;  ti meline for the completion of Mumbai-Goa-
Mangalore Sector; process of identification and rectification of Black Spots and how much time  it 
takes; and clarification on the need for multiple (7-8) small bumpers/speed breakers on highways. 

12 
 
III 
Review of Road Survey Guidelines 
Present Road Survey Guidelines 
35. The guidelines on Road Surveying with Network S urvey Vehicle (NSV) prescribe that for all 
projects involving 2/4/6/8-lane expressways and str engthening, surveys shall be undertaken in the 
following intervals: 
(i) Before the start of the work 
(ii) Before the issuance of the completion certificate 
(iii) After completion of work, every six months. 
36. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways inf ormed that NSV surveys are conducted 
after the completion of a project. The NSV report i s mandatory for issuing Commercial Operation 
Date (COD). In the Defect Liability Period (DLP) pe riod, NSV reports are mandatory for the 
release of maintenance payments. The Ministry has d eveloped an online centralized Road Asset 
Management System (RAMS) to upload and integrate NS V/  Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD) 
survey data with RAMS for all NH stretch. NHAI has linked the monthly payments of Independent 
Engineer/Authority Engineer /Supervision Consultant  to the uploading and acceptance of NSV 
data. NSV data are utilized for internal planning and monitoring by the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways, and as such, there is no plan for upl oading the same into the public domain, 
considering its limited utility for the general public. 
37. The Ministry of Railways informed that Indian R ailways conducts the Train Vehicle Unit 
census (TVU census) every three years. The TVU is d isplayed at Gate Lodge on Level Crossing.  
All ROBs and RUBs are inspected annually by the field officials at various levels as per provisions 
of the Indian Railways Bridge Manual. On the basis of these inspections, 
maintenance/replacement/rehabilitation is being pla nned. Total 13 ROBs have been declared 
abandoned in the last five years involving an estimated cost of 454.94 cr. 
 
38. The Committee notes that the NSV data being tec hnical in nature is of limited utility for 
the general public.   The Committee, however, feels that the survey data must be made public 
so that the organizations and NGOs related to road sector can make use of it in 
strengthening policies. 
 
39. The Committee also  notes that in the case of ‘ New Highway Construction Projects’, 
‘Compromising Stages’ along with ‘Solutions’ must b e added in each survey mentioned 
under ‘Road Survey Guidelines’ and be a mandatory p art of DPR. Further, the detailed 

13 
 
design of highways of Merging and Diversion, Inters ection, Cuts and U-Turns including 
drawings, etc., prepared by the Contractor must be proof checked by IIT/NIT before its 
approval by NHAI and must be uploaded in public domain on NHAI Portal.  The Committee 
recommends that the road safety measures being inte gral to the road projects must be 
strictly implemented, so that the varied levels of road safety will validate or otherwise the 
road design and engineering, which in turn, can help develop the standard of road safety. 
 
Analysis of existing road survey guidelines  
40. The surveys conducted for road construction pla y a crucial role in gathering essential 
information about the project area and its surround ings. These surveys provide valuable data 
before the construction of a project and the insigh ts that inform the design, planning, and 
construction processes.  
 
41. IRC: SP:19-2001- The "Manual for Survey, Invest igation and Preparation of Road Projects 
(Second Revision)” provides detailed instructions a nd methodologies for conducting surveys, 
investigations, and preparing road projects in Indi a. The manual covers various aspects of road 
project preparation and outlines the necessary survey methodologies and procedures to be followed 
during each stage of the project. 
 
42. The manual specifically highlights the followin g surveys necessary for the road construction 
project such as: 
i. Traffic Survey 
ii. Reconnaissance Survey  
iii. Topographic Survey  
iv. Geotechnical and Material Survey 
v. Environmental Survey  
vi. Final Location Survey  
vii. Utility Survey  
viii. Right-of-Way Survey  
 
43. The existing guidelines also prescribe many oth er surveys that are essential for road 
construction projects. Overall, this guideline offe rs details on various surveys that are essential to  
design and build quality roads.  
The Committee notes that community engagement plays  a crucial role in road construction 
projects as it caters to the needs, requirements, a nd difficulties faced by the local 
communities. These communities often experience dis ruptions in their daily lives due to 
construction of highways. 
 

14 
 
44. The Committee observes that a notable limitatio n of the existing guidelines, particularly 
for highways and expressways, is the lack of emphas is on community engagement and the 
impact of road projects on local communities.  
 
45. Incorporating the elements of community engagem ent into the guidelines would involve 
measures such as conducting public consultations, h olding informational sessions, and 
actively seeking feedback from the affected communi ty. By involving local residents, 
businesses, and other stakeholders in the decision- making process, road construction 
projects can better serve their specific needs and mitigate potential negative impacts. This 
may include implementing traffic management plans, providing alternative routes, adjusting 
construction schedules to meet local requirement or minimising disruption.  
 
Use of technology for inspections 
 
46. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informe d that during the construction stage, there 
is a periodic inspection carried out by the Authori ty’s Engineer (AE)/ Independent Engineer (IE) 
and Authority (MoRTH & its implementing agencies) for ROBs/RUBs. Different tests are done for 
quality assurance and quality control as per guidel ines, and special attention is taken during the 
launching of girders. During Operation and Maintena nce, periodic visual as well as instrument-
aided inspections including non-destructive tests, are conducted. The Authority’s Engineer (AE)/ 
Independent Engineer (IE) carry out the condition a nd structural assessment survey of the bridges 
in accordance with IRC-SP: 35 with the use of Mobil e Bridge Inspection unit (MBIU) for close 
access to different component of the ROBs/RUBs.  Re gular inspections are carried out by the 
Authority’s Engineer (AE)/ Independent Engineer (IE ) for timely identification of problems as per 
the provisions of the Contract Agreement. Additiona lly, Bridge Health Monitoring System has 
been included in some of the contracts to identify the problems/distress occurring on the bridge so 
that the same can be addressed timely. 
 
47. Modern technology for periodic inspection of RO Bs/ RUBs can help in the early 
detection of damage, minimize human errors and lowe r maintenance costs.  The Committee, 
therefore, feels that more steps should be taken to  adopt modern technology for inspection of 
ROBs/RUBs. Drones equipped with high-resolution cam eras and sensors can be used to 
capture aerial imagery of ROBs/RUBs, providing a de tailed visual assessment of the 
structure's condition. The images can be analysed f urther to identify any signs of damage, 
deterioration, or structural weakness. Drones are p articularly useful for accessing hard-to-
reach areas and can significantly reduce inspection time and costs. 

15 
 
 
48. Laser scanning technologies, such as LiDAR, can  be used to generate accurate 3D 
models of ROBs/RUBs. LiDAR sensors emit laser pulse s and measure the reflected light, 
creating precise point cloud data. This data can be  used to assess the geometry, dimensions, 
and deformations of the structure, detecting any ir regularities or deformations that may 
indicate structural deficiencies. 
 
49. Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) should be used t o penetrate the ground or structure, 
allowing for subsurface inspection of ROBs/RUBs. It  can identify hidden defects, such as 
voids, delamination, or corrosion in concrete or st eel elements. GPR can provide valuable 
information on the internal condition of the struct ure without the need for invasive 
investigations.  
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) Systems should be adopted to involve the installation of 
sensors and monitoring devices on ROBs/RUBs to cont inuously monitor their structural 
behaviour. These sensors can measure parameters lik e vibrations, strains, and deflections, 
providing real-time data on the performance and hea lth of the structure. SHM systems 
enable early detection of structural abnormalities and help in proactive maintenance and 
intervention. 
 
50. Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) Techniques, such as ultrasonic testing, magnetic 
particle testing, and radiographic testing, can be employed for ROB/RUBs inspection. These 
techniques assess the integrity of structural compo nents, detect cracks, weld defects, or 
corrosion, and identify potential failure points. N DT methods are typically used in 
combination with visual inspections to provide a comprehensive assessment of the structure's 
condition. 
 
51. Data Analysis and Visualization Software should  be used to process and analyse the 
data collected from various inspection technologies . These tools facilitate the interpretation 
of data, enabling engineers and inspectors to ident ify anomalies, assess risks, and generate 
reports on the condition of ROBs/RUBs. Data Visuali zation software helps in presenting the 
raw inspection data in a clear and easily understan dable format, which can be interpreted 
correctly to facilitate decisions. 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
IV 
Challenges faced in the construction of ROBs, RUBs and Service roads 
52. The Committee, through its engagements with var ious stakeholders, identifies the following 
bottlenecks in the construction of ROBs/RUBs and service roads: 
 
(i) Major issues 
Environment clearances and land acquisition 
 
53. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways inf ormed that land acquisition (LA) is a 
major reason for the delay in the construction of R OBs/RUBs in standalone project.  In the 
corridor project, the delay in the construction of ROBs/RUBs on account of land acquisition is 
insignificant as the process of land acquisition is  completed prior to the award of the NH project.  
However, there have been some cases of delay in the  implementation of ROBs/RUBs where the 
land of other departments, such as Railways, State Government etc., is to be acquired. 
Approximately 40 to 50 % of ROBs/RUBs have been rep ortedly delayed due to delays in various 
clearances from Railways, such as approval of GAD of ROBs/RUBs, detailed design, etc. 
 
54. The Ministry has taken various steps to expedit e land acquisition and statutory clearance. The 
Government of India has established the Bhoomirashi  portal to make the land acquisition process 
online and thereby speeding up the process. Regular  review meetings are being conducted at State/ 
Central Govt. level to coordinate, monitor and comp lete the LA process in a time-bound manner.  
The Ministry has also signed an MoU with the Minist ry of Railways to streamline the approval 
process for the construction of ROBs and RUBs. Now,  the process has been initiated for the 
signing of another MoU with the Ministry of Railway s to facilitate the acquisition of land owned 
by the Ministry of Railways. As per the proposed Mo U, land will be cleared within a period of 90 
days.  
 
55. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of th e Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways in addressing the most important issue of land acquisition in fast tracking the 
ROB/RUB projects. The Bhoomirashi portal has undoub tedly expedited the process of land 
acquisition for National Highways. However, the Com mittee urges upon the Ministry and 
NHAI to accord continued priority to the land acqui sition issue and fails to appreciate as to 
why huge Government funds are parked with Competent  Authority for Land Acquisition 
(CALAs). 

17 
 
 
56. The Ministry of Railway informed that 
 clearances are required at three levels in the 
construction of ROBs: 
i. Approval of GAD, Structural design and Launching scheme 
ii. Sanction of Principal Chief Engineer for execution over railway portion. 
iii. In case of construction of ROB in lieu of level cro ssing, consent of the State 
Government for closure of level crossing is also required. 
 
 57. The Railways has developed an online portal to  resolve the transfer of land cases for the 
construction of ROBs/RUBs. To avoid delay due to GAD approval, the Railways has developed an 
online portal RORACS for GAD approval with a specif ied timeline of 70 days. The Chief Bridge 
Engineer, Indian Railways conducts monthly or bimon thly coordination meeting at all Zonal 
Railways between Railway Field Unit and Field Units  of implementing agencies of MoRTH. The 
Issues related to ROBs/RUBs are discussed in the me eting for early resolution. Policy-related 
issues are discussed at Railway Board Level. In thi s meeting, Senior Officers of MoRTH and the 
Railways participate for resolving the issues. In a ddition to it, State Government is being regularly 
approached for land acquisition and shifting of utilities. 
 
 58. The Committee observes that the MoRTH/ Railway s should regularly engage with the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF& CC) to address policy and 
project-specific issues, ensuring swift clearances and resolution of operational challenges. 
The MoEF&CC has taken proactive steps to streamline  the process of obtaining statutory 
clearances, particularly for Stage-I and Stage-II f orest clearances. This includes issuing 
directions for the one-time submission of Essential  Details Sought (EDS) and eliminating the 
requirement for hard copies of proposals. Fortnight ly Regional Coordination Meetings 
(FRCM) are conducted to monitor the progress of cle arances and expedite forest clearances. 
Additionally, Inter-Ministerial Co-ordination and M onitoring Committee meetings are held 
to address policy matters and address long-standing proposals. 
Poor contract management 
 
59. MoRTH informed that the National Highway projec ts are executed as per the provisions 
specified in standard documents viz.RFP/DCA/MCA, fi nalized and approved by Inter-Ministerial 
Group (IMG) and then adopted by concerned implementing agencies of the MoRTH.  The standard 
document lays down defined roles and responsibiliti es of Authority’s Engineer (AE)/ Independent 
Engineer (IE) and Authority (MoRTH or its implement ing agencies) for different aspects of 
contract management; and, accordingly, contracts are being managed /administered. 

18 
 
 
60. Senior officials of the Ministry/NHAI/NHIDCL pe riodically review the standard documents 
to ensure that contracts are effectively managed. B ased on the current industry practice, 
government regulations, standards and feedback rece ived from various stakeholders, viz 
Contractors/Concessionaires AE/IE, NHBF etc., standard document are regularly updated by Inter- 
Ministerial Group (IMG) and then adopted by concerned implementing agencies of MoRTH 
. 
 
61. To expedite the conciliation of disputes, NHAI has established a system for conciliation of 
disputes through a Conciliation Committee of Indepe ndent Experts (CCIEs) vide  the NHAI 
circular dated 02.06.2017 based on the decision of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) in its meeting held on 31.08.2016 
. 
 
62. The Committee notes that CAG has flagged off th e issue of poor contract management, 
such as delays in the finalisation of the negotiate d rates and grant of extensions despite poor 
progress by the contractor. The Committee recommend s that the Ministry should look into 
the issue on priority as such problems have resulted in avoidable expenditures and delays.  
 
63. The Committee also desires to be apprised of th e reasons as to why the Ministry/NHAI 
allows contractors to hire or lease out to sub-cont ractors for carrying out specific work 
instead of splitting the project into smaller parts  so that contractors with limited 
wherewithals could also bid for the same and legiti mately get awarded on merit as principal 
contractor for the assigned work. 
 
64. The Committee also recommends that Ministries s hould assign competent contract 
managers who have the necessary skills and expertis e to effectively manage contracts. These 
managers should have a strong understanding of cont ract law, project management, and 
negotiation skills. Imparting them adequate skill t raining will enable them to fulfil their 
responsibilities. 
 
65. The Ministry may also develop a transparent and  efficient payment management 
system. Emphasis should be laid on establishing cle ar protocols for verifying contractor 
invoices, approving payments, and addressing any pa yment disputes promptly. Timely and 
accurate payments can help maintain contractor’s mo tivation, besides ensuring timely 
completion of project.   
 
66. The Committee suggests that the Ministry should  incorporate performance incentives 
and penalties into the contract terms. Incentives c an motivate contractors to contribute 

19 
 
significantly to the project, exceeding expectation s, while penalties can lead to poor 
performance or non-compliance. 
 
Flooding/ water logging issues 
 
67. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways stated that there is no issue of flooding/water 
logging on ROBs. However, in the case of RUBs, drai nage considerations are an upfront part of 
fixing Finished Road Level (FRL) and design of RUBs  and service roads. RUBs are constructed 
with a vertical clearance of 5.50 metres. Whenever required clearance permits, the road level of 
RUB is raised by 0.3 to 0.5 metres, as a result of which the water logging problem is minimized. 
This also facilitates adequate hydraulic gradient t o the outfall (either natural stream or percolation  
pit or low-lying area) besides avoiding reverse flo w from the stream/percolation pit. In spite of 
this, there is sometimes the problem of drainage du e to ribbon development and inadequate 
drainage arrangement on the land affecting NH. The same is being resolved in consultation with 
local bodies and District Administration. De-siltin g of pipes is ensured before monsoon as well as 
during monsoon. The Ministry holds frequent interac tions with local bodies and District 
Administration to resolve the issues. 
 
68. The Ministry of Railways is taking the followin g steps to address flooding/water logging on 
RUBs: 
 
(a) Sealing of joints. 
(b) Provision of the cover shed. 
(c) Provision of humps on approach. 
(d) Provision of the sump. 
(e) Provision of dewatering pump. 
 
69. The Committee notes that several instances of f looding/water logging on ROBs, RUBs 
and service roads have been reported in the recent past. This not only results in great public 
inconvenience but also damages the roads for future use. 
 
70. The Committee recommends that a comprehensive h ydrological study of the area 
surrounding the ROBs, RUBs and service roads should  be undertaken to understand the 
flood patterns, including the frequency, duration, and intensity of floods. Such a study will 
help determine the design requirements that address  the issues of flood mitigation for the 
ROBs/RUBs. 
 
71. The Ministry can also construct flood barrier w alls or embankments around the RUBs 
to prevent floodwater from entering into the underp ass. These barriers can be designed to 

20 
 
withstand the anticipated flood levels and provide protection to the RUBs during flood 
occurrences. 
 
72. The Railways should look for a cost-effective a nd durable solution to the problem of 
water-logging by modifying embankment height, provi ding suitable cross and longitudinal 
drains, cutting off the ingress of water from the catchment area into the subway, etc. 
 
73. The Committee recommends conducting regular ins pections and maintenance of the 
drainage systems, pumps, and flooding barriers to ensure their proper functioning, especially 
during monsoon season. Debris or obstructions that may hinder the flow of water during 
floods should be cleared regularly. 
Delay in construction 
 
74. The Ministry of Railways informed that the prob lem of delay in construction of ROBs/RUBs 
is faced due to factors such as fixing the alignmen t of approaches, delay in land acquisition, 
removal of encroachments, delay in finalization of General Arrangement Drawing (GAD), 
acceptance and sanction of estimate in approaches b y State Government, etc. Therefore, it is not 
possible to fix definite timelines for the completion of these ROBs/RUBs. 
 
75. Indian Roads Congress (IRC) informed that the c onstruction of ROB/RUB/service roads 
normally gets delayed during implementation because  of delays in land acquisition. ROBs/RUBs 
also require approvals in various stages from the railway authorities, which is very time consuming 
process. Standard drawings issued by RDSO may avoid  delay in initial approval in normal cases 
but the cases requiring site-specific modifications  or innovations in design may still result in delay  
in approvals.  For example, if a RUB has a height r estriction as the Rail Track level is less than 3 
m above the road level, the service or approach roa d will need to be depressed.  This poses an 
additional problem of drainage of storm water. Some  of the RUBs can have surface (Municipal) 
drains which can be placed below or adjacent to the Road carriageway.  
 
76. IRC further informed that though for ROB/RUB, G AD approvals can be pursued online, 
Railway authorities still insist on physical submis sion also, which can be avoided to expedite the 
work. 
 
77. The Committee recommends that Ministries should  adopt digitalization of GAD 
approval as it will help the stakeholders to check online the status of the approval.  This can 
reduce the undue delay in the construction of ROBs/ RUBs. Further, there is a need for an 

21 
 
inter-ministerial co-ordination mechanism to bring all the stakeholders on one platform for 
better discussion and understanding.  
 
78. The Ministry should also come up with an expect ed timeline of events along with the 
deadline, and the updated status should be brought into the public domain for better 
information of MPs, MLAs and other citizens. Further, the charter shall also have the details 
of contractors, engineers and officers involved. Th is will set the accountability of all the 
stakeholders involved.  
 Shortage of manpower 
 
79. The Committee notes that the issue of the short age of staff is a concern at a time when 
the country is moving ahead with a huge number of r oad networking projects.  Since the 
time factor is of paramount importance, every effort should be made to complete the ongoing 
projects on time. The role of human resources in th e project management, being critical, the 
Committee may be apprised about the staff requireme nt. The Committee expresses the view 
that in case of any shortage, recruitment process m ust be rolled out. In the case of 
consultants, the Committee seeks to know the total number of consultants with the Ministries 
and the basis for their appointment. 
 
80. The Committee recommends that recourse be taken  to five R's - (i)  Revive or create 
posts, (ii)  Restructure the organization to bring in efficiency, (iii) Recruit young talent, (iv) 
Reframe policy/processes, (v) Refresh minds by givi ng interim professional training and also 
to revive and create posts.   
Budgetary Allocation 
 
81. The State/UT-wise details of accrual, Unspent B alance as of 01.04.2022 and Maximum 
Possible Release under CRIF during FY 2022-23 are attached as Annexure VII. 
 
82. The Committee notes that the provisioning and u tilization of funds for the construction 
of ROBs/ RUBs could be better. There needs to be mo re co-ordination between the Railways 
and the State Governments in providing a budget and  executing the works. Further, the 
large chunk of unspent amount under the Setu Bharat am programme is an overarching 
concern. There is a need for proper channelization and utilization of the earmarked funds. 
 

22 
 
(ii) Road Safety related issues 
83. The Committee notes that ensuring road safety i s a humongous challenge both during 
construction and after construction of ROBs/RUBs an d service roads. In 2021, an estimated 1,550 
railway crossing crashes caused 1,807 deaths all across India. As per the Road Accidents in India 
2021, in the Million Plus Cities, ongoing road work s/roads under construction and Bridges 
together account for 5.9% of road accidents, 9.0% o f deaths, and 5.23% of injuries.  Potholes 
account for nearly 0.8% of road accidents, 1.4% of road accident deaths and 0.6% of injuries. 
Many of these crashes could have been averted if du e care had been taken at the fundamental 
stages of road design construction and maintenance and if guidelines were followed properly. 
 
84. The Committee notes that the Motor Vehicles Ame ndment Act (MVAA), 2019 
creates adequate accountability framework to ensure  that road-owning agencies, 
contractors and concessionaires are held accountabl e for faulty road design and 
construction. To operationalise this at the State l evel, the Act provides discretionary 
powers to States to create Rules under  Section 210D.  The Section 210 D authorizes State 
Governments to make rules for design, construction and maintenance standards for National 
Highways and roads other than National Highways, respectively. 
 
85. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the M inistry of Road Transport and 
Highways should persuade State Governments to frame such rules under Section 210D of the 
MVAA Act at the earliest.  The Committee may also be kept apprised of the matter.   
 
86. The Indian Railways has taken the initiative of  Gate Mitras to enhance safety and prevent 
accidents at unmanned level crossing gates. Under t his system, the person engaged as "Gate 
Mitra" alerts road users about approaching trains a t unmanned level crossings. They are 
primarily deployed to counsel road users to be vigi lant while crossing the unmanned level 
crossing gates. However, the Committee observes that Gate Mitras often complain of exploitation 
and meagre payment.  They are made to work for 12 h ours every day, without any off throughout 
the year, for a meager salary of 3000 to 4000 rupee s per month. There are also complaints that 
there is no arrangement for shelter, first aid and bathroom.  Further, if somebody is not well, taking 
a day off would amount to a salary cut and even losing the job. 
 
87. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of R ailways should relook into ‘Gate 
Mitra’ scheme and ensure that these personnel are b eing provided with all basic amenities.  
In the Committee’s view, proper implementation of t he Gate Mitra scheme will promote the 
safety of road users, besides generating employment. 

23 
 
 
88. The Committee identified the following flaws on  ROBs/RUBs and service roads, which lead 
to accidents and loss of life and property.  
Damaged Pavement Surface 
89. The Committee observes that a damaged pavement surface can result in loss of vehicle control 
and compromised braking performance, which can lead  to accidents. It is a matter of concern that 
service roads are often neglected despite regular maintenance of main carriageways. Neglecting the 
repair of service roads can create uneven surfaces, potholes, and other hazards, posing risks to drivers, 
pedestrians, and cyclists and increasing the likeli hood of accidents. Ensuring the maintenance and 
repair of service roads is essential for promoting road safety and preventing accidents. 
90. The Committee recommends that timely repair and  maintenance of damaged pavement 
surfaces on service roads should be undertaken on p riority in the interest of road safety.  
Routine inspection should be carried out at regular  intervals to identify and address any 
issues such as waterlogging, potholes, cracks, or u neven surfaces. Adequate resources and 
manpower need to be allocated for timely repairs, i ncluding resurfacing, relaying or 
patching of service roads as needed. The safety of all road users needs to be prioritized by 
maintaining smooth and well-maintained service roads. 
Lane Drop  
 
91. A lane drop is a location on a road where the n umber of lanes provided for through traffic 
decreases. This is mainly due to issues relating to  land acquisition and other technical or cost 
constraints. Hence, many sections of the bridges ac t as a bottleneck, resulting in frequent 
congestion and conflict. Limited space also leads t o difficulty in manoeuvring and increases the 
risk of collisions or sideswiping. 
92. The Committee observes that lane drops with poo rer site geometrics have higher 
conflict rates.  The Committee is of the view that there is a need to 
revise existing 
guidelines/criteria to ensure that bridge sections are designed with consistent geometry, 
including the same number of lanes, similar to thos e of the through road for fast and 
long distance traffic.  Lane drops must be designed properly from the outset, in as much 
as traffic control devices are not as effective in reducing conflicts as are proper site 
geometrics.  
Absent Shoulders  
93. Shoulder refers to the paved/unpaved section of  road present along the road, which is 

24 
 
generally provided to give support to the road surf ace and for emergency stops. The Committee 
observes that many of the bridge sections do not ha ve shoulders. This has become a critical issue 
during breakdowns or emergencies. 
94. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may re-examine the existing 
guidelines/criteria relating to paved and unpaved s ections of the road.  If needed, the 
Ministry should come out with revised guidelines/cr iteria to ensure that bridge sections 
are designed with shoulders so that they can be use d for emergency stopping of vehicles.  
Further, these guidelines must be strictly followed during the construction of the roads.  
Inadequate Illumination  
95. The Committee notes that the provision of artif icial lighting systems along roadways needs to 
be improved. Inadequate illumination reduces visibi lity and exposes the traffic to greater risks of 
accidents. 
96. The Committee takes note of the technological a dvances made in the field of 
streetlighting and recommends that installation of street lights, preferably with automatic 
sensors, retro-reflectors may be undertaken for pro per road illumination. In the case of 
power supply failure or damage to the street lights , the retro-reflectors act as reliable visual 
guides, reflecting light from headlights and assist ing drivers in manoeuvring safely and 
staying on the correct path. 
97. The Committee recommends conducting comprehensi ve lighting audits to assess the 
adequacy of current lighting conditions on roads.  Areas with inadequate lighting should be 
identified and prioritized based on factors such as  traffic volume, accident history, and 
visibility requirements.  
Inefficient Safety Barriers  
98. The Committee notes that one of the primary fun ctions of safety barriers is to prevent 
vehicles from accidentally veering off the bridge a nd falling onto lower levels. By acting as a 
containment system, these barriers help to reduce t he severity of crashes and prevent fatality. 
However, in certain bridge sections, the safety bar riers are inefficient in terms of height and 
capacity to effectively prevent heavy vehicles from falling off the bridge section. 
99. The Committee recommends that all measures shou ld be taken to ensure that the safety 
barriers are appropriately designed and constructed  to withstand the impact forces 
generated by heavy vehicles.  Also, these should be  provided with sufficient height to prevent 
them from breaching the barrier.  Increasing the he ight and capacity of safety barriers is 

25 
 
essential for maintaining the integrity of the brid ge and protecting the road users, thereby 
minimizing the risk of fatal crashes.  
Absent Signage and Hazard Markings  
100. The Committee is of the view that traffic sign s and hazard markers on bridge sections are 
necessary to ensure the safety of vehicles, pedestr ians, and cyclists. They convey warnings, 
regulations, directions and other essential messages helping to prevent accidents, guide traffic flow 
and ensure safe navigation on road. Additionally, h azard markers on bridges highlight potential 
risks, like the presence of hard objects or sharp t urns, enabling drivers to adjust their behaviour 
accordingly. With reﬂective materials, these signs enhance visibility in low-light conditions. 
However, it is observed that many bridge sections d o not adequately account for   the traffic signs 
and hazard markers, and even when they are present, their maintenance is often lacking. 
101. The Committee recommends that bridge infrastructure planning and maintenance should 
prioritize the inclusion and proper maintenance of traffic signs and hazard markers to ensure 
the safety of road users, pedestrians, and cyclists . Regular inspections, timely repairs, and 
routine maintenance are essential to ensure that th ese vital elements effectively communicate 
important information, guide road users, and mitigate potential hazards, thus contributing to 
safer and more organized bridge crossings. 
102. The Committee also recommends establishing sta ndardized designs for road signs that 
comply with national or international standards, such as those set by the Manual on Uniform 
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).  Also, there should be use of clear and easily recognizable 
symbols, colours, and fonts to improve readability and comprehension. 
Inadequate Anti-glare Measures 
     
103. Anti-glare measures are vital to road safety, especially during night time or adverse weather 
conditions. The Committee is of the view that glare  from the vehicles coming from opposite 
direction at night can blur a driver's vision, caus ing temporary blindness or reduced visibility. This  
can lead to delayed reaction times, difficulty in d iscerning road hazards or signage, and 
compromised depth perception . 
 
104. The Committee recommends for proper implementa tion of appropriate anti-glare 
measures on bridge sections to enhance visibility, reduce the risks associated with glare, 
and ensure the safety of all road users, especially during night time. 
 
105. The Committee also recommends implementing adv anced technologies, such as 

 
adaptive lighting systems or intelligent transporta tion systems (ITS) in 
adjust lighting levels based on real 
or adjust lighting intensity to reduce glare during  specific periods or in response to 
changing weather conditions. 
significantly enhance road safety and reduce the ri sk of accidents caused by blinding 
glare. 
 
Issue of vegetation/plantation 
106. The Committee notes that IRC SP 021: Guidelines on Landscaping and Tree Plantation has 
already described the brief layout reg 
depicted below in the image: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106. 
The above picture clearly shows that after the pave d shoulder 
plantation up to 8.75m, and on the divider 
 
107. 
The NGO, namely TRAX 
median, junctions, exits and entry points. 
diverging/merging, there mu st not be any obstacles in the clea 
centre of the junction which is necessary for clear sight distance. 
26 
adaptive lighting systems or intelligent transporta tion systems (ITS) in 
adjust lighting levels based on real -time conditions. These systems can automatically dim 
or adjust lighting intensity to reduce glare during  specific periods or in response to 
changing weather conditions.  The Committee feels that the road authorities can 
significantly enhance road safety and reduce the ri sk of accidents caused by blinding 
Issue of vegetation/plantation  
The Committee notes that IRC SP 021: Guidelines on Landscaping and Tree Plantation has 
already described the brief layout reg arding vegetation and plantation along the road, wh ich is 
The above picture clearly shows that after the pave d shoulder , there must not be a tree 
and on the divider , there must not be any plantation up to 1.5m. 
The NGO, namely TRAX  informed that m aximum crashes are occurring 
and entry points. Hence, near cuts and crossings, 
st not be any obstacles in the clea r zone up to 50m from the 
of the junction which is necessary for clear sight distance.  
Courtesy: TRAX S. Society 
adaptive lighting systems or intelligent transporta tion systems (ITS) in automobiles that 
time conditions. These systems can automatically dim 
or adjust lighting intensity to reduce glare during  specific periods or in response to 
The Committee feels that the road authorities can  
significantly enhance road safety and reduce the ri sk of accidents caused by blinding 
The Committee notes that IRC SP 021: Guidelines on Landscaping and Tree Plantation has 
arding vegetation and plantation along the road, wh ich is 
there must not be a tree 
there must not be any plantation up to 1.5m.  
aximum crashes are occurring near cuts at 
cuts and crossings, at 
r zone up to 50m from the 
Courtesy: TRAX S. Society 

27 
 
108. However, as per IRC: SP- 021 at median cut and  grade separator, at least 5m blank 
space shall be left for a clear view of traffic and  (1 1 .24.6) Trees planted in the median 
provide shade in the carriageway resulting in poor visibility especially during dawn and 
dusk, which is contradictory itself with IRC 066: R ecommended Practice for Sight 
Distance on Highways which says around 50m clear si ght distance from the center of the 
crossing i.e. around 25m. 
 
109. CRRI also informed that the provision of plant ation up to the height of 1.5 m on the 
standard median width of 5.5 to 6m is essential con forming to IRC:SP 21 (2009), IRC:SP-
84 (2019) and IRC:SP-87 (2019). When selecting plan t species for median plantations, it is 
advisable to choose shrubs of low or medium height.  This selection helps prevent headlight 
glare while still providing visual separation betwe en the lanes. Depending on the width of 
the median in different sections, one to two rows o f flowering shrubs can be planted. 
However, it is important to note that in sections w here the median width is less than 1.5 
meters, it is recommended to use only turf grass, a s specified by IRC:SP:21-2009 article 
no.11.11.1. Planting of large-sized trees in the me dian should generally be avoided. On the 
other hand, wherever there is a designated median o pening (provided to facilitate the cross 
traffic / U-Turning traffic movement), there shall be no plantation for a distance which will 
help to enhance the sight distance for the turning traffic. 
 
110. The Committee, therefore, recommends that no plantation be done up to 25m at the 
median while approaching a crossing. Cuts in the me dian, and exit/ entry to or from service 
lane need to be ensured for clear visibility to avoid chances of crashes/accidents. 
 
(iii) Lack of pedestrian facilities 
111. The Committee observes that there is a lack of  pedestrian facilities on service roads, making 
them vulnerable to crashes as they are forced to us e the roads. The Committee identifies some of 
the issues related to pedestrian facilities, which are placed below: 
Inadequate Pedestrian Facilities 
112. To ensure safe and comfortable walking conditi ons, the Committee recommends 
that it is crucial to provide hassle-free pedestria n facilities based on the requirement.  
Places with high pedestrian traffic require wider f ootpaths. Pedestrian facilities should 
also consider accessibility requirements for indivi duals with disabilities or limited 

 
mobility.  
Absent Pedestrian Guard Rails 
113. The Committee notes that the lack of 
safety concern. Pedestrians face risks due to the a bsence of dedicated infrastructure and inadequate 
safety measures. In the absence of 
vehicular traf ﬁc, especially on busy roads and intersections. A s ample image showing the absent 
pedestrian guard rails on the service road is presented below. 
              Picture showing absence of guard rails                             Courtesy: S 
 
114. To address the lack of pedestrian guardrails on service roads, 
the Ministry to perform thorough audits of high 
to identify locations where pedestrian guardrails a re most needed.  Guard 
provided at all safety-critical areas with a highe 
as near schools, hospitals, and areas with a signif icant pedestrian population. Additionally, it 
must be ensured that the guardrails are designed with appropriate standards, considering the 
height, strength, a nd visibility requirements for optimal pedestrian safety. 
 
115. 
There is also a need to conduct public awareness ca mpaigns to educate pedestrians and 
drivers about the importance of using designated pe destrian crossings, respecting guardrails, 
and adhering to traffic rules for pedestrian safety. 
Absent Pedestrian and Cyclist Facilities 
116. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities on bridge section s play a vital role in fostering 
sustainable transportation systems by providing saf e and accessible options 
traffic. However, it is observed that many of the bridge sections do not account for the 
pedestrian and bicycle facilities. 
vulnerable road users are forced to navigate alongs ide 
crashes and injuries. 
28 
Absent Pedestrian Guard Rails  
The Committee notes that the lack of  pedestrian guardrails on service roads is a 
safety concern. Pedestrians face risks due to the a bsence of dedicated infrastructure and inadequate 
In the absence of  proper guardrails, pedestrians are left exposed to the dangers 
ﬁc, especially on busy roads and intersections. A s ample image showing the absent 
pedestrian guard rails on the service road is presented below.  
Picture showing absence of guard rails                             Courtesy: S aveLIFE Foundation 
To address the lack of pedestrian guardrails on service roads, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry to perform thorough audits of high -traf ﬁc areas, intersections, and road segments 
to identify locations where pedestrian guardrails a re most needed.  Guard 
critical areas with a highe r concentration of vulnerable road users, such 
as near schools, hospitals, and areas with a signif icant pedestrian population. Additionally, it 
must be ensured that the guardrails are designed with appropriate standards, considering the 
nd visibility requirements for optimal pedestrian safety.  
There is also a need to conduct public awareness ca mpaigns to educate pedestrians and 
drivers about the importance of using designated pe destrian crossings, respecting guardrails, 
to traffic rules for pedestrian safety.  
Absent Pedestrian and Cyclist Facilities  
Pedestrian and bicycle facilities on bridge section s play a vital role in fostering 
sustainable transportation systems by providing saf e and accessible options 
it is observed that many of the bridge sections do not account for the 
pedestrian and bicycle facilities.  Without dedicated pathways for pedestrians and cycl ists, these 
vulnerable road users are forced to navigate alongs ide vehicular traf ﬁc, increasing the risk of 
pedestrian guardrails on service roads is a significant 
safety concern. Pedestrians face risks due to the a bsence of dedicated infrastructure and inadequate 
proper guardrails, pedestrians are left exposed to the dangers of 
ﬁc, especially on busy roads and intersections. A s ample image showing the absent 
 
aveLIFE Foundation  
Committee recommends 
ﬁc areas, intersections, and road segments 
to identify locations where pedestrian guardrails a re most needed.  Guard rails should be 
r concentration of vulnerable road users, such 
as near schools, hospitals, and areas with a signif icant pedestrian population. Additionally, it 
must be ensured that the guardrails are designed with appropriate standards, considering the 
 
There is also a need to conduct public awareness ca mpaigns to educate pedestrians and 
drivers about the importance of using designated pe destrian crossings, respecting guardrails, 
Pedestrian and bicycle facilities on bridge section s play a vital role in fostering 
sustainable transportation systems by providing saf e and accessible options for non-motorized 
it is observed that many of the bridge sections do not account for the 
Without dedicated pathways for pedestrians and cycl ists, these 
ﬁc, increasing the risk of 


29 
 
 
117. The Committee recommends including  pedestrian and bicycle facilities as a 
mandatory and integral part of bridged sections to accommodate the requirements of all road 
users, promoting safety, accessibility, and sustainable tr ansportation options. Moreover, 
the mandatory inclusion of pedestrian and bicycle f acilities on bridges promotes social 
equity, providing equal access to all members of th e community, regardless of their 
mode of transportation or physical abilities.  
 
(iv)  Design-related issues 
Discontinuous Service Roads  
118. The Committee observes that in some sections, due to constraints like land acquisition 
challenges, road-owning agencies have not construct ed the service roads. As a result, the service 
road network becomes discontinuous or inadequate, f orcing local traffic to merge directly with the 
main highway. Such discontinuity signiﬁcantly incre ases the risk of collisions as vehicles are 
forced to enter the highway to continue their journey.  
 
119. The Committee recommends that it is important for road-owning agencies to address 
discontinuous service lanes to ensure the safety of local traffic and minimize the risks associated 
with merging the service lanes with the main highwa y. Continuous service roads offer a 
dedicated route for local traffic. This reduces the  risk of collisions due to merging with the 
highway. Road planning and design should take into account the needs of the local traffic and 
ensure provisioning of appropriate infrastructure, including merging lanes, acceleration lanes, 
deceleration lanes, and proper signage. This will h elp minimize conflicts between local traffic 
and high-speed highway traffic, improving overall road safety. 
   Lack of designed U-turn facilities under the bridges 
120. The Committee observes that the absence of U-t urn facilities in many of the bridges section 
often leads to contraﬂow movements, where vehicles are forced to travel in the opposite direction 
of the through trafﬁc. This lack of proper U-turn facilities, at times, forces the commuters to ply on 
the wrong side, and signiﬁcantly increases the risk of crashes and fatalities on the bridge sections. 
 
121. The Committee recommends implementing U-turn f acilities under bridge sections 
where feasible. These U-turn facilities should have  controlled access points, clear signage, 
and proper lane markings, allowing motorists to make use of it safely. 

30 
 
Inadequate Treatment of Merging and Diverging Points 
122. The Committee notes that merging and diverging  points serve as critical transition zones 
where vehicles merge into or diverge from the main ﬂow of trafﬁc. However, it also observes that 
many of the bridge sections are designed and operat ionalised without proper merging and 
diverging points. As a result, inadequate merging a nd diverging points lead to sudden lane 
changes, unsafe merging practices, and decreased dr iver awareness, signiﬁcantly compromising 
safety and efficiency. 
 
123. The Committee recommends for providing adequat e length for acceleration and 
deceleration lanes, clear signage, and road markings. Consistent lane designations and trafﬁc 
control measures, such as trafﬁc signals or yield s igns, should be implemented to guide 
drivers and minimize conﬂicts. Additionally, regula r maintenance and periodic assessments 
of these points are essential to address any signag e obstructions, pavement deterioration, or 
visibility issues. By implementing these recommenda tions, bridge sections can facilitate 
smooth and safe transitions for merging and divergi ng trafﬁc, enhancing overall trafﬁc ﬂow 
and reducing the risk of crashes. 
 
 
  

31 
 
V 
Monitoring mechanisms 
 
124. A robust monitoring mechanism is required not only to oversee the progress of ongoing 
ROB/RUB projects but also to identify and address any bottlenecks in the project execution. 
 
125. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in formed that National Highway works are 
being monitored regularly by Authority’s Engineer/ Independent Engineer. In addition, Officers of 
the Ministry/NHAI/NHIDCL regularly monitor the proj ects at the field level as well as at the 
senior officer’s level. For improvement in monitori ng mechanism, the Ministry informed that IT-
based programme management tools such as PMIS, Data  Lake have been developed to enable 
efficient monitoring of the progress of the project s and programme across the entire project 
lifecycle and to generate Management Information Sy stem (MIS) reports for effective decision 
making. 
 
126. The Committee recommends that a robust monitor ing mechanism may be put in place 
not only to oversee the progress of ongoing ROB/RUB  projects but also to identify and 
address any bottlenecks in execution. 
 
Inter-ministerial coordination mechanism  
127. The MoRTH informed that for environment & fore st issues, the policy and project- specific 
matters are regularly taken up with the Ministry of  Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) to expedite clearances and removal of fun ctional bottlenecks. MoEF&CC has taken 
the initiative for streamlining statutory clearance s, especially for the grant of Stage-I and Stage-II  
forest clearance, e.g. direction for the issue of o ne-time Essential Details Sought (EDS), not 
insisting for a hard copy of the proposal. Fortnigh tly, Regional Coordination Meeting (FRCM) is 
held to monitor the clearances and expedite forest clearances. In addition, Inter-Ministerial 
Coordination and Monitoring Committee meetings are held to deal with policy issues and long 
pending proposals. 
 
128. For ROBs/RUBs clearance issues, monthly or bim onthly coordination meeting is conducted 
by the Chief Bridge Engineer at all Zonal Railway b etween the Railway Field Unit and Field Units 
of implementing agencies of the MoRTH. The issues r elated to ROBs/RUBs are discussed in the 
meeting for early resolution. 
 
Policy-related issues are discussed at the level of  Railway Board Level. In this meeting, Senior 
Officers of the MoRTH and the Railways participate for resolving the issues. 

32 
 
 
129. The Ministry of Railways informed that Inter-M inisterial coordination issues were a major 
impediment in the infrastructure sector generally a nd more particularly, in the road sector.  The 
Ministries of Railways, Civil Aviation, Ports, Ship ping & Waterways and Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change have been participating in Group of Infrastructure (GOI) meetings which are 
chaired by the Minister of Road Transport & Highway s.  The 10 
th  meeting of GOI was held on 
24.01.2023 and a number of road projects involving issues related to environment clearances, land 
acquisition, ROBs/RUBs etc., were discussed and resolved.  
 
130. The Ministry also informed that multi-tiered r eviews are being undertaken for early 
identification and resolution of issues affecting N H projects, including ROBs/RUBs driven by 
digital portals like PRAGATI portal and Project Mon itoring Group (PMG) portal. These portals 
enable monitoring of the status of the issues resol ution process of the issues and allow feedback of 
all relevant stakeholders by conducting periodic me etings. The Secretary, the Coordination in 
Cabinet Secretariat periodically reviews projects l isted in PMG portal with various Ministries and 
State Governments to resolve the issues affecting t he NH and other infrastructure projects. 
Under PRAGTI, Prime Minister chairs the meeting wherein the status of select critical projects and 
their issues are reviewed and resolved. 
 
131. The Committee notes that PM Gati Shakti- Natio nal Master Plan for Multi-modal 
Connectivity has provided an excellent platform for  integrated planning and coordinated 
implementation of all infrastructure projects, incl uding ROBs/RUBs, whether on a 
standalone basis or as part of corridor projects. 
 
132. The Committee recommends that the Government s hould establish a Central 
Coordinating Body or a Committee comprising represe ntatives from key ministries involved 
in road development, namely, the Ministry of Road T ransport and Highways, Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Clima te Change, and Ministry of Railways. 
This body will facilitate regular communication, co ordination, and decision-making among 
the Ministries. Such a step will also help overcome the delay in construction due to waiting in 
approval of clearances. 
 
133. The Committee also recommends that the roles, responsibilities, and mandates of each 
Ministry involved in road development must be clearly defined. It must be ensured that there 
is clarity on the specific areas in which each Ministry is responsible for and how they interact 
with other Ministries to ensure time-bound resoluti ons of issues. This will minimize delay, 

33 
 
overlaps, conflicts, and uncertainties in decision-making and implementation. 
 
134. The Committee feels that there remains a commu nication gap among the Ministries, 
leading to avoidable delay.  The Committee, therefo re, recommends establishing effective 
communication channels between the Ministries, such  as dedicated focal points or inter-
ministerial co-ordinating officers. These officers can serve as a single point of contact for 
communication, coordination, and information exchange between the Ministries. 
 
135. The Ministries should establish mechanisms for  information sharing and data 
integration among the Ministries/ Agencies involved  in road development. They can create a 
centralized repository or platform where relevant d ata, reports, and project updates can be 
shared among the concerned Ministries/authorities. This will enable Ministries to access and 
utilize comprehensive information for decision-making and project monitoring. 
 
Maintenance and upgradation  
136. The Committee notes that many service roads ac ross the country have become unusable due 
to problems like faulty designs, disrepair, encroac hments, etc. A thorough inspection of all service 
roads is needed to assess the needs for maintenance and upgradation. 
 
137. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in formed that periodic maintenance and 
upgradation of service roads are always taken up to gether with maintenance and upgradation of a 
particular section of road. Maintenance of highway sections, including the service road, during the 
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) period is the obligat ion of contractor as per the Contract 
Agreement. The MoRTH has issued SoP on periodic mai ntenance, and ordinary repair works vide 
letter dated 23.11.2020. 
 
138. Removal of encroachments is taken up on a peri odic basis in accordance with the provision 
of the Land and Traffic Control Act. Regular drives  are conducted by field offices for identifying 
the encroachments along the RoW and notices are iss ued as per guidelines. Thereafter, the 
assistance of Police and State Authorities are soug ht for removing such encroachments.  However, 
encroachment related activities being dynamic in nature, there is requirement for constant vigil and 
monitoring. Further, Incident Management Services ( Route Patrol Vehicle) are deployed over the 
stretches/ highways under the jurisdiction of NHAI,  which are available 24X7 to avoid 
encroachments on the highways. 
 
139. The Committee is of the view that the Ministri es should conduct regular inspections of 
ROBs and RUBs to identify any signs of deterioratio n, structural issues, or maintenance 

34 
 
requirements. These inspections should be carried o ut by qualified engineers and experts to 
assess the condition of the built infrastructure. T he study assessment should be placed in the 
public domain and MPs and MLAs of the concerned are a may also be appraised about the 
findings of the inspection report. 
 
140. The Committee recommends the Ministries to eva luate the load-carrying capacity of 
ROBs/RUBs periodically and consider structural upgr ades if required. This may involve 
strengthening the existing structure, modifying loa d limits, or implementing weight 
restrictions to ensure the safety and longevity of the infrastructure. 
 
141. The Ministries/ Agencies must ensure proper li ghting and signage along ROBs/RUBs 
for improved visibility and safety. Installation of  adequate lighting systems and prominent 
signage indicating height restrictions, speed limit s, and other important information benefit 
the road users. 
 
142. With reference to encroachments, the Committee  recommends that the Ministries 
should conduct a comprehensive survey and mapping o f the ROB/RUB area to identify 
encroachments and unauthorized structures by using modern surveying techniques, such as 
drones or satellite imagery so that proper remedial  measures can be taken to get rid of 
encroachments around the infrastructure. 
 
143. The concerned authorities must ensure to take legal actions against encroachers in 
accordance with relevant laws and regulations. They  should initiate eviction proceedings and 
enforce penalties for unauthorized occupation. Adeq uate humanitarian support and 
assistance should be provided to those affected by encroachment- induced eviction. 
 
144. Further, the Committee recommends that the eng agement with the local community 
and stakeholders should be strengthened to obviate any future encroachments. The relevant 
NGOs, advocacy bodies and local opinion of leaders may also be roped in to create awareness 
about non-encroachment of the public infrastructure spaces. 
 
Role of CRRI 
145. The Committee notes that the Central Road Rese arch Institute (CRRI) is a premier national 
research lab constituted by the Council of the Scie ntific and Industrial Research (CSIR) under the 
Ministry of Science and Technology (Govt. of India) . It carries out R&D in the areas of the road 
and transportation sector to meet the requirement o f the country. It was established in 1952 as a 
constituent laboratory of the CSIR, pursuing resear ch and consultancy activities related to roads, 

35 
 
railways and airports (runway and Taxi-lane), traff ic and transportation, bridge and geotechnical 
aspects. 
 
146. CRRI informed that it is actively pursuing Res earch and Development for highway 
structures, including underpasses, ROBs, RUBs, Flyo vers, Road overpasses, etc. Primarily, these 
structures are constructed with RCC, PSC, Steel, Co mposites, etc. Therefore, the CRRI has been 
guiding their innovative design, construction, qual ity control, post-construction structural safety 
audit, distress diagnosis, rehabilitation, retrofit ting, etc. The CRRI has also pioneered in 
developing structural health monitoring of these st ructures. The salient points in this regard are as 
follows:  
• The construction material evaluations have been don e in the laboratory and on-site for 
various projects sponsored by National and State Hi ghways Agencies from a long-term 
durability perspective.  
• Quality control of elevated structures, including R OBs, Guidance and Monitoring of 
launching technique used for segmental construction  for long-span and long-distance 
elevated viaducts, bridges, and flyovers. 
• Load testing of the structures to verify load-carry ing capacity, including ROBs. This 
technique has proven useful for old, distressed, or rehabilitated underpasses and ROBs.  
• Development of techniques for inspection of bridges over long river spans and with very high 
vertical clearance. 
• CRRI has developed a Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit (MBIU), used extensively for 
hundreds of bridges across India on many highway pr ojects. The use of an inspection 
platform is also essential for closer inspection of defects in such structures.  
• Structural Health Monitoring of the structures, inc luding ROBs, for long-term performance 
and construction acceptability.  
• Inspection of underpasses for structural soundness through non-destructive testing. 
• Planning and design of retrofitting measures to enhance the service life. 
 
147. The CRRI also undertakes scientific developmen ts regarding sustainable materials for road 
construction for ROB & RUB approach embankments and  service roads and other indigenous 
technology and patents. 
 
148. With reference to the traffic study, the CRRI informed that it conducted traffic studies for the 
junction improvement of major road corridors in Ahm edabad, Gujarat. As part of this survey, the 
improvement of the Naroda Railway Crossing was stud ied. This railway crossing is located in the 
eastern part of Ahmedabad city on the Old NH8 Narod a approach road. A typical plan for a Road 
Over Bridge (ROB) at Naroda Railway Crossing was su bmitted to the Ahmedabad Municipal 
Corporation (AMC) for implementation on the ground.  Subsequently, the Ahmedabad Municipal 
Corporation implemented the short-term and long-ter m plans submitted by CSIR-CRRI. The 
assessment and impact is shown below in the picture: 

 
ASSESSMENT AND IMPACT OF CRRI TRAFFIC STUDY AT NARODA 
                      
149. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by 
development. However, the Committee is of the view that 
binding guidelines for adoption of sustainable 
development and the road designs 
Role of IRC 
150. Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is 
highway sector without any grant from 
codes, guidelines, manuals, etc ., 
The IRC also holds periodical meetings, seminars, workshops, 
technical problems regarding latest cutting 
disseminate technical knowledge of experience among st highway engineers. 
publishes, or arranges for publication of proceeding s, journals, periodicals, and other literature for 
promoti on of the objectives of the IRC, 
with road sector.  
 
151. The 
IRC has a group of 26 Commi 
Specifications & Standards Committee (H1 
committee (B-1 to B-9) and General Specifications & Standards Committee (G 
had MoUs with intern ational partners like JICA, PIARC, AASTHO and Inter national Road 
36 
Courtesy: Central Road Research Institute 
ASSESSMENT AND IMPACT OF CRRI TRAFFIC STUDY AT NARODA RAILWAY CROSSING 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the CRRI in the field of road 
development. However, the Committee is of the view that the CRRI should also come up with 
binding guidelines for adoption of sustainable technology and 
designs  keeping in view the national goals and aspirations 
Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is a self-sustained non- profit organization working for 
highway sector without any grant from the Government. The objective of 
.,  for the road sector. So far, the IRC has published 297 documents. 
holds periodical meetings, seminars, workshops,  and annual meet to discus 
latest cutting -edge technology in roads, bridges, etc 
disseminate technical knowledge of experience among st highway engineers. 
ublishes, or arranges for publication of proceeding s, journals, periodicals, and other literature for 
on of the objectives of the IRC,  besides advising on priority areas for rese 
IRC has a group of 26 Commi ttees, broadly divided into three streams viz. Highway 
Specifications & Standards Committee (H1 -H10), Bridge Specifications & Standards apex 
9) and General Specifications & Standards Committee (G 
ational partners like JICA, PIARC, AASTHO and Inter national Road 
 
Courtesy: Central Road Research Institute  
RAILWAY CROSSING   
CRRI in the field of road 
CRRI should also come up with 
technology and materials for road 
keeping in view the national goals and aspirations . 
profit organization working for the 
The objective of the IRC is to prepare 
IRC has published 297 documents. 
annual meet to discus s 
edge technology in roads, bridges, etc ., and also 
disseminate technical knowledge of experience among st highway engineers. The IRC also 
ublishes, or arranges for publication of proceeding s, journals, periodicals, and other literature for 
priority areas for rese arch connected 
three streams viz. Highway 
H10), Bridge Specifications & Standards apex 
9) and General Specifications & Standards Committee (G -1 to G-7). IRC also 
ational partners like JICA, PIARC, AASTHO and Inter national Road 

37 
 
Federation. In addition, IRC also had collaboration s with research organizations like CRRI and 
Highway Research Stations, Chennai and other Instit utions like IITs, NITs, NATPAC, leading 
consultants, and contractors. 
 
a. Important manuals related to Road, bridges  
152. For planning and design of the construction an d maintenance of  structures  like 
ROBs/RUBs, the IRC has prepared a document titled I RC:SP:90 ‘Guidelines for Grade Separators 
and Elevated Structures’ which gives details about the Planning aspect, General Features & 
Geometric Standards, Environmental Considerations, Construction Methods & Constructability 
Issues, Safety Requirements, Inspection and Mainten ance aspects, etc. In addition to this, general 
features and geometric design standards of ROBs, RU Bs are  based on numerous  relevant IRC 
Codes/ manuals depending upon category of roads i.e . 2 lane, 4 lane, 6 lane, expressways, urban 
roads, hill roads,  etc. 
 
153. With respect to service roads, the IRC publish ed IRC:SP:19 ‘Manual for Survey, 
Investigation and preparation of Road Projects’ whi ch gives details about stages in project 
preparation, guiding principles for route selection  and alignment improvement, survey of socio-
economic profile, traffic surveys and analysis, rec onnaissance survey, topographic survey, 
environmental impact assessment & rehabilitation an d resettlement study, feasibility report, 
staking final alignment on ground, soil and materials surveys, road inventory and condition survey, 
drainage studies, preparation and presentation of D PR, pre-construction activities & project 
clearances, etc. 
 
154. Further, IRC:SP:09 which deals with traffic su rveys has been revised in 2022 based on the 
latest equipment available for traffic surveys. Thi s document also covers information regarding 
current traffic, generated traffic and induced traffic. 
b.   IRC Initiatives- training, workshops and seminars 
155. With reference to the initiatives taken, IRC i nformed that it regularly organizes seminars and 
workshops both at the international and national le vels in order to pool the latest knowledge from 
experts on various topics of importance connected w ith roads and bridges and to disseminate the 
knowledge to practising highway engineers. The IRC has organized national/ international 
Seminars, national/ regional workshops on various i mportant topics and beneficial to highway 
engineers / professionals. The details of seminars and workshops organized by the IRC during the 
last 05 years are provided in Annexure V. 
 
c. Compliance of IRC guidelines  

38 
 
156. The Committee was informed that all the implem enting agencies for the road sector, 
especially, under the Ministry of Roads, Transport & Highways like the NHAI, NHIDCL and 
PWDs, are scrupulously following the IRC guidelines.  However, modifications if any, are effected 
through administrative orders of the MoRTH as and where required. 
 
157. IRC informed that the Compendium for Road Over  Bridges (ROBs) on Indian Railways 
(Report BS-132)” published by RDSO, Lucknow is a co mpilation of good practices adopted in 
planning of ROBs, launching operations and to creat e a repository of drawings in use over Indian 
Railways for adoption in railway span.  In this Com pendium, it is mentioned that for developing 
design and drawings various IRC & BIS Codes and Spe cial Publications are helpful. Details of 
important IRC document refereed in Indian Railways (Report BS-132) Compendium are as under.  
• IRC SP:73-2018 ‘Manual of Specifications and Standa rds for Two Laning of Highways with 
Paved Shoulder’,  
• IRC SP:84-2019 ‘Manual of Specifications and Standards for Four Laning of Highways’ 
• IRC SP:87-2019 ‘Manual of Specifications and Standards for Six Laning of Highways’, 
• IRC 5-2015 ‘Standard Specifications and Code Of Pra ctice for Road Bridges, Section -I 
General Features of Design’, 
• IRC 6-2017 ‘Standard Specifications and Code of Pra ctice for Road Bridges, Section-II – 
Loads and Stresses’, 
• IRC SP:69-2011 ‘Guidelines and Specifications for Expansion Joints’,  
• IRC 22-2015 ‘Standard Specifications and Code of Pr actice for Road Bridges, Section-VI – 
Composite Construction’,  
• IRC 24-2010 ‘Standard Specifications and Code of Pr actice or Road Bridges, Section-V – 
Steel Road Bridges’, 
• IRC 83 ‘Standard Specifications and Code of Practice for Road Bridges, Bearings’,  
• IRC 112-2020 Code of Practice for Concrete Road Bridges’, 
• IRC:78 - IRC 78-2014 Road Bridges Foundation and Substructure’, 
• IRC: SP:105 Explanatory Handbook to IRC:112 Code of  
Practice for Concrete Road Bridges’,  
 
158. IRC: SP:90 ‘Guidelines for Grade Separators an d Elevated Structures’ is a separate document 
covering exclusive details about grade-separated st ructures like flyovers, interchanges, elevated 
structures, viaducts, underpasses / overpasses, ROB , RUB and LHSs, etc.  In order to design any  
type of such structures, numerous IRC codes needs t o be used like  for planning & other geometric 
requirement (IRC:5),  bridge loading (IRC:6), proje ct preparation ( IRC:SP:54), foundation 
(IRC:78), super- structure ( for concrete bridges s tructure (IRC:112), for steel bridges structure 
(IRC:24) & for composite bridges structure (IRC:22) ,   bridge bearings ( IRC:81 , part 1, part 2 , 
part 3 & part 4), bridge Expansion joints (IRC:SP:6 9), quality control (IRC:SP:112), 
mandatory/cautionary/ incriminatory Signage (IRC:67 ), Marking (IRC:35), Pedestrian Facilities 
(IRC:103) , etc. All these publications are being p eriodically updated /revised based on the 

39 
 
experience gained and developments in technologies abroad. In doing so, the IRC Technical 
Committees constituted for the purpose do refer to the International Codes of Practice and 
Specifications. 
 
159. RDSO (Report BS-132) Compendium is in complian ce with existing IRC codes. The 
compendium for Road Over Bridges (ROBs) on Indian R ailways (Report BS-132) published by 
RDSO which is based on their proven and best practi ces is being adhered while preparing GADs 
of Structures across rail tracks in the Highway Projects.  
 
160. There is scope for bringing new technologies, introducing new materials such as GFRP, 
CFRP, Aluminium, Carbon Fibre Cables, Minimizing ma terial consumption by better designs, 
lighter & aesthetically appealing   structures with  associated strength and stability issues to 
address.  
 
161. The IRC has Committees for accreditation of di fferent New Materials which could be used 
on Trial basis in Highway projects for a limited pe riod. The successful ones among them could be 
used by the Professionals / Govt. Departments as per requirement. 
 
162. The Committee in this regard recommends that c ompliance with IRC guidelines must 
be made a mandatory requirement for all road develo pment projects. Further, the 
Committee suggests that independent third-party aud its should be conducted to assess 
compliance with IRC guidelines. Engaging qualified auditors who are familiar with IRC 
guidelines can provide an unbiased evaluation of project compliance and identify any gaps or 
non-compliance issues that need to be addressed. 
 
163. The Committee further notes that effective imp lementation of Rule 166 of the Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR) can ensure road safety.  Rule 166 (dealing with road, design, 
construction, and maintenance standards) under the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 
7, 
was added via G.S.R 584(E), dated 25th September 20 20 (w.e.f. 1-10-2020) to give effect to 
Sec 198A of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019. The rule states as follows: 
“(1)The design, construction, and maintenance of na tional highways shall be in accordance 
with the standards and speciﬁcations of the Indian Road Congress (IRC) as may be applicable, 
or any other instructions or guidelines issued by the Central Government from time to time…” 
 
164. The Committee notes that the IRC guidelines ar e mammoth in nature, as there are over 
200 guidelines introduced and renewed by IRC since it was established in December 1934. 
Currently, the IRC guidelines include a range of su bjects like the method of recording 
accidents, and practices for road users, apart from  the guidelines on road, design, 

40 
 
construction, and maintenance. Therefore, for effec tive implementation of the codes 
pertaining to road design, construction, and mainte nance by the designated authority, 
contractor, consultant, or concessionaire, it is im perative that such IRC guidelines be 
speciﬁcally called out under Rule 166 CMVR, or else  there will be chances on missing out 
important standards at any point while implementing  road safety standards at all or any of 
the three stages. 
 
 d. Fund allocation and support to IRC  
165. IRC informed that so far IRC has not received any kind of earmarked budget for carrying out 
comprehensive guidelines/manual on road surveys and  road development by IRC.  The Ministry is 
sanctioning all the priority areas and the research work for R&D requirements. 
 
166. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may  consider deputing some officers 
having interest and inclination toward standardizat ion, R&D to work in the IRC.  Also, the 
Ministry may consider providing a reasonable amount  of corpus seed fund to the IRC to 
manage the function of its Secretariat, the modalit ies of which may be worked out in 
consultation with the IRC.  
 
167. Further, since the Technical Committees, Apex Committees, Highway Research Board 
and its Committees are involved in the preparation of initial drafts, reviewing critically the 
draft prepared, state-of-the-art reports, explanato ry handbook on Codes with solved 
examples, etc., the Ministry may consider providing  them support through budgetary 
allocation for their works including for bearing ex penditure on intercity travels, 
accommodation, local travel, and honorarium. 
 
168. The Ministry may provide budgetary allocation to the IRC to organize workshops, 
seminars, and webinars in order to disseminate the knowledge on latest IRC guidelines to the 
practicing highway engineers in the interest of cre ating a large pool of engineers with 
knowledge on the cutting-edge technology in the rap idly evolving road design and 
engineering sector.  
 
The Committee may be apprised of the decision taken  in these matters, giving reasons 
thereof.  
  

41 
 
VI 
Adoption of best practices 
169. As countries strive to improve their transport ation networks and address increasing traffic 
demands, adopting best practices in the planning, d esign, construction, and maintenance of 
ROBs/RUBs and service roads becomes crucial. 
 
Global perspective 
a. Entry/exit at service roads 
170. The Committee suggests that entry/exit at serv ice roads must be designed for a 
Single/Intermediate Lane of Entry or Exit (IRC:SP:8 7-2013), and the same will be applicable in 
the case of Slip Lane too.  The picture below explains it after comparing to Switzerland: 
 
Figure showing difference in entry/exit in India and Switzerland                          Courtesy: TRAX S. Society, NGO  
 
171. The Committee notes that TRAX, NGO has suggest ed a change in design which is provided 


42 
 
below: 
 
New design as suggested by TRAX, NGO 
 
172. The picture placed below at (a) shows how road s are being built at present in India. The 
image below it represents the international Standar ds being followed worldwide. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the Ministry must exam ine the feasibility of adopting and 
implementing the proposed design suggested at (b) w hich is based on international 
standards .
Design 
suggested by NGO                                                        Courtesy: TRAX S. Society  
(a).The manner in which roads are being built presently in India (top)  
(b). The design suggested by NGO (bottom) 

 
b. Lane marking and Gore area marking 
173. L ane marking, especially Shoulder Line and Gore Area  Marking is generally absent in India. 
However, in foreign countries like Dubai, 
visible in the picture placed below: 
Figure 1. Lane Marking and gore area marking in India 
Figure 2. Lane Marking and gore marking in Dubai 
 
Figure 3. Picture showing gore marking in Sr 
43 
Lane marking and Gore area marking  
ane marking, especially Shoulder Line and Gore Area  Marking is generally absent in India. 
However, in foreign countries like Dubai,  the markings are clearly done. The difference is cl early 
visible in the picture placed below:  
Lane Marking and gore area marking in India  
Lane Marking and gore marking in Dubai  
Picture showing gore marking in Sr i Lanka  
ane marking, especially Shoulder Line and Gore Area  Marking is generally absent in India. 
the markings are clearly done. The difference is cl early 
 
 
 


44 
 
Induction of new technologies 
174. Technology is the mainstay in developing world -class infrastructure in the country. The 
Committee notes that one of the mandates of the Bri dge and Structures Directorate of the RDSO is 
the development and adoption of new technology for bridges and related structures. 
 
175. The Indian Railways informed that it has conti nuously adopted the latest technologies and 
has upgraded its designs and standards in line with  the world’s technology. This has been done in 
all walks of the domain of Bridges and structures, whether it is design or product or the process. A 
brief of all such new technologies adopted by RDSO in the field of ROBs and RUBs is given 
below- 
a) Adoption of Composite Steel Girders for ROBs 
b) Achieving longer span designs. 
c) New standards for RDSO approved Fabrication workshops 
d) Design innovations- Fully Welded Bow String Girder. 
e) Use of advanced bridge bearings- Spherical Bearings 
f) Adoption of the latest welding process. 
g) Adoption of latest High Strength Friction Grip Bolts. 
h) Adoption of Shear Studs in place of Shear Connectors. 
 
  176.  Following Process improvements have been do ne by RDSO:- 
i. RDSO has issued a MODEL Quality Assurance Plan for all cases of fabrication of RDSO 
standard spans of Road Over Bridges to reduce time taken in approval. 
ii. Fabrication of ROB steel girders is mandatorily done in RDSO-approved workshops. 
iii. Simplification of vendor approval system for the en listment of vendors for girder 
fabrication. 
iv. Various methods for launching RUBs are as follows- 
 
• Cut and Cover method 
• Temporary Girders 
• Box Pushing- with cutting edge and with Air Pushing 
• Segmental and single-piece launching 
 
All of these methods are frequently used by the Zon al Railways depending upon the field 
conditions.  
 
177. The Indian Railways further informed that the adoption of technology of advanced nations is 
taken up cautiously as these are connected with the  safety of rail and road users. Only proven 
technologies are adopted, considering the market ca pability. In most cases, India is at par with the 
advanced nations. IR is adopting the conservative a pproach as rail safety is prime concern as also 
the priority. 
178. The Committee notes the reply of RDSO, Indian railways that in most cases, India is at 
par with the advanced nations.  However, the Commit tee suggests adopting Building 

45 
 
Information Modelling (BIM) technology which enable s the creation of detailed 3D models 
that integrate various aspects of the ROB/RUB development process, including architectural, 
structural, and utility design. Further, Virtual Re ality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) 
technologies can also be used to provide immersive experiences and simulations during the 
design and construction phases of ROBs/RUBs. They a llow engineers and project teams to 
visualize and interact with virtual models, facilit ating better design review, construction 
planning, and stakeholder communication. 
 
179. The Committee also emphasizes on usage of Adva nced Construction Materials such as 
fiber-reinforced polymers (FRPs), high-performance concrete, and composite materials to 
enhance the durability, strength, and lifespan of R OBs/RUBs. These materials offer 
improved resistance to corrosion, seismic forces, and other environmental stress factors. 
 
180. Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled Intellige nt Transportation Systems (ITS) 
technologies can be integrated into ROBs/RUBs to en hance road safety and better traffic 
management. These include systems for automated tra ffic control, real-time monitoring of 
road conditions, traffic signalling, and vehicle de tection. ITS can improve the efficiency of 
traffic flow, reduce congestion, and enhance overall safety. 
 
181. Smart Sensors embedded in ROBs/RUBs can contin uously monitor the structural 
health, detecting and alerting to any anomalies or signs of deterioration. SHM systems 
provide real-time data on the structural integrity,  stress, vibrations, and deformation of the 
infrastructure, facilitating proactive maintenance and preventing failures. 
 
182. The Committee also recommends the usage of Geo spatial technologies, such as 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote sen sing, to enable accurate mapping, 
analysis, and visualization of the project area. Th ese tools assist in land surveying, route 
planning, environmental impact assessment, and site selection for ROB/RUB development. 
 
Private Sector Participation 
183. The RDSO informed that it is collaborating wit h private players with the help of the 
following mechanisms- 
a) Cross-Approval Policy 
b) Feedback on Draft specifications from the private i ndustry before finalization of 
specification. 
c) Vendor registration system  
d) Engagement with Innovators/ Startups and Entreprene urs to develop cost-effective, 

46 
 
implementable, innovative solutions. 
e) Rail exhibition event for private players to showca se their innovative products and solutions 
for the Railway industry. 
 
184. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry  should conduct comprehensive 
feasibility studies to assess the viability of impl ementing PPP models for ROB/RUB 
development. The Ministry should evaluate factors s uch as project size, revenue potential, 
market conditions, and potential private sector int erest. Feasibility studies will provide 
valuable insights into the suitability of PPP and help in making informed decisions. 
 
185. The Committee recommends that an assessment of  legal and regulatory framework 
should be pursued to evaluate the existing legal an d regulatory framework and to identify 
any barriers or limitations to implementing PPP in ROB/RUB development.  The Ministry 
should also identify necessary amendments or new le gislations required to facilitate PPP 
arrangements, ensure transparency, and provide a fa vourable business environment for 
private partners. 
 
186. The Committee also suggests that the Ministrie s should establish transparent and 
competitive procurement processes to attract capabl e private entities. They should also 
implement a fair and competitive bidding process th at encourages multiple private sector 
players to participate.  
 
187. The Ministry should engage with various stakeh olders, including local communities, 
transport authorities, private sector entities, and  financing institutions, seeking their input 
and addressing any concerns or expectations they ma y have. The Ministry should also foster 
partnerships and collaboration to enhance the success and sustainability of PPP projects. 
 
Sustainable and environment-friendly roads 
188. The IRC informed that it has been making effor ts to align itself to global initiatives of 
environmental strategy for the promotion of cleaner  and energy-efficient construction techniques, 
resource efficient measures, use of recycled paveme nts, use of waste material, etc. The IRC has 
framed/ revised relevant code and guidelines which are very innovative and first in the world i.e., 
use of shredded waste plastic (IRC: SP:98) in pavem ent construction. This environment-friendly 
technology helps to achieve higher resistance to wa ter-induced damage leading to the deformation 
of pavements. Numerous new/revisions are published by the IRC in the last 16 years for adoption 
by road user departments, are given in Annexure VI. 
 
189. The CRRI informed about the usage of different  waste materials like steel slag waste in 

47 
 
collaboration with different industries like MNS, J SW Steel, Rashtriya Ispat Limited and Tata 
Steel to construct a bituminous road in Arunachal P radesh. In Odisha, Alumina waste has been 
utilised for road construction. Also, the CRRI works on the development of different new materials 
out of waste, including the waste plastic.  
 
190. The CRRI has carried out detailed R&D studies on various industrial wastes, viz.  Fly ash; 
Copper slag; Steel slag; Red mud; Chrome slag, Jaro fix and Phosphogypsum; and has developed 
technical design specifications for their use in Em bankment/granular layers; Bituminous/concrete 
mixes. Experimental test tracks along actual highwa ys have been laid with the support of the 
waste-producing industry and concerned stakeholders . Different Indian Roads Congress (IRC) 
code of practices viz. IRC: SP-121 (2018); IRC-SP-1 32 (2022); have been published for their 
utilization by different stakeholders. The CRRI has  also investigated the utilisation of urban 
Construction and Demolition wastes (C&D) wastes for  road construction. The details of using 
C&D wastes (CRRI reports/case studies) are published in IRC:121-2017. 
 
191. The CRRI has also adopted noise barrier design s in Mumbai by the usage of noise barrier 
materials like Honeycomb patterns, sponge patterns and grass patterns, which can reduce noise 
levels by 30 dB. 
 
192. The Committee appreciates the innovative effor ts made in the direction of construction 
of environmentally sustainable roads. However, it f eels that given the national aspirations to 
gradually move towards a zero-waste circular econom y, more measures should be taken in 
this regard. The Committee suggests that the Minist ries should adopt features like rain 
gardens, bioswales, and permeable pavements to mana ge stormwater runoff and improve 
water quality. Green infrastructure can help rechar ge groundwater, reduce the load on 
drainage systems and help enhance biodiversity in roadside areas. 
 
193. The Ministries should also implement Sustainab le Drainage Systems (SuDS) to manage 
surface water runoff from roads. SuDS techniques in clude infiltration basins, constructed 
wetlands, and detention ponds that mimic natural hy drological processes. SuDS can reduce 
the risk of flooding, promote groundwater recharge,  and improve water quality by removing 
pollutants. 
 
194. The Ministries should also encourage road desi gn that optimizes energy efficiency. This 
can include factors such as minimizing excessive gr ades, optimizing alignment to reduce 
vehicle energy consumption, and incorporating intel ligent transportation systems (ITS) to 

48 
 
improve traffic flow and reduce congestion-related emissions. 
 
195. The Committee also recommends that the Ministr ies can explore opportunities to 
integrate renewable energy sources into road infras tructure. This can include incorporating 
solar panels into noise barriers or utilizing solar -powered lighting along roads. Renewable 
energy integration can help reduce dependence on fo ssil fuels and contribute to a more 
sustainable transportation network. 
 
196. The Ministries should enhance Environmental Im pact Assessments for road projects to 
evaluate the potential ecological, social, and cult ural impacts. Further, such assessments 
should be placed in the public domain. Assessment o f the project's potential effects on 
ecosystems, habitats, and natural resources should also be undertaken to develop 
appropriate mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts. 
 
Need for VUP/CUP   
197. The Committee notes that Vehicle Underpasses ( VUPs) enhance road safety by providing a 
dedicated passage for vehicles to pass beneath a ro ad or highway. VUPs help maintain smooth 
traffic flow by eliminating the need for vehicles t o cross the road at grade. VUPs optimize land 
utilization by utilizing the space underneath the r oad, which might otherwise be unused or would 
have required costly land acquisition. Similarly, C attle Underpasses (CUPs) facilitate the 
movement of livestock, minimising stress and potential harm to them. 
198. The Committee reiterates that CRRI’s suggestio n that wherever the highway passes 
through built areas, the need for VUP/ Light Vehicu lar Underpass (LVUP) must be built as 
part of Road safety Audit (RSA) report conforming t o IRC: 84 (2019) or IRC: 87 (2019), 
including the provision of half-subway, i.e. depressed Pedestrian Under Pass (PUP). 
               Good Samaritan Law 
 
199. The NGOs that appeared before the Committee, i nformed that currently, the promotion of the 
‘Good Samaritan Law’ is focused on two aspects; 
 (i) A Good Samaritan will not be questioned/harassed by the police or doctors and  
(ii) He or she is entitled for a reward for such a good act.  
 
200. A 2018 study by SaveLIFE Foundation revealed t hat only 16% of the respondents were 
aware of the good Samaritan Law. Further, while 88%  of the respondents were willing to become 
Good Samaritans in the event of a road crash, only 12% reported that they would call the police in 
the event of a road crash, and less than 30% of the  respondents were either willing to call an 

49 
 
ambulance or take the victim to the hospital. The c urrent steps to ensure awareness and training on 
Good Samaritan law are inadequate for law enforceme nt agencies and medical professionals, let 
alone civilians. 201. Section 134A of MVAA 2019 pro tects a good samaritan from any civil or 
criminal action while providing emergency medical c are or other required assistance to a road 
crash victim. Still, a lot can be done under this t o ensure the enforcement of the Good Samaritan 
Law. 
 
202. The Committee further notes that India records  more than 1.5 lakh road traffic-related deaths. 
As per the study conducted by the AIIMS and NITI Aa yog in 2021, 98.5% of the victims are dead 
 
due to lack of pre-hospital care and injury prevent ion during the golden hour. The Provider Course 
Manual for Paramedics National Emergency Life Suppo rt, released by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare in 2022 (post MVAA 2019), covers a c omprehensive syllabus for paramedics and 
doctors on emergency care but does not provide comp rehensive coverage on the Good Samaritan 
Law. It is crucial for such training materials to c over the Good Samaritan Law in greater detail to 
enhance the legal awareness of medical professional s on their rights and responsibilities; 
awareness on the risks associated with providing em ergency care; the level of assistance they can 
provide without facing legal actions; engagement an d discussion; proper communication and 
documentation for easy references. Training and Man uals like these form the basis of 
emergency care. 
 
203. The Committee notes that the Good Samaritan ma y not be properly trained in 
handling/assisting an injured person. Medical profe ssionals are already aware and trained in 
handling such situations. However, currently, there  is no training available for ‘Good Samaritan 
Law’, only awareness.  
 
204. The Committee further notes that personnel fro m Law Enforcement Agencies need to be 
trained in proper first aid procedures as they ofte n play the role of ‘first responder’ in case of a 
road accident. They do get trained in certain kinds  of training in this regard but what kind of 
medical equipment they carry, how effectively they implement the procedures they learn and 
efficacy of such training in real life situations is still questionable.  
 
205. The Committee notes that Several state statute s in the US have the concept of liability 
immunity and protection. The concept of liability i mmunity enhances the good samaritan law a 
step further by providing immunity to the good sama ritans from any unintended consequences that 
may occur while providing assistance to injured per sons. Liability protection safeguards the 
medical, healthcare and trained emergency care prof essionals who voluntarily render medical 

50 
 
emergency services. While both these provisions var y from state to state - some states protect both 
civilians and trained professionals and some safegu ard only one section. This approach can help 
the enforcement of Good Samaritan Law further by addressing the core fear of legal accountability 
among the potential Good Samaritans.   
 
206. Another striking feature of the US state statu tes is voluntary emergency care training 
provisions where civilians can get free training fo r emergency road accident situations. This 
expands the ambit of Good Samaritan Law as far as awareness and enforcement is concerned. 
 
207. In France, the Good Samaritan Law goes by the name: Duty to rescue if the Samaritans are in 
a position to do so, making the Good Samaritan act a duty rather than a voluntary act. This 
approach may have its own issues in a country like India, where the current level of awareness and 
Good Samaritan actions are low. This approach, although, may be explored at a later interval when 
some level of success has been achieved in awarenes s regarding the Good Samaritan Law. 
 
208. Incentivisation has proved worthy to encourage  voluntary citizen engagement in several 
other countries. China awards witnesses who provide  evidence of Good Samaritan’s acts 
11 . The 
GSL Scheme grant of Award to the Good Samaritan who  has saved the life of a victim of a fatal 
accident is a positive step in this regard. The off icial numbers of the grants distributed have not 
been released to gather any information regarding the success of the scheme. 
 
209. The Committee recommends that first aid educat ion for every police personnel must be 
mandatory along with their regular training. All Po lice PCRs must be equipped with the 
requisite first aid equipments and items, etc.  
 
210. Further, the scope of the ‘Good Samaritan Law’  must be enlarged beyond helping a 
road accident victim. Victims of natural calamities  like drought and flood, fire incidents, or 
victims of any medical condition, etc. must be incl uded in the ambit of ‘Good Samaritan 
Law’, as the nature of helping victims of above sit uations, is identical with the road accident 
victims and hence must be part of Good Samaritan Law.  
 
211. The Committee feels that for reaping the best results out of ‘Good Samaritan Law’; 
mass training and awareness is needed. ‘Scouts & Gu ide’ system which used to be in schools 
earlier can be truly instrumental in this regard. ‘ First Aid Training’ and handling and 
assisting a person injured in a road accident or in  any natural calamity, is an essential part 
for every student trained under the ‘Scout and Guid e’ System. This needs to be resurrected 
in all schools and the Ministry should appropriatel y sensitise and take up with the concerned 

51 
 
authorities for building citizenship rooted in sublime values.   
 
212. The Committee also recommends sensitizing the police of its duties and 
 responsibilities 
during such a situation. Increased fund allocation to public funded hospitals has the potential 
to establish robust emergency care units, besides c reating adequate infrastructure. Police 
and judiciary must be adequately sensitized so that  they remain alive towards the protection 
of Good Samaritans. 
 
213. To provide for accountability of various Gover nment authorities and encouragement 
for Good Samaritans, the Committee recommends that a “Grievance Redressal Mechanism” 
be instituted nationally. The new section 134A of t he MVAA 2019 protects the Good 
Samaritans but does not guide one over the breach o f the obligations of the police and the 
hospital. Sin ce these subjects are a part of state lists, the states must be encouraged to 
come up with rules regarding the grievance mechanism in case of breach of compliance. 
 
214. Besides, campaigns to increase the awareness o f the rights of Good Samaritans must be 
undertaken to educate the public. Further, in pursu ance to the guidelines for Good 
Samaritans issued by the Ministry of Health and Fam ily Welfare mentioned therein, both 
public and private hospitals and police stations mu st publish the charter on the rights of 
Good Samaritans. This will go a long way in encouraging the spirited public and help greater 
information dissemination on right of the good Samaritans. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

52 
 
VII 
Miscellaneous 
Members of the Committee also raised following issu es regarding ROBs/RUBs in the 
country:  
• Emphasis on NHAI to provide information regarding p atches  for opening retail outlets on NHs so 
that oil marketing companies can put up their adver tisements and proper guidelines regarding NoC 
of retail outlets for promoting Ease of Doing Business; 
• Current construction status of six by-pass roads ne ar Rajahmundry viz. Diwancheruvu ROB, 
Gammon India ROB, Rajanagaram ROB, Lalacheruvu ROB, Bommuru ROB and Vemagiri ROB; 
• Requirement of bridge on Godavari river from Devara palli to Maredumilli to bypass Rajahmundry 
city and to reduce distance; 
• Construction status of the National Highway connect ing Hajipur to Sonepur and NH- 527C, 
Muzaffarpur bypass connecting Ramdayalu to Motihari and Old NH-77 in Bihar. 
• Delay in construction and bad condition of Himmat N agar-Jaipur-Delhi highway, Ahemdabad-
RadhanpurNational highway, Bechraji-Mehsana highway , Hajipur-Sonpur NH, NH 527 C and 
Muzzafarpur Bypass etc; 
• The number of surveys and investigations conducted on ROBs on NH 29 in Nagaland connecting 
Maligaon to Imphal, which has one ROB that was inau gurated in 1973 and the upgradation/ repair 
of one road from Mon headquarters to Nimonagarh, Ch araideo (Assam) via Hongphoi village 
along with the construction of a road from Y-anner to Mundun Heritage Model village. 
• Report of surveys conducted on NH-58, NH-52, NH-11,  NH-10, the money spent on these surveys 
and the consultant monitoring them; 
• The issue regarding NH16 and NH 216 A from Visakhapatnam to Vijayawada; 
• Water-logging issues in RUBs in Bhandara-Gondiya co nstituency and other places including 
Minto road in New Delhi; 
• Starting construction work of Mehsaul ROB in Sitama rhi to prevent the death of patients due to 
obstruction of ambulance movement caused by traffic blockage ; 
• Need for increasing manpower at the railway crossin g in Arunachal Pradesh (Murkongselek to 
Pasighat) along with the requirement of construction of ROBs/RUBs in the area; 
• Issue of repairing of ROB at NH-29 in Manipur as al so increasing the number of spans to be 
repaired and widening the same. In addition, traffi c problem on ROB due to the absence of 
railways in Manipur was also flagged; 
• Road accident on NH-66 Kovalam- Mukkola stretch due to unscientific road construction; 
• Status of completion of upgradation on economic cor ridor connecting five states to a six-lane 

53 
 
highway and two-lane service road on either side;  
• Status of 6 lane road tunnel being constructed alon g Wadakkanchery -Thrissur Section of NH-544 
near the Kuthiran hills in kerala- the reasons for its delay and the estimated time line for its 
completion; 
• Provision for adequate lighting arrangement inside the tunnels in Konkan Railway especially 
during monsoon season.  
• The implementation of all the proposed provisions o f the Motor vehicle Amendment Act 2019 
(MVA Act 2019) needs to be made more effective.  
• The National Road Safety Board should be formed as early as possible.  
• Child Road Safety standards for helmet and headgear are needed to be notified by the Ministry. 
• There is a need for critical analysis of reason for  missing the road safety targets to reduce 
accidents, deaths and injuries by 50% by 2025 and f urther requirement of robust action plan for 
achieving the same by 2030.  
• The speed limits on the express ways needs to be re duced up to 100 kmph instead of 120 kmph as 
it is the main reason for accidents, deaths and injuries. Further, the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and States should come up with speed management guidelines or policies at the earliest. 
• The relaxation in norms for pillions in Kerala wher ein children who are under 12 years of age can 
be carried with two others on two wheelers must be withdrawn with immediate effect. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE  
 
Construction of ROBs and RUBs 
The Committee appreciates the increase in annual av erage progress in the number of Level 
Crossings (LCs) replaced with Road-Over-Bridges and  Road-Under-Bridges. However, it also 
notes that the target of replacement of 1100 LCs se t for 2023-24 is lower than the annual 
average of 1207 progress achieved during 2014-2023.  The Committee is of the view that the 
target should be increased and the pace of replacem ent of LCs with ROBs/ RUBs should be 
expedited in the interest of greater safety and seamless mobility of the commuting public. 
(Para 10) 
Progress of projects under the Setu Bharatam Programme  
The Committee notes that only 25% of ROB/RUB projec ts have been completed since the 
inception of the Setu Bharatam scheme in March, 201 6. The construction of the ROB/RUB 
projects indicates staggered growth. The majority o f the projects are either in progress or have 
not been started as yet. The Committee recommends t hat the Ministry makes concerted efforts 
to achieve the aims and targets of the Setu Bharata m Programme. If needed, Ministry should 
increase the allocation of funds under this program me for timely construction of ROBs/RUBs. 
Also, the Ministry should strive towards completing  all the pending ROBs/RUBs projects in a 
time-bound manner to ensure safe and smooth flow of traffic besides minimising road fatalities. 
(Para 12) 
Construction of Service Roads  
The Committee notes that the National Highways (Lan d and Traffic) Act, 2002 provides for 
control of land within the National Highways, right  of way and traffic movement on the 
National Highways and also for removal of unauthorized occupation thereon. 
(Para 16) 
The Committee while taking note of the utility of service roads recommends that NHAI should put 
up signboards along the service roads on the highway, indicating that the traffic on these roads is 
two-way and not one-way. City commuters are under the impression that the traffic on the service 
roads is one-way.  This creates hurdles for those coming from the opposite direction. Service roads 
should have painted arrows directing two-way traffic on the stretch.   
(Para 17) 
Elimination of Level crossing 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that all unma nned level crossings on Broad Gauge have 
been eliminated by January 2019. However, existence of 559 Unmanned Level Crossings in both 
Metre Gauge and Narrow Gauge needs to be replaced w ith ROB/RUB expeditiously in a 
focused and time bound manner. 
(Para 19) 
MoU between the Ministry of Railways and the Minist ry of Road, Transport and Highways 
regarding the construction of ROBs/RUBs on National Highways 
In this regard, the Committee underscores the need for replacement of LCs with ROB/RUB on 
priority and recommends that the Ministry should ex amine whether there is proper co-
ordination between the Railways and Central/ State Governments in identifying, prioritizing 
and allocating resources to various ROB/RUB projects sanctioned. 
(Para 27) 
Status of ROBs/RUBs/Level Crossings on National Highways  

55 
 
The Committee notes that out of total 405 Level Cro ssings on NHs, only 24 have been 
completed, and around 213 LCs, the work is under pr ocess, or the GAD approval is awaited. 
The Committee also observes that in around 135 case s, approval is pending on the part of 
NHAI. The Committee takes note of the fact that onl y 6% of the LCs have been successfully 
replaced with ROB/RUB. The Committee suggests that a dedicated inter-agency co-ordination 
mechanism involving railway authorities, road trans portation agencies, local governments, and 
other relevant stakeholders may be put in place to ensure effective planning, fund allocation, 
and timely implementation of level crossing elimination projects in a time bound manner. 
(Para 29) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry/ NHAI to impl ement a robust monitoring and 
evaluation system to track the progress of level-cr ossing elimination projects. The Committee 
urges upon the Ministry/ NHAI to regularly assess t he effectiveness of implemented measures 
and identify areas for further improvement. 
(Para 30) 
Status of Level Crossings (LCs) and Road over Bridg es/Road under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) on 
Indian Railways 
 
The Committee notes that there are still 427 Manned  Level Crossings on National Highway 
(NH) and 954 on State Highways.  Given the unfinished task at hand, the pace of construction of 
ROBs/RUBs on Railway Level Crossings needs to be ac celerated to avoid accidents, clear 
congestion and ensure dependability of road transpo rtation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to expedite the progress of  eliminating level Crossings in a time-
bound manner. 
(Para 32) 
Present Road Survey Guidelines  
The Committee notes that the NSV data being technic al in nature is of limited utility for the 
general public.   The Committee, however, feels tha t the survey data must be made public so 
that the organizations and NGOs related to road sec tor can make use of it in strengthening 
policies. 
(Para 38) 
The Committee also  notes that in the case of ‘New Highway Construction Projects’, 
‘Compromising Stages’ along with ‘Solutions’ must b e added in each survey mentioned under 
‘Road Survey Guidelines’ and be a mandatory part of  DPR. Further, the detailed design of 
highways of Merging and Diversion, Intersection, Cu ts and U-Turns including drawings, etc., 
prepared by the Contractor must be proof checked by  IIT/NIT before its approval by NHAI 
and must be uploaded in public domain on NHAI Porta l.  The Committee recommends that the 
road safety measures being integral to the road pro jects must be strictly implemented, so that 
the varied levels of road safety will validate or otherwise the road design and engineering, which 
in turn, can help develop the standard of road safety. 
(Para 39) 
Analysis of existing road survey guidelines 
The Committee notes that community engagement plays  a crucial role in road construction 
projects as it caters to the needs, requirements, a nd difficulties faced by the local communities. 
These communities often experience disruptions in t heir daily lives due to construction of 
highways. 

56 
 
(Para 43) 
The Committee observes that a notable limitation of  the existing guidelines, particularly for 
highways and expressways, is the lack of emphasis on community engagement and the impact of 
road projects on local communities. 
(Para 44)  
Incorporating the elements of community engagement into the guidelines would involve 
measures such as conducting public consultations, h olding informational sessions, and actively 
seeking feedback from the affected community. By in volving local residents, businesses, and 
other stakeholders in the decision-making process, road construction projects can better serve 
their specific needs and mitigate potential negativ e impacts. This may include implementing 
traffic management plans, providing alternative rou tes, adjusting construction schedules to 
meet local requirement or minimising disruption. 
(Para 45) 
Use of technology for inspections 
Modern technology for periodic inspection of ROBs/ RUBs can help in the early detection of 
damage, minimize human errors and lower maintenance  costs.  The Committee, therefore, feels 
that more steps should be taken to adopt modern tec hnology for inspection of ROBs/RUBs. 
Drones equipped with high-resolution cameras and se nsors can be used to capture aerial 
imagery of ROBs/RUBs, providing a detailed visual a ssessment of the structure's condition. The 
images can be analysed further to identify any sign s of damage, deterioration, or structural 
weakness. Drones are particularly useful for access ing hard-to-reach areas and can significantly 
reduce inspection time and costs. 
         (Para 47)   
Laser scanning technologies, such as LiDAR, can be used to generate accurate 3D models of 
ROBs/RUBs. LiDAR sensors emit laser pulses and meas ure the reflected light, creating precise 
point cloud data. This data can be used to assess t he geometry, dimensions, and deformations of 
the structure, detecting any irregularities or defo rmations that may indicate structural 
deficiencies. 
(Para 48) 
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) should be used to penetrate the ground or structure, allowing 
for subsurface inspection of ROBs/RUBs. It can iden tify hidden defects, such as voids, 
delamination, or corrosion in concrete or steel ele ments. GPR can provide valuable information 
on the internal condition of the structure without the need for invasive investigations. Structural 
Health Monitoring (SHM) Systems should be adopted t o involve the installation of sensors and 
monitoring devices on ROBs/RUBs to continuously mon itor their structural behaviour. These 
sensors can measure parameters like vibrations, str ains, and deflections, providing real-time 
data on the performance and health of the structure . SHM systems enable early detection of 
structural abnormalities and help in proactive maintenance and intervention. 
(Para 49) 
Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) Techniques, such as ultrasonic testing, magnetic particle testing, 
and radiographic testing, can be employed for ROB/R UBs inspection. These techniques assess 
the integrity of structural components, detect crac ks, weld defects, or corrosion, and identify 
potential failure points. NDT methods are typically  used in combination with visual inspections 
to provide a comprehensive assessment of the structure's condition. 
(Para 50) 

57 
 
 
Data Analysis and Visualization Software should be used to process and analyse the data 
collected from various inspection technologies. The se tools facilitate the interpretation of data, 
enabling engineers and inspectors to identify anoma lies, assess risks, and generate reports on 
the condition of ROBs/RUBs. Data Visualization software helps in presenting the raw inspection 
data in a clear and easily understandable format, which can be interpreted correctly to facilitate 
decisions. 
(Para 51) 
Environment clearances and land acquisition 
The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Mi nistry of Road Transport and Highways in 
addressing the most important issue of land acquisi tion in fast tracking the ROB/RUB projects. 
The Bhoomirashi portal has undoubtedly expedited th e process of land acquisition for National 
Highways. However, the Committee urges upon the Min istry and NHAI to accord continued 
priority to the land acquisition issue and fails to  appreciate as to why huge Government funds 
are parked with Competent Authority for Land Acquisition (CALAs). 
(Para 55) 
 
The Committee observes that the MoRTH/ Railways sho uld regularly engage with the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF& CC ) to address policy and project-
specific issues, ensuring swift clearances and reso lution of operational challenges. The 
MoEF&CC has taken proactive steps to streamline the  process of obtaining statutory 
clearances, particularly for Stage-I and Stage-II f orest clearances. This includes issuing 
directions for the one-time submission of Essential  Details Sought (EDS) and eliminating the 
requirement for hard copies of proposals. Fortnight ly Regional Coordination Meetings (FRCM) 
are conducted to monitor the progress of clearances  and expedite forest clearances. 
Additionally, Inter-Ministerial Co-ordination and M onitoring Committee meetings are held to 
address policy matters and address long-standing proposals. 
(Para 58) 
Poor contract management 
The Committee notes that CAG has flagged off the is sue of poor contract management, such as 
delays in the finalisation of the negotiated rates and grant of extensions despite poor progress by 
the contractor. The Committee recommends that the M inistry should look into the issue on 
priority as such problems have resulted in avoidable expenditures and delays.  
(Para 62) 
 
The Committee also desires to be apprised of the re asons as to why the Ministry/NHAI allows 
contractors to hire or lease out to sub-contractors  for carrying out specific work instead of 
splitting the project into smaller parts so that co ntractors with limited wherewithals could also 
bid for the same and legitimately get awarded on me rit as principal contractor for the assigned 
work. 
(Para 63) 
The Committee also recommends that Ministries shoul d assign competent contract managers 
who have the necessary skills and expertise to effe ctively manage contracts. These managers 
should have a strong understanding of contract law, project management, and negotiation skills. 
Imparting them adequate skill training will enable them to fulfil their responsibilities. 

58 
 
(Para 64) 
The Ministry may also develop a transparent and eff icient payment management system. 
Emphasis should be laid on establishing clear proto cols for verifying contractor invoices, 
approving payments, and addressing any payment disp utes promptly. Timely and accurate 
payments can help maintain contractor’s motivation,  besides ensuring timely completion of 
project.   
(Para 65) 
The Committee suggests that the Ministry should inc orporate performance incentives and 
penalties into the contract terms. Incentives can m otivate contractors to contribute significantly 
to the project, exceeding expectations, while penal ties can lead to poor performance or non-
compliance. 
(Para 66) 
Flooding/ water logging issues 
The Committee notes that several instances of flood ing/water logging on ROBs, RUBs and 
service roads have been reported in the recent past . This not only results in great public 
inconvenience but also damages the roads for future use. 
(Para 69) 
The Committee recommends that a comprehensive hydro logical study of the area surrounding 
the ROBs, RUBs and service roads should be undertak en to understand the flood patterns, 
including the frequency, duration, and intensity of  floods. Such a study will help determine the 
design requirements that address the issues of flood mitigation for the ROBs/RUBs. 
(Para 70) 
The Ministry can also construct flood barrier walls  or embankments around the RUBs to 
prevent floodwater from entering into the underpass . These barriers can be designed to 
withstand the anticipated flood levels and provide protection to the RUBs during flood 
occurrences. 
(Para 71) 
The Railways should look for a cost-effective and d urable solution to the problem of water-
logging by modifying embankment height, providing s uitable cross and longitudinal drains, 
cutting off the ingress of water from the catchment area into the subway, etc. 
(Para 72) 
The Committee recommends conducting regular inspect ions and maintenance of the drainage 
systems, pumps, and flooding barriers to ensure the ir proper functioning, especially during 
monsoon season. Debris or obstructions that may hin der the flow of water during floods should 
be cleared regularly. 
(Para 73) 
Delay in construction 
The Committee recommends that Ministries should ado pt digitalization of GAD approval as it 
will help the stakeholders to check online the stat us of the approval.  This can reduce the undue 
delay in the construction of ROBs/RUBs. Further, th ere is a need for an inter-ministerial co-
ordination mechanism to bring all the stakeholders on one platform for better discussion and 
understanding.  
(Para 77) 
The Ministry should also come up with an expected t imeline of events along with the deadline, 
and the updated status should be brought into the p ublic domain for better information of MPs, 

59 
 
MLAs and other citizens. Further, the charter shall  also have the details of contractors, 
engineers and officers involved. This will set the accountability of all the stakeholders involved.  
(Para 78) 
Shortage of manpower 
The Committee notes that the issue of the shortage of staff is a concern at a time when the 
country is moving ahead with a huge number of road networking projects.  Since the time factor 
is of paramount importance, every effort should be made to complete the ongoing projects on 
time. The role of human resources in the project ma nagement, being critical, the Committee 
may be apprised about the staff requirement. The Co mmittee expresses the view that in case of 
any shortage, recruitment process must be rolled ou t. In the case of consultants, the Committee 
seeks to know the total number of consultants with the Ministries and the basis for their 
appointment. 
(Para 79) 
The Committee recommends that recourse be taken to five R's - (i)  Revive or create posts, (ii)  
Restructure the organization to bring in efficiency , (iii) Recruit young talent, (iv) Reframe 
policy/processes, (v) Refresh minds by giving inter im professional training and also to revive 
and create posts.   
(Para 80) 
Budgetary Allocation 
The Committee notes that the provisioning and utili zation of funds for the construction of 
ROBs/ RUBs could be better. There needs to be more co-ordination between the Railways and 
the State Governments in providing a budget and exe cuting the works. Further, the large chunk 
of unspent amount under the Setu Bharatam programme  is an overarching concern. There is a 
need for proper channelization and utilization of the earmarked funds. 
(Para 82) 
(ii) Road Safety related issues 
The Committee notes that the Motor Vehicles Amendme nt Act (MVAA), 2019 creates 
adequate accountability framework to ensure that ro ad-owning agencies, contractors and 
concessionaires are held accountable for faulty roa d design and construction. To 
operationalise this at the State level, the Act pro vides discretionary powers to States to 
create Rules under  Section 210D.  The Section 210 D authorizes State Governments to make 
rules for design, construction and maintenance stan dards for National Highways and roads 
other than National Highways, respectively. 
(Para 84) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minis try of Road Transport and Highways 
should persuade State Governments to frame such rul es under Section 210D of the MVAA Act 
at the earliest.  The Committee may also be kept apprised of the matter.   
(Para 85) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railw ays should relook into ‘Gate Mitra’ 
scheme and ensure that these personnel are being pr ovided with all basic amenities.  In the 
Committee’s view, proper implementation of the Gate  Mitra scheme will promote the safety of 
road users, besides generating employment. 
(Para 87) 
Damaged Pavement Surface 
The Committee recommends that timely repair and maintenance of damaged pavement surfaces 

60 
 
on service roads should be undertaken on priority i n the interest of road safety.  Routine 
inspection should be carried out at regular interva ls to identify and address any issues such as 
waterlogging, potholes, cracks, or uneven surfaces.  Adequate resources and manpower need to 
be allocated for timely repairs, including resurfac ing, relaying or patching of service roads as 
needed. The safety of all road users needs to be pr ioritized by maintaining smooth and well-
maintained service roads. 
(Para 90) 
Lane Drop 
 The Committee observes that lane drops with poorer  site geometrics have higher conflict rates.  
The Committee is of the view that there is a need t o revise existing guidelines/criteria to 
ensure that bridge sections are designed with consi stent geometry, including the same 
number of lanes, similar to those of the through ro ad for fast and long distance traffic.  
Lane drops must be designed properly from the outset, in as much as traffic control devices 
are not as effective in reducing conflicts as are proper site geometrics.  
(Para 92)  
Absent Shoulders  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may re-e xamine the existing 
guidelines/criteria relating to paved and unpaved s ections of the road.  If needed, the 
Ministry should come out with revised guidelines/cr iteria to ensure that bridge sections are 
designed with shoulders so that they can be used fo r emergency stopping of vehicles.  
Further, these guidelines must be strictly followed during the construction of the roads. 
(Para 94)  
Inadequate Illumination  
The Committee takes note of the technological advan ces made in the field of streetlighting and 
recommends that installation of street lights, pref erably with automatic sensors, retro-reflectors 
may be undertaken for proper road illumination. In the case of power supply failure or damage 
to the street lights, the retro-reflectors act as r eliable visual guides, reflecting light from 
headlights and assisting drivers in manoeuvring safely and staying on the correct path. 
(Para 96) 
The Committee recommends conducting comprehensive l ighting audits to assess the adequacy 
of current lighting conditions on roads.  Areas wit h inadequate lighting should be identified and 
prioritized based on factors such as traffic volume, accident history, and visibility requirements. 
(Para 97)  
Inefficient Safety Barriers 
The Committee recommends that all measures should be taken to ensure that the safety barriers 
are appropriately designed and constructed to withs tand the impact forces generated by heavy 
vehicles.  Also, these should be provided with suff icient height to prevent them from breaching 
the barrier.  Increasing the height and capacity of safety barriers is essential for maintaining the 
integrity of the bridge and protecting the road use rs, thereby minimizing the risk of fatal 
crashes. 
(Para 99)  
             Absent Signage and Hazard Markings 
The Committee recommends that bridge infrastructure  planning and maintenance should 
prioritize the inclusion and proper maintenance of traffic signs and hazard markers to ensure the 
safety of road users, pedestrians, and cyclists. Re gular inspections, timely repairs, and routine 

61 
 
maintenance are essential to ensure that these vita l elements effectively communicate important 
information, guide road users, and mitigate potential hazards, thus contributing to safer and more 
organized bridge crossings. 
(Para 101) 
The Committee also recommends establishing standard ized designs for road signs that comply 
with national or international standards, such as t hose set by the Manual on Uniform Traffic 
Control Devices (MUTCD).  Also, there should be use  of clear and easily recognizable symbols, 
colours, and fonts to improve readability and comprehension. 
(Para 102) 
Inadequate Anti-glare Measures 
The Committee recommends for proper implementation of appropriate anti-glare measures 
on bridge sections to enhance visibility, reduce th e risks associated with glare, and ensure 
the safety of all road users, especially during night time. 
(Para 104) 
 
The Committee also recommends implementing advanced  technologies, such as adaptive 
lighting systems or intelligent transportation syst ems (ITS) in automobiles that adjust 
lighting levels based on real-time conditions. These systems can automatically dim or adjust 
lighting intensity to reduce glare during specific periods or in response to changing weather 
conditions. The Committee feels that the road autho rities can significantly enhance road 
safety and reduce the risk of accidents caused by blinding glare. 
(Para 105) 
Issue of vegetation/plantation 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that no plantation be done up to 25m at the median 
while approaching a crossing. Cuts in the median, and exit/ entry to or from service lane need to 
be ensured for clear visibility to avoid chances of crashes/accidents. 
(Para 110)  
Inadequate Pedestrian Facilities 
To ensure safe and comfortable walking conditions, the Committee recommends that it is 
crucial to provide hassle-free pedestrian facilitie s based on the requirement.  Places with 
high pedestrian traffic require wider footpaths. Pe destrian facilities should also consider 
accessibility requirements for individuals with disabilities or limited mobility. 
(Para 112)  
Absent Pedestrian Guard Rails 
To address the lack of pedestrian guardrails on ser vice roads, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to perform thorough audits of high-trafﬁc areas, intersections, and road segments to 
identify locations where pedestrian guardrails are most needed.  Guard rails should be provided at 
all safety-critical areas with a higher concentration of vulnerable road users, such as near schools, 
hospitals, and areas with a significant pedestrian population. Additionally, it must be ensured that 
the guardrails are designed with appropriate standa rds, considering the height, strength, and 
visibility requirements for optimal pedestrian safety. 
(Para 114) 
There is also a need to conduct public awareness ca mpaigns to educate pedestrians and drivers 
about the importance of using designated pedestrian crossings, respecting guardrails, and adhering 
to traffic rules for pedestrian safety. 

62 
 
(Para 115) 
  Absent Pedestrian and Cyclist Facilities 
The Committee recommends including  pedestrian and bicycle facilities as a mandatory a nd 
integral part of bridged sections to accommodate th e requirements of all road users, promoting 
safety, accessibility, and sustainable transportati on options. Moreover, the mandatory 
inclusion of pedestrian and bicycle facilities on b ridges promotes social equity, providing 
equal access to all members of the community, regardless of their mode of transportation or 
physical abilities. 
(Para 117)  
Discontinuous Service Roads  
The Committee recommends that it is important for r oad-owning agencies to address 
discontinuous service lanes to ensure the safety of  local traffic and minimize the risks associated 
with merging the service lanes with the main highway. Continuous service roads offer a dedicated 
route for local traffic. This reduces the risk of c ollisions due to merging with the highway. Road 
planning and design should take into account the needs of the local traffic and ensure provisioning 
of appropriate infrastructure, including merging lanes, acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, and 
proper signage. This will help minimize conflicts b etween local traffic and high-speed highway 
traffic, improving overall road safety. 
(Para 119) 
          Lack of designed U-turn facilities under the brid ges 
            The Committee recommends implementing U-turn facili ties under bridge sections where 
feasible. These U-turn facilities should have contr olled access points, clear signage, and proper 
lane markings, allowing motorists to make use of it safely. 
(Para 121) 
            Inadequate Treatment of Merging and Diverging Points 
            The Committee recommends for providing adequate length for acceleration and deceleration 
lanes, clear signage, and road markings. Consistent  lane designations and trafﬁc control 
measures, such as trafﬁc signals or yield signs, sh ould be implemented to guide drivers and 
minimize conﬂicts. Additionally, regular maintenanc e and periodic assessments of these points 
are essential to address any signage obstructions, pavement deterioration, or visibility issues. By 
implementing these recommendations, bridge sections  can facilitate smooth and safe transitions 
for merging and diverging trafﬁc, enhancing overall  trafﬁc ﬂow and reducing the risk of 
crashes. 
 (Para 123) 
           The Committee recommends that a robust m onitoring mechanism may be put in place not only 
to oversee the progress of ongoing ROB/RUB projects  but also to identify and address any 
bottlenecks in execution 
 (Para 126) 
            Inter-ministerial coordination mechanism 
The Committee notes that PM Gati Shakti- National M aster Plan for Multi-modal Connectivity 
has provided an excellent platform for integrated p lanning and coordinated implementation of 
all infrastructure projects, including ROBs/RUBs, w hether on a standalone basis or as part of 
corridor projects. 
(Para 131) 
The Committee recommends that the Government should  establish a Central Coordinating 

63 
 
Body or a Committee comprising representatives from  key ministries involved in road 
development, namely, the Ministry of Road Transport  and Highways, Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change , and Ministry of Railways. This body 
will facilitate regular communication, coordination , and decision-making among the Ministries. 
Such a step will also help overcome the delay in co nstruction due to waiting in approval of 
clearances. 
(Para 132) 
The Committee also recommends that the roles, respo nsibilities, and mandates of each Ministry 
involved in road development must be clearly defined. It must be ensured that there is clarity on 
the specific areas in which each Ministry is respon sible for and how they interact with other 
Ministries to ensure time-bound resolutions of issu es. This will minimize delay, overlaps, 
conflicts, and uncertainties in decision-making and implementation. 
(Para 133) 
The Committee feels that there remains a communicat ion gap among the Ministries, leading to 
avoidable delay.  The Committee, therefore, recomme nds establishing effective communication 
channels between the Ministries, such as dedicated focal points or inter-ministerial co-
ordinating officers. These officers can serve as a single point of contact for communication, 
coordination, and information exchange between the Ministries. 
(Para 134) 
The Ministries should establish mechanisms for info rmation sharing and data integration 
among the Ministries/ Agencies involved in road dev elopment. They can create a centralized 
repository or platform where relevant data, reports , and project updates can be shared among 
the concerned Ministries/authorities. This will ena ble Ministries to access and utilize 
comprehensive information for decision-making and project monitoring. 
(Para 135) 
Maintenance and upgradation 
The Committee is of the view that the Ministries sh ould conduct regular inspections of ROBs 
and RUBs to identify any signs of deterioration, st ructural issues, or maintenance requirements. 
These inspections should be carried out by qualifie d engineers and experts to assess the 
condition of the built infrastructure. The study as sessment should be placed in the public 
domain and MPs and MLAs of the concerned area may a lso be appraised about the findings of 
the inspection report. 
(Para 139) 
The Committee recommends the Ministries to evaluate  the load-carrying capacity of 
ROBs/RUBs periodically and consider structural upgr ades if required. This may involve 
strengthening the existing structure, modifying loa d limits, or implementing weight restrictions 
to ensure the safety and longevity of the infrastructure. 
(Para 140) 
 
The Ministries/ Agencies must ensure proper lightin g and signage along ROBs/RUBs for 
improved visibility and safety. Installation of ade quate lighting systems and prominent signage 
indicating height restrictions, speed limits, and o ther important information benefit the road 
users. 
(Para 141) 
With reference to encroachments, the Committee reco mmends that the Ministries should 

64 
 
conduct a comprehensive survey and mapping of the R OB/RUB area to identify encroachments 
and unauthorized structures by using modern surveyi ng techniques, such as drones or satellite 
imagery so that proper remedial measures can be tak en to get rid of encroachments around the 
infrastructure. 
(Para 142) 
The concerned authorities must ensure to take legal  actions against encroachers in accordance 
with relevant laws and regulations. They should ini tiate eviction proceedings and enforce 
penalties for unauthorized occupation. Adequate hum anitarian support and assistance should 
be provided to those affected by encroachment- induced eviction. 
(Para 143) 
Further, the Committee recommends that the engageme nt with the local community and 
stakeholders should be strengthened to obviate any future encroachments. The relevant NGOs, 
advocacy bodies and local opinion of leaders may al so be roped in to create awareness about 
non-encroachment of the public infrastructure spaces. 
(Para 144) 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the C RRI in the field of road development. 
However, the Committee is of the view that the CRRI  should also come up with binding 
guidelines for adoption of sustainable technology a nd materials for road development and the 
road designs keeping in view the national goals and aspirations. 
(Para 149) 
The Committee in this regard recommends that compli ance with IRC guidelines must be made 
a mandatory requirement for all road development pr ojects. Further, the Committee suggests 
that independent third-party audits should be condu cted to assess compliance with IRC 
guidelines. Engaging qualified auditors who are fam iliar with IRC guidelines can provide an 
unbiased evaluation of project compliance and ident ify any gaps or non-compliance issues that 
need to be addressed. 
(Para 162) 
The Committee further notes that effective implemen tation of Rule 166 of the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules (CMVR) can ensure road safety. Rule 166 (dealing with road, design, 
construction, and maintenance standards) under the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 7, was 
added via G.S.R 584(E), dated 25th September 2020 ( w.e.f. 1-10-2020) to give effect to Sec 198A 
of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019. The rule states as follows: 
“(1)The design, construction, and maintenance of na tional highways shall be in accordance with 
the standards and speciﬁcations of the Indian Road Congress (IRC) as may be applicable, or any 
other instructions or guidelines issued by the Central Government from time to time…” 
           (Para 163)  
The Committee notes that the IRC guidelines are mam moth in nature, as there are over 200 
guidelines introduced and renewed by IRC since it w as established in December 1934. 
Currently, the IRC guidelines include a range of su bjects like the method of recording 
accidents, and practices for road users, apart from  the guidelines on road, design, construction, 
and maintenance. Therefore, for effective implement ation of the codes pertaining to road 
design, construction, and maintenance by the design ated authority, contractor, consultant, or 
concessionaire, it is imperative that such IRC guid elines be speciﬁcally called out under Rule 
166 CMVR, or else there will be chances on missing out important standards at any point while 
implementing road safety standards at all or any of the three stages. 

65 
 
(Para 164) 
 Fund allocation and support to IRC 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may cons ider deputing some officers having 
interest and inclination toward standardization, R& D to work in the IRC.  Also, the Ministry 
may consider providing a reasonable amount of corpu s seed fund to the IRC to manage the 
function of its Secretariat, the modalities of whic h may be worked out in consultation with the 
IRC.  
(Para 166) 
 Further, since the Technical Committees, Apex Comm ittees, Highway Research Board and its 
Committees are involved in the preparation of initi al drafts, reviewing critically the draft 
prepared, state-of-the-art reports, explanatory han dbook on Codes with solved examples, etc., 
the Ministry may consider providing them support th rough budgetary allocation for their 
works including for bearing expenditure on intercit y travels, accommodation, local travel, and 
honorarium. 
(Para 167 ) 
The Ministry may provide budgetary allocation to th e IRC to organize workshops, seminars, 
and webinars in order to disseminate the knowledge on latest IRC guidelines to the practicing 
highway engineers in the interest of creating a lar ge pool of engineers with knowledge on the 
cutting-edge technology in the rapidly evolving road design and engineering sector. 
(Para 168)  
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Min istry must examine the feasibility of 
adopting and implementing the proposed design suggested at (b) which is based on international 
standards . 
(Para 172)  
Induction of new technologies 
The Committee notes the reply of RDSO, Indian railways that in most cases, India is at par with 
the advanced nations.  However, the Committee sugge sts adopting Building Information 
Modelling (BIM) technology which enables the creati on of detailed 3D models that integrate 
various aspects of the ROB/RUB development process,  including architectural, structural, and 
utility design. Further, Virtual Reality (VR) and A ugmented Reality (AR) technologies can also 
be used to provide immersive experiences and simula tions during the design and construction 
phases of ROBs/RUBs. They allow engineers and proje ct teams to visualize and interact with 
virtual models, facilitating better design review, construction planning, and stakeholder 
communication. 
(Para 178) 
The Committee also emphasizes on usage of Advanced Construction Materials such as fiber-
reinforced polymers (FRPs), high-performance concre te, and composite materials to enhance 
the durability, strength, and lifespan of ROBs/RUBs . These materials offer improved resistance 
to corrosion, seismic forces, and other environmental stress factors. 
(Para 179) 
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled Intelligent Tr ansportation Systems (ITS) technologies can be 
integrated into ROBs/RUBs to enhance road safety an d better traffic management. These 
include systems for automated traffic control, real -time monitoring of road conditions, traffic 
signalling, and vehicle detection. ITS can improve the efficiency of traffic flow, reduce 

66 
 
congestion, and enhance overall safety. 
(Para 180) 
 
Smart Sensors embedded in ROBs/RUBs can continuousl y monitor the structural health, 
detecting and alerting to any anomalies or signs of  deterioration. SHM systems provide real-
time data on the structural integrity, stress, vibr ations, and deformation of the infrastructure, 
facilitating proactive maintenance and preventing failures. 
(Para 181) 
The Committee also recommends the usage of Geospati al technologies, such as Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) and remote sensing, to en able accurate mapping, analysis, and 
visualization of the project area. These tools assi st in land surveying, route planning, 
environmental impact assessment, and site selection for ROB/RUB development. 
(Para 182) 
Private Sector Participation 
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry shou ld conduct comprehensive feasibility studies 
to assess the viability of implementing PPP models for ROB/RUB development. The Ministry 
should evaluate factors such as project size, reven ue potential, market conditions, and potential 
private sector interest. Feasibility studies will p rovide valuable insights into the suitability of 
PPP and help in making informed decisions. 
(Para 184) 
 
The Committee recommends that an assessment of lega l and regulatory framework should be 
pursued to evaluate the existing legal and regulato ry framework and to identify any barriers or 
limitations to implementing PPP in ROB/RUB developm ent.  The Ministry should also identify 
necessary amendments or new legislations required t o facilitate PPP arrangements, ensure 
transparency, and provide a favourable business environment for private partners. 
(Para 185) 
The Committee also suggests that the Ministries sho uld establish transparent and competitive 
procurement processes to attract capable private entities. They should also implement a fair and 
competitive bidding process that encourages multiple private sector players to participate.  
(Para 186) 
 
The Ministry should engage with various stakeholder s, including local communities, transport 
authorities, private sector entities, and financing institutions, seeking their input and addressing 
any concerns or expectations they may have. The Min istry should also foster partnerships and 
collaboration to enhance the success and sustainability of PPP projects. 
(Para 187) 
Sustainable and environment-friendly roads 
The Committee appreciates the innovative efforts ma de in the direction of construction of 
environmentally sustainable roads. However, it feel s that given the national aspirations to 
gradually move towards a zero-waste circular econom y, more measures should be taken in this 
regard. The Committee suggests that the Ministries should adopt features like rain gardens, 
bioswales, and permeable pavements to manage stormw ater runoff and improve water quality. 
Green infrastructure can help recharge groundwater,  reduce the load on drainage systems and 
help enhance biodiversity in roadside areas. 

67 
 
(Para 192) 
 
The Ministries should also implement Sustainable Dr ainage Systems (SuDS) to manage surface 
water runoff from roads. SuDS techniques include infiltration basins, constructed wetlands, and 
detention ponds that mimic natural hydrological pro cesses. SuDS can reduce the risk of 
flooding, promote groundwater recharge, and improve water quality by removing pollutants. 
(Para 193) 
 
The Ministries should also encourage road design th at optimizes energy efficiency. This can 
include factors such as minimizing excessive grades , optimizing alignment to reduce vehicle 
energy consumption, and incorporating intelligent t ransportation systems (ITS) to improve 
traffic flow and reduce congestion-related emissions. 
(Para 194) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministries c an explore opportunities to integrate 
renewable energy sources into road infrastructure. This can include incorporating solar panels 
into noise barriers or utilizing solar-powered ligh ting along roads. Renewable energy 
integration can help reduce dependence on fossil fu els and contribute to a more sustainable 
transportation network. 
(Para 195) 
The Ministries should enhance Environmental Impact Assessments for road projects to evaluate 
the potential ecological, social, and cultural impacts. Further, such assessments should be placed 
in the public domain. Assessment of the project's p otential effects on ecosystems, habitats, and 
natural resources should also be undertaken to deve lop appropriate mitigation measures to 
minimize negative impacts. 
(Para 196) 
 
Need for VUP/CUP   
The Committee reiterates that CRRI’s suggestion tha t wherever the highway passes through 
built areas, the need for VUP/ Light Vehicular Underpass (LVUP) must be built as part of Road 
safety Audit (RSA) report conforming to IRC: 84 (20 19) or IRC: 87 (2019), including the 
provision of half-subway, i.e. depressed Pedestrian Under Pass (PUP). 
(Para 198) 
            Good Samaritan Law 
The Committee recommends that first aid education f or every police personnel must be 
mandatory along with their regular training. All Po lice PCRs must be equipped with the 
requisite first aid equipments and items, etc.  
(Para 209) 
Further, the scope of the ‘Good Samaritan Law’ must  be enlarged beyond helping a road 
accident victim. Victims of natural calamities like drought and flood, fire incidents, or victims of 
any medical condition, etc. must be included in the  ambit of ‘Good Samaritan Law’, as the 
nature of helping victims of above situations, is i dentical with the road accident victims and 
hence must be part of Good Samaritan Law.  
(Para 210) 
 
The Committee feels that for reaping the best resul ts out of ‘Good Samaritan Law’; mass 
training and awareness is needed. ‘Scouts & Guide’ system which used to be in schools earlier 

68 
 
can be truly instrumental in this regard. ‘First Ai d Training’ and handling and assisting a 
person injured in a road accident or in any natural  calamity, is an essential part for every 
student trained under the ‘Scout and Guide’ System.  This needs to be resurrected in all schools 
and the Ministry should appropriately sensitise and  take up with the concerned authorities for 
building citizenship rooted in sublime values.   
(Para 211) 
 
The Committee also recommends sensitizing the polic e of its duties and 
 responsibilities during 
such a situation. Increased fund allocation to publ ic funded hospitals has the potential to 
establish robust emergency care units, besides crea ting adequate infrastructure. Police and 
judiciary must be adequately sensitized so that the y remain alive towards the protection of 
Good Samaritans. 
(Para 212) 
 
To provide for accountability of various Government  authorities and encouragement for Good 
Samaritans, the Committee recommends that a “Grievance Redressal Mechanism” be instituted 
nationally. The new section 134A of the MVAA 2019 p rotects the Good Samaritans but does not 
guide one over the breach of the obligations of the  police and the hospital. Sin ce these 
subjects are a part of state lists, the states must  be encouraged to come up with rules regarding 
the grievance mechanism in case of breach of compliance. 
(Para 213) 
 
Besides, campaigns to increase the awareness of the  rights of Good Samaritans must be 
undertaken to educate the public. Further, in pursu ance to the guidelines for Good Samaritans 
issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare mentioned therein, both public and private 
hospitals and police stations must publish the char ter on the rights of Good Samaritans. This 
will go a long way in encouraging the spirited public and help greater information dissemination 
on right of the good Samaritans. 
(Para 214) 
              Miscellaneous 
Members of the Committee also raised following issues regarding ROBs/RUBs in the country:  
• Emphasis on NHAI to provide information regarding p atches  for opening retail outlets on NHs 
so that oil marketing companies can put up their ad vertisements and proper guidelines 
regarding NoC of retail outlets for promoting Ease of Doing Business; 
• Current construction status of six by-pass roads ne ar Rajahmundry viz. Diwancheruvu ROB, 
Gammon India ROB, Rajanagaram ROB, Lalacheruvu ROB,  Bommuru ROB and Vemagiri 
ROB; 
• Requirement of bridge on Godavari river from Devara palli to Maredumilli to bypass 
Rajahmundry city and to reduce distance; 
• Construction status of the National Highway connect ing Hajipur to Sonepur and NH- 527C, 
Muzaffarpur bypass connecting Ramdayalu to Motihari and Old NH-77 in Bihar. 
• Delay in construction and bad condition of Himmat N agar-Jaipur-Delhi highway, Ahemdabad-
RadhanpurNational highway, Bechraji-Mehsana highway , Hajipur-Sonpur NH, NH 527 C and 
Muzzafarpur Bypass etc; 
• The number of surveys and investigations conducted on ROBs on NH 29 in Nagaland 

69 
 
connecting Maligaon to Imphal, which has one ROB th at was inaugurated in 1973 and the 
upgradation/ repair of one road from Mon headquarte rs to Nimonagarh, Charaideo (Assam) 
via Hongphoi village along with the construction of  a road from Y-anner to Mundun Heritage 
Model village. 
• Report of surveys conducted on NH-58, NH-52, NH-11,  NH-10, the money spent on these 
surveys and the consultant monitoring them; 
• The issue regarding NH16 and NH 216 A from Visakhapatnam to Vijayawada; 
• Water-logging issues in RUBs in Bhandara-Gondiya co nstituency and other places including 
Minto road in New Delhi; 
• Starting construction work of Mehsaul ROB in Sitamarhi to prevent the death of patients due to 
obstruction of ambulance movement caused by traffic blockage ; 
• Need for increasing manpower at the railway crossin g in Arunachal Pradesh (Murkongselek to 
Pasighat) along with the requirement of construction of ROBs/RUBs in the area; 
• Issue of repairing of ROB at NH-29 in Manipur as al so increasing the number of spans to be 
repaired and widening the same. In addition, traffi c problem on ROB due to the absence of 
railways in Manipur was also flagged; 
• Road accident on NH-66 Kovalam- Mukkola stretch due to unscientific road construction; 
• Status of completion of upgradation on economic cor ridor connecting five states to a six-lane 
highway and two-lane service road on either side;  
• Status of 6 lane road tunnel being constructed alon g Wadakkanchery -Thrissur Section of NH-
544 near the Kuthiran hills in kerala- the reasons for its delay and the estimated time line for its 
completion; 
• Provision for adequate lighting arrangement inside the tunnels in Konkan Railway especially 
during monsoon season. 
• The implementation of all the proposed provisions o f the Motor vehicle Amendment Act 2019 
(MVA Act 2019) needs to be made more effective. 
• The National Road Safety Board should be formed as early as possible. 
• Child Road Safety standards for helmet and headgear are needed to be notified by the Ministry. 
• There is a need for critical analysis of reason for  missing the road safety targets to reduce 
accidents, deaths and injuries by 50% by 2025 and f urther requirement of robust action plan 
for achieving the same by 2030. 
• The speed limits on the express ways needs to be re duced up to 100 kmph instead of 120 kmph 
as it is the main reason for accidents, deaths and injuries. Further, the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and States should come up wi th speed management guidelines or 
policies at the earliest. 
• The relaxation in norms for pillions in Kerala wher ein children who are under 12 years of age 
can be carried with two others on two wheelers must be withdrawn with immediate effect. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure I  
 

71 
 
Sr. 
No.  
Name of the 
state  
No. of ROBs/RUBs  
      Existing  Under 
construction  
RoBs/ RuBs 
sanctioned but in 
bidding stage/ 
appointed date to 
be declared   
No of Level Crossings yet 
to be sanctioned for 
replacement as 
RoBs/RuBs   
1  Andhra Pradesh  62  36  27  10  
2  Andaman and 
Nicobar  0  0  0  0  
3  Arunachal 
Pradesh  0  0  0  0  
4  Assam  28  14  6  8  
5  Bihar  50  41  25  15  
6  Chhattisgarh  11  7  10  5  
7  Chandigarh  0  0  0  0  
8  Goa  2  2  0  0  
9  Delhi  0  0  0  0  
10  Haryana  25  13  8  5  
11  Gujarat  22  16  5  3  
12  Jammu  3  4  9  0  
13  Jharkhand  11  12  19  6  
14  Himachal 
Pradesh  2  2  3  2  
15  Kerala  8  10  2  2  
16  Karnataka  47  29  28  11  
17  Lakshadweep  0  0  0  0  
18  Madhya 
Pradesh  43  33  28  27  
19  Maharashtra  79  39  22  31  
20  Manipur  0  0  0  0  
21  Meghalya  0  0  0  0  
22  Mizoram  0  0  0  0  
23  Nagaland  1  0  0  0  
24  Odisha  21  10  14  2  
25  Puducherry  0  0  0  0  
26  Punjab  50  29  22  12  
27  Rajasthan  58  41  8  5  
28  Sikkim  0  0  0  0  
29  Srinagar  0  0  0  0  

72 
 
30  Tripura  2  0  2  0  
31  Tamil Nadu  69  28  14  7  
32  Telangana  23  7  23  10  
33  Uttar Pradesh  73  47  44  37  
34  Uttarakhand  10  2  5  2  
35  West Bengal  65  30  8  18  
 TOTAL  765  452  332  218  
 
 
 
  

73 
 
Annexure II  
 
Sr. No.   Name of the  state  Length of Service Road (In Km)  
      Single Lane   Intermediate Lane   2-Lane   
1  Andhra Pradesh  21.86  120.32  1225.27  
2  Andaman and 
Nicobar  0  0  0  
3  Arunachal Pradesh  0  0  0  
4  Assam  0  131.03  19.01  
5  Bihar  23.01  143.59  881.09  
6  Chhattisgarh  0  109.31  79.12  
7  Chandigarh  0  0  0  
8  Goa  51.62  3  26.24  
9  Delhi  16.13  0  67.00  
10  Haryana  26.10  188.26  813.77  
11  Gujarat  4.78  0  78.32  
12  Jammu  21.57  33.45  0  
13  Jharkhand  2.8  113.26  279.24  
14  Himachal Pradesh  7.9  22.42  6  
15  Kerala  84.236  116.9  143.11  
16  Karnataka  186.02  140.34  1806.32  
17  Lakshadweep  0  0  0  
18  Madhya Pradesh  24.51  260.20  633.53  
19  Maharashtra  470.51  537.63  1868.38  
20  Manipur  12.16  0  1.5  
21  Meghalya  0  0  7.5  
22  Mizoram  0  0  0  
23  Nagaland  0  0  4.15  
24  Odisha  5.92  31.21  564.03  
25  Puducherry  0  0  0  
26  Punjab  98.33  350.85  622.50  
27  Rajasthan  27.76  128.38  1556.51  
28  Sikkim  0  0  0  
29  Srinagar  0  0  0  
30  Tripura  0  6.25  0  

74 
 
31  Tamil Nadu  32.12  693.12  1448.25  
32  Telangana  37.34  186.62  455.19  
33  Uttar Pradesh  406.67  928.66  1440.35  
34  Uttarakhand  2.22  186.41  30.52  
35  West Bengal  50.03  60.38  448.48  
   Total   1614  4492  14505  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

75 
 
Annexure III  
 
S
N
  
Rl 
y  
LC 
s 
on 
N
H 
Work 
Complet 
ed(LC 
NOT 
closed)  
Work 
in 
progr 
ess  
GA 
D 
app 
rov 
ed 
but 
wor 
k 
not 
star 
ted  
GAD 
under 
proces 
s 
Proposal 
yet to 
come 
from 
NHAI  
Diversio 
n 
Planned 
by NHAI  
1 CR  9 0 0 6 1 2 0 
2 ER  28  0 1 11  0 16  0 
3 ECR  38  1 18  1 1 17  0 
4 ECO 
R 10  0 3 6 0 1 0 
5 NR  47  3 4 6 0 34  0 
6 NCR  8 1 4 1 0 1 1 
7 NER  38  0 12  9 0 17  0 
8 NFR  58  8 7 7 1 15  20  
9 NWR  28  5 11  6 1 3 2 
1
0 SR  33  1 3 11  0 9 9 
1
1 SCR  37  2 19  12  0 4 0 
1
2 SER  22  1 8 9 0 3 1 
1
3 
SEC 
R 15  0 7 2 1 5 0 
1
4 SWR  21  1 0 13  1 6 0 
1
5 WR  10  1 5 2 0 2 0 
1
6 WCR  3 0 3 0 0 0 0 
IR  405  24  105  102  6 135  33  
 
 
 
  

76 
 
Annexure IV  
 
S
N STATES MLC 
s 
UML 
Cs 
S
N RLY MLCs UMLCs 
1 Andhra Pradesh 935 0 1 CR 449 6 
2 Assam 871 0 2 ER 1015 0 
3 Bihar 1759 0 3 ECR 1508 0 
4 Chandigarh 3 0 4 ECoR 683 0 
5 Chattisgarh 191 0 5 NR 2777 0 
6 Delhi 26 0 6 NCR 662 0 
7 Goa 8 0 7 NER 1451 32 
8 Gujarat 1594 262 8 NFR 1460 163 
9 Haryana 473 0 9 NWR 947 96 
1
0 Himachal Pradesh 53 0 1
0 SR 1737 0 
1
1 Jammu & Kashmir 28 0 1
1 SCR 1173 0 
1
2 Jharkhand 392 0 1
2 SER 782 0 
1
3 Karnataka 643 0 1
3 SECR 359 0 
1
4 Kerala 388 0 1
4 SWR 688 0 
1
5 Madhya Pradesh 639 0 1
5 WR 1811 262 
1
6 Maharashtra 737 6 1
6 WCR 416 0 
1
7 Manipur 0  
Total (Manned 
+ Unmanned) 17918 559 
1
8 Mizoram 1 0 Total (Manned 
+ Unmanned) 18477 
1
9 Nagaland 1 0 
 
2
0 Odisha 675 0 
2
1 Puducherry 20 0 
2
2 Punjab 1022 0 Gauge MLCs UMLCs 
2
3 Rajasthan 955 96 BG 17720 
* 0 
2
4 Tamilnadu 1335 0 MG 120 288 
2
5 Telangana 289 0 NG 78 271 
2
6 Tripura 15 0 Total 17918 559 
2
7 Uttar Pradesh 3040 32 
*Manned LC on BG- 17720 and All UMLCs on BG 
have been eliminated on 31.01.2019 
 
2
8 Uttarakhand 153 0 
2
9 West Bengal 1672 163 

77 
 
 Total 1791 
8 559 
Total (MLC+UMLC) 18477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
Annexure V 
Seminars:  
1) International Seminar on "Advance in Design, Constr uction and Operation of Tunnels" on 19 th - 
20 th  April 2023 at Dehradun (Uttarakhand). 
2) International Conference on “New Technologies and I nnovations in Rural Roads” on 24 th  -26 th  
May 2022 at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi. 
3) International Seminar on “Design and Construction o n Sustainable Road and Bridges in Hill 
Roads” on 22 nd  & 23 rd  April 2022 at Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh) 
4) International Seminar on "Road Safety: Current Scenario & Way Forward" scheduled on 28 th  - 29 th  
October 2022 at Indore (Madhya Pradesh). 
5) International Webinar on Road Tunnel: Recent Trends , Innovations and Way Forward on 5 th  - 
6th  May 2021. 
6)  International Seminar on “Construction and Rehabil itation of Rigid Pavement-Current Practice 
and Way Forward” on 18 th  & 19 th  January 2019 at New Delhi. 
 
Workshops:  
7) "Quality control, New Materials & Techniques in Roa d Sector" on 7th & 8th February 2020 at IIT 
Roorkee. 
8) Quality control, New Materials & Techniques in Road  Sector"   on 26-27 July 2019 at Hyderabad 
(Telangana). 
 
Research Activity:  
IRC does not receive any grant or funding from Gove rnment department for road research. 
However, IRC has stimulated interest in road resear ch and taken active interest in setting-up of 
road research laboratories in the country way back as in 1944. Detailed scheme was worked out by 
one of its committees for setting-up Central Road R esearch Institute, New Delhi, and a chain of 
research laboratories in the States, in addition to  the work of gathering, correlating and 
disseminating information concerning road research within the country. 
In October 1973, the Highway Research Board (HRB) was set up under the auspices of the IRC for 
giving undivided attention to road research and dev elopment activities. The Board aimed to 
Identify highway research needs, recommend prioriti es and schedules of research, set up 
Committees consisting of experts who are concerned with the problems of roads and road 
transport.  Within its limited resources and capabi lity of IRC concerted efforts are also being made 
to summarise and make available the significant res ults of road research and to guide and 
coordinate road research work in our country with a view to avoid duplication of effort. 
Further, as per advice/ directive from the Hon’ble Court (one order by Madras High Court) and 
Vigilance agency (one case by Kerala State) IRC has  sent team of Experts for investigation of 
specific road and bridge project and submit its reports.  
IRC is also involved in preparation & revision of ‘ Specification of Road & bridge Works’ for 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and ‘Specification for Rural Roads’ for NRIDA, Ministry 
of Rural Development. 
Simultaneously, IRC provides technical inputs / ass istance to NDMA, NGT, BIS, Ministry of 
Environment, and forest, etc. whenever sought.  
 

79 
 
Annexure -VI 
During Year 2017:  
• IRC:15-2017 “Code of Practice for Construction of Jointed Plain Concrete Pavements” 
• IRC:44-2017 “Guidelines for Cement Concrete Mix Design for Pavements 
• IRC:121-2017 “Guidelines for Use of Construction and Demolition Waste in Road Sector”  
• IRC:122-2017 “Guidelines for Construction of Precast Concrete Segmental Box Culverts”  
• IRC:65-2017 “Guidelines for Planning and Design of Roundabouts”  
• IRC:70-2017 “Regulation and Control of Mixed Traffic in Urban Areas”  
• IRC:92-2017 “Guidelines for Design of Interchanges in Urban Areas”  
• IRC:124-2017“Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Design Guidelines for Indian Cities”  
• IRC: SP:110-2017 “Application of Intelligent Transport System (ITS) for Urban Roads”  
• IRC: SP:111-2017 “Capacity Building of Road Agencie s in Charge of Implementation of 
 Road Projects in Urban Areas”  
• IRC:7-2017 “Recommended Practice for Numbering Culverts, Bridges and Tunnels” 
• IRC:123-2017 “Guidelines on Geophysical Investigation for Bridges” 
• IRC:125-2017 “Guidelines on Dozers for Highway Works”   
• IRC:126-2017 “Guidelines on Wet Mix Plant”  
• IRC: SP:93-2017 “Guidelines on Requirements for Env ironmental Clearances for Road 
 Projects” 
• IRC: SP:112-2017 “Manual for Quality Control in Road and Bridge works” 
 
During the year 2018 
• IRC:83-2018 Part II “Standard Specifications and Code of Practice for Road Bridges, Section 
 IX – Bearings (Elastomeric Bearings)”  
• IRC:83-2018 Part III “Standard Specifications and C ode of Practice for Road Bridges, 
 Section IX – Bearings, Part III: POT, PIN, Metalli c Guide and Plane Sliding Bearings”  
• IRC:99-2018 “Guidelines for Traffic Calming Measures in Urban and Rural Areas”  
• IRC: SP:65-2018 “Guidelines for Design and Construction of Segmental Bridges”  
• IRC: SP:71-2018 “Guidelines for Design and Construc tion of Precast Pre-Tensioned Girders 
 for Bridges”  
• IRC: SP-89 (Part II) – 2018 “Guidelines for the Design of Stabilized Pavements” 
• IRC: SP:113-2018 “Guidelines on Flood Disaster Mitigation for Highway Engineers” 
• IRC: SP:114-2018 “Guidelines for Seismic Design of Road Bridges”  
• IRC: SP:115-2018 “Guidelines for Design of Integral Bridges” 
• IRC: SP:116-2018 “Guidelines for Design and Installation of Gabion Structures”  
• Irc:57-2018 “Recommended Practice for Sealing of Joints In Concrete Pavements”  
• IRC: SP:63-2018 “Guidelines for the Use of Interlocking Concrete Block Pavement 
• IRC: SP:83-2018 “Guidelines for Maintenance, Repair s & Rehabilitation of Cement 
 Concrete Pavements” 
• IRC: SP:121-2018 “Guidelines for Use of Iron, Steel  and Copper Slag in Construction of 
 Rural Roads” 
• IRC:86-2018 “Geometric Design Standards for Urban Roads and Streets” 
• IRC: SP:117-2018 “Manual on Universal Accessibility for Urban Roads and Streets” 
• IRC: SP:118-2018 “Manual for Planning and Development of Urban Roads and Streets”  
• IRC: SP:119-2018 “Manual of Planting and Landscaping of Urban Roads”  
• IRC: SP:54-2018 “Project Preparation Manual for Bridges”  
• IRC: SP:120-2018 “Explanatory Handbook to IRC:22-20 15 “Standard Specifications and 
 Code of Practice for Road Bridges, Section VI-Comp osite Construction”  
• IRC:87-2018 “Guidelines for Formwork, Falsework and  Temporary Structures for Road 
 Bridges”  

80 
 
• IRC: SP:36-2018 “Guidelines for IRC Standards”  
• IRC: SP:73-2018 “Manual of Specifications and Stand ards for Two Laning of Highways 
 with Paved Shoulder” 
• IRC:127-2018 “Guidelines on Skill Development of Workmen in Road Sector" 
• Pocket Book for Road Construction Equipment  
 
During the year 2019:  
• IRC:52-2019 “Guidelines for the Alignment Survey and Geometric Design of Hill Roads”  
• IRC:79-2019 “Recommended Practice for Road Delineators”  
• IRC: SP:16-2019 “Guidelines on Measuring Road Roughness and Norms”  
• IRC: SP:17-2019 “Guidelines for Concrete Overlays on Concrete Pavements”  
• IRC: SP:40-2019 “Guidelines on Repair, Strengthenin g & Rehabilitation of Concrete 
 Bridges” 
• IRC: SP:59-2019 “Guidelines for Use of Geosynthetic s in Road Pavements and Associated 
 Works” 
• IRC: SP:84-2019 “Manual of Specifications & Standards for Four Laning of Highways”  
• IRC: SP:87-2019 “Manual of Specifications & Standards for Six Laning of Highways”  
• IRC: SP:88-2019 “Manual on Road Safety Audit” (First Revision)   
• IRC: SP:122-2019 “Guidelines for Green Rating of Highways”  
• Pocket Book for Highway Engineers,  
• IRC:128-2019 “Guidelines on Training of Highway Professionals”  
• IRC:112-2019 “Code of Practice for Concrete Road Bridges”  
• IRC:129-2019 “Specification for Open-Graded Friction Course” 
• IRC: SP:101-2019 “Guidelines for Warm Mix Asphalt”  
• IRC:105-2019 “Specifications for Dense Bituminous M acadam and Bituminous Concrete for 
 Airfield Pavements”  
• IRC: SP:123-2019 “Guidelines for the Construction of Two-Layer Concrete Pavements”  
• IRC: SP:124-2019 “Model Contract for Maintenance of  Roads” (Based on Single Percentage 
 Rate)  
• IRC: SP:125-2019 “Guidelines for Cement Grouted Bit uminous Mix-Surfacing for Urban 
 Roads”  
• IRC: SP:91-2019 “Guidelines for Road Tunnels”   
• IRC:89-2019 “Guidelines for Design and Construction  of River Training & Control Works 
 for Road Bridges”  
• IRC: SP:30-2019 “Manual on Economic Evaluation of Highway Projects in India” 
• IRC: SP:126-2019 “Guidelines for Design and Constru ction of Low Volume Rural Roads 
 using Jute Geotextiles 
 
During the year 2020  
• IRC:78 (Part II)-2020 “Code of Practice for Limit State Design for Foundations”   
• IRC: SP:19-2020 “Manual for Survey, Investigation and Preparation of Road Projects”  
• IRC: SP:98-2020 “Guidelines for the Use of Waste Pl astic in Hot Bituminous Mixes (Dry 
 Process) in Wearing Courses”  
• IRC: SP:127-2020 “Manual for Performance Assessment  of Highway Assets during 
 Operation and Maintenance Stage” 
• IRC: SP:128-2020 “Urban Roads Manual” 
• IRC:130-2020 “Guidelines for Road Asset Management System”  
 
 

81 
 
During the year 2022. 
• IRC:9-2022 “Traffic Census for Non-Urban Roads” 
• IRC:67-2022 “Code of Practice for Road Signs”  
• IRC:80-2022 “Typical Designs for Pick-Up Bus Stops on Rural (i.e. Non-Urban) Highways”  
• IRC:103-2022 “Guidelines for Pedestrian Facilities”  
• IRC:131-2022 “Guidelines for Identifying and Treating Blackspots”  
• IRC: SP:43-2022 “Guidelines on Traffic Management Techniques for Urban Areas”  
• IRC: SP:129-2022 “Guidelines for the Design and Con struction of Roads Using Coir 
 Geotextiles”  
• IRC: SP:131-2022 “Guidelines for Design and Evaluat ion of Public and Non-Motorised 
 Transport Systems for Sustainability”  
• IRC: SP:132-2022 “Guidelines on Use of Industrial W astes for Road Embankment and 
 Subgrade Construction”  
• IRC: SP:13-2022 "Guidelines for the Design of Small Bridges and Culverts”  
• IRC: SP:130-2022 “Guidelines on Design and Installation of Noise Barriers for Roads”  
• IRC: SP:133-2022 “Guidelines on Reducing Carbon Footprint of Road Projects”  
• IRC: SP:134-2022 "Guidelines for Assessment of Wave Effects on Bridges” 
• IRC: SP:135-2022 “Manual for the Design of Hot Bituminous Mixes”  
• IRC: SP:68-2022 “Guidelines for Construction of Roller Compacted Concrete Pavements”  
• IRC:134-2022 “Guidelines on Skid Resistance of Pavement Surfacing”  
• Irc:102-2022 “Planning for Bypasses Around Towns” (First Revision)   
• IRC:137-2022 “Guidelines on Use of Fibre-Reinforced Polymer Bars in Highway Projects”  
• State-of-the-Art-Report “Design of Safer Highways b ased on Lessons from Past 
 Earthquakes”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

82 
 
Annexure- VII  
 
Regarding State/UTwise details of accrual, Unspent Balance as on 01.04.2022 and Maximum Possible 
Release under CRIF during FY 2022-23  
Amount in Rs. Crore  
No.  State/UTs  Existing 
Accrual 
for the 
FY 
2022-
23 
Existing Accrual for 
ROBs/RUBs/Bridges 
on State Road 
under “SETU 
BANDHAN” for the 
FY2022-23 
Unspent 
Balance as 
on 
01.04.2022 
Maximum 
Possible 
release in 
FY 2022-
23 
(3+4+5) 
1 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
344.73 35.46 374.13 754.32 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
133.88  13.77  213.34  360.99  
3 Assam  153.82  15.82  92.63  262.27  
4 Bihar  205.35  21.12  0 226.47  
5 Chhattisgarh  254.90  26.22  387.6  668.72  
6 Goa  14.74  1.52  47.32  63.58  
7 Gujarat  461.81  47.50  215.74  725.05  
8 Haryana  179.29  18.44  291.36  489.09  
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 
106.75  10.98  51.32  169.05  
10 Jharkhand  167.71  17.25  707.37  892.33  
11 Karnataka  465.27  47.86  4.99  518.12  
12 Kerala  133.46  13.73  1.5  148.69  
13 Madhya 
Pradesh 
573.96  59.03  0 632.99  
14  Maharashtra  710.15  73.04  300.96  1084.15  
15  Manipur  38.17  3.93  195.58  237.68  
16  Meghalaya  43.08  4.43  25.34  72.85  
17  Mizoram  34.64  3.56  89.6  127.80  
18 Nagaland 28.39 2.92 7.63 38.94 

83 
 
19 Odisha 309.15 31.8 8.56 349.51 
20 Punjab 160.46 16.5 0 176.96 
21 Rajasthan 649.05 66.76 1287.27 2003.09 
22 Sikkim 12.78 1.31 20.26 34.35 
23 Tamil Nadu 365.12 37.55 4 406.67 
24 Telangana 275.89 28.38 2.92 307.19 
25 Tripura 19.25 1.98 0.17 21.40 
26 Uttar Pradesh 636.91 65.51 6.63 709.05 
27 Uttarakhand 103.38 10.63 274.79 388.80 
28 West Bengal 217.90 22.41 0 240.31 
 Sub Total 
(States) 
6800.00 699.41 4611.03  
 UTs with 
Legislatures 
    
29 Delhi 29.07 2.99  32.06 
30 Jammu  & 
Kashmir 
102.89 10.72 113.61 
31 Puducherry 7.83 2.56 10.39 
 Sub Total 
(UTs with 
Legislature) 
139.79 16.27  
 UTs without 
Legislature 
   
32 A&N Islands 15.81 1.68 17.49 
33 Chandigarh 5.08 1.47 6.55 
34 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
5.09 0.65 5.74 
35 Ladakh 261.34 27.72 289.06 
 Sub Total 
(UTs without 
Legislature) 
287.33 31.51  
 Total reserve    
 Grand total for 
State & UTs 
7227.12 747.19   
 
**** 

84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

85 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25th April 2023 in Room No. 53, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
 7.    Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
 8.    Shri Rahul Kaswan  
 9.    Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11.  Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14.  Shri Prince Raj 
15.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways 

86 
 
i. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh; Additional Secretary 
ii. Shri D. Sarangi, ADG; 
iii. Shri Kaushik Basu, ADG 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
2.         Some concerns were raised by the Committee regarding the issue of entry passes to 
Research Assistant to the Chairman of the Committee and the postponement of the study visit of 
the Committee to Gangtok, Guwahati & Tawang from 15 th April to 19 th April 2023.   The 
Chairman informed that he got the entry pass made for her with the permission of the Hon'ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Members were of the view that the Secretariat should restrict itself to the 
smooth functioning of the Committee.   Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman to 
take necessary action in this regard. The Committee also desired that a brief note on issues to be 
discussed in the meetings may also be provided to the Members, henceforth. 
 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
 
3.         The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the Additional 
Secretary, Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways and National Hig hways Authority of India 
on the subject 'Construction of Road -Over-Bridges (ROBs) and Road -Under-Bridges (RUBs), 
Service Roads, and Review of Road Survey Guidelines etc.'  The Chairman asked the Additional 
Secretary to brief the Committee on the following points: 
i. Details of ROBs and RUBs constructed in the country under PM Gati Shakti and the 
targets set by the Ministry to construct more such bridges in the country; 
ii. Current status of the ongoing ROB and RUBs projects in the country and their deadlines 
and targets; 
iii. Achievements of the Ministry, if any, in the construction of ROBs and RUBs in the 
country; 
iv. Details of the ROBs and RUBs constructed by the Ministry which have proved beneficial 
for other modes of transport, not only for those who are using the road  but beneficial 
even for rail connectivity, air connectivity and sea or inland waterways;  
v. Details of the Rail -cum Road Over -Bridges, ROBs and RUBs constructed by the 
Ministry which have contributed to road safety and minimizing road accidents and 
mishaps in the last five years and the assessment thereof;  

87 
 
vi. The salient features of the 'Setu Bharatam' Programme which aims at making all National 
highways,  Railway Level Crossings free by 2019 and the revised deadline; 
vii. The total number and length of Service Roa ds constructed in the country and whether 
such roads have proved beneficial and the steps taken to improve the quality of such 
service roads; 
viii. Number of  Service Road projects in the country where the deadlines were revised and 
the  challenges faced by the Ministry in this regard; 
ix. The steps taken to expedite the construction work of ROBs and RUBs, and resolve 
coordination issues between Ministries; 
x. Details of Budget allocated for construction of ROBS/RUBs and Service Roads in the 
country; 
xi. The process adopted by the Ministry to choose land for the development and construction 
of a road or a highway and the survey guidelines implemented for the same;  
xii. The coordination mechanisms adopted by the Ministry to coordinate with other Central 
and State Government depar tments and the challenges and difficulties faced in this 
regard; 
xiii. New initiatives taken by the Ministry to improve road connectivity across the country and 
the challenges and difficulties faced by the Ministry in constructing roads and various 
other road projects in various States; 
xiv.  Permissions/approvals  required from the State Governments for constructing roads and 
various other road projects in various States and  whether the process of obtaining such 
permissions/approvals is effective; and  
xv. Encroachments on service roads and the solutions thereof. 
 
4.  The Ministry presented a detailed PowerPoint Presentation on the following points: 
 Guidelines for construction of ROBs and RUBs; 
 Status of ROBs/RUBs/Level Crossings on National Highways; 
 Setu Bharatam Programme; 
 Clearances required in the implementation of ROBs/RUBs; 
 Difficulties being faced in the construction of ROBs/RUBs and action taken to expedite 
ROBs/RUBs construction; 
 Service Roads; 
 Status of service roads on National Highways; 

88 
 
 Length of Service Road (in km); 
 Surveys and Investigations carried out for DPR Preparation; and 
 Surveys & investigations conducted on existing roads under operation. 
5.  The Additional Secretary, MoRTH elaborated that the construction of ROBs/RUBs on 
National Highways is impo rtant for ensuring smooth traffic flow, improving logistics efficiency 
of freight movement, improving road safety and achieving better fuel efficiency. He informed 
that presently there are 765 existing ROBs/RUBs and 452 ROBs/RUBs are under construction. 
He also stated that selected level -crossings on already constructed NHs or proposed for 
construction are taken up under the Setu Bharatam.  To ensure better coordination with the 
Ministry of Railways, an MoU was signed on 10 th November 2014 regarding the cons truction of 
ROBs/RUBs on NH corridors in which construction of span over railway lines would be done on 
a single entity basis.  
6.  The Additional Secretary, MoRTH highlighted that the NH network is continuously 
expanding in the country during the last sev en to eight years, and has grown from less than 
90,000 kms to more than 1.4 lakh kms. The width of service roads can be from 7 meters to 5.5 
meters and the total existing length of service roads of a single lane is 1614 kms; the 
intermediate lane is 4,492 kms and two lanes is 14,505 kms. 
7.   The Additional DG, MoRTH briefed about the Indian Roads Congress Manuals for the 
design of highways and informed that all level crossings on national highways will be replaced 
by ROBs or RUBs. He also highlighted the f eatures of the Setu Bandhan and Sethu Bharatam 
Schemes. The Setu Bandhan Scheme is for the construction of ROBs/RUBs on level crossings 
on State Highways etc. for which the Ministry is getting separate CRIF accrual; while Setu 
Bharatam Scheme is specific t o National Highways and is funded by internal sources of the 
NHAI or MoRTH. There are 218 level crossings on NHs based on the existing length of NHs. 
8.  The Chairman sought information about the various kinds of surveys and investigations 
which are carrie d out for the construction of NHs/Bypass bridges and for the design of 
intersections. 
9.  He also enquired about the policy on which a decision is taken for the construction of 
ROB/RUB in a particular place or State on a particular highway. He also suggest ed to the 
Members of the Committee to collect information on ROBs/RUBs in their constituencies and 
States for incorporation in the Report. The Chairman further enquired about the existing strength 
of staff and consultants, staff shortage, staff requirement s, and procedures followed in recruiting 
consultants. He queried about the total amount paid to the concessionaire and consultants for 

89 
 
conducting the surveys for the entire stretch throughout the country over the last two years and 
desired that a report on the issue may be submitted to the Committee within 15 days. 
10. The Members also raised various queries pertaining to the following issues:- 
 Details of the Road map and vision for development; 
 Details of ROBs/RUBs/Service roads/ Service lanes on National Highways, and reasons 
for delay in their construction; 
 Status of charging stations for Electric Vehicles on National Highways and plans to 
construct dedicated corridor for electric vehicles; 
 Details of funds allocated to Indian Roads Congress (IRC) and bri nging out of 
comprehensive guidelines/manuals on road survey and road development by IRC; 
 Raised a request for the appearance of IRC before the Committee; 
 Steps taken to address the shortage of manpower; 
 Reasons for stoppage of vehicles with FASTag at toll plazas; 
 Encroachments of service roads and measures to eradicate it; 
 The deteriorating condition of NH connecting Ambala to Pali ; 
 Report of surveys conducted on NH -58, NH-52, NH-11, and NH-10, the money spent on 
these surveys and the consultant monitoring them; 
 The issue regarding NH16 and NH 216 A from Visakhapatnam to Vijayawada; 
 The total amount paid to the concessionaire and consultants for conducting the surveys 
throughout the country over the last two years, the time spent for the purpose and qualit y 
of work done; 
 Exploration of push box technology in Kazhakoottam -Gurunagar Underpass in Kerala; 
 Status of ROBs and RUBs in the state of Kerala, especially in the context of the 
Thalassery-Mahe Bypass and policy of constructing the underpass; 
 Dereliction of duty by officials responsible for service road development on Highways; 
 The number of surveys and investigations conducted on ROBs on NH 29 in Nagaland 
connecting Maligaon to Imphal, which has one ROB that was inaugurated in 1973 and 
the upgradation/ r epair of one road from Mon headquarters to Nimonagarh, Charaideo 
(Assam) via Hongphoi village along with the construction of a road from Y -anner to 
Mundun Heritage Model village. 
 Number of roads undertaken in Nagaland under CRIF for the past five years; 
 Upgradation/construction of other roads in Arunachal Pradesh. 
 Construction of roads with plastic and steel waste. 

90 
 
 Delay in construction and bad condition of Himmat Nagar -Jaipur-Delhi highway, 
Ahmedabad-RadhanpurNational highway, Bechraji -Mehsana highway, Haj ipur-Sonpur 
NH, NH 527 C and Muzzafarpur Bypass etc; 
 Developing small parks, and gardens under over-bridges on the lines of those constructed 
in Mumbai, in order to prevent settlements of slums and for beautification of the city; 
 Roadblocks due to construc tion of divider on NE -1 Highway connecting Ahmedabad to 
Vadodara; 
 The rules or any other financial model for providing service lanes to highways in order to 
reduce accidents that occur due to the establishment of hotels, dhabas and other ribbon 
developments; 
 Issue of obligation on Petrol pump owners to develop service road; 
 Construction status of the National Highway connecting Hajipur to Sonepur and NH - 
527C, Muzaffarpur bypass connecting Ramdayalu to Motihari and Old NH-77 in Bihar. 
 Issue of shine board installment on completion of Diversion Bridge in Kumma, between 
Sitamarhi and Sursand on NH connecting Sitamarhi and Jaynagar; 
 Issue of deaths of patients due to long waiting of ambulances at railway crossings in the 
absence of ROBs and RUBs; 
 Long waiting time at railway crossings due to the absence of ROBs/RUBs at Bhola 
Talkies and Muktapur (on NH 322) in Samastipur and completion of the same; 
 The number of sanctioned and under-sanctioned ROBs/RUBs in all the States; 
 Issue of delay in construction of ROBs and RUBs in Maharashtra; 
 Proposal for a separate department for handling   Highways related issues like clearances, 
land acquisition, etc; 
 Emphasis on the establishment of ROBs and RUBs on State roads, district roads and 
village roads; 
 Awareness and training to drivers regarding lane discipline to reduce accidents; 
 Need to focus on VUPs/CUPs and flyovers in NH near villages in general and especially 
on NH-58 for the safety of people; 
 In regard to the Setubandhan  programme, suggestions were made regarding pre-approval 
of GAD after collecting data of all constituencies in coordination with States 
Governments as it takes 200 days for the same; 
 The issue regarding the design of National Highways, subsidence of roads due to 
improper compaction; 

91 
 
 Traffic issues on Delhi- Gurugram Highway due to the absence of an extra lane; 
 Detailed report on traffic count and its impact on pavement design; 
 Requirement of axle load survey; 
 Emphasis on NHAI to provide information regarding patches   for opening re tail outlets 
on NHs so that oil marketing companies can put up their advertisements and proper 
guidelines regarding NoC of retail outlets for promoting Ease of Doing Business and; 
 Current construction status of six by -pass roads near Rajahmundry viz. Diwan cheruvu 
ROB, Gammon India ROB, Rajanagaram ROB, Lalacheruvu ROB, Bommuru ROB and 
Vemagiri ROB; 
 Requirement of a bridge on Godavari river from Devarapalli to Maredumilli to bypass 
Rajahmundry city and to reduce distance; 
 Issue of junction improvements on NH365 BB; 
 Extension of service roads up to 10 metres in municipal areas; 
 Need for time factor in the completion of Highways and other road projects; 
 Need for high mast lights or centre divider lighting on Highways; 
 Existing strength staff and consultants, st aff shortage, staff requirement, and procedures 
followed in recruiting consultants 
 The issue of water logging at underpasses during the rainy season and audit for the 
identification of such underpasses. 
11. The Additional Secretary and his team responded t o some of the queries raised by the 
Members and took note of the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman directed that 
written replies to the points which had not been answered may be sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 2.06 PM. 
   
New Delhi,                                                                                                               Swarabji B. 
25th April, 2023                                                                                                       Director 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 

92 
 
 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
11.00 A.M. 
MINISTRY OF ROAD, TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS. 
1 Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Additional Secretary 
2 Shri D. Sarangi ADG 
3 Shri Kaushik Basu ADG 
4 Shri B. K. Sinha ADG 
5 Shri V. K. Rajawat ADG 
6 Shri Sudip Choudhary ADG 
7 Shri O. P. Shrivastava CE 
8 Shri Rajeev Singh CE 
9 Shri Aditya Prakash CE 
10 Shri P. R. Meena CE 
11 Shri P.K. Shakya CE 
12 Shri Rahul Gupta CE 
13 Shri Anil Kushwaha CE 
14 Shri Jitendra Kumar SE 
National Highways Authority of India 
S. No. Name Designation 
1 Shri Mahabir Singh Member, Technical 
2 Shri Manoj Kumar Member, Project 
3 Shri K. Venkata Ramana Member (PPP) 
National Highways and Infrastructure Development 
S. No. Name Designation 
1 Shri Atul Kumar Director (Technical) 
  
* * * * 
  

93 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th May, 2023 in Committee Room 
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.   Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2.Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj  
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar   
Lok Sabha 
 5.Shri Tapir Gao  
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe  
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu  
8. Shri Prince Raj  
9. Shri Dushyant Singh  
10. Tirath Singh Rawat  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Bridges Directorate and Bridges & Structure Directorate of Research Development & 
Standards Organisation (RDSO), Ministry of Railways  
i. Shri Roop Kumar Sunkar - Member (Infra)  
ii. Shri Sanjeev Bhutani- Director General (RDSO) 
Indian Roads Congress 

94 
 
iii. Shri S.K. Nirmal, Secretary-General, (IRC) 
iv. Shri S.B. Vasava, President, (IRC) 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the agenda 
of the meeting was to deliberate on the subject of “Construction of Road-Over-Bridges (ROBs) 
and Road-Under-Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads, and Review of Road Survey Guidelines etc.”. 
The Chairman also informed that the Committee has already heard the representatives from the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, and Nat ional Highways Authority of India (NHAI), 
on the subject in its meeting dated 25.04.2023. 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.           The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Bridges Directorate and Bridges & 
Structure Directorate of Research Development & Standards Organization (RDSO), Ministry of 
Railways and the Indian Roads Congress.   Thereafter, the Chairman asked Member (Infra), 
Ministry of Railways to brief the Committee on the difficulties being faced in the construction o f 
ROBs/RUBs/Service roads and action taken to expedite their completion; the average waiting 
time at railway crossings due to the absence of ROBs/RUBs as also clearances required in the 
construction of ROBs/RUBs/Service Roads.  He asked the Ministry to elab orate on the inter -
governmental coordination mechanisms adopted and the surveys carried out on existing bridges 
along with abandoned bridges and the reasons for such abandonment. The Chairman also 
inquired about the effectiveness of the implementation of t he research and designs done by 
RDSO for the construction of ROBs and RUBs and the bottlenecks in this regard. He desired that 
the Committee may also be briefed regarding standards requirement for ROBs and RUBs and 
their compliance by G overnment agencies;  and technological advancements and process 
improvements done by Railways/RDSO. 
4.         The Chairman asked the Indian Roads Congress(IRC)  about various traffic surveys and 
investigations carried out for the construction of NHs/Bypass bridges and for deci ding the 
carriageway configuration width for 6 -lane, 4-lane and 2 -lane roads emphasizing the pros and 
cons of these three categories for NHs. The Chairman also sought information on the research 
and development criteria followed by IRC and the survey repor t on traffic count and its impact 
on road design, engagement of consultants and the expenditure incurred thereon. The Chairman 
also inquired about extant/proposed guidelines on the construction of ROBs and RUBs, hurdles 

95 
 
in their implementation and the extent to which it is being complied with by NHAI/Central/State 
Government/Departments. The Chairman also desired to know about initiatives undertaken by 
IRC for promoting environmental-friendly technologies and materials in road construction along 
with the ad option of global standards. He also sought suggestions from IRC to bring 
the construction of ROB/RUB/Service lanes on track along with the details of budgetary 
allocation and other challenges faced in their construction. 
5.         Thereafter, Member (Infr a), Railway Board made a presentation.   He informed the 
Committee that Indian Railways has been making efforts to improve safety as a  whole, 
particularly at level crossings. Indian Railways has been  able to eliminate 100% unmanned level 
crossings on broad gauge routes by January 2019. As of date, the railway network has 
17,720 manned level crossings on a broad gauge system and the Ministry is aiming to replace all 
the level crossing gates with ROBs and RUBs.  He explained the provision in the earlier system 
where the State Government proposed the construction of ROBs and the cost was shared by both 
the Railways and the State Government or the local government.   However, the allocation of 
limited funds by the State  Governments/Road owning Authorities, for road  crossing works led 
to delays in sanction and completion of these works. To address this issue, the Ministry of 
Railways has decided to eliminate those level crossing gates by constructing ROBs and RUBs at 
their cost to keep up with the pace. He, further, highlighted the issue of the cost of land as they 
were not getting land free from encumbrances and also touched upon the issue of utility shifting, 
which is now being managed and borne by the Ministry of Railway itself. He informed that the 
Ministry of Rai lways aims to accelerate road crossing works and a policy letter was issued in 
March 2023 to remove bottlenecks in sanctioning and progressing of these works at an 
accelerated pace. He apprised the Committee that under this new policy, they have already 
sanctioned 300 ROBs/RUBs with this proviso and 151 ROBs/RUBs in the last two months, i.e. 
April and May. He also informed about the MoU signed between the Ministry of Railways and 
NHAI to eliminate level crossing gates and provide technical assistance in the  clearance of their 
drawings under GAD arrangements. 
6.        On the query by the Chairman regarding the nodal agency responsible for ownership and 
management of land after the construction of ROBs/RUBs, Member (Infra), informed that the 
ownership of the land lies with the Railways if acquired by them, and ROBs are also managed by 
Indian Railways if they are on Railways property. Chairman, thereafter, enquired about the 
number of requests received from various State Governments for the construction of ROBs  and 

96 
 
RUBs and the number of such requests which have been accepted and rejected along with the 
reasons thereof. 
  
7.     Thereafter, Secretary - General, IRC made a presentation.   He informed that the Indian 
Roads Congress was established in 1934 as a Socie ty of Engineers and Professionals associated 
with the Highway Sector in the country. He informed the Committee about the Governing 
Council, its constitution and membership details. He emphasized that IRC does not get any 
grants from the Government. He appr ised the Committee that IRC also had MoUs with 
international partners like JICA, PIARC, AASTHO and International Road Federation. In 
addition, IRC also had research organizations like Central Road Research Institute and Highway 
Research Stations, Chennai. Moreover, it collaborates with Institutions like IITs, NITs, 
NATPAC and other engineering colleges and leading consultants, and contractors. It was 
submitted that the objective of IRC is to prepare national standards, guidelines and manuals for 
the entire road sector. 
8.         He also informed about the publication of proceedings, journals, periodicals and other 
literature with the assistance of technical committees, experts from MoRTH, State PWDs, NHAI, 
NHIDCL, BRO, Railways, IITs and International bodie s like World Bank, ADB and JICA.   
Elaborating about the Technical Committees, he informed that there are 26 committees divided 
into three streams viz. Highway Specifications & Standards Committee (H1 -H10), Bridge 
Specifications & Standards apex committee (B-1 to B-9) and General Specifications & Standards 
Committee (G-1 to G-7).  
9.         He apprised the Committee that for planning, design construction and maintenance of 
ROBs and RUBs, IRC has prepared a document IRC:SP:90 which provides guidelines for gr ade 
separators and elevated structures including planning aspects, general features, and geometric 
standards, environmental considerations, construction methods and constructability issues, safety 
requirement, inspection and maintenance. In addition, there are two separate documents for roads 
and bridges i.e. IRC:SP:19 and IRC:SP:54, respectively. These give details about the stages in 
project preparation, guiding principles for route selection, alignment improvement, survey of 
socio-economic profile, traff ic surveys and their analysis, recce surveys, topographic surveys, 
environmental impact assessment and rehabilitation and resettlement studies, feasibility report, 
staking final alignment on ground, soil and material survey, road inventory and condition su rvey, 

97 
 
drainage studies, preparation and presentation of DPRs, preconstruction activities and project 
analysis. Further, IRC:SP:09 which deals with traffic surveys has been recently revised in 2022 
based on the latest equipment available for traffic surveys . This document also covers 
information regarding current traffic, generated traffic and induced traffic. 
10.       Secretary-General, IRC also informed about the capacity of two -lane, four-lane, six-lane 
and expressways, which has been covered in differen t manuals.  Elaborating on the service level 
concept, he informed that level B service pertains to comfortable driving while level C means 
congestion; and that as the road reaches to congestion level, it is upgraded to a higher level lane. 
He also submitted that due to the fund crunch, IRC does not undertake any R&D initiative on its 
own. Instead, it compiles the latest research done in the country and publishes its document 
every year in its Annual session. With reference to guidelines on ROBs/RUBs, he inf ormed that 
IRC is totally guided by Railway authorities and as far as global standards are concerned.    IRC 
takes inputs from all the interested international agencies, particularly, World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank, JICA and TRL, UK. In addition, World Bank is also preparing the first draft 
for IRC on intersections and junctions. He also submitted that based on the exhaustive document 
prepared by IRC on environmental issues of the road sector, a report was prepared by the 
Environment Ministry, MoRTH and IRC only last month.   The combined report on  the 
requirement of environmental issues in the road sector will now be presented to the Supreme 
Court. 
11.       The Committee was also apprised that all the implementing agencies for the road sector, 
especially, under the Ministry of Roads, Transport & Highways like the NHAI, NHIDCL and 
PWDs, are following the IRC document.   However, modifications if any, are brought about 
through administrative orders of MoRTH as and where required. In respect of fund allocatio n, 
the Ministry is sanctioning all the priority areas and the research work for R&D requirements. 
For code preparation, the Ministry is acting through the Apex Body, i.e., the Chairman of the 
three Technical Committees. He informed that the Director Genera l, the Ministry of Road 
Transport is the Chairman of the three Apex Committees which are approving the IRC codes. 
12.       Vice-President, IRC threw light on the contribution of Central Road Research Institute 
(CRRI).  He stated that CRRI along with other eight academic institutes, carried out a study 
called Indo -Highway Capacity Manual to understand the width of the  National Highways 
depending on the traffic. He informed that CRRI is a 70 -year-old institute and has seven R&D 
divisions. The Bridge Engineering & Structures Division deals with ROBs and RUBs. 

98 
 
Geotechnical Engineering Division, Traffic Engineering and Saf ety Division, and Transport 
Planning & Environment Division deal with the traffic transportation aspects. Geotechnical 
Engineering Division provides support in developing RUBs which use Box Pushing Technology. 
Bridge Division assesses the condition of the Bridges by utilizing Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit. 
13.      He informed the Committee about the usage of different waste materials like steel slag 
waste in collaboration with different industries like MNS, JSW Steel, Rashtriya Ispat Limited 
and Tata Steel  to construct a bituminous road in Arunachal Pradesh. In Odisha, Alumina waste 
has been utilised for road construction. Also, CRRI works on the development of different new 
materials out of waste including waste plastic.   These R&D activities are largely s ponsored by 
the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, MoRTH, NHAI, other line Ministries and the 
State Governments. CRRI also carries out a 15-Day Road Safety Audit Certificate Programme to 
provide trained auditors.   He also informed the Committee a bout IRC:SR:103, a document on 
pedestrian facilities. 
14.      Thereafter, Chairman enquired about the recommendations and standards set for 
ROBs/RUBs by the 26 Technical Committees under IRC and the details of such ROBs and 
RUBs which have not been constr ucted in accordance with these standards.  To a query by a 
Member, Member (Infra) stated that it is mandatory for all departments to follow IRC 
guidelines.  Clarifying the doubts regarding the elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings 
(ULCs) on broad gauge, he stated that they have eliminated ULCs on broad gauge and they are 
now replacing metre gauge and narrow gauge with broad gauge.   This is a continuing process 
and presently only 2000 km of stretch is left for conversion. However, heritage lines will not b e 
converted as these already have less traffic. 
15.       In response to another query by Chairman regarding Manned Level Crossings on Broad 
Gauge, Metre Gauge and Narrow Gauge and targets and timelines set therefor, Member (Infra) 
stated that there are 17 ,720 level crossings in Broad gauge, out of which 405 are on  National 
Highways and rest are on State Highways, local village roads and other roads; 120 in Metre 
Gauge and 78 in Narrow Gauge. Also, Railways is eliminating 1,200 to 1,500 level crossing 
gates every year. Regarding the timeline to eliminate these manned level crossings and construct 
the road -over-bridges or road -under-bridges, Member (Infra) submitted that they will give a 
detailed reply in writing 
16.       Members also raised various queries such as: 

99 
 
 Need for research and innovation in the development of   lightweight structures and 
promoting the use of metallurgy for the development of lightweight metals like 
Aluminium, and carbon steel; 
 Need for the adoption of new technologies along with the  inclusion of aesthetic sense in 
structures. 
 Year-wise target and timeline for construction of ROBs/RUBs. 
 Water-logging issues in RUBs in Bhandara -Gondiya constituency and other places 
including Minto road in New Delhi; 
 Need for the adoption of new designs and transparency in the working; 
 Average waiting time at railway crossings and the issue of traffic congestion at Bhola 
Talkies, Gumti and Muktapur in Samastipur and building projects to resolve the same; 
 Issue of   NoC awaited from Railways for starting r epair of approach road in Gandhi 
Chowk, Rosera; 
 Non-adherence to guidelines while constructing multiple consecutive speed breakers on 
roads and consequent inconvenience caused due to them, along with lack of   research on 
the same in local areas for incorporating required  modifications; 
 Need for Govt funding  for IRC to work efficiently; 
 Timeline for the inauguration of Sonepur ROB in Bihar; 
 Starting construction work of Mehsaul ROB in Sitamarhi to prevent the death of patients 
due to obstruction of ambulance movement caused by traffic blockage ; 
 Traffic issue due to deplorable condition of roads near railway crossings and NOC tussle 
between State Government and Railways for development of road as it comes under the 
jurisdiction of Railways; 
 Chairman also en quired about the number of requests pending for NOCs for RoBs and 
RuBs along with the timeline; 
 Issue of multiple speed breakers at Sangem village at 1 km stretch of road and 
identification of black spots; 
 Emphasis on the construction of tunnels to overcom e problems due to fog and snow 
blockades in the Himalayan belt; 
 Need for a control mechanism to overcome traffic issues and other mess at railway 
crossings; 
 Need for increasing manpower at the railway crossing in Arunachal Pradesh 
(Murkongselek to Pasighat ) along with the requirement of construction of ROBs/RUBs 
in the area; 
 Need for developing a mechanism for mandatory cooperation of State Government in 
land availability; 
 Chairman  enquired about the reasons for the difference in waiting time at the railwa y 
crossings with reference to the passing of passenger trains, express trains and goods trains 
and the peak time for closing the gate for all 17,720 crossings; 
 Chairman also questioned the poor performance in the elimination of manned level -
crossings and inordinate delay at manned level -crossings causing traffic jams and 
resulting in the wastage of petrol and man hours. He also enquired about the interlocking 
of gates; 
 Issue of repairing of ROB at NH-29 in Manipur as also increasing the number of spans to 
be repaired and widening the same. In addition, traffic problem on ROB due to the 
absence of railways in Manipur was also flagged; 
 The date of  enforcement of the MoU between the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry 
of Road Transport which was signed on 1 0.11.2014 to eliminate all level crossings on 
National Highways; 

100 
 
17.       The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of 
the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman also asked to explain guidelines regarding 
Metro Rail. In response, Member  (Infra) stated that Metro is not a part of Indian Railways.   It is 
with the Ministry of Urban Development . On further enquiry on Nagpur and Delhi Metro, 
Member (infra) submitted that Railway is not funding Metros. However,  if a DPR is cleared by 
the Ministry of Urban Development, then mostly the cost -sharing is 50 per cent by the Central 
Government and 50 per cent by the State Government.   They are taking on loans either from 
JICA or some other agencies. As far as RDSO's role in metros is concerned, all the technological 
part is cleared by the RDSO. Whatsoever technology is brought for rolling stock or power supply 
and traction, it is cleared by RDSO. Subsequently, oscillation trials and clearing them for 
operation for passenger service is mostly done by RDSO except for NCRTC which has been 
done by Independent Safety Assessor (ISA). 
18.       Chairman further asked IRC about their 85 th Annual Conference. Secretary-General, IRC 
replied that the last year IRC Annual Conference was held in October 2022   and hosted by the 
State Government of UP. This year it will be held in Ahmedabad and is hosted and totally funded 
by the respective State Government. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points that 
had not been answered and to the ten questions forwarded by him may be sent to the Secretariat 
within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
19.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
20.       The meeting adjourned at 4.59 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                        Swarabji B. 
16th May, 2023                                                                                                    Director 
  
  
  
  
  
  

101 
 
  
  
  
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
  
3.00 P.M. 
Railway Board, Ministry of Railways 
1       Shri Roop Kumar Sunkar                             Member (Infra) 
2          Shri Sanjeev Bhutani        Director General (RDSO) 
3 Shri Vijay Pratap Singh Principal Executive Director(Bridge) 
4 Shri B.P. Awasthi Principal Executive Director(Infra-II), RDSO 
5 Shri Pankaj Tyagi ED(L&A) 
6 Shri Rakesh Choudhary EDGS(SD&T) 
7 Shri R.K. Srivastava ED(B&S), RDSO 
Indian Roads Congress 
8 Shri S.K. Nirmal                      Secretary-General 
9 Prof. Manoranjan Parida Vice-President 
10 Shri R.S. Sharma Ex Secretary-General 
11 Shri R.V. Patil Deputy Director(Tech.) 
  
* * * * 
  
  
 
 
 
 

102 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIV 
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th June, 2023 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim  
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Ten dulkar 
Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
7. Shri Chhedi Paswan  
8. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu  
9. Shri Prince Raj  
10. Shri Dushyant Singh  
11. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
        Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
  
Central Road Research Institute 
Prof. Manoranjan Parida, Director 
  
TRAX S. Society 
Shri Anurag Kulshrestha, President. 
  
SaveLIFE Foundation:  
Shri Piyush Tewari, Founder & CEO.  
  

103 
 
 (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the agenda of 
the meeting was to deliberate on the subject of “Construction of Road -Over-Bridges (ROBs) and 
Road-Under-Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads, and Review of Road Survey Guidelines etc.”. The 
Chairman also informed that  the Co mmittee has already heard the representatives from the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, and National Highways Authority of India (NHAI),  
and the representatives from the Bridge Directorate of the Ministry of Railways; Bridge & 
Structure Directorate  of Research Designs & Standards Organisation (RDSO) of Ministry of 
Railways, and Indian Roads Congress (IRC) on the above subject in its meeting held on 
25.04.2023 and 16.05.2023 respectively. 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.          The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Central Road Research Institute, TRAX, 
and SaveLIFE Foundation to the meeting. Stating the importance of research on design, 
engineering, and technology in the construction of ROBs and RUBs in the country, he  asked 
CRRI to brief the Committee about the role of CRRI in the construction of ROBs/RUBs and the 
research conducted by it in this regard.; its contribution to the development of safety standards 
and guidelines for the construction and maintenance of ROBs an d RUBs in India;  innovative 
technologies and methodologies developed or adopted along with  the use of sustainable and eco-
friendly materials for ROB and RUB construction;  improvements done in existing design codes 
and junction improvements made. He also sought information regarding international agreements 
or collaborations undertaken/proposed to be undertaken by CRRI and the details of training, 
workshops, and seminars conducted by it. 
4.        The Chairman asked the NGOs, namely, TRAX and SaveLIFE Founda tion about their 
engagement with the Government agencies and policy-makers to advocate for the construction of 
ROBs and RUBs in areas prone to accidents. He also asked about their  engagement with local 
communities for raising awareness about the benefits a nd importance of ROBs and RUBs in 
enhancing transportation infrastructure; and how NGOs are addressing the potential 
environmental and social impacts associated with the construction of such structures. Further, he 
sought information about the major challenges being faced by them in promoting road safety and 
how they promote awareness regarding Good Samaritan Law. He also enquired about their 
engagements with local authorities, stakeholders, and the public to ensure transparency and 
community participation throughout the construction process and the measures taken to ensure 

104 
 
the safety of construction workers. The Chairman also sought suggestions to involve NGOs in 
the construction of ROB/RUB/service lanes and the challenges in this regard. The following 
issues were discussed: 
I.   CRRI 
(i) About CRRI: The Director, CRRI, gave a presentation on the establishment and vision of 
CRRI. He informed the Committee about its seven R&D divisions in the areas of traffic and 
transportation, namely, Transportation Planning and Environment; Traffic Engineering and Road 
Safety;  Pavement Evaluation Division; Flexible Pavements Division; Rigid Pavements Division; 
Geotechnical Engineering Division; and Bridges and   Structural Engineering Division. Further, 
CRRI is currently developing the Trip General Manual at the national level. He also apprised the 
Committee of the application of AI for road safety in Nagpur city, known as iRASTE -Nagpur, 
which is now being extended to iRASTE -Telangana. He stated that CRRI also conducts studie s 
with respect to noise mapping, identification of noise hot spots, and mitigation plans, especially 
in terms of the provision of noise barriers. With reference to the North -east engagement, he 
informed the Committee about the preparation of the ongoing In tegrated Transport Network 
Development Plan for Meghalaya. He also informed that CRRI also undertakes Skill 
Development on Road Safety Awareness for teachers/faculty of higher educational institutes. 
 (ii).       Pavement Engineering and materials used in projects: the Director  of CRRI informed 
that steel slag and prefabricated plastic panels were utilized in road construction in Arunachal 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Jharkhand.  In the case of bridges and structural engineering, 
CRRI carries out a con dition survey, and structural evaluation and suggests retrofitting and 
remedial measures.  Currently, CRRI has received a huge project for understanding the condition 
assessment of 308 bridges in the State of Odisha. The projects include design constructio n, 
supervision, and pavement performance evaluation of roads constructed by using red mud under 
geotechnical engineering.   He apprised the Committee about another project relating to 
sustainable road pavements at high altitude regions using geosynthetics a nd Hill Road Widening 
using Light Weight Geofoam Block, which is an alternative to earth cutting and filling.   He 
informed the Committee about the ' Indian Highway Capacity Manual', in which about seven 
academic institutes participated, and the document was  released in 2018.  This manual guides 
all capacities related to the highway sector in the country. He also informed about CRRI's 
clientele and associate institutes like the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI, 
NHIDCL, NRIDA, State PWDs, Delhi traffic police, Reliance, PCRA, RITES, etc. 

105 
 
(iii).    CRRI's contribution to ROBs/RUBs : CRRI has undertaken a study of 751 bridges 
including one project on Delhi Vadodara Expressway, near Bandiqui, Alwar, Rajasthan, and 
another project in Bareilly, to underst and the requirements of the major repairs and retrofitting 
measures in these projects. He also informed the Committee about the study of quality control 
undertaken on elevated highways and ROB from the Delhi -Ghaziabad border to the Meerut 
crossing at Ghaziabad as also a structural audit of 2.6 kilometres of the elevated road at Agartala 
Tripura. Also, CRRI has provided technical service in various ROB/RUB projects in   Kota, 
Rajasthan; Mahipalpur, New Delhi;   Jhalawar, Rajasthan; and Delhi He informed about the 
Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit, which is one of the new technologies used for condition 
monitoring of bridges. He added that it was patented in 2020 and received an innovation Award 
from NRDC.  He also informed that CRRI has undertaken forensic investig ations of failed ROB 
approaches and makes recommendations for remedial action in respect of these ROBs. 
(iv).        Studies conducted on traffic : CRRI uses RSA  documents for a detailed study at a 
railway crossing in Ahmedabad. The detailed design prepare d by CRRI has been implemented 
by Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. Further, given that service roads alongside the four -lane 
and six -lane national highways are often found to be not appropriately designed, CRRI   
undertook a specific road safety audit and m ade recommendations on the design for the 
intersection of the service road and secondary road which is merging with the major arterial 
network. 
(v).        CRRI's mandate to work on waste to wealth : Different industrial waste materials are 
being utilized f or road construction. He gave some examples, like the usage of copper slag for 
road construction in Tuticorin, Tamil Nadu;   Phosphogypsum in the internal road network of 
Paradip Port Trust; red mud for National Highways in Koraput district in Odisha; Jarof ix for 
road construction in Chittorgarh, Udaipur; and burnt brickbats in the North -East. He apprised 
that the first steel slag -based road construction project was undertaken by CRRI and that they 
have developed a technology where steel slag can be utilized  for both bituminous and cement 
concrete road construction.   Further, CRRI has also developed some types of equipment, 
namely,  a simulation lab for driver diagnostics, a pothole repair machine, and a mobile cold 
mixer-cum-paver. Regarding training program mes conducted by it,   he informed that CRRI has 
an annual training calendar that encompasses all the seven R&D expertise. CRRI also organizes 
a 15 -day Certificate Course on 'Road Safety Audit and other Road Safety related aspects’ in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 

106 
 
 
II. SaveLIFE Foundation 
(i) About SaveLIFE Foundation  : CEO, SaveLIFE Foundation (SLF), briefed the Committee 
about his NGO stating that it is a part of the technical drafting team for the Motor Vehicles 
Amendment Act, 2019 and that SaveLIFE is best known for its contribution to establishing the 
Good Samaritan law in the country. He stated that SLF is also advising the Supreme Court 
Committee on Road Safety on various facets of Section 136A which pertain to the enf orcement 
of traffic laws. He further stated that SLF also works at grass -root levels through Zero Fatality 
Corridors and Zero Fatality Districts programmes. He informed that currently, SLF is in the 
process of scaling the Zero Fatality Corridor and Zero Fa tality District work to a hundred 
Highways and hundred districts across the country in close partnership with the Government of 
India. He, further, informed that through the 'Crash Vulnerability Audits' programme, his team 
goes to various Highways across t he country to study exactly what is happening as far as safety 
elements are concerned, especially, service roads because service roads connecting to main 
carriageways are often major points where incidents or road crashes take place. 
(ii). Issues pertainin g to service roads:  CEO apprised the Committee about some issues 
pertaining to service roads such as discontinuous service roads, encroachments on service roads, 
inadequate treatment of gaps present in service roads, pedestrian challenges on service roads, and 
absence of pedestrian guardrails. He informed the Committee that the majority of deaths were 
happening not on the main highway but on the service roads alongside the highway. Thereby 
emphasizing that a significant amount of safety work needed to be ca rried out on service roads. 
SLF has also submitted a detailed report along with recommendations on ROBs, RUBs, and 
Service Roads. He also apprised in detail about the advocacy methodology adopted by them.   
With reference to engagement with communities, he informed that SLF carries out both informal 
and formal consultative processes with the local community to understand their views and, most 
importantly, also get them to buy into the changes that are being recommended. 
(iii).      Experience in ROBs/RUBs: President, SaveLIFE Foundation (SLF) submitted that SLF 
has a very limited experience in railway over -bridges and under -bridges. He raised the issue of 
lane drop, which is a significant safety hazard.   He also informed about the lack of illumination, 
the in sufficient height of crash barriers, the lack of pedestrian and cyclist facilities, and 
inadequate treatment of merging and diverging points as significant issues. He further informed 

107 
 
the Committee that SLF conducted a survey in September 2022 in Tamil Nad u, where there was 
a challenge of merging and demerging points which were leading to crashes, and fatalities on 
these routes. In this regard, SLF sent detailed recommendations to the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, which were taken well into action. 
(iii).      Need for peripheral roads near villages on both sides for crossing the road: A Member 
drew attention to the road from Kota to Shivpuri, passing through Bara, which has Villages on 
both sides, and raised the issue of how villagers and animals are supposed to cross the roads. The 
Member emphasized the need to give peripheral roads near villages on both sides for crossing 
the road. In response, Chief Scientist & Head, CRRI informed that Indian Roads Congress has 
come out with the specific stipul ation that for any concession -driven project or EPC -driven 
project, it is necessary to have a service road either in the form of a vehicle underpass or a 
pedestrian underpass if a lesser number of people is going to cross it. If a lot of agriculture -
related movement is there, even a cattle underpass has to be provided. He stated that such issues 
are ignored by the concessionaire or EPC people. The Member also raised the issue of providing 
health and medical facilities on these roads and the use of helicopte rs for picking up people from 
crash sites. He also emphasized the need for education programmes for lorry drivers. 
(iv). Submission by TRAX:  President, TRAX informed that currently the road is acquired from 
the States and converted from two -lanes to four -lanes and making it a highway. However, the 
edge of the road is not defined.  So, there is trespassing from every place.  He, further, suggested 
that until there is provision for the cattle, etc., that road must not be announced as a National 
Highway.  A Member suggested that this was only possible by opening Greenfield expressways. 
He added that nothing has been done in this direction yet. He, f urther, enquired whether there is 
any country that has de -tagged the national highway to a street road or city road.   President, 
TRAX assured that they will submit the report on that. Another Member raised an issue about 
the large number of trucks at Moren a section of the toll and asked about the future planning of 
CRRI vis-à-vis tags and making the place more user-friendly.   
Submission by CRRI:  Director, CRRI replied that at present, there is no area licensing system. 
He cited the example of London having  a green tax that had to be paid if one was entering the 
city center.   In India, cities have pretty free entry and one does not have many restrictions.   
Specific to trucks, good highway -side amenities like developing truck terminals on the side of 
national highways can address these concerns.   Trucks can be easily parked there and the rest 
area can have fuel stations, toilets, etc.  

108 
 
(iv). Sending alerts to the driver on being sleepy:   A member also raised a query on sending 
alerts to the driver on being sle epy. Director, CRRI informed that rumble strips are there.   That 
provision is there in some places.   So, if the driver is sleepy, then an advanced driver assistance 
system is now going to be useful.  He informed about the iRASTE Telangana project where the y 
are trying to fit such devices which observe the blinking of the eyes of the bus drivers, especially 
the roads on which the buses are plying. CEO, SLF informed that as part of their current 
standards, there is a practice called Raised Profile Edge which is supposed to be on the edge of 
the road and is supposed to create a rumbling sound when a driver is departing that lane.   He 
added that this is a fairly recent inclusion in the road standards in the Maharashtra region. He 
also informed SLF has made a rec ommendation last year that fatigue detection devices and 
warning systems should be installed as a mandatory feature, just like a seat belt in every vehicle.  
(v). IRC Guidelines:     CEO, SLF concluded by saying that the majority of standards already 
exist within IRC.  The only need is to follow the IRC guidelines. He further, stated that Section 
198A of the Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Act, 2019 has been designed to hold road contractors 
and engineers accountable for faulty construction, faulty design, and fa ulty maintenance.   In 
order for that to be implemented, comprehensive rules under Section 210D of the Motor Vehicle 
(Amendment) Act have to be created by States. Rule 166 which the Union has to work on, 
pertains to roads owned by the unions, like National Highways and other MoRTH roads. He 
recommended starting enforcing Section 198A against shoddy construction maintenance and 
building of roads overall. He also informed that Section 135 of the Motor Vehicle Amendment 
Act calls for forensic investigation of c rashes which goes beyond the traditional notion of driver 
error being the sole responsible for a crash. It looks at the overall environment in which the crash 
happened. To realize such action, States need to create rules under Section 135. 
III. TRAX       
(i) Brief description of the organization:  Secretary, TRAX Society gave a brief description of 
their organization and their work. She also informed that TRAX is attached with members of 
different District and State Road Safety Committees. A Member interven ed and stated that the 
definition of the District Road Safety Committee must be defined and put in black and white. 
Secretary, TRAX, thereafter, proceeded to inform that it has worked at black spots regions like 
Hero Honda Chowk and Rajiv Chowk in Gurugram ; Ajmer Gate intersection; Surajkund, Pali, 
Trijunction. She also informed that TRAX has been a flag bearer for standard helmet advocacy 
as there are fake or non-standardized helmets available in the market. President, TRAX informed 

109 
 
that Hero Honda Chowk h as been converted into a zero -death intersection.  Only one death took 
place during the last one -and-a-half year.  With reference to junction design, he suggested that 
there should be a pedestrian facility, and there should be halt and go space because thi s is a basic 
need of any crossing. He stated that NHAI provides 4 -5-6 lane space under the flyovers which 
provokes the people for rash driving. At Hero Honda Chowk, TRAX reduced the number of 
lanes by one and converted that into a pedestrian path.   Now it has been converted into three 
lanes from four. Further, the islands have been covered almost everywhere in India by fencing or 
by doing vegetation on them. The main function of these islands is the servicing of pedestrians. 
(ii).      Construction of the service road: Secretary, TRAX recommended that there must be a 
single or intermediate lane for entry as there were faulty exits everywhere.   Hae added that 
although the code from the IRC was there, it is hardly followed on our highways in giving proper 
entries or exits. In the case of slip lanes also, he recommended that the IRC code must be made 
mandatory for all existing and new roads. He also suggested that there should be some penal 
provisions if authorities are not working as per the IRC codes.   With reference to lane marking, 
he stated that in almost 80 per cent of cases, lane marking is faulty, especially at exit and entry 
points. A Member, citing Right of Way, stated that it does not allow for constructing an extra 
lane.  If there are four lanes for exiting the highway, you need a fifth lane also now, which 
becomes a problem as space is not available there. The Member also enquired from the NGOs 
whether their recommendations are being implemented on the new highway s, the Greenfield 
Expressways. He emp hasized on the accountability of Concessionaires and Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways officers to check quarterly.   He also stated that if we are constructing a 
national highway, four lanes or six lanes,  the same has to be raised. 
(iii)(a) Merging Traffic/Plantation issue: President, TRAX, informed that the entry and exit from 
Sohna is the worst example of merging of traffic in the case of the Delhi -Mumbai Expressway. 
He submitted that in six -lane roads, they have started eight -lane expressways, whi ch means 
including shoulder area, there are now five lanes.   From one lane, five lanes are opening, and 
from five lanes, only one lane is coming on the existing road.   This is the cause of accidents 
because high-speeding traffic is moving and merging with the local traffic from five lanes to one 
lane only. He further stated that lane markings are also missing. A Member added that some 200 
or 300 meters before the exit, an extra lane must be there. President, TRAX, compared the road 
structure in India and ab road, citing a focus on lane marking and space management. He also 
emphasized on dust pollution, and higher chances of accidents due to vegetation on dividers, at 

110 
 
the side of the roads as it reduces visibility. At the median, they are reducing it by 50 per  cent 
first, and then if service lanes are there or if an exit or entry is there, again, they are reducing it 
by 50 per cent.  So, visibility is happening to just 20 per cent or 30 per cent on our roads. 
(b).       A Member countered whether the organizati on has done any survey or research on his 
remark.  President, TRAX   replied that it is in the IRC codes itself. Chief Scientist & Head, 
CRRI clarified that in the median, the height of the plantation should not be more than 1.5 
metres, however, he said tha t there is no such guideline for the sides of the road. He also 
submitted that whenever a median opening is there, in a minimum of hundred metres, there 
should not be any vegetation. He stated that the clear zone should be two or three metres; a 
minimum of  three metres to five metres after the shoulder, which becomes a total of seven 
metres. The Member, further, enquired whether full -grown trees should be planted on the roads 
in the context of accidents taking place. Director, CRRI informed that a study was  done by the 
Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change, and it recommended having a plantation 
while developing   National Highways when trees are cut, and also due to vehicular emissions.   
So, to balance carbon emissions, tree planting has been  recommended, at least, for NHAI. The 
Member further enquired whether any such study has been undertaken by CRR. Director 
informed that they have done Road Safety Audit but it is difficult to say whether they have a 
record of accidents because of trees on the part of the cross -section.  Chief Scientist & Head, 
CRRI also raised the issue of overloaded vehicles being toppled by the wind. A Member asked 
whether any scientific study has been done in this regard. Director, CRRI informed they do not 
have a docume nted study.   CRRI would do it scientifically and look at the accident data they 
have. 
(c).      Chairman pointed out the contradiction on the plantation issue between the Department of 
Highways and CRRI.  He stated that one reason given by the Department o f Highways is that it 
is better to have plantations in the median so that the reflection of lights at night could be 
prevented. Whereas, Chief Scientist, CRRI has stated that the height of 1.5 metres is good for an 
anti-glare effect. Nowadays if the median  width is around five metres or six metres, even if a 
vehicle is moving on the left side of the carriageway, because of a mistake, he may run off to the 
other side.   If the plantation is very high, there could be a vehicle coming from the other 
direction w hich could get hit.   That is why the median plantation height of 1.5 metres would 
facilitate things. 

111 
 
(iv).      Effect of glare of lighting on vehicular traffic: A Member also raised the query on  the 
effect glare of lighting has on vehicular traffic. Direc tor, CRRI stated that glare is a very 
important problem.  There are certain solutions like Plantation. Then, there are anti -glare devices 
on National Highway-3, between Agra and Gwalior.   There are other devices like pre -fabricated 
panels, aluminum panels, etc, which can also be adopted. Further, Glare cutting is possible to be 
installed in front of the driver. President, TRAX informed that Entry and exit are problems 
everywhere.  Otherwise, there is no jam.  He also explained how this could impact the movement 
as at the same time, there is a median opening also.   From the extreme top service lane, one can 
come out from the extreme down service lane also 
5.      Members also raised various queries such as: 
 Usage of Rolling roadside barriers in hilly areas 
 Importance of IRC and neglect of research done by other organizations. 
 Budget utilization for research  
 Whether deaths of patients are also counted who die due to delays on roads. 
 Whether any research is done on the free movement of ambulances and the uses  of 
sensors. 
 Coordination mechanism between NGOs and other organizations related to the road 
sector. 
 Need for interaction between NGOs and members of the Committee for better inputs and 
information. 
 Need of paver blocks on village roads 
 Need for minimum speed limit 
 Query regarding the height of National Highways 
 Need for VUPs and CUPs 
 The water logging issue in RUBs in the Northeast Region 
 Supported for the recommendation for no plantation at the median cut and grade 
separator. 
 Need for recommendations for overloaded trucks in North Eastern region 
 Road accident on NH -66 Kovalam - Mukkola stretch due to unscientific road 
construction. 
 Installation of AI cameras 
 How to prevent extra fittings on vehicles  
 Need for logistics park 
6.      The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of the 
suggestions made by the Members and also assured to give the details in writing on the issues 
which could not be answered during the meeting. The Chairman also said that the Secretariat will 
provide a questionnaire to the witnesses which is to be replied to within one week time. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
7.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 

112 
 
8.      The meeting adjourned at 5.15 PM 
New Delhi,                                                                                            Swarabji B.                      
15th June 2023                                                                                                         Director 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
  
2.30 P.M. 
Central Road Research Institute 
1 Prof. Manoranjan Parida Director 
2 Dr. Vasant G. Havangi Chief Scientist 
3 Dr. S. Velmurugan 
Chief Scientist & Head, Traffic Engineering & Safety 
Division 
4 Dr. Ch. Ravi Sekhar Chief Scientist & Head, Bridge Engineering & Structures 
Division 
5 Shri J.K. Goyal Chief Scientist 
6 Dr. P.S. Prasad Sr. Principal Scientist & Head, PME. 
TRAX S. Society 
8 
Shri Anurag 
Kulshrestha 
President 
9 Ms. Rajni Gandhi Secretary 
10 Ms. Sonia Highway & Safety Engineer 
SaveLIFE Foundation 
11. Shri Piyush Tewari Founder & CEO 
12. Ms. Karuna Raina Director, Public Policy & Research. 
13. Shri Roshan Jose Associate Director, Projects 
  
* * * * 
  
  
 
 
 
 

113 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIX 
THIRTY SECOND MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 09th August, 2023 in Committee Room-
4, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri A.A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 
 Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
15. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
19. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
20. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  

114 
 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following 
Reports:- 
(i) ****** 
(ii) ******* 
(iii) Construction of Road -Over-Bridges (ROBs), Road -Under-Bridges (RUBs),  Service 
Roads and Review of Road Survey Guidelines etc. 
 
2. ******** 
 
3.       The Committee authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P., and in his absence, Shri 
A.A. Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Ram Margani Bharat , M.P. and in his absen ce, Shri Chhedi 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 
4.       ******1 
 
5.       The Meeting adjourned at 3:21 P.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
09th August, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 