Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED TENTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
210
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
its One Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report on 
Functioning of Commission of Railways Safety 

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED TENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
its One Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report on
Functioning of Commission of Railways Safety
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTTEE ........................................................................................... 1—29
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 30—34
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 35— 37
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 9—44
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 45—63

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Tenth Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Eighty Eighth
Report on Functioning of Commission of Railways Safety”.
2. The One Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 27
th February, 2013
to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
22
nd January, 2014. The Committee heard the views of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) and Commission of Railway Safety in its meeting held on 27 th January, 2014.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th February, 2014.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 18, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 29, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACD – Anti-Collision Device
CCRS – Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
CRS – Commissioner of Railway Safety
CsRS – Commissioners of Railway Safety
EOI – Expression of Interest
ETCS – European Train Control System
HoD – Head of Department
IRCA – Indian Railway Conference Association
JPO – Joint Procedure Orders
KRCL – Konkan Railway Corporation Limited
MOCA – Ministry of Civil Aviation
MTKm – Million Train Kilometer
PHOD – Principal Heads of Department
RSA – Rail Safety Authority
RRDC – Railway Research and Development Council
RDSO – Research Designs and Standards Organization
SPAD – Signal Passed at Danger
TCAS – Train Collision Avoidance System
UMLC – Unmanned Level Crossing
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Eighty-Eighth Report on
“Functioning of Commission of Railways Safety” which was presented to both the Houses of
Parliament on 27
th February, 2013.
2. The Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted the interim Action Taken Replies on 7 th October,
2013 and the final Action Taken Replies on 22 nd January, 2014 containing the views of Ministry
of Railways also. The Committee heard the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Railway
Board on the Action Taken Replies in its meeting held on 27
th January, 2014. The observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Para Nos. 23, 56, 57, 84, 85, 86, 96 and 97
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Ministry replies:
Para Nos. 57, 58, 73, 85, 87 and 97
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 55, 56, 59, 71, 72, 84 and 98
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are
still awaited:
Para Nos. 8, 17, 18, 42, 48, 49, 50, 76, 77 and 94
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministries. The recommendations of
the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report, action taken/views thereon
by the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways and further recommendations/observations of the
Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. However, after the first round of discussions with the both the Ministries separately and
also with the CCRS, the Committee found that the two Ministries had quite different, sometimes
opposite views on certain crucial issues relating to effectiveness, autonomy and need to empower
and restructure the CRS. The Ministry of Railways maintained that the CRS was fulfilling its
mandate effectively and had enjoyed complete autonomy and that its views are taken quite seriously
and most of its recommendations are implemented and that there was no need to disturb the
existing arrangement to further restructure/empower CRS. The Ministry of Civil Aviation which is
also Central Government for the CRS had expressed contrary views on many such issues.
(Para No. 8 of 188
th Report)

2
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
6. Noted. It is reiterated that the existing institution of the Commission of Railway Safety
under the Ministry of Civil Aviation is working satisfactorily. There is no interference from the
Ministry of Railways in the functioning of the Commission.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
7. Effectiveness of Commission of Railway Safety is much below the required level as present
set up is such that Commissioners have to rely on facilities extended by Railways. Chief
Commissioner of Railway Safety is of the opinion that Commission of Railway Safety needs to be
restructured, with a view to strengthen the organization, so as to improve its efficiency and
effectiveness, with least reliance on Railways for technical and logistic support.
ACTION TAKEN
8. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with a view
to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization so as to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the consultant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
9. The Committee observes that the replies submitted by both the Ministries of Civil
Aviation and Railways are divergent and diagonally opposite. The Committee strongly feels
that it is high time that both the Ministries sorted out their differences on crucial issues
related to CRS. The Committee is pleased to note that a proposal to appoint consultant to
examine the present functioning of CRS is under active consideration of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation. The Committee desires that urgent steps should be taken to finalize the
proposal and implement the same.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
DUALITY OF COMMAND
10. Thus, CRS functions under Rules framed by both the Ministries under the Railways Act.
While accident investigation related rules are issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, accidents
inquiry related rules were issued by the Ministry of Railways. Though the CRS is under the
administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation, it takes its origin and discharges its duties as
per the Rules and Regulations framed under the Railways Act. The Committee feels that
involvement of two Ministries - Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation, leads to
avoidable confusion and also makes it difficult to apportion the responsibilities due to duality of
control and command in the functioning of CRS. It also leaves scope for conflict of interest for
Ministry of Railways.
(Para No: 16 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
11. As far as the Ministry of Railways is concerned, there is no confusion in functioning of
the Commission of Railway Safety under the Ministry of Civil Aviation even when it takes its origin
and discharges its duties under the Railways Act 1989 as the duties and powers of both Ministry
of Railways and the CRS are well defined. Whenever any dispute arises in respect of any aspect
of the functioning of the Commissioner of Railway Safety (CRS), it is resolved by both the

3
Ministries mutually within the framework of the Act. Ministry of Railways and the Commission of
Railway Safety under the Ministry of Civil Aviation are Government bodies functioning in the public
interest and carrying out their respective duties as defined in the Act. There is no interference or
exercising of influence on the part of the Ministry of Railways in the working of the Commission.
Commissioners of Railway Safety are completely independent and exercise their independent and
free judgment while discharging their duties under the Act.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
12. Commissioners of Railway Safety are concerned with the safety control aspects of the
operations of the railways, whereas Ministry of Railways plays the role of operator and regulator
both. There have been instances when Railway Board has not kept balance between its role as
operator vis-a-vis role of regulator.
13. Unilaterally changing of rules, schedule of dimensions and manuals etc. by the Ministry of
Railways without the concurrence of MoCA (administrative ministry in r/o CRS) has been a cause
of concern for the CRS. Such actions lead to lowering/compromising with the desired safety
standards. Further such action on the part of Railways leads to confusion/differences between the
two organizations. The issue is to be addressed on priority basis.
ACTION TAKEN
14. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide its DO letter dated 08.08.2013 to Railway Board,
has proposed to formalize the process of fixing minimum requirements/standards ( e.g. Schedule of
Dimensions, Standards for fixed Structures and rolling Stocks and Rules governing Train
operations) which regulate railway Safety.
15. In response to Secretary MOCA letter, Ministry of Railways have withstood with their
earlier reply and opined that for changing the rules and Standards it is not obligatory to consult
the Commission of Railway Safety as per statute.
16. No conclusive decision reached due to stand of the Ministry of Railways as conveyed
above.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee feels that stand taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as
the Railways do not address the concerns of the Committee on the duality of command in
discharging the functions of CRS. The Committee is of the considered view that having a
separate legislation for CRS, which could prove to be an effective solution to such avoidable
confusion, needs serious thought and deliberation.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. Besides, under the Railways Act the term Central Government means the Ministry of
Railways. There being some overlapping in safety related issues between the Railway Board and
CRS as it is, this confusion gets further confounded. Although Ministry of Railways denied the
existence of such confusion, instances of unilateral action by the Railway Board for deciding
standards and codes and informing the Commission of Railway Safety without any involvement/
consultation with the latter were brought to the notice of the Committee. The Committee is
constrained to conclude that such an arrangement is suitable to Ministry of Railways which is why
it does not want to disturb the existing arrangement.
(Para No: 17 ibid)

4
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
19. As per Section 60 of Indian Railways Act, the power to make rules for regulating the
traveling upon, and the use, working and management of Railways lies with Central Government
i.e. Ministry of Railways. The Commission of Railway Safety has to discharge its duties within the
framework of rules formulated by Ministry of Railways.
20. As per statute it is not obligatory to consult the Commission before any amendment/
revision/deletion/addition to General Rules and other Rules, standards, codes and manuals.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
21. As per the transaction of Business Rules – when the subject of a case concerns more than
one department, no decision can be taken or order issued until all such departments have
concurred, or, failing such concurrence, a decision thereon has been taken by or under the
authority of the Cabinet.
The stand of the Railways that the Commission of Railway Safety has to discharge its
duties within the framework of rules formulated by the Ministry of Railways is legally incorrect.
Commissioners of Railway Safety have been bestowed responsibility and powers by the Act of
Parliament, to inspect/inquire/investigate and then to report on safety related issues to Government.
Section 60 of the Indian Railways Act, 1989 as referred to by the Ministry of Railways mentions
about the carriage of passengers rules only and not on operation. Operational rules are actually the
subject matter under Section 29(2)(c) of the Railways Act.
22. Section 29 is reproduced below:
Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter ( Ch V-Opening of Railways)–
(1) The Central Government, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) The duties of the railway administration and the Commissioner in regard to the
opening of a railway for the public carriage of passengers;
(b) The arrangements to be made for and the formalities to be complied with before
opening a railway line for the public carriage of passengers;
(c) for regulating the mode in which, and the speed at which rolling stock used on
railways is to be moved or propelled; and
(d) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure provided in the Chapter
may be dispensed with.
23. Concurrence of MoCA (CRS) is essential before making any amendment/ revision/ deletion/
addition to operational rules.
ACTION TAKEN
24. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide its DO letter dated 08.08.2013 to Railway Board,
has proposed to formalize the process of fixing minimum requirements/standards ( e.g. Schedule of
Dimensions, Standards for fixed Structures and rolling Stocks and Rules governing Train
operations) which regulate railway Safety. In response to Secretary MOCA letter, Ministry of

5
Railways have withstood with their earlier reply and opined that for changing the rules and
Standards it is not obligatory to consult the Commission of Railway Safety as per statute.
25. No conclusive decision reached due to stand of the Ministry of Railways as conveyed
above.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. The Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules clearly delineate the functions of
various Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee recommends that the term
Central Government occurring in the Railway Act should adequately be defined to demarcate the
functions of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation to avoid any confusion in respect
of powers, mandate and autonomous working of CRS between the two Ministries.
(Para No: 18 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
27. The Indian Railway Act, 1989 deals with functioning of Railways and as such it is implied
that “Central Government” means Ministry of Railways. Wherever Commission of Railway Safety
(CRS) is specifically mentioned, it is automatically refers to Ministry of Civil Aviation as under the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, Commission of Railway Safety has been
clearly stated under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Roles, powers, duties of CRS are quite clearly
defined in the Act and there is no confusion in this regard.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
28. In this connection attention is drawn towards the Transaction of Business rules whereby
when the subject of a case concerns more than one department, no decision can be taken or order
issued until all such departments have concurred, or, failing such concurrence, a decision thereon
has been taken by or under the authority of the Cabinet.
29. It is therefore imperative that in all matters which pertain to safety of public, Railways
independently should not amend/revised/delete/add to General Rules and other Rules, standards,
codes and manuals rules without consulting and concurrence of the Commission of Railway Safety.
Term Central Government is not required to be defined. Once transaction of business rules are
followed considering that Railway Safety is also business of MoCA, things would be in order.
ACTION TAKEN
30. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide its DO letter dated 08.08.2013 to Railway Board,
has proposed to formalize the process of fixing minimum requirements/standards ( e.g. Schedule of
Dimensions, Standards for fixed Structures and rolling Stocks and Rules governing Train
operations) which regulate railway Safety.
31. In response to Secretary MOCA letter, Ministry of Railways have withstood with their
earlier reply and opined that for changing the rules and Standards it is not obligatory to consult
the Commission of Railway Safety as per statute. No conclusive decision reached due to stand of
the Ministry of Railways as conveyed above.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. As regards consulting CRS in fixing standards/specifications for the purpose of
inspection/investigation etc., the Committee finds that the response of the Railways too
technical in saying that under the statute they are not required to do so. The Committee

6
feels that the idea of consultation with the CRS in this respect, no doubt has definite merit
as standard/specification are very closely linked with the inspection and investigation by
CRS effectively. The Committee hastens to add that the CRS could not have a free hand
in this regard as it might affect Railways working adversely as over all safety is mainly
their responsibility under the Railways Act. The Committee emphasizes the need to have
regular consultation in this regard between the CRS and Ministry of Railways.
33. The Committee notes that there are grey areas between both the Ministries on the
issues of rules making and fixing of minimum requirements/standards. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the matter may be placed before the Cabinet Secretary to arrive
at a decision on the points on which there are serious differences between both the Ministries.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee raised the issue of adequacy of existing rules, legislations relating to Railway
Safety and a need, if any, to amend these to meet the present day requirements, the Ministry of
Railways informed that the existing rules, legislations relating to Railway Safety were adequate and
that there was no need to amend them. However, review of safety standards is a continuous
process and amendments in the manuals, codes, general rules, etc. are made as and when required.
(Para No: 19 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
35. Noted.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
36. It is again reiterated that concurrence of MoCA (CRS) is necessary, in all matters which
pertain to safety of railway passengers and also before making any amendment/ revision/ deletion/
addition to General Rules and other Rules, standards, codes and manuals is given effect to by
Ministry of Railways.
ACTION TAKEN
37. Ministry of Railways has in its reply has confirmed in affirmation regarding compliance of
the recommendation made by the Committee. However, it remained silent/non-committal in seeking
concurrence of Ministry of Civil Aviation before making any amendment/revision/deletion/addition to
General Rules and other Rules, standards, codes and manuals etc., and other matter pertains to
safety of railway passengers.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The Committee is not satisfied with reply furnished by Ministry of Railways as they
have not spelt out any details of review of the safety standards. It seems that the Ministry
has not taken the recommendation of the Committee due with required seriousness.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
39. It was brought before the Committee that whenever the Ministry of Railways propose to
change any rules relating to railway safety, the same is referred to CRS, but modifications or
changes in standards or codes pertaining to railway safety were not referred. Thus the changes/
modifications in safety codes are implemented without consultation with CRS. As per the
Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules when the subject of a case concerns more

7
than one Department, no decision can be taken or order issued until all such departments have
concurred, or failing such concurrence, a decision thereon has been taken by or under the authority
of the Cabinet. As such any modification/change of rules or standards by the Ministry of Railways
needs the concurrence of Ministry of Civil Aviation also.
(Para No: 20 ibid)
40. The Annual Report of CRS for 2010-11, gives specific examples of amendment/modification
of rules/policy in respect of safety train operations without the information/involvement of the
office of CRS. One such examples was revised Policy Circular dated the 12th July, 2010 on the
‘sanction of speed of nominated trains on specific routes’ and the increase of speed of trains
without the approval of Commissioner of Railway Safety of the concerned Zone, resulting in
danger to travelling public.
(Para No: 21 ibid)
41. The Committee is of the view that any decision taken by the Ministry of Railways in
respect of matters relating to railway safety should have the concurrence (not merely consultation)
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation as per the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules.
(Para No: 22 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
42. Responsibility for safety in the working and operation of Railway rests solely with the
Ministry of Railways.
43. As per Section 60 of Indian Railways Act, the power to make rules for regulating the
traveling upon, and the use, working and management of the Railways lies with Central
Government i.e. Ministry of Railways. The Commission of Railway Safety has to discharge its
duties within the framework of rules formulated by Ministry of Railways. As per statute it is not
obligatory to consult the Commission before any amendment/ revision/ deletion/ addition to General
Rules and other Rules, standards, codes and manuals.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
44. The stand of the Railways of their being solely responsible for safety in the working and
operation of Railways and also that the Commission of Railway Safety has to discharge its duties
within the framework of rules formulated by the Ministry of Railways is legally incorrect.
Commissioners of Railway Safety have been bestowed responsibility and powers by the Act of
Parliament, to inspect/inquire/investigate and then to report on safety related issues to Government.
The Section 60 of the Indian Railways Act, 1989 as referred to by the Ministry of Railways
mentions about the carriage of passengers rules only. Operational rules are actually the subject
matter under Section 29(2)(c) of the Railways Act 29 is reproduced below:
Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter –
(1) The Central Government, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) The duties of the railway administration and the Commissioner in regard to the
opening of a railway for the public carriage of passengers;
(b) The arrangements to be made for and the formalities to be complied with before
opening a railway line for the public carriage of passengers;

8
(c) for regulating the mode in which, and the speed at which rolling stock used on
railways is to be moved or propelled; and
(d) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure provided in the Chapter
may be dispensed with.
45. Concurrence of MoCA (CRS) is essential before making any amendment/ revision/ deletion/
addition to operational rules.
ACTION TAKEN
46. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide its DO letter dated 08.08.2013 to Railway Board,
has proposed to formalize the process of fixing minimum requirements/standards ( e.g. Schedule of
Dimensions, Standards for fixed Structures and rolling Stocks and Rules governing Train
operations) which regulate railway Safety.
47. In response to Secretary MOCA letter, Ministry of Railways have withstood with their
earlier reply and opined that for changing the rules and Standards it is not obligatory to consult
the Commission of Railway Safety as per statute. No conclusive decision reached due to stand of
the Ministry of Railways as conveyed above.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The safety of the traveling public is the concern of the Government as a whole.
Therefore, all the Ministries involved should play a role in formulating the safety
regulations/rules, etc. More consultation means more practicable policies. The Committee is
not satisfied with the reply and it reiterates its recommendation on the decisions taken by
the Ministry of Railways in respect of matters relating to railway safety.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. In view of the scope for confusion due to dual control in respect of CRS on many
respects, this Committee had recommended in its 83
rd Report to go for a stand-alone legislation for
Commission of Railway Safety in the year 2005. As such, the Ministry of Civil Aviation had
prepared a draft ‘Commission of Railway Safety Bill’ which, the Committee was informed, did not
find favour with the Ministry of Railways and eventually the proposal was dropped in the year
2010. The Committee does not know the exact reason for Railway’s reservation in this regard but
is still convinced that in the present rail safety scenario, having a separate legislation needs serious
consideration for clearly defining the role, powers and jurisdiction of CRS for ensuring its
autonomy and effective functioning.
(Para No: 23 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
50. Standing Committee in its 83rd report suggested that the Commission of Railway Safety
should be made an autonomous statutory body like Election Commission and Union Public
Service Commission. The autonomy and independence of Commission is ensured by virtue of
its functioning under a Ministry different from Ministry of Railways. There is no interference
in day to day working of the Commission by the Ministry of Railways. Sufficient safeguards
have been inbuilt in powers, duties, constitution of the Commission to ensure its independent
working.
51. The High Level Safety Review Committee headed by Shri Anil Kakodkar has recommended
formation of Rail Safety Authority (RSA) under Ministry of Railways independent from Railway

9
Board and merger of Commission of Railway Safety with RSA. Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA)
have submitted their comments on the recommendations of Kakodkar Committee and suggested
CRS to be given only accident investigation duty and form and independent Rail Accident
Investigation Commission under another Ministry say Ministry of Civil Aviation.
52. All the above suggestions need to be debated thoroughly before arriving at a most suitable
and effective model to ensure a higher level of safety than what is available through current set
up. This will also require amendment to the Act. The matter is under examination.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
53. Agrees with the observation/views of the Committee. Commission of Railway Safety needs
to be restructured, with a view to strengthen the organization, so as to make its functioning more
effective.
54. It would be appropriate that Commission of Railway Safety be structured as a complete
organization, with having its own resources and infrastructure such as technical manpower
support, test lab, logistic and data bank etc., so that minimum or no dependency is there on
railways, while performing the duties of the post. Further it would be in public interest that the
Commission be given shape of a complete organization. So that it may, as a team, examine and
look into the safety aspects from all angles. This will reduce possibility of judgmental and technical
errors and arbitrariness in working. The probability of error and arbitrariness is likely to be more,
when the duties are performed by an individual person (Commissioner of Railway Safety).
ACTION TAKEN
55. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with a view
to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization so as to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the consultant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee is yet have arguments, convincing or unconvincing, against a
stand-alone legislation for CRS as recommended by it in its 83
rd Report, and reiterated in
188th Report in 2013. It is disappointed to see that it is still under consideration. The
Committee takes serious note of such an evasive reply and directs the Ministry of Railways
to submit a note on this further for its consideration. The Committee feels that this reflects
the non-committal attitude of the Ministry of Railways for providing much needed autonomy
to CRS in real terms.
57. The Kakodkar Committee report which remains under consideration for last more
than two years may be debated at the earliest in consultation with all the stakeholders. The
Committee would like to have inputs in this regard from both Ministries within two months
for its consideration.
CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAY SAFETY — FIXING OF STANDARDS
58. The Committee feels that minimum standards for railway tracks and rolling stock should be
codified in consultation with the Commission of Railways Safety, Ministry of Civil Aviation with
a view to rule out any possibility of lowering the required standards as per its convenience by the
Ministry of Railways. The Committee also feels that the standards fixed should not be lowered on
the plea of scarcity of resources to maintain them. The CRS should be empowered to carry out

10
periodic safety audit of Railways to ensure the proper functioning of the railway safety apparatus
of the huge railway network in the country.
(Para No: 42 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
59. Responsibility for safety in the working and operation of Railways rests solely with the
Ministry of Railways. It is reiterated that Ministry of Railway acts as per the provisions made in
the Railway Act. The codes and manuals related to railway tracks and rolling stocks are modified
from time to time to ensure better safety while ensuring high speed and more comfort. Before any
amendments, considerable and comprehensive research, field observation and discussion by various
committees are done and changes which would compromise safety of train operations are never
made. As per the act, the changes in codes and manuals do not come under the ambit of
Commission of Railway Safety.
60. The CRSs are always invited for annual inspections conducted by the General Managers and
attended by all Principal Heads of Department (PHOD). Besides this, they are extended all support
whenever they wish to inspect any section/ Rolling Stock or during the course of an accident
investigation.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
61. As already emphasized at earlier paras it is again reiterated that since the safety of
passengers of railway concerns CRS, consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation as per
Transaction of Business Rules, before any amendment/revision/deletion/addition to General Rules
and other Rules, Standards, Codes and Manuals is a legal requirement.
62. In respect of periodic inspections it is stated that its a statutory mandate provided by the
Act to the Commissioners under Section 6 (b) to make periodic or other inspection of Railways.
Periodic inspections should be the requirement of Railway lines working, instead of only being duty
of CRS. For this, rules needs to be framed by the Central Government for periodic inspection of
working lines and report thereon from the Commissioners of Railway Safety for review of sanction
of open lines by Central Government. Once sanction for continuing working of a line is required
to be reviewed periodically on the basis of report from Commissioner of Railway Safety, things
will become proper. Provisions for review of sanction can be incorporated in Rules for Opening
of Railways.
ACTION TAKEN
63. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide its DO letter dated 08.08.2013 to Railway Board,
has proposed to formalize the process of fixing minimum requirements/standards ( e.g. Schedule of
Dimensions, Standards for fixed Structures and rolling Stocks and Rules governing Train
operations) which regulate railway Safety.
64. In response to Secretary MOCA letter, Ministry of Railways have with stood with their
earlier reply and opined that for changing the rules and Standards it is not obligatory to consult
the Commission of Railway Safety as per statute. No conclusive decision reached due to stand of
the Ministry of Railways as conveyed above.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the role of CRS, at present, is
restricted to accident investigation only and not for periodic safety audit of railways. The

11
stand taken by the Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation on the codification
of minimum standard of railway tracks and rolling stock should come to a logical
conclusion.
INSPECTION
66. The argument extended by the Ministry of Railways in respect of its order issued in the
year 1953 relieving CsRS of their duty of ‘annual periodical inspection’ is not legally tenable. The
said circular says very clearly that Government Inspectors (then) are being “relieved of their
responsibility under Section 4(2)(b) of the Indian Railways Act 1890”. It took away, in fact, the
duty of inspection provided to the Commissioners by the Act of 1890. This amounts to by-passing
the law making power of Parliament. Besides, the Committee does not agree with the Ministry’s
argument that this was done under the power to issue direction by the Central Government, as
provided in Section 6(b) of the Railways Act. The Committee is of the view that the power to issue
directions given to the Ministry by the Act, cannot be used to take away something given by the
same Act. This is against the basic tenets of subordinate legislation. This ‘power to issue direction’
should relate to such details, procedures, manner, formalities, timings, etc. of the inspection and
certainly not for withdrawing these powers. And the Ministry is supposed to have laid down rules,
etc. for carrying out these functions. The Committee does not know if any rule, regulations etc.
have been framed under this.
(Para No: 48 ibid)
67. Committee was informed that the said circular has continued to remain in operation till
date. The Committee feels that this circular should have been objected to by the then Ministry
of Communication when it was issued and later by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the matter
could have been settled in consultation with the Ministry of Law, if needed. And if the 1953
Order became inoperative with the new Railway Act coming into being in 1989, the Ministry of
Railways should have issued a fresh circular clarifying the position, which unfortunately was not
done. In the absence of such a clarification, the said Order continued to remain in operation till
date. The Committee fails to understand the silence of both the Ministries and desires this issue
to be settled on priority in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice under intimation
to this Committee.
(Para No: 49 ibid)
68. The Committee is of the opinion that powers for annual inspections of open lines and asset
of the Railway by CRS should be strengthened. The Commissioner of Railway Safety is “invited”
by General Manager to the annual inspection conducted by them, as per the existing practice. The
Committee feels that such a practice makes CsRS dependent on the GMs who may carry out
inspection as per their desire and convenience. The Committee feels that the CsRS should be given
independence to carry out periodic or other inspection of railway lines as provided in Section 6 (b)
of Indian Railways Act 1989.
(Para No: 50 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
69. The provision of the earlier Railway Act of 1890 and the executive order issued in
1953 have been superseded by the Railway Act 1989. Section 6(b) (Duties of Commissioner) and
Section 7(a) (Powers of Commissioner) of the Act empowers the Commissioners to enter upon and
inspect any Railway or any rolling stock used thereon for any of the purposes laid down in the
Railway Act. These provisions are similar to Section 4(2)(b) and Section 5(a) of the Railway
Act, 1890.

12
70. Provisions for review of sanction can be incorporated in Rules for Opening of Railways.
However, as suggested by the Committee, the opinion of Ministry of Law and Justice will be
sought in this regard.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
71. Periodic inspections other inspection of Railways is a statutory mandate provided by the Act
to the Commissioners under Section 6 (b). Periodic inspections should be the requirement of
Railway lines working, instead of only being duty of CRS. For this, rules needs to be framed by
the Central Government for periodic inspection of working lines and report thereon from the
Commissioners of Railway Safety for review of sanction of open lines by Central Government.
Once sanction for continuing working of a line is required to be reviewed periodically on the basis
of report from Commissioner of Railway Safety, things will become proper.
ACTION TAKEN
72. Ministry of Civil Aviation shall take appropriate action on the decision/opinion tendered by
M/o Law and Justice to Ministry of Railways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
73. The Committee does not agree with the stand taken by Ministry of Railways in this
regard and feels that legal opinion on this ought to have been taken in 1953 itself. It
desires that the opinion of Ministry of Law and Justice on the Executive Order issued by
the Ministry of Railways in the year 1953 relieving CsRS of their duty of annual periodical
inspection may be got expedited. The Committee may be appraised on the opinion tendered
by the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Law provides for periodic inspection of railways by
CRS. It is not clear why CRS is not exercising this function. The Committee may be
apprised why the CRS is not undertaking suo-motto inspections.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
INVESTIGATION OF RAILWAY ACCIDENTS
74. The Committee notes that the accident enquiry is done as per the provisions of Railway
Accident Rules, 1998 (Ministry of Civil Aviation) and Notice of and Inquiries into Accidents
Rules, 1998 (Ministry of Railways). As such, the investigator - the CRS, carries out the accident
inquiry on the basis of laid down procedure by the service provider – the Ministry of Railways.
Since CRS does not have any independent investigating mechanism for accidents, it has to depend
mainly on the Ministry of Railways for technical manpower, infrastructure and other logistical
support required for investigations as well as inspections.
(Para No: 55 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
75. The dependence of CRS on Railways for technical staff is due to the fact that necessary
expertise to carry out the railway safety work is available only with Railway staff. Such an
expertise cannot be obtained from open market. The commissioners are inducted on permanent
absorption basis and subordinate staff on deputation basis, depending upon vacancies and
willingness of staff.
76. For the accident investigation, inspections for starting of train services on sections of the
Railway and certification of rolling stocks, the CRS is provided services of personnel of Railways.

13
However, the Commissioners of Railway Safety work under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. While
working under Ministry of Civil Aviation, they enjoy full liberty to exercise their powers under the
frame work of set rules.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
77. It is clarified that the Procedural rules and procedure to be followed by Commissioners of
Railway Safety in accident investigations have been notified/issued by Ministry of Civil Aviation.
78. At present the Commission is completely dependent on Ministry of Railways for technical
personnel, infrastructure and logistical support required during investigation of accidents. It would
be appropriate that Commission of Railway Safety be structured as a complete organization, with
having its own resources and infrastructure such as technical manpower support, test lab, logistic
and data bank etc, so that minimum or no dependency is there on railways, while performing the
duties of the post. Further it would be in public interest that the Commission be given shape of
a complete organization. So that it may, as a team, examine and look into the safety aspects from
all angles. This will reduce possibility of judgmental and technical errors and arbitrariness in
working
79. Commission of Railway Safety needs to be restructured, with a view to strengthen the
organization, so as to make its functioning more effective.
ACTION TAKEN
80. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with a view
to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization so as to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the consultant.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
81. The Committee notes that CRS has powers to investigate a railway accident but normally
it does so only after receiving a notice from the concerned GM. The accidents for which no notice
has been issued and those which the CRS is unable to investigate for some reasons, are
investigated by the Ministry of Railways themselves. It has also been provided that the CRS
investigates those accidents resulting in loss of passengers’ life, grievous hurt or damage to
property worth more than Rs. 25 lakhs. Besides, sometimes accidents are investigated under
Commissions of Inquiry Act also. Thus, in actual practice, CRS is able to investigate only some
accidents notified by the concerned GMs and a large number of accidents are left to be investigated
by the Ministry the Railways, the service provider themselves. Although the Railways Act provides
that the CRS can investigate any accident, notified or not, CRS, in actual practice, is not able to
do so in view of the limitations - legal, infrastructural, technical, manpower, etc. under which it
has to function. This presents a highly disappointing picture, where the CRS’s powers relating to
accident investigation, the basic mandate of CRS, is greatly restricted. Therefore, the Committee
emphasizes the need for empowering CRS for increasing its autonomy and effectiveness as an
accident investigator.
(Para No: 56 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
82. Ministry of Railways agrees that with expansion of Rail Network, the Commission of
Railway Safety should be adequately strengthened in terms of manpower, infrastructure to fully
discharge its statutory duties. Action needs to be taken by Ministry of Civil Aviation.

14
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
83. Every accident resulting in Grievous hurt, fatalities to passengers is mandatorily inquired by
the Commissioners of Railway Safety. Some accidents are inquired by choice. Commissioners also
review investigation reports of accident investigations done by the committee of railway officers.
84. Due limitations, sometimes investigations lacks thoroughness and number of investigation of
by choice is also less. With the stronger organization, investigations would be more thorough and
cases of accident investigations by choice and review of reports will also be more.
85. Apart from as stated in reply to para 55 above regarding strengthening of the CRS, it is
further submitted that with the expansion and increase in density of the rail network across the
length and breadth of the country, there is an urgent need for bringing the number of Circles of
Commission of Railway Safety, co-terminus with the existing nos. of 16 Zonal Railways. As per
the recommendations of Sikri Committee (1978), the circle offices of the Commission were
increased from 7 to 9 in the year 1984. The proposal for expansion of circles of commission from
9 to 16 in order to be co-terminus with the zonal railways is to be initiated. If numbers of circles
are increased, more accidents can be investigated by choice and review can also be stronger.
Ministry of railways has agreed for this proposal.
ACTION TAKEN
86. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with a view
to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization so as to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the consultant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the difficulties faced by CRS in
conducting accident investigation should be adequately addressed by both the Ministries of
Civil Aviation and Railways. The Committee finds that the proposal to increase the
number of circles of CRS falls under the domain of Ministry of Civil Aviation and
Ministry of Railways has no objection to it. The Committee recommends that it should be
expedited.
88. The Committee is also not in a position to comprehend why Ministry of Civil Aviation
was not increasing the staff strength of CRS to cope-up with the increase of the Railway
network. The Committee also feels that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is equally to be
blamed for the present situation of the CRS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take immediate steps to increase the number of
Circles of CRS as well as to augment the staff position of CRS.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
89. The Committee also feels that delayed reporting of such accidents/incidents in violation of
Section 113(2) of Railways Act 1989 should be considered as serious and the concerned zone of
the railways should be penalized for such violations accordingly.
(Para No: 57 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
90. Noted.

15
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
91. Noted.
ACTION TAKEN
92. Agreed by the Ministry of Railways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
93. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
94. It has come to the notice of the Committee that the Ministry of Railways had enhanced the
financial threshold for investigating an accident to Rs. 2.0 crores from to Rs. 25 lakhs as provided
in the Rules, without making necessary changes in the concerned rules. The Committee feels that
through this enhancement, a large number of accidents have been excluded from the purview of
the CRS. The Committee feels that this is another example of circumventing the Act of Parliament
and Rules made thereunder, by an executive order i.e. through internal manual of the Ministry of
Railways. If it was felt necessary to enhance the financial limits, it should have been done by
concerned Rules at the earliest and place them before the Parliament instead of adopting the
executive orders.
(Para No: 58 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
95. The issue of increase of threshold value of Rs.25 lacs to Rs.2.0 crore. For treating an
accident as serious accident has been approved by Railway Board (MT/CRB) in view of inflationary
increase. The value of Rs.25 lacs was fixed in 1998 i.e. about 15 years ago and due to inflation
over the past several years, it was considered to suitably increase the threshold value.
96. The process for increase of gazette notification for effecting amendment in Railway (Notice
of and Inquiries into Accidents) Rules-1998 has already been initiated and the draft amendment has
been put up on file for approval of the competent authority. After approval of the draft amendment,
the same will be got vetted from Legal Adviser and Ministry of Law and Justice, and thereafter
the bilingual amendment shall be got printed and gazette notified.
97. After the above process is completed, Ministry of Civil Aviation shall be requested through
the Commission of Railway Safety for corresponding amendment in the Statutory Investigation into
Railway Accidents Rules-1998 to ensure uniformity in both the rules.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
98. The manner in which the Railways have increased the threshold value by an executive order
is not proper, and as rightly pointed out by the Committee, it tantamount to circumventing the Act
of Parliament.
ACTION TAKEN
99. Ministry of Railways vide its gazette notification dated 02.08.2013 has made amendment in
Railway (Notice of and Inquiries into Accidents) Rules-1998, whereby it has increase the threshold
value of Rs.25 lacs to Rs.2.0 crore for treating an accident as “serious accident”. Accordingly,
Ministry of Civil Aviation on 05.12.2013 has forwarded the notification, regarding bringing of

16
changes in its Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules 1998, for its publication in
gazette.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
100. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee notes that there are large numbers of incidents which may be serious
enough but do not lead to human deaths etc. are not covered under Section 113. There may be
‘accident’ under Section 120 and, therefore, may not be investigated by any agency. The
Committee is of the opinion that such serious incidents should also be investigated with a view to
take preventive measures so that minor incidents do not lead to major accidents. The Committee
feels that for this purpose ‘incidents’ need to be defined appropriately in Section 120 and inquiry
be made necessary for them as well.
(Para No: 59 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
102. Section 16(1) of “The Railways (Notices of and Inquiries into Accidents) Rules, 1998”
defines the accidents not covered under Section 113 of Railway Act 1989 and read as-
“Whenever any accident, not of the nature specified in section 113 of the Act, such as
averted collisions, breaches of block rules or other technical accidents, occurs in course of
working a Railway, the Railway Administration concerned may cause an inquiry, either a
joint inquiry of a departmental inquiry, to be held into the accident.”
103. All such accidents and serious incidents are enquired by the Railway administration to find
the cause and take necessary corrective action.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
104. Under Section 120 of the Railways Act-1989 it is clearly mentioned that the railway
administration within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs (accident not covered by Section 113),
may cause such inquiry to be made into the causes of the accident, as may be prescribed.
105. Accordingly inquiries of such accidents under Rule 16(1) of “The Railways (Notices of and
Inquiries into Accidents) Rules, 1998” may be caused by the Railway administration to find the
cause and take necessary corrective action is in order.
106. However, it is pointed out that reports of investigation into accidents of Section 120 enquired
by the Railway Administrations are required to be forwarded by Railway Administration to the
concerned Commissioner of Railway Safety as per provision of the Rule 16(2) of the above rule.
ACTION TAKEN
107. No conclusive decision reached, as Ministry of Railways remained silent/non committal on
forwarding of the reports of investigation into accidents of Section 120 as enquired by the Railway
Administration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee is unhappy to note that such a deadlock between the Ministries
undermine such serious issues as railways safety. The Committee would like to impress upon

17
both the Ministries that a conclusive decision should be reached on the issue of forwarding
of the reports of investigation into accidents of Section 120 as enquired by the Railway
Administration. The Committee desires that all the accident investigation reports may be
available with the CRS to enable a better safety environment for the traveling public.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF CRS
109. The Committee notes that the recommendations of the CRS are not mandatory and the
Ministry of Railways takes its own decision on a recommendation of CRS on the basis of executive
and operational and other requirements. The Committee also notes that majority of the
recommendations made by the CRS are accepted by the Ministry of Railways. However, there does
not exist a formal mechanism to inform the CRS whether the accepted recommendations have
actually been implemented. The Committee emphasizes the need for putting a system for this
purpose in place so that periodic status reports are sent to CRS about the compliance of accepted
recommendations. It would greatly help him in shaping his opinion on different issues in his
subsequent Reports.
(Para No: 71 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
110. Noted.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
111. In regards to recommendations pertaining to compliance of extant rules/standards,
implementation status is not required by us. In regards to recommendations pertaining to changes,
implementation status is required to be known to CCRS and Commissioners. Ministry of Railways
does not intimate status of implementation of such recommendations to MOCA/CCRS. A six
monthly status of implementation of accepted recommendations should be conveyed by Ministry of
Railways in January and July to MOCA.
ACTION TAKEN
112. Though Ministry of Railways has noted, Ministry of Railways remained silent on informing
the system/periodicity for intimating status of implementation of recommendations to MoCA/CCRS
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
113. The Committee is concerned to note that majority of the recommendations made by the
CRS related to “ensuring compliance of extant instructions/standards” concerning railway safety. It
means that non-observance of safety instructions/standards is the main cause of railway accidents.
The Committee is constrained to conclude that the safety standards and instructions are not being
followed by Ministry of Railways resulting into accident. This puts the entire safety mechanism
including the effectiveness of CRS in question.
(Para No: 72 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
114. All efforts are made to ensure strict compliance of extant instructions/standards. With
continuous monitoring, regular training/counseling of staff, periodic replacement of over aged
gears, timely maintenance of equipment, the number of consequential accidents has steadily

18
decreased from 0.41 per Million Train Kilometer (MTKm) in 2003-04 to 0.13 per MTKm in
2011-12. Implementation and follow up of CRS recommendations have also played an important
role in achieving the same.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
115. When violations/non-compliance is very high in number, it requires inspection by many
persons at every level. CRS, being one person, cannot be effective when non compliance is very
high, as detection by CRS in his limited examination has very low probability. This is particularly
true in respect of compliance of rules.
ACTION TAKEN
116. Pertains to Ministry of Railways. Its reply may kindly be seen.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
117. The Committee finds that the replies submitted by Ministries of Civil Aviation and
Railways are of routine nature. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that a proper
system should be put in place to ensure the compliance of accepted recommendations and
other follow-up actions taken by the Ministry of Railways, in a periodical manner.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
118. The Committee finds that some of the advanced safety systems such as Complete Track
Circuiting in station yards, Auxiliary Warning System in suburban section, Audio Visual Device in
Locomotives, Data Loggers, Anti-Collision Device, etc. were recommended by CRS for
consideration by the Ministry of Railways. All of which remain unimplemented so far on one
pretext or the other. The Committee fails to understand why none of these modern safety devices
could be adopted in Indian Railways, wholly or partially. The Committee notes that Anti Collision
Device which was introduced in select rail routes on trial basis could not be expanded to other
routes due to some deficiencies noticed during the trial period. The Committee hopes that further
trials will be conducted after removal of deficiencies and the device will be installed on the rail
routes in the coming years.
(Para No: 73 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
119. All efforts are being made to provide the required advanced safety systems on Indian
Railways. Complete Track circuiting in station yards has been provided at 95% of stations on
Broad Guage. 5041 data loggers have been provided till 31.03.2013 and the balance at Panel
stations and Relay Huts will be provided in next three years. Auxiliary Warning System is existing
in Western Railway and Central Railway suburban sections. Train Protection and Warning system
based on European Train Control System Level 1 (ETCS L1) has been provided on 50 RKm of
suburban section of Southern Railway as a pilot project.
120. S tatus of ACD-Improved version of software to address the operational and technical
problem is under deployment of Northeast Frontier Railway by Konkan Railway. Train Status of
ACD-Improved version of software to address the operational and technical problem is under
deployment of Northeast Frontier Railway by Konkan Railway. Train Collision Avoidance System
(TCAS) has been developed by RDSO. Proof of Concept trials of TCAS were done on South
Central Railway. Tender for expected trial over 200 Km section including electrified and non-
electrified section is under finalization by RDSO.

19
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
121. It is reiterated that recommendations/ suggestions made by the Commissioners for
introduction of the advanced safety systems in the Railways, for enhancement of safety for
travelling passengers needs to be implemented at the earliest. Though the Railways is introducing
it, the process is very slow. Commission is of the view that progress of trials and implementation
needs to be expedited to achieve reduction in number of accidents due to loco crew error
particularly in sections having Automatic Signalling.
ACTION TAKEN
122. Pertains to Ministry of Railways. Its reply may kindly be seen.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
123. The Committee notes the reply.
SEPARATION OF ROLES OF OPERATOR, REGULATOR AND INVESTIGATOR
124. The Committee notes that currently Ministry of Railways, in actual practice, plays the roles
of regulator, the operator and the investigator, as the CRS is largely dependent upon the Ministry
of Railways in many ways for carrying out its mandate. Currently, separation of these roles is
being resorted to in other areas for better management. This argument of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation was not favored by the Ministry of Railways.
(Para No: 76 ibid)
125. The Committee, however, agrees in principle, with the idea of having a regulator fully
independent of the service provider. This has been recommended by the Kakodkar Committee as
well. The Committee recommends that this should be considered for implementation at the earliest
as the existing system does not demarcate clearly between the roles of regulator and the service
provider leaving thereby enough scope for conflict of interest. That may be the reason why the
Ministry of Railways is not in favour of disturbing the existing structure in any manner.
(Para No: 77 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
126. Recommendations of Kakodkar Committee of forming an independent Railway Safety
Authority under Ministry of Railways, merging CRS with RSA, comments of Ministry of Civil
Aviation on the same suggesting CRS to become independent Accident Investigation Agency under
some other Ministry say MOCA, etc. need an in depth analysis in terms of their effectiveness
vis-à-vis the current set up is order to arrive at the most suitable model with a view to achieve higher
level of safety. These will also require amendments to the Acts. The matter is under examination.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
127. Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) have submitted their comments on the recommendations
of Kakodkar Committee and suggested CRS to be given only accident investigation duty and form
an independent Rail Accident Investigation Commission under another Ministry say Ministry of Civil
Aviation.
ACTION TAKEN
128. The recommendations of the Kakodkar Committee are already pending with the
Government. We may therefore wait for Ministry of Railways to clear its stand on the
recommendations made by the Kakodkar Committee.

20
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
129. The Committee recommends that the Kakodkar Committee recommendation that are
under consideration for a long time should be expedited to arrive at a conclusion
particularly those relating to Railway Safety Authority as proposed. Safety of the public
should be the utmost criteria while deciding on the recommendation rather than the powers
and jurisdictions of particular Ministries or governmental agencies.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
HUMAN RESOURCES IN CRS
130. The Committee feels that the autonomy and effectiveness of CRS is greatly constrained due
to the fact that it has to depend mainly on the Ministry of Railways for technical manpower and
other support. It also has to adjust to the convenience of the concerned railway administration for
inspections etc. The Committee finds that Commissioners are working without any technical
support. The CRS is currently managing with 111 staff as against the sanctioned strength of 145.
Even the sanctioned staff is inadequate and CRS needs more technical staff and adequate
infrastructure mainly at field level, to deal with its increased work due to ever expanding rail
network. The Committee recommends that the man-power in CRS at various levels should be
increased and vacancies filled on priority. The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening
and expansion of office of Commissioner of Railway Safety at Zonal level with adequate officers
preferably from different technical background relevant for railways.
(Para No: 84 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
131. Pertains to Ministry of Civil Aviation
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
132. Agrees to the views/observation of the Committee. As pointed out in replies to earlier paras
Commission of Railway Safety needs to be restructured, with a view to strengthen the organization,
so as to make its functioning more effective.
133. At present the Commission is heavily dependent on Ministry of Railways for technical
personnel, infrastructure and logistical support required during investigation of accidents. It would
be appropriate that Commission of Railway Safety be structured as a complete organization, with
having its own resources and infrastructure such as technical manpower support, test lab, logistic
and data bank etc, so that while performing the duties of the post, minimum or no dependency
is there on railways. Further it would be in public interest that the Commission be given shape of
a complete organization. So that it may, as a team, examine and look into the safety aspects from
all angles. This will reduce possibility of judgmental and technical errors and arbitrariness in
working pertaining to the safety issues of rail passenger.
134. The induction of officers should be at lower level, on permanent absorption basis instead
of deputation basis from Railways. In such a way that they may be able to serve for atleast ten
to 15 years in the Commission, so as to have permanency and continuity in the organization. The
promotional avenues should also be better than those in Railways, so as to draw efficient and able
officers from the cadre of Railways.
ACTION TAKEN
135. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with

21
a view to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization
so as to improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry
of Civil Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the
consultant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
136. The Committee fails to understand the reply of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
regarding not filling-up the vacancies in CRS so far. The Committee feels that follow up
action on the report by the consultant who is yet to be engaged to examine the present
functioning of CRS would take considerable time and that the filling up of vacancies in CRS
cannot be postponed for such a long duration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take immediate action to augment the staff strength
and restructure the CRS.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
137. The Committee notes that Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety are appointed on
deputation basis from amongst the officers of railways from signalling, electrical, mechanical,
operating and civil engineering departments. The Committee recommends that possibility be
explored to ensure that Railway Officers join the CRS at some junior level, say below the Deputy
CsRS rank so that such officer should be in a position to reach the level of Commissioner of
Railway Safety in the course of time. The Committee hopes that this would widen the promotional
avenues in CRS and the availability of more promotional avenues will definitely attract talents to
CRS.
(Para No: 85 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
138. It is felt that if officers join at some junior level below Dy.CRS rank, they will not have
the necessary exposure of field working which is considered essential for discharging the duties
as defined in the Railways Act 1989.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
139. Agrees to the views/observations made by the Committee.
The induction of officers should be at lower level, on permanent absorption basis instead
of deputation basis from Railways, in such a way that they may be able to serve for atleast ten
to 15 years in the Commission, so as to have permanency and continuity in the organization. The
promotional avenues should also be better than Railways, so as to draw efficient and able officers
from the cadre of Railways.
ACTION TAKEN
140. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with a view
to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization so as to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the consultant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
141. The Committee notes the reply.

22
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
142. The Committee recommends to upgrade the status of Chief Commissioner of Railway
Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety to the level of Secretary and Special Secretary to
Government of India respectively, which would greatly help CRS to improve it efficiency and
effectiveness, while dealing with the Railways Board and Ministry of Railways. It would also result
in attracting the best talent to the Commission. The financial implication of this recommendation
will be insignificant as the CCRS normally draws the pay at the maximum of the grade (Rs 80,000
which is also the grade of Secretary)) and the grade of CRS will go up by only Rs.1000 (from
79,000 max. to 80,000 max.) This issue is hanging fire since a long time and had been
recommended earlier also by this Committee in its 83
rd Report and also by the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Railways in its 19 th Report. Railway Safety Review
Committee headed by Justice Khanna in 1998 had also made recommendations in this regard. The
Committee would like to know the reasons for non-implementation of these recommendations.
(Para No: 86 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
143. As regards the scales of pay and rank of CCRS being equivalent to the Chairman, Railway
Board and that of CRS being equal to General Managers on the Indian Railways, it may be
mentioned that scales and ranks of different officials in Government of India are determined by the
worth of charge of the posts concerned. Worth of charge and complexities of Chairman, Railway
Board and General Managers on Zonal Railways are not comparable with those of CCRS and CRSs
respectively. These jobs in the Commission of Railway Safety are akin to the Principal Director of
Audit under the Controller and Auditor General of India in different departments of Government of
India to which their rank and scale should correspond. Commission of Railway Safety is required
to coordinate with safety organization of India Railways and not with the Railway Board Members
individually. However, Ministry of Civil Aviation may also take a view of this.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
144. Agrees to the observation views taken by the Committee. Ministry of Railways partially
accepted the recommendations of RSRC 1998 to extant that the CCRS to be of the pay of
Secretary to the Government of India and CRS in the Grade of General Manager of Railways i.e.
Rs.24050-26000. This would make the Commission’s functioning more vibrant and effective. As
the proposal involved financial implication, the proposal was examined in consultation with
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. Initially, Deptt. of Expenditure not agreed to the
proposal however, they had advised to refer the proposal to 6th CPC. Accordingly, the proposal
was submitted to the 6
th CPC. The proposal did not find favour for consideration by the 6th CPC.
ACTION TAKEN
145. The proposal shall be forwarded to the 7th Pay Commission for its consideration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
146. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
147. The Committee was surprised to know that a major handicap in the current set up is that
there is no system of skill upgradation for the officers working in the Commission. While the
railway technology is constantly changing, the training needs of the CRS officials in the new

23
technology developing fast are not looked after. The Committee feels that frequent exposure to
specialized training courses are required for keeping the Commission officials abreast of the
developments in technology and best practices being followed in the more developed railway
systems. There is no budget for this purpose nor does the Commission have any powers for
arranging such trainings. The Committee notes that Section 9 of Railway Act which deals with the
facilities to be afforded to the Commissioners, lays down that all reasonable facilities shall be
afforded by railway administration for discharge of the duties and exercise of power by the
Commissioners but the railway administration does not include the Commissioners in the study
tours or technology trainings arranged by them for railway officers. The Committee recommends
that Railways Board must reserve slots in relevant training course meant for its senior officers for
officers of the Commission for which budget may be shared with the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
The Committee feels that it should be taken up on urgent basis.
(Para No: 87 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
148. Ministry of Railways agrees to include officer of Commission in relevant training courses.
Modalities of financing the training will be discussed with Ministry of Civil Aviation.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
149. Ministry of Railways have agreed to include officers of the Commission of Railway Safety
for relevant training courses.
ACTION TAKEN
150. Ministry of Railways have agreed to the recommendation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
151. The Committee happy to note the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATIONS OF HIGH LEVEL SAFETY REVIEW COMMITTEE ON SAFETY
ARCHITECTURE ON INDIAN RAILWAYS (DR.ANIL KAKODKAR COMMITTEE)
152. The Committee notes that the High Level Safety Review Committee headed by Dr. Anil
Kakodkar has made important recommendations for setting up of Railway Safety Authority and also
for strengthening and empowering CRS. These recommendations came when this Committee was
half way through its considerations of working of CRS. Ministry of Railways was requested to
furnish its response to relevant recommendations of the Kakodkar Committee, which it said were
under consideration. Whereas, Ministry of Civil Aviation did furnished detailed comments to those
recommendations that have been given in the paragraphs above. Although, most of
recommendations of Kakodkar Committee appear to be of far reaching significance for
strengthening safety regulations in Indian Railways, this Committee could not apply its mind in the
absence of Ministry of railways’ response. It would, therefore, like to call upon the Ministry of
Railways to finalise its responses at the earliest as it has already taken a long time. While, doing
so it should discuss the issues with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and CRS. The Committee was
informed that the Kakodkar Committee had not consulted the Ministry of Civil Aviation while
finalising its recommendations. At this stage, the Committee can only say that recommendations of
the Kakodkar Committee and comments/suggestions given by the Ministry of Civil Aviation appear

24
to be very significant to be considered seriously. The Ministry of Railways should furnish its
response in this regard to this Committee as soon as these are finalised. The Committee
recommends that while implementing the recommendations the views of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation may be taken into account and due weightage should be given. The role of Chief
Commissioner of Railway Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety should be clearly defined
in the new dispension and any legislative amendments, if necessary, must be brought forward
accordingly. At any cost the role of operator, regulator and investigator must be clearly delineated
and put under different administrative control.
(Para No: 94 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
153. The High Level Safety Review Committee headed by Shri Anil Kakodkar has recommended
formation of Rail Safety Authority (RSA) under Ministry of Railways independent from Railway
Board and merger of Commission of Railway Safety with RSA.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
154. Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) have submitted their comments on the recommendations
of Kakodkar Committee and suggested CRS to be given only accident investigation duty and form
an independent Rail Accident Investigation Commission under another Ministry say Ministry of Civil
Aviation.
ACTION TAKEN
155. The matter is under examination by Ministry of Railways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
156. The Committee notes the reply and it may be appraised on the status of
implementation of the recommendations of HLSR Committee, particularly on the
strengthening of CRS. The Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken on
the recommendations of HLSR Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
157. Due to increase in the Metro Rail network in Delhi and its expansion to other cities as well,
the Committee feels that the number of existing circles Safety Commission may need to be
increased to cope up with future Metro Rail safety requirements. Accordingly, the existing
Railways, CRS needs to be expanded and empowered.
(Para No: 95 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
158. Pertains to Ministry of Civil Aviation
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
159. Proposal for creation of two posts of CsMRS is under consideration before the Ministry
of Civil Aviation.
ACTION TAKEN
160. Draft Cabinet Note for circulation to the concerned Ministries for seeking comments/views
has been approved by the Competent Authority and is being circulated.

25
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
161. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will
pursue the creation of two posts of CsMRS vigorously with the concerned departments.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
General Observation
162. The Committee on the basis of the deliberations with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and that
of Railways and information made available to it finds that the existing system in which CRS has
to function, leaves much to be desired. The CRS has to work under lot of limitations and has to
depend for so many things on the Ministry of Railways that it is not able to exercise, in actual
practice, even those powers, that are available to it in Railways Act and the Rules made there
under. Its autonomy, thus, is greatly impaired. (Para 96)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
163. The dependence of the CRS on Railways for technical staff is due to the fact that
necessary expertise to carry out the railway safety related work is available only with the Railway
staff. Such an expertise cannot be obtained from open marked. The Commissioners are inducted
on permanent absorption basis and subordinate staff on deputation basis, depending upon vacancies
and willingness of staff. For the accident investigations, inspections for starting services on
sections of the Railways and certification of rolling stocks, the CRS is provided services of
personnel of Railways. However, the Commissioners of Railway Safety work under the Ministry
of Civil Aviation. While working under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, they enjoy full liberty to
exercise their powers under the frame work of set rules.
164. Ministry of Railways and the Commission of Railway Safety under the Ministry of Civil
Aviation are Government bodies functioning in the public interest and carrying out their respective
duties as defined in the Act. There is no interference or exercising of influence on the part of the
Ministry of Railways in the working of the Commission. Commissioners of Railway Safety are
completely independent and exercise their independent and free judgment while discharging their
duties under the Act.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
165. Agrees to the views/observations made by the Committee. As pointed out in replies to earlier
paras Commission of Railway Safety needs to be restructured, with a view to strengthen the
organization, so as to make its functioning more effective.
166. At present the Commission is completely dependent on Ministry of Railways for technical
personnel, infrastructure and logistical support required during investigation of accidents. It would
be appropriate that Commission of Railway Safety be structured as a complete organization, with
having its own resources and infrastructure such as technical manpower support, test lab, logistic
and data bank etc, so that while performing the duties of the post, minimum or no dependency
is there on railways. Where the Railways as operator can be called before the Inquiry in rail
accident to participate as an witness. Further it would be in public interest that the Commission
be given shape of a complete organization. So that it may, as a team, examine and look into the
safety aspects from all angles. This will reduce possibility of judgmental and technical errors and
arbitrariness in working pertaining to the safety issues of rail passenger.
167. The induction of officers should be at lower level, on permanent absorption basis instead
of deputation basis from Railways, in such a way that they may be able to serve for atleast ten

26
to 15 years in the Commission, so as to have permanency and continuity in the organization. The
promotional avenues should also be at par with Railways, so as to draw efficient and able officers
from the cadre of Railways.
ACTION TAKEN
168. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with a view
to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization so as to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the consultant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
169. The Committee notes the reply and finds that restructuring of CRS is the need of
the hour which should be taken up on priority by both the Ministries.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
170. The CRS is not having much say in the monitoring of railway safety presently in the
country except accident investigation and inspection of new lines before they are commissioned.
The CRS is not having any power to carry out annual audit of safety parameters of Indian
Railways. The Committee emphasizes that the CRS should be strengthened with required powers
and autonomy for the betterment of railway safety in the country.
(Para No: 97 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
171. Section 6(b) (Duties of Commissioner) and Section 7(a) (Powers of Commissioner) of the
Railway Act 1989 empower the Commissioners to enter upon and inspect any Railway or any
rolling stock used thereon for any of the purposes laid down in the Railway Act. The CRSs are
always invited for annual inspections conducted by the General Managers and attended by all
Principal Heads of Department (PHOD). Besides this, they are extended all support whenever they
wish to inspect any section/Rolling Stock or during the course of an accident investigation.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
172. Fully agrees to the views/observations made by the Committee. Periodic inspections, other
inspection of Railways is a statutory mandate provided by the Act to the Commissioners. Periodic
inspections under Section 6(b) should be the requirement of Railway lines working, instead of only
being duty of CRS. For this, rules needs to be framed by the Central Government for periodic
inspection of working lines and report thereon from the Commissioners of Railway Safety for
review of sanction of open lines by Central Government. Once sanction for continuing working of
a line is required to be reviewed on the inspection report of the Commissioners, it will form part
of safety audit of open lines.
ACTION TAKEN
173. A proposal to appoint consultant to examine the present functioning of the CRS with
a view to suggest reforms for augmentation, strengthening and restructuring the organization
so as to improve its efficiency and effectiveness is under active consideration with Ministry
of Civil Aviation. Subsequent action shall be initiated after submission of the report by the
consultant.

27
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
174. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
175. The Committee found that apart from Parliamentary Committees, many high powered
Committees/Commissions, constituted by the Government from time to time, have made important
recommendations for empowering Commission of Railway Safety. But most of these have largely
remained unimplemented. The Committee fails to understand if it is due to lack of will or resistance
from the Railways to change the status quo. The Committee is concerned about this.
Recommendations/suggestions made in this Report, in fact, fall in two categories - those which can
be implemented by executive/administrative orders and those that are long term needing legislative
intervention. Those belonging to former may be implemented urgently, not to be delayed for those
in the latter categories. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Action Taken Replies
should be submitted to it separately for the two categories furnishing status of their implementation
in clear terms. The Committee feels that most of the problems with the CRS mentioned in this
Report can be taken care of even in the existing system if the recommendations/suggestions of the
Committee are implemented urgently.
(Para No: 98 ibid)
REPLY FROM M/O RAILWAYS
176. The recommendations made by various committees with respect to Commission of Railway
Safety are examined in detail. Some of the important recommendations pertaining to Commission
of Railway Safety like making the CRS inquiries public and transparent, making available the inquiry
reports to public after finalization, making the post of CRS multi-disciplinary etc. have been
accepted and implemented. With regard to reorganizing the Commission of Railway Safety, there
are variant views offered by different committees which requires in-depth analysis to ensure a
higher level of safety than what is available through the current set up. The recommendations of
Kakodkar Committee along with views of Ministry of Civil Aviation with regard to Commission of
Railway Safety are under examination.
STAND OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
177. It is admitted that many of the recommendations made by earlier committees have been
accepted by the Government and accordingly changes have been incorporated. However, as replied
in earlier paras, there is an urgent need to restructure the Commission to make it more effective
and efficient in its functioning.
ACTION TAKEN
178. The recommendations of the Committee which can be implemented through executive/
administrative orders have been complied through except for the paras at 16, 17,18, 20, 21, 22
and 42, in which no conclusive decision reached between the Ministry of Railways and Ministry
of Civil Aviation. Further the recommendations made in paras 19, 59 and 71 have been partially
agreed to by the Ministry of Railways but remained silent/non committal on the main
recommendation.
179. Apparently, none of the recommendations as made by the Committee requires legislative
intervention at this stage. Accordingly we may furnish the status of ATR regarding the
implementation of the recommendations made by the committee.

28
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
180. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the replies furnished by both the
Ministries are evasive and non-committal. The Committee finds that both the Ministries are
responsible for the present poor state of affairs of CRS. The Committee hopes that
restructuring of CRS on priority and greater co-ordination between the two Ministries will
address the shortcomings of the existing system.
OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
181. The Committee also finds that Ministry of Civil Aviation, directly and indirectly, puts
blame for all the ills in CRS on Ministry of Railways. But feels that restructuring and
expansion of CRS is their responsibility. However, the Ministry in its Action Taken Replies
has repeatedly said that a consultant will be appointed to address all the issues raised in
respect of CRS by the Committee. As for having a study done by a consultant is fraught
with many ifs and buts causing undue delays. Who will appoint the consultants and what
will its mandate etc.? What if Ministry of Railways has any objection or reservations about
these aspects? Therefore, the Committee is very apprehensive about consultant route, which
cannot provide solution to all the ills being faced in this regard.
Conclusion
182. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture presented its One-Hundred and Eighty-Eighth Report on “Functioning of
Commission of Railways Safety” to both the Houses of Parliament on 27
th February, 2013.
The Report inter-alia contained the observations/recommendations of the Committee on the
following issues:—
(i) Duality of command on Commission of Railway Safety (CRS)
(ii) Fixing of safety standards
(iii) Inspection by CRS
(iv) Investigation of railway accidents
(v) Implementation of recommendations of CRS
(vi) Separation of roles of operator, regulator and investigator
(vii) Human resources in CRS; and
(viii) Recommendations of high level safety review committee on safety architecture
on Indian railways (Dr. Anil Kakodkar Committee)
183. The Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted the final Action Taken Replies on 22
nd
January, 2014 which contained the views of Ministry of Railways on each of the
recommendations of the Committee.
184. The Committee after examining the Action Taken Replies found that most of the
replies submitted by both the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways are divergent and
diagonally opposite. The Ministry of Railways had submitted that the existing system of the
CRS under Ministry of Civil Aviation is working satisfactorily and that there was no need
to empower/restructure the CRS; it is working very well; and the Committee’s observations
and apprehensions are unfounded. The Committee also found that the Ministry of Railways
was not willing to consult the CRS in fixing the minimum requirements/standards which

29
regulate railway safety. The Ministry of Railways informed the Committee that a stand-
alone Legislation for the CRS as recommended by this Committee in 2005 is still under
their consideration. The Ministry is still having reservations on allowing the CRS to carry
out the ‘annual periodical inspection’. On other major observations of the Committee the
Ministry of Railways submitted non-committal replies only.
185. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, on the majority of observations of the Committee,
replied that a proposal to appoint a consultant to examine the issues raised by the
Committee is under active consideration of the Ministry. The replies of the Ministry in
respect of expansion of the CRS in terms of HR and creation of extra Zones, investigation
of rail accidents and addressing the shortcomings faced by CRS in carrying out its day-
to-day function are very casual and evasive. Actions on these issues, the Committee feels
are to be taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation without involvement of Ministry of
Railways.
186. The Committee after analyzing the replies and also hearing the representatives of
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Railways feels that stand taken by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation as well as Railways do not address the concerns of the Committee for the effective
and efficient working of CRS. The Committee is of the considered view that having a
separate legislation for creating an empowered/autonomous body as CRS, which could prove
to be an effective solution to prevailing short comings and confusion, needs serious
consideration and implementation. But the Ministry of Railways for reasons better known
to them does not appear to be in favor of a separate legislation, although the Ministry of
Civil Aviation did not express any reservation about this.
187. The Committee also emphasized upon the need to draw up clear demarcation of
functions of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation in the working of CRS. The
Committee notes that both the Ministries are not able to arrive at a consensus on the
issues of rules making and fixing of minimum requirements/standards. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the matter may be placed before the Cabinet Secretary to take
a view in the light of observations/recommendations of the Committee in consultation with
both the Ministries. The Committee still feels that any change in specifications/standards by
the Ministry of Railways in respect of matters relating to railway safety should not be one-
sided; involvement of CRS has to be there. We have to evolve a system in which CRS is
also involved in fixing/changing specifications/standards without, of course, resulting in any
hurdles for the Ministry of Railways in its day-to-day working. Ministry of Railways also
should be careful in dealing with CRS so that its efficiency is not jeopardized.
188. The Committee has desired that the difficulties faced by CRS in conducting accident
investigation should be adequately addressed by both the Ministries of Civil Aviation and
Railways. The Committee also recommends that the proposal to increase the number of
circles of CRS should be expedited.
189. The Committee invited the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Chairman,
Railway Board to appear before the Committee to examine all the issues afflicting the CRS.
However, the Chairman, Railway Board could not appear before the Committee. The
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation while deposing before the Committee informed that
issues highlighted in the Report of the Committee will be discussed with the Chairman,
Railway Board and suitable remedial action will be taken as per the discussions within four
weeks timeframe. The Committee hopes that some positive result will come out in the
coming days to strengthen the functioning of CRS.

30
30
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest. (Para 3)
The Committee observes that the replies submitted by both the Ministries of Civil
Aviation and Railways are divergent and diagonally opposite. The Committee strongly feels
that it is high time that both the Ministries sorted out their differences on crucial issues
related to CRS. The Committee is pleased to note that a proposal to appoint consultant to
examine the present functioning of CRS is under active consideration of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation. The Committee desires that urgent steps should be taken to finalize the
proposal and implement the same. (Para 9)
The Committee feels that stand taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as
the Railways do not address the concerns of the Committee on the duality of command in
discharging the functions of CRS. The Committee is of the considered view that having a
separate legislation for CRS, which could prove to be an effective solution to such avoidable
confusion, needs serious thought and deliberation. (Para 17)
As regards consulting CRS in fixing standards/specifications for the purpose of
inspection/investigation etc., the Committee finds that the response of the Railways too
technical in saying that under the statute they are not required to do so. The Committee
feels that the idea of consultation with the CRS in this respect, no doubt has definite merit
as standard/specification are very closely linked with the inspection and investigation by
CRS effectively. The Committee hastens to add that the CRS could not have a free hand
in this regard as it might affect Railways working adversely as over all safety is mainly
their responsibility under the Railways Act. The Committee emphasizes the need to have
regular consultation in this regard between the CRS and Ministry of Railways. (Para 32)
The Committee notes that there are grey areas between both the Ministries on the
issues of rules making and fixing of minimum requirements/standards. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the matter may be placed before the Cabinet Secretary to
arrive at a decision on the points on which there are serious differences between both the
Ministries. (Para 33)
The Committee is not satisfied with reply furnished by Ministry of Railways as they
have not spelt out any details of review of the safety standards. It seems that the Ministry
has not taken the recommendation of the Committee due with required seriousness.
(Para 38)
The safety of the traveling public is the concern of the Government as a whole.
Therefore, all the Ministries involved should play a role in formulating the safety
regulations/rules, etc. More consultation means more practicable policies. The Committee is
not satisfied with the reply and it reiterates its recommendation on the decisions taken by
the Ministry of Railways in respect of matters relating to railway safety. (Para 48)
The Committee is yet have arguments, convincing or unconvincing, against a stand-
alone legislation for CRS as recommended by it in its 83
rd Report, and reiterated in

31
188th Report in 2013. It is disappointed to see that it is still under consideration. The
Committee takes serious note of such an evasive reply and directs the Ministry of Railways
to submit a note on this further for its consideration. The Committee feels that this reflects
the non-committal attitude of the Ministry of Railways for providing much needed autonomy
to CRS in real terms. (Para 56)
The Kakodkar Committee report which remains under consideration for last more
than two years may be debated at the earliest in consultation with all the stakeholders. The
Committee would like to have inputs in this regard from both Ministries within two months
for its consideration. (Para 57)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the role of CRS, at present, is
restricted to accident investigation only and not for periodic safety audit of railways. The
stand taken by the Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation on the codification
of minimum standard of railway tracks and rolling stock should come to a logical
conclusion. (Para 65)
The Committee does not agree with the stand taken by Ministry of Railways in this
regard and feels that legal opinion on this ought to have been taken in 1953 itself. It
desires that the opinion of Ministry of Law and Justice on the Executive Order issued by
the Ministry of Railways in the year 1953 relieving CsRS of their duty of annual periodical
inspection may be got expedited. The Committee may be appraised on the opinion tendered
by the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Law provides for periodic inspection of railways by
CRS. It is not clear why CRS is not exercising this function. The Committee may be
apprised why the CRS is not undertaking suo-motto inspections. (Para 73)
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the difficulties faced by CRS in
conducting accident investigation should be adequately addressed by both the Ministries of
Civil Aviation and Railways. The Committee finds that the proposal to increase the number
of circles of CRS falls under the domain of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of
Railways has no objection to it. The Committee recommends that it should be expedited.
(Para 87)
The Committee is also not in a position to comprehend why Ministry of Civil Aviation
was not increasing the staff strength of CRS to cope-up with the increase of the Railway
network. The Committee also feels that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is equally to be
blamed for the present situation of the CRS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take immediate steps to increase the number of
Circles of CRS as well as to augment the staff position of CRS. (Para 88)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 93)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 100)
The Committee is unhappy to note that such a deadlock between the Ministries
undermine such serious issues as railways safety. The Committee would like to impress
upon both the Ministries that a conclusive decision should be reached on the issue of
forwarding of the reports of investigation into accidents of Section 120 as enquired by the
Railway Administration. The Committee desires that all the accident investigation reports
may be available with the CRS to enable a better safety environment for the traveling
public. (Para 108)
The Committee finds that the replies submitted by Ministries of Civil Aviation and
Railways are of routine nature. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that a proper

32
system should be put in place to ensure the compliance of accepted recommendations
and other follow-up actions taken by the Ministry of Railways, in a periodical manner.
(Para 117)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 123)
The Committee recommends that the Kakodkar Committee recommendation that are
under consideration for a long time should be expedited to arrive at a conclusion
particularly those relating to Railway Safety Authority as proposed. Safety of the public
should be the utmost criteria while deciding on the recommendation rather than the powers
and jurisdictions of particular Ministries or governmental agencies. (Para 129)
The Committee fails to understand the reply of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
regarding not filling-up the vacancies in CRS so far. The Committee feels that follow up
action on the report by the consultant who is yet to be engaged to examine the present
functioning of CRS would take considerable time and that the filling up of vacancies in CRS
cannot be postponed for such a long duration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take immediate action to augment the staff strength
and restructure the CRS. (Para 136)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 141)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 146)
The Committee happy to note the reply. (Para 151)
The Committee notes the reply and it may be appraised on the status of
implementation of the recommendations of HLSR Committee, particularly on the
strengthening of CRS. The Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken on
the recommendations of HLSR Committee. (Para 156)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will
pursue the creation of two posts of CsMRS vigorously with the concerned departments.
(Para 161)
The Committee notes the reply and finds that restructuring of CRS is the need of
the hour which should be taken up on priority by both the Ministries. (Para 169)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 174)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the replies furnished by both the
Ministries are evasive and non-committal. The Committee finds that both the Ministries are
responsible for the present poor state of affairs of CRS. The Committee hopes that
restructuring of CRS on priority and greater co-ordination between the two Ministries will
address the shortcomings of the existing system. (Para 180)
The Committee also finds that Ministry of Civil Aviation, directly and indirectly, puts
blame for all the ills in CRS on Ministry of Railways. But feels that restructuring and
expansion of CRS is their responsibility. However, the Ministry in its Action Taken Replies
has repeatedly said that a consultant will be appointed to address all the issues raised in
respect of CRS by the Committee. As for having a study done by a consultant is fraught
with many ifs and buts causing undue delays. Who will appoint the consultants and what
will its mandate etc.? What if Ministry of Railways has any objection or reservations about
these aspects? Therefore, the Committee is very apprehensive about consultant route, which
cannot provide solution to all the ills being faced in this regard. (Para 181)

33
Conclusion
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture presented its One-Hundred and Eighty-Eighth Report on “Functioning of
Commission of Railways Safety” to both the Houses of Parliament on 27
th February, 2013.
The Report inter-alia contained the observations/recommendations of the Committee on the
following issues:—
(i) Duality of command on Commission of Railway Safety (CRS)
(ii) Fixing of safety standards
(iii) Inspection by CRS
(iv) Investigation of railway accidents
(v) Implementation of recommendations of CRS
(vi) Separation of roles of operator, regulator and investigator
(vii) Human resources in CRS; and
(viii) Recommendations of high level safety review committee on safety  architecture
on Indian railways (Dr. Anil Kakodkar Committee)
(Para 182)
The Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted the final Action Taken Replies on
22
nd January, 2014 which contained the views of Ministry of Railways on each of the
recommendations of the Committee. (Para 183)
The Committee after examining the Action Taken Replies found that most of the
replies submitted by both the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways are divergent and
diagonally opposite. The Ministry of Railways had submitted that the existing system of the
CRS under Ministry of Civil Aviation is working satisfactorily and that there was no need
to empower/restructure the CRS; it is working very well; and the Committee’s observations
and apprehensions are unfounded. The Committee also found that the Ministry of Railways
was not willing to consult the CRS in fixing the minimum requirements/standards which
regulate railway safety. The Ministry of Railways informed the Committee that a stand-
alone Legislation for the CRS as recommended by this Committee in 2005 is still under
their consideration. The Ministry is still having reservations on allowing the CRS to carry
out the ‘annual periodical inspection’. On other major observations of the Committee the
Ministry of Railways submitted non-committal replies only. (Para 184)
The Ministry of Civil Aviation, on the majority of observations of the Committee,
replied that a proposal to appoint a consultant to examine the issues raised by the
Committee is under active consideration of the Ministry. The replies of the Ministry in
respect of expansion of the CRS in terms of HR and creation of extra Zones, investigation
of rail accidents and addressing the shortcomings faced by CRS in carrying out its day-to-
day function are very casual and evasive. Actions on these issues, the Committee feels are
to be taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation without involvement of Ministry of Railways.
(Para 185)
The Committee after analyzing the replies and also hearing the representatives of
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Railways feels that stand taken by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation as well as Railways do not address the concerns of the Committee for the effective
and efficient working of CRS. The Committee is of the considered view that having a

34
separate legislation for creating an empowered/autonomous body as CRS, which could prove
to be an effective solution to prevailing short comings and confusion, needs serious
consideration and implementation. But the Ministry of Railways for reasons better known
to them does not appear to be in favor of a separate legislation, although the Ministry of
Civil Aviation did not express any reservation about this. (Para 186)
The Committee also emphasized upon the need to draw up clear demarcation of
functions of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation in the working of CRS. The
Committee notes that both the Ministries are not able to arrive at a consensus on the issues
of rules making and fixing of minimum requirements/standards. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the matter may be placed before the Cabinet Secretary to take a view in
the light of observations/recommendations of the Committee in consultation with both the
Ministries. The Committee still feels that any change in specifications/standards by the
Ministry of Railways in respect of matters relating to railway safety should not be one-sided;
involvement of CRS has to be there. We have to evolve a system in which CRS is also
involved in fixing/changing specifications/standards without, of course, resulting in any hurdles
for the Ministry of Railways in its day-to-day working. Ministry of Railways also should be
careful in dealing with CRS so that its efficiency is not jeopardized. (Para 187)
The Committee has desired that the difficulties faced by CRS in conducting accident
investigation should be adequately addressed by both the Ministries of Civil Aviation and
Railways. The Committee also recommends that the proposal to increase the number of
circles of CRS should be expedited. (Para 188)
The Committee invited the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Chairman,
Railway Board to appear before the Committee to examine all the issues afflicting the CRS.
However, the Chairman, Railway Board could not appear before the Committee. The
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation while deposing before the Committee informed that
issues highlighted in the Report of the Committee will be discussed with the Chairman,
Railway Board and suitable remedial action will be taken as per the discussions within four
weeks timeframe. The Committee hopes that some positive result will come out in the
coming days to strengthen the functioning of CRS. (Para 189)

35
ANNEXURE

37
ANNEXURE
(vide para No.2)
MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri G . Asok Kumar, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Joint Secretary & DGCA
4. Dr. Balmiki Prasad, Director
5 Shri Suyash Narain, Director
6. Ms. Puja Jindal, Director
COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
1. Shri Prashant Kumar, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
2. Shri R.K. Kardam, Commissioner of Railway Safety (Northern Circle)
3. Shri Prabhat Kumar Bajpai, CRS (NE Circle)
4. Shri L.B. Singh, Deputy CRS (Gen.)
5. Shri Ajay Misra, Director
RAILWAY BOARD
1. Shri Sanjiv Garg, Adviser (Safety)
2. Ms. Vijay Laxmi Kaushik, Executive Director, Safety
3. Shri J.S. Bindra, Director (Safety)
4. Shri A.S. Upadhyay, Executive Director Traffic (M)

MINUTES

40

41
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 27 th January, 2014 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
6. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri S. Pakkirappa
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri G. Asok Kumar, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. Prabhat Kumar, Joint Secretary and DGCA
4. Dr. Balmiki Prasad, Director
5. Shri Suyash Narain, Director
6. Ms. Puja Jindal, Director
41

42
Air India
1. Shri Anil Mehta, Chief Operating Officer, Alliance Air
2. Shri. H.R. Jagannath, Chief Operating Officer, AIESL
3. Shrimati Deepa Mahajan, Executive Director (Pers.)
Commission of Railway Safety
1. Shri Prashant Kumar, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
2. Shri R.K. Kardam, Commissioner of Railway Safety (Northern Circle)
3. Shri Prabhat Kumar Bajpai, CRS (NE Circle)
4. Shri L.B. Singh, Deputy CRS (Gen.)
5. Shri Ajay Misra, Director
Railway Board
1. Shri Sanjiv Garg, Adviser (Safety)
2. Ms. Vijay Laxmi Kaushik, Executive Director, Safety
3. Shri J.S. Bindra, Director (Safety)
4. Shri A.S. Upadhyay, Executive Director Traffic (M)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee. Thereafter, the
Chairman informed that the officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Commission of Railway
Safety and Railway Board had been invited for presenting their views on the Action Taken Replies
submitted by the Government on the 188
th Report of the Committee on the ‘Functioning of
Commission of Railway Safety’.
3. The Chairman, in his opening remarks, pointed out the divergent and diagonally opposite
Action Taken Replies received from both the Ministries-Civil Aviation and Railways in response to
the Committee’s recommendations contained in the 188
th Report. The Chairman further raised the
issues of poor interface between Ministry of Civil Aviation and Railways on the one side and
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) and Ministry of Railways on the other side, problems faced
by CRS in their day-to-day functioning, staff shortage in CRS, strengthening of CRS,
empowerment of CRS with more accountability and CRS’s inability to fulfill its mandate.
4. The officials of the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railway Board presented their views on
the issues raised in the Chairman’s opening remarks and also on the Action Taken Replies submitted
by them before the Committee. The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety also informed the
Committee on the practical problems being faced in carrying out the assigned task. Thereafter, the
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation assured the Committee that he will try to sort out the issues
concerning the smooth functioning of CRS with Ministry of Railways within four weeks. In  fact,
he had already raised this issue with the Railway Board Members also raised questions relating to
the subject to which the concerned officials replied. For the unanswered questions and other
information sought, the Chairman directed the officials to submit written replies to the Committee.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

43
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th February, 2014 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shri Satish Sharma
8. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
9. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
the following draft Reports:
(i) 210
th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report on Functioning
of Commission of Railways Safety;
(ii) * * *
43
*** Relate to other matters.

44
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
3. The Committee adopted the said reports without any modification, after some discussion
and decided to present/lay the Reports to Parliament on 19 th February, 2014.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

45
45
List of Reports of Department-Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 ( with
evidence )
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence )
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

46
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 ( with evidence )
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence )
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

47
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (l Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

48
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption from Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.08.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

49
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

50
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

51
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
06.12.2004 (RS)
03.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2005-06 (18 Reports)

52
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

53
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture.
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

54
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006.
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006.
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.08.2007
16.08.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

55
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

56
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (10 Reports)

57
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.12.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

58
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

59
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the Houses of
the Parliament 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament on
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

60
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11.2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

61
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

62
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
2013-14 (9 Reports)

63
1
204th
205th
206th
207th
208th
209th
2
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Two Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One-Hundred
Ninety Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety First Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation
4
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
3
13.01.2014
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports).

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.