REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
REPORT 
 
            Lighthouse is a real guide of the mariners in vast ocean.  Lighthouses play an important role in guiding the
 mariners and fixing their position in the sea.  The term “Lighthouse” represents all aids to navigation, including light
 vessels, sound signals, buoys, beacons for any mark, sign or apparatus, radio aids such as Differential Global
 Positioning System Racons, Loran – C, Radio Beacons etc.  The Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is premier
 agency in India and provides all aids to marine navigation during harbour phase for mariners in Indian waters. 
2.         The Lighthouses are defined as ‘General’ and ‘Local’.  The lighthouses under the Central Government and
 notified in the Official Gazette are the ‘General Lighthouses’ which come under the authority of the Department of
 Lighthouses and Lightships.  The responsibility of establishment, operation and maintenance of the lighthouses lies
 with the Department.  The ‘Local’ Lighthouses are those which are under the State Governments or the Port Trusts for
 guiding the ships while entering/leaving the Ports.  However as per the Lighthouse Act, the Department is empowered
 to inspect a local lighthouse and advise the concerned authority for its improvement. 
3.         The Department of Lighthouses and Lightships consisting of 167 Lighthouses, 12 Deep Sea Buoys, 10
 Differential Global Positioning Systems, 4 Decca Navigator Chain Stations, 6 LORAN –C Stations and 29 Racons
 covering the coastal length of over 7000 kms.  The Department would be adding 5 major Lighthouses-2 along the
 Andhra Coast and 3 in the Palk Bay.    Apart from the new Lighthouses and Radio Aids to navigation, the Department
 has up graded the old and pre-independent equipments with the latest state-of-art equipments.  
4.         The Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is a subordinate office under the Ministry of Shipping and
 headed by the Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships.  The Headquarters of the Department of Lighthouses
 and Lightships is situated at Noida. 
5.         The Indian coast has been divided into six regions known as Lighthouse Districts.  The area covered and
 facilities available at Regional Headquarters are as under: - 
(i)            Jamnagar -      is the regional headquarters of Saurashtra & Kachchh Lighthouse District stretching from
 Jakhau Lighthouse near Pakistan border to Bhavnagar.  The region caters to the ‘Aids to Navigation’ requirements of
 two peninsulas, namely the Gulf of Kachchh and the Gulf of Khamabat.  The vessels approaching Kandla Port and a
 number of minor ports under the aegis of Gujarat Maritime Board take the help of various Aids established in this
 region. 
(ii)            Mumbai - is the regional headquarter for Mumbai Lighthouses District stretching from Hazira Lighthouses to
 Suratkal Lighthouses near Mangalore.  The region meets the navigational requirements of Major Ports at Mumbai,
 JNPT, Mormugao and new Mangalore.  In addition the various aids established by this region also caters to the needs of
 minor ports of Gujarat Maritime Board established on the eastern bank of the Gulf of Khambat and Maharashtra
 Maritime Board. 
(iii)       Cochin - is the regional headquarter for the Cochin Lighthouse District stretching from Kasaragod to
 Manakodam and all the Lighthouses in the Lakshadweep Island.  The region meets the navigational requirements of the
 Major Port of Kochi and number of minor ports of Karnataka and Kerala. 
(iv)            Chennai - is the regional headquarters for the Chennai Lighthouse District stretching from Alleppey on the
 west coast to Kanyakumari and Kanyakumari to Machhlipatnam on the east coast.  The region meets the navigational
 requirement of a number of ports under Maritimes Boards of  Tamilnadu and  Andhra Pradesh and the ship breaking
 yard to Vodarevu. 
(v)            Kolkata - is the regional headquarters of the Kolkata Lighthouses District stretching from Antervedi
 (Narsapur) to Saugar Island.  The District caters to the need of the shipping traffic for Vishakhapatnam Port, Hoogly
 Dock and Port and a number of ports under Andhra Pradesh Martime Board and West Bengal Maritime Board. 
(vi)            Andaman & Nicobar Islands:- Port Blair is the regional headquarters of Andaman & Nicobar groups of
 Islands Lighthouse District stretching from East Island to Indira Point in the Bay of Bengal covering nearly 540
 islands/islets.  In these island shipping services is the lifeline.  The region is also situated in the international
 navigational route in the Indian Ocean and thus has been given a special significance to this Lighthouse District.  In this
 region, the Department since its inception, has established number of lighthouses, electronic navigational aids and local
 aids to navigation on agency-basis for Andaman Port Trust.  It maintains and operates all the Aids to marine navigation
 in A&N group of Islands and caters to the needs of all minor ports and international traffic. 
6.         Owing to rapid increase in the lighthouse service, the Central Advisory Committee for Lighthouses, in its 74
th
 meeting held in April 2000, has approved to have a separate Lighthouse District, the seventh District with its
 headquarters at Kakinada to provide safe navigation to mariners sailing along the Andhra Coast. 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
7.         Each Lighthouse District is headed by a Director (Regional) who reports on the technical matters to the Deputy
 Director General and he in turn to the Director General Lighthouses and Lightships.  A team of qualified Engineers and
 Ministerial staff assist the Director at Regional Headquarters.  
8.         The Department also undertakes construction of new Lighthouse tower and its allied buildings including
 installation and testing of Lighthouse equipment with the help of Departmental Engineers.  In addition to this, they also
 carry out the installation and testing of captive power plants, racons, high power parabolic transmission systems, the
 latest satellite-based Differential Global Positioning System etc. 
9.         The Department also undertakes foreign jobs for Maritime State for construction/ development/ maintenance of
 the Local Lighthouses on agency basis.  Most of the spares required for lighting equipment are fabricated/
 manufactured in its laboratories/workshops. 
10.       There is a statutory body called Central Advisory Committee for Lighthouses. It is appointed for a period of two
 years to advise the Government for erection, alteration, removal and examination of new proposals pertaining to
 Lighthouses. It also advises activities i.e. aids to navigation such as light vessel, Fog Signal, Buoy, Beacon or any sign
 and mark exhibited for guidance of ship.  The Central Advisory Committee for Lighthouses (CACL) meets at least
 once in a year under the Chairmanship of the Secretary,  Ministry of Shipping.  There are 16 official and non-official
 members of the   Central Advisory Committee for Lighthouses (CACL) representing various sectors of shipping and
 the Chambers of Commerce. 
11.       The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism undertook the study
 visits to Regional Headquarters at Calcutta, Cochin, Mumbai and Andaman & Nicobar Islands and held discussions
 with the representatives of the Department of Lighthouse and Lightships on the ‘Functioning of Lighthouses’.  In the
 course of discussion at various places, the Committee was informed about the functioning of the Regional Headquarters
 under the Department and maintenance of the Lighthouses. 
12.       On the basis of feedback received from the Regional Headquarters of various Lighthouses Districts, the
 Committee heard the representatives of the  Ministry of Shipping and the Department of Lighthouses & Lightships, at
 its meeting held on 13
th February 2001 at the Headquarters of the Department at  Noida.
 
RELAVANCY OF HAVING HEADQUARTER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHTSHIPS AT
 NOIDA
 
13.       The Lighthouses are operating at coast line and therefore all the schemes are executed by the Department along
 the coast line.  However, the Headquarters of the Director-General of Lighthouses and Lightships is situated at Noida.
 The Committee wanted to know the justification for keeping DGLL’s Headquarters at Noida.. 
14.       The Committee was informed that in 1929,  the Central Government took over the general control and
 supervision of Lighthouse in accordance with the provisions of Indian Lighthouse Act enacted in 1927.  A Central
 Organisation was set-up to deal with Lighthouses and its Headquarters was located at Delhi/Shimla.  This position
 continued till 1949 when this Organisation was merged with the then newly established office of Directorate General of
 Shipping at Mumbai.  Soon there after, it became apparent that there was little or no advantage in attaching the
 Lighthouse Department to the DG Shipping and that its location was away from the headquarters of the Government
 that militated against its efficient functioning.  Therefore  the Headquarters of the Lighthouse Department was moved
 back to Delhi in 1953-54. 
15.         In 1962, the shifting of the offices from Delhi was considered by the Cabinet Committee, which decided that
 Lighthouse Department should be shifted from Delhi to Calcutta.  And that time the members of the staff represented to
 the Government not to uproot them from Delhi.  The proposal of  shifting of Department to Calcutta did not materlise. 
16.       The question of de-centralisation of Government offices was considered by the Government in 1971 and   it was
 decided that the Department be shifted to Ghaziabad.  Due to certain administrative reasons, the Ministry of Surface
 Transport had finally decided to locate the office of Department of Lighthouse and Lightships at Noida. The proposal
 for shifting of the office of Department of Lighthouse from Delhi to Noida was approved by the Cabinet Committee in
 its meeting held on 7
th May, 1987.  The Department acquired plot of land for construction of office building complex at
 a cost of Rs.1.40 crores.  Simultaneously, a proposal for acquisition of ready built flats under housing scheme of Noida
 Authority was also approved and Department acquired 154 nos. ready built flats.  The establishment of DGLL was
 finally shifted from New Delhi to Noida in August 1999.   In reply to a question, it was submitted before the Committee
 that the Ministry of Shipping and the Department had no objections in shifting of Headquarters of the Department to
 any of coastal towns or centrally located place. 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
17.       The Committee observes that no proper thought have been given to the matter of having Headquarters of the
 Department. The Committee is not satisfied with the justification given by the Department of Lighthouse & Lightships
 for having its Headquarters at Noida just for keeping better co-ordination and liaisoning with the Ministry of Shipping
 in connection with the various matters concerning administration and development works and to avoid the procedural
 delays. The Committee is of the view that area  of operation of the Department lies along the coastal line and  all the
 Regional Headquarters are located along the coastal line of the country and are at a distance from DELHI/ NOIDA and
 therefore the officials of the Department sitting there and  involved in the planning and supervision of the schemes may
 not be able to do justice to their work. 
18.         The Committee is of the view that in view of latest developments and changes which has totally revolutionised
 the information technology, the same should be used to the maximum possible extent.  It is, therefore, really not
 necessary to maintain large set up at Headquarters in Delhi for liaison work with the Ministry.  The Committee,
 therefore, feels that the present size of the headquarter of Department of Lighthouses and Lightships should be reduced
 to the level as is really required for the liaison work.  Instead regional offices may be strengthened and made more
 effective.  This will ensure better coordination between the headquarters of Department of Lighthouses and Lightships
 and regional headquarters. 
DELEGATION OF FINANCIAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONAL AUTONOMY TO THE DEPARTMENT
 
19.       The Department of Lighthouses and Lightship is subordinate Office of the Ministry of Shipping.   Since the
 Department is self-sustaining, generally the Ministry have little or no objection while giving approval to the Schemes.
20.       With regard to financial powers available to the Department, the Committee was informed that presently, the
 Director General and Directors have been delegated with the following financial powers:-
Director General
(i)         Capital works                           -Rs.15.00 lakhs in each case
(ii)        Repair works                           -Rs.5.00 lakhs in each case
(iii)            Purchase of stores                    -Rs.10.00 lakhs
            in functioning of the
            Lighthouse
Director (Regional)      
(i)         Capital works               -Nil
(ii)        Repair works               -Rs. 5000/- in each case subject     
to a maximum               -Rs. 20000/-             per annum
(iii)            Purchase of stores            -Rs.2000/- per annum
            in the functioning of the
            Lighthouse. 
21.       All the maintenance works, salary and wages to the staff, procurement of stores and professional services are
 debited to the revenue expenses.  For meeting the revenue expenses, the Director General of Lighthouses & Lightships
 and Directors (Regional) are vested with certain financial powers as Head of the Department and Head of the Office
 respectively.  This financial power is in addition to the financial powers approved by the Government in respect of the
 Head of the Department and Head of the Office for meeting the expenditure of common nature like stationary, etc. 
22.       The Committee was further apprised that the functioning of the Department is quite satisfactory as subordinate
 office of the Ministry of Shipping.  The Department is getting proper support and guidance from the Ministry. 
 However, the proposals/schemes of the Department sent to the Ministry for approval are handled in a routine manner
 as  done in any other Ministry/Department of the Government of India without taking into consideration the efficient
 functioning of the Department.  
23.       The Committee appreciates the better coordination and relationship existing   between the Department of
 Lighthouses and Lightships and Ministry of Shipping. The Committee is however not satisfied with the present set up
 of delegation of financial powers to the Department.   The Committee is of view that if more financial powers are
 delegated   to the Department in respect of capital and revenue expenses, it will not only reduce the time taken  in
 decision making process but also ensure the faster implementation of the schemes of the Department. 
24.       The Committee observes that the Department is totally dependent on the Ministry of Shipping on its functional
 matters, which causes undue delays and affects the functioning of lighthouses.   The Committee is of the view that
 Ministry of Shipping should take into consideration the track record of the Department and ensure speedy approval of 
 its schemes by doing away the routine bureaucratic hurdles.   Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
 Department of Lighthouses and Lightships should be provided with more functional autonomy so that they should take

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
Year Light-dues Misc. Receipts Total Cap+Rev.
 Expenditure
Profit/Loss
1995-96 63.56 3.17 66.73 33.45 33.28
1996-97 57.68 3.70 61.38 32.56 28.82
1997-98 79.39 4.61 84.00 36.48 47.53
1998-99 78.48 5.02 83.50 53.10 30.40
1999-00(P) 76.54 - 76.54 37.02 39.52
 their own decision and do not have to depend on the Ministry even for small matters. 
BASIC FACILITIES TO THE STAFF POSTED AT REMOTE/ISLAND LIGHTHOUSES
 
25.       To provide navigational aids to the mariners, some of the operational staff members are working at
 remote/Island lighthouses .The Committee wanted to know as to what facilities i.e. educational, medical and
 accommodation, the Department has provided to staff members who are working at such isolated /remote areas. 
26.       The Committee was informed by the representatives of the Department that the Department was not having
 sufficient quarters at its disposal to provide to the operational staff at landing points of Island Lighthouses.  Most of the
 lighthouses are located in the remote areas where basic facilities like medical, schooling, transportation etc. are the
 barest minimum.  The operational staff have to keep their families at other places for the purpose of accommodation
 and  education of their children.  However 100% semi furnished  accommodation was available at the Light stations
 and the Department was contemplating to provide some quarters at landing point and hostel accommodation to the
 children of staff for better education facilities and also free ration to staff serving at Remote/Island Lighthouses. 
27.       The Committee is not satisfied with the welfare measures taken by the Department in respect of staff posted at
 landing points of Island Lighthouses.  The Committee is of the view that insufficient facilities at these locations will
 affect motivation and morale of the operational staff who are isolated from their family and society.  Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that for the operational staff posted at island/remote stations, the possibility be explored to
 provide family accommodations at mainland nearby the landing area, in addition to the accommodation already
 provided at duty place. This additional accommodation would enable the employees to avail of better educational
 facilities and social environment for their family members, wherever such facilities are not available.  The Committee
 also recommends that hostel facility in the vicinity of Regional Directorate be provided to enable the children of
 employees to avail of higher education.  Efforts also be made to provide periodical transport,  recreational facilities for
 the staff posted at remote sites and free ration to those who are not getting any special remote area allowance. 
STREAMLINING OF LIGHTDUES COLLECTION
 
28.       In India the Lightdues are charged on the basis of “Foreign Going Vessels”.  Foreign Going Vessels are defined
 in Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 as the vessels having 3000 G.R.T. and above tonnage irrespective of the origin of
 vessels.  If the G.R.T. of the vessels is 3000 or more, they fall under the purview of Lightdues. The Committee wanted
 to know the details of the Lightdues Collection and that whether it has any effect on the movement of the vessels.  
29.       The Committee was informed that the details of lightdues collection, revenue expenditure and amount
 transferred to General Reserve Fund (GRF) for the last few years are as under: -
(Amount in Crores)
                                                               
 
 
 
(Amt. in Crores) 
 
Figures for 1999-2000 are provisional.  Performa Account is under preparation. Misc. receipts shall be accounted
At the time of preparation of Performa account.  Revenue expenditure includes expenditure towards salaries,
Contribution towards pension and professional services, management etc. 
 
30.       The Committee was further apprised that for improving the movement of the vessels without any hindrance and
 as an incentive to the coastal shipping, the Government of India has proposed to exempt the coastal vessels and other
 sailing vessels from the day-to-day check of the Customs Department.  Accordingly, the Lighthouse Act has been
 amended with effect from the 7
th October 2000, to exempt the coastal ships from payment of light-dues. 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
31.       The Committee enquired about the procedure followed for collection of Lightdues.  In their reply the
 Department informed the Committee that the collection of Lightdues is done by the Central Customs Department on a
 commission basis (present rate ½ percent) and credited to the General Revenue of the Govt. India.  The balance 99 ½
 percent of Lightdues is remitted to the Pay and Accounts Officer, Lighthouses and Lightships, through PAO Customs. 
 A separate account is maintained by way of collection of light-dues, expenses, cost and all expenditure for maintenance
 of navigational aids in the form of Proforma Accounts.  This account is laid before the CACL after the close of each
 financial year.  Any surplus over the expenditure is credited to the General Reserve Fund (GRF) of the Department. 
 Expenditure on plan schemes is met out of the  internal resources to the extent of amount available in the GRF. 
 However, uncovered balance, if any, is met out of the general revenue of the Government as a loan to be repaid in
 subsequent years.  Therefore, no budgetary support is required though necessary provisions for plan allocations are left
 to the scrutiny and approval of the Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and Parliament.  All expenditure of
 management and development (both plan and non-plan) are to be managed within the revenue collected by way of
 light-dues.  Thus, there is no budgetary support to the Department. 
32.       The Committee wanted to know whether the Department have any mechanism to know the quantum of
 Lightdues collected by the Customs authorities.  The Committee was apprised that the Lightdues are collected by the
 Customs authorities on behalf of the department on ½ percent commission basis   The Department of Lighthouses and
 Lightships is completely dependent upon the Customs Department for collection of Lightdues and it does not have any
 mechanism of its own either to collect Lightdues or monitor the collection. The representatives of the Department
 submitted that the Department of Lighthouse and Lightships is satisfied with the present system of collection of
 lightdues by Customs Authorities. Throwing the light on the steps being taken by the Department with regard to
 collection of lightdues, the representatives informed that in view of the fluctuations on the collection of the light dues,
 emphasis have been placed on streamlining certain important issues relating to Department’s GRF, DRF, proper
 assessment of collection of light dues in BE/RE stages etc.  Accordingly, to streamline the collection of Lightdues and
 projection of estimates, a committee has been constituted by the Ministry of Shipping under the Chairmanship of Chief
 Controller of Accounts for furnishing the recommendations.  The Report of the committee is expected soon.              
 
33.       The Committee is surprised to note that the Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is having no system of
 checking the quantum of lightdues collected by the Customs authorities and whatever amount is given by the Customs
 authorities is simply accepted by the Pay and Accounts Officer, Lighthouses.  The Committee therefore recommends
 that in order to have transparency in the system of collection of lightdues, the Department of Lighthouses and
 Lightships should have some sort of its own credible mechanism to know the amount of lightdues collected by the
 Customs authorities.   The Committee is aware that Ministry of Shipping have constituted a panel under the
 Chairmanship of Chief Controller of Accounts and hope that it will submit its report in time and efforts will be made by
 the Government    to streamline procedure of collection of the lightdues in pursuance of the recommendations of the
 panel.
 34.      The Committee appreciates the performance of the Department which has been self-sustaining and do not
 depend upon the Govt. of India for budgetary support including plan and non-plan expenditure.  The Committee
 observes that the large amount of funds are transferred to the General Reserve Fund (GRF) which are lying unutilised.  
 The Committee is unhappy to note that despite  the fact that large reserve  funds are available with the Department no
 serious efforts have been made to frame schemes for modernisation of Lighthouses.  Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that the Department should plan schemes for modernisation of Lighthouses by way of introducing modern
 technique so that the large reserve of funds available with it could be utilised. The Government should also have no
 hesitation in approving the schemes/projects of Department of Lighthouses and Lightships and rather encourage the
 Department to chalk out schemes for modernisation of Lighthouses. The Committee also recommends that the
 Department should also dedicate a part of fund for implementing such schemes which are for the welfare of
 staff/employees who are posted at difficult Remote/Island Lighthouses.
 
INADEQUATE AND UNQUALIFIED STAFF AT OPTICAL RESEARCH LABORATORY AND TRAINING
 CENTRE AT KOLKATA
 
35.       The Department of Lighthouse and Lightship has its own Optical Research Laboratory and Training Centre at
 Kolkata, which is headed by Director.  The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) has approved and
 certified the laboratory. In the laboratory all aids to navigation procured by various maritime boards are tested and
 certified before putting into the service and also experiments on lighting equipment are carried out.  Regular Refresher

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 Courses all imparted to all technical and the operational staff of the Department to keep them abreast with the latest
 technical developments in the field of aids to maritime navigation. 
36.       The Committee was  informed that the Training Centre  is not having sufficient number of qualified staff except
 the Director (Training) as the other staff viz. two Assistant Engineers (one each Mech. And Elec.) are diploma holders
 or low  qualified staff.  The Committee was informed that when the Training Centre was established, no qualified
 faculty was envisaged, as most of the navigational aids were kerosene/gas- operated lights and the mechanism was
 based on operation of petromax light.  The technology in the field of Aids to Navigation has now evolved very fast in
 the last two decades with satellite navigation as mainstay, necessiating the improvement of the quality of training,
 which is possible only through adequate qualified faculty.  As such, the Training Centre needs adequate number of 
 qualified personnel for imparting training as well as for preparing materials for training in order to bring the quality of
 the operational staff at par with International standard.  Presently the requirement of training is being met by pooling
 engineers from the Lighthouse Districts, which adversely affects the works there.  Moreover the faculty thus pooled is
 not at home as they are not dedicated staff for training.
 
37.       The Committee observes that from the beginning itself , there is a lack of pro-active approach on the part of  the
 Department of Lighthouses and Lightships with regard to training of its staff.  The Committee is at a loss to understand
 as to how the Department had ensured effective use of modern technology in Lighthouses in absence of proper training
 to its staff.  The Committee is also of the view that before adopting latest technology and equipments in functioning of
 the Lighthouses, the Department should have ensured the adequate number of qualified staff at Training Centre. The
 Committee recommends that the Department should establish qualified, adequate and dedicated faculty at the Training
 Centre – Kolkata which will make possible not only to impart training to staff of the Department but also be able to
 train the staff of Martime States and lightkeepers from neighbouring countries. The Committee also takes strong
 exception to the fact that instead of faculty members of the Training Institute, some officials from the administrative
 side are being deputed abroad who on their return impart training to the staff of the Department.  The Committee feels
 that this affects the functioning of the Department where large number of posts are lying vacant.  The Committee
 therefore recommends that only the faculty members of the Training Centre should be sent for training in latest
 technology and modern equipment abroad so that their expertise may be better utilised  in the Department.
 
VACANT POSTS IN THE DEPARTMENT
 
38.       The Committee was informed that the position of sanctioned and vacant posts in the Department is as under: -
GROUP SANCTIONED IN POSITION VACANT
Group A 51 38 13
Group B 155 126 29
Group C 691 564 127
Group D 435 384 51
Total 1332 1112 220
 
39.       The Committee was informed that two hundred twenty (220) posts in the Department of Lighthouses and
 Lightships are vacant out of sanctioned posts of one thousand three hundred thirty two (1332), which is adversely
 affecting the efficiency of the Organisation.  The administrative measures for filling-up of above posts could not be
 initiated earlier by the Department, on account of : (a) the post of Director General (who is Chairman of DPC for
 various Group C posts and Member and Appointing Authority for all Group B posts) was vacant from June 1997 till
 January 1999; (b) the post of Administrative Officer who is Member and Chairman of DPC for various Group C and
 Group D posts respectively and Appointing Authority for all Group C and D posts and also who is the only officer in
 the Department to guide the Director General in such cases was vacant from September 1996 to October 1997, and
 again from September 2000 onwards; and (c) all the posts of Executive Officer in the Headquarters Office who are
 required to initiate such type of action also remained vacant  during the period due to non-availability of eligible
 candidates for promotion etc. 
40.       The Committee was further apprised that the Department has taken measures to tide over this problem by
 inducting the officials in the grade of Executive Officer on deputation which helped the Department to a certain extent
 to streamline the matters related to the recruitment and promotion from January 1999 onwards.  The recent ban of
 Ministry of Finance in filling-up the vacant posts either through promotion or through direct recruitment prohibits the
 Department to fill-up the vacancies.  The recent directives of the Govt. of India regarding abolition of promotional

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 posts due to delay in filling/direct recruitment, the filling of post has become time consuming which is affecting the
 morale of the staff as they have to wait for longer period and they have to work for longer hours as the operation of
 navigational aids are round the clock. 
41        The Committee also noticed that Deputy Director General of the Department of Lighthouses and Lightships are
 working without any staff and financial powers, which is also affecting the functioning of the Department.  The
 Committee was apprised that three Deputy Director Generals are functioning from the field offices at Mumbai, Chennai
 and Kolkata.  These officers are responsible to advise the Director General on matters of light stations assigned to
 them.  They are also required to liaise on operational matters of local lights maintained by State Maritime Board and
 Port establishments. Periodical inspections of light stations, scrutiny of various proposals, estimates etc. received from
 the respective Directors and dealing of cases related to arbitration are also part of their responsibilities.  Further, the
 Department is also proposing to take over all the local aids and entrust the management of the same to the Deputy
 Director Generals.  
42.       The Committee is not happy to note that large numbers of posts are lying vacant since long. The Committee is of
 the view that the Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is entirely different from  other organisations, since most
 of the posts in this Organisation are operational ones and non-filling of these posts will hamper the normal functioning
 of navigational aids.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that  to achieve the very objective of providing safe
 navigation of the Department, it is very essential to fill-up the vacant posts, as early as possible, in the Organisation for
 ensuring smooth functioning of Lighthouses.   Immediate efforts should also be made to fill up the post of
 Administrator who after all is the incharge of the entire administration and in his absence, administrative machinery is
 not able to take decisions. The Committee also recommends that the Govt. of India should lift its ban on the operational
 vacant posts in the Department. 
43.       The Committee further recommends that Deputy Director General of the Department should also be provided
 with sufficient and proper functional staff, so that they can perform their duty properly.
 
EXECUTION OF CONSTRUCTION WORK OF LIGHTHOUSES
 
44.       The Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is purely an engineering department having qualified engineers
 and technicians from all the major disciplines of engineering.  The works related to construction and maintenance of
 Lighthouses towers, buildings, internal roads, etc. are taken up by the Department at remote locations where responses
 are not received from contractors.  The Department has executed all the construction works pertaining to Lighthouses
 by engaging labourers on muster roll and by procuring building materials through local suppliers.  The Lighthouses
 towers etc. built by the Department withstood the wrath of nature like cyclone.  The Committee was informed that the
 recent earthquake in Gujarat, the Lighthouses constructed by the Department also withstood the strain of earthquake
 without any major damage. 
45.       The Committee was further informed that due to restrictions on engaging labourers on muster roll and associated
 labour problems such as demand for permanent absorption, continued employment etc., the Department switched over
 during latter part of 80’s to the execution of construction work on contract basis by inviting tenders for the complete
 work including supply of materials and labourers. 
46.       The Committee appreciates the civil work done by the Department in respect of Lighthouses, as most of the
 construction work done by the Department have remained safe from the cyclone and no major damages have been
 caused to the Lighthouses even during the recent earthquake in Gujarat. Now the Department  have switched over to
 contract basis for executing their civil work.  The Committee is of the view that the Department should ensure that
 there is no compromise as far as quality of work is concerned and if the Department find the quality of construction of
 civil work not up to the standard, the Department should not hesitate to switch over to its earlier pattern. To ensure the
 quality of the construction work, the Committee recommends that the Government should give, the Department which
 has been the master in the field, freedom to adopt pattern for executing the civil work.
 
BEAUTIFICATION OF LIGHTHOUSES
 
47.       Today, tourism has taken the shape of industry and day-by-day it is gaining the importance.  Importance of
 tourism reflects the identity of the country on the world map.  The Lighthouses are situated in coastal line of the
 country. These Lighthouses can play some role in the tourism sector where tourists can enjoy and view the scenic
 beauty of mainland and sea. On being asked whether any steps have been taken to beautify the Lighthouses to attract
 the tourists, the representatives of the Department submitted that very little has been done in that area.   The

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 Lightstations and Lighthouses are located in coastal area, many of which are sensitive and subject to terrorist threats. 
 Keeping in this view visitors/tourists entry to some of the Lighthouses have been stopped. 
48.         The Committee recommends that the Department of Lighthouse and Lightships should explore the possibility
 of development of Lighthouses with a view to attract tourist thereby beautifying them and take initiative to beautify the
 Lighthouses keeping tourism in the mind, without compromising the safety and security of Lighthouses so that the
 Department can earn some revenue. 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
RELAVANCY OF HAVING HEADQUARTER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHTSHIPS AT
 NOIDA
 
The Committee observes that no proper thought have been given to the matter of having Headquarters of the
 Department. The Committee is not satisfied with the justification given by the Department of Lighthouse & Lightships
 for having its Headquarters at Noida just for keeping better co-ordination and liaisoning with the Ministry of Shipping
 in connection with the various matters concerning administration and development works and to avoid the procedural
 delays. The Committee is of the view that area of operation of the Department lies along the coastal line and all the
 Regional Headquarters are located along the coastal line of the country and are at a distance from DELHI/ NOIDA and
 therefore the officials of the Department sitting there and  involved in the planning and supervision of the schemes may
 not be able to do justice to their work.
The Committee is of the view that in view of latest developments and changes, which has totally revolutionised the
 information technology, the same should be used to the maximum possible extent.  It is, therefore, really not necessary
 to maintain large set up at Headquarters in Delhi for liaison work with the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, feels
 that the present size of the headquarter of Department of Lighthouses and Lightships should be reduced to the level as
 is really required for the liaison work.  Instead regional offices may be strengthened and made more effective.  This will
 ensure better coordination between the headquarters of Department of Lighthouses and Lightships and regional
 headquarters.
(Paras 17 and 18)
 
DELEGATION OF FINANCIAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONAL AUTONOMY TO THE DEPARTMENT
 
The Committee appreciates the better coordination and relationship existing   between the Department of Lighthouses
 and Lightships and Ministry of Shipping. The Committee is however not satisfied with the present set up of delegation
 of financial powers to the Department.   The Committee is of view that if more financial powers are delegated   to the
 Department in respect of capital and revenue expenses, it will not only reduce the time taken  in decision making
 process but also ensure the faster implementation of the schemes of the Department.
 
The Committee observes that the Department is totally dependent on the Ministry of Shipping on its functional matters,
 which causes undue delays and affects the functioning of lighthouses.   The Committee is of the view that Ministry of
 Shipping should take into consideration the track record of the Department and ensure speedy approval of  its schemes
 by doing away the routine bureaucratic hurdles.   Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of
 Lighthouses and Lightships should be provided with more functional autonomy so that they should take their own
 decision and do not have to depend on the Ministry even for small matters.
(Paras 23 and 24) 
 
BASIC FACILITIES TO THE STAFF POSTED AT REMOTE/ISLAND LIGHTHOUSES
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the welfare measures taken by the Department in respect of staff posted at landing
 points of Island Lighthouses.  The Committee is of the view that insufficient facilities at these locations will affect
 motivation and morale of the operational staff who are isolated from their family and society.  Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that for the operational staff posted at island/remote stations, the possibility be explored to
 provide family accommodations at mainland nearby the landing area, in addition to the accommodation already
 provided at duty place. This additional accommodation would enable the employees to avail of better educational
 facilities and social environment for their family members, wherever such facilities are not available.  The Committee

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 also recommends that hostel facility in the vicinity of Regional Directorate be provided to enable the children of
 employees to avail of higher education.  Efforts also be made to provide periodical transport,  recreational facilities for
 the staff posted at remote sites and free ration to those who are not getting any special remote area allowance.
(Para 27)
 
STREAMLINING OF LIGHTDUES COLLECTION
 
The Committee is surprised to note that the Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is having no system of checking
 the quantum of lightdues collected by the Customs authorities and whatever amount is given by the Customs authorities
 is simply accepted by the Pay and Accounts Officer, Lighthouses.  The Committee therefore recommends that in order
 to have transparency in the system of collection of lightdues, the Department of Lighthouses and Lightships should
 have some sort of its own credible mechanism to know the amount of lightdues collected by the Customs authorities.  
 The Committee is aware that Ministry of Shipping have constituted a panel under the Chairmanship of Chief Controller
 of Accounts and hope that it will submit its report in time and efforts will be made by the Government    to streamline
 procedure of collection of the lightdues in pursuance of the recommendations of the panel. 
The Committee appreciates the performance of the Department which has been self-sustaining and do not depend upon
 the Govt. of India for budgetary support including plan and non-plan expenditure.  The Committee observes that the
 large amount of funds are transferred to the General Reserve Fund (GRF) which are lying unutilised.   The Committee
 is unhappy to note that despite  the fact that large reserve  funds are available with the Department no serious efforts
 have been made to frame schemes for modernisation of Lighthouses.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
 Department should plan schemes for modernisation of Lighthouses by way of introducing modern technique so that the
 large reserve of funds available with it could be utilised. The Government should also have no hesitation in approving
 the schemes/projects of Department of Lighthouses and Lightships and rather encourage the Department to chalk out
 schemes for modernisation of Lighthouses. The Committee also recommends that the Department should also dedicate
 a part of fund for implementing such schemes which are for the welfare of staff/employees who are posted at difficult
 Remote/Island Lighthouses.                           (Paras 33 and 34) 
 
INADEQUATE AND UNQUALIFIED STAFF AT OPTICAL RESEARCH LABORATORY AND TRAINING
 CENTRE AT KOLKATA
 
The Committee observes that from the beginning itself , there is a lack of pro-active approach on the part of  the
 Department of Lighthouses and Lightships with regard to training of its staff.  The Committee is at a loss to understand
 as to how the Department had ensured effective use of modern technology in Lighthouses in absence of proper training
 to its staff.  The Committee is also of the view that before adopting latest technology and equipments in functioning of
 the Lighthouses, the Department should have ensured the adequate number of qualified staff at Training Centre. The
 Committee recommends that the Department should establish qualified, adequate and dedicated faculty at the Training
 Centre – Kolkata which will make possible not only to impart training to staff of the Department but also be able to
 train the staff of Martime States and lightkeepers from neighbouring countries. The Committee also takes strong
 exception to the fact that instead of faculty members of the Training Institute, some officials from the administrative
 side are being deputed abroad who on their return impart training to the staff of the Department.  The Committee feels
 that this affects the functioning of the Department where large number of posts are lying vacant.  The Committee
 therefore recommends that only the faculty members of the Training Centre should be sent for training in latest
 technology and modern equipment abroad so that their expertise may be better utilised in the Department.
(Para 37)
 
VACANT POSTS IN THE DEPARTMENT
 
The Committee is not happy to note that large numbers of posts are lying vacant since long. The Committee is of the
 view that the Department of Lighthouses and Lightships is entirely different from  other organisations, since most of
 the posts in this Organisation are operational ones and non-filling of these posts will hamper the normal functioning of
 navigational aids.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that  to achieve the very objective of providing safe
 navigation of the Department, it is very essential to fill-up the vacant posts, as early as possible, in the Organisation for
 ensuring smooth functioning of Lighthouses.   Immediate efforts should also be made to fill up the post of
 Administrator who after all is the incharge of the entire administration and in his absence, administrative machinery is

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/47threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 not able to take decisions. The Committee also recommends that the Govt. of India should lift its ban on the operational
 vacant posts in the Department. 
The Committee further recommends that Deputy Director General of the Department should also be provided with
 sufficient and proper functional staff, so that they can perform their duty properly.
(Paras 42 and 43) 
 
EXECUTION OF CONSTRUCTION WORK OF LIGHTHOUSES
 
The Committee appreciates the civil work done by the Department in respect of Lighthouses, as most of the construction
 work done by the Department have remained safe from the cyclone and no major damages have been caused to the
 Lighthouses even during the recent earthquake in Gujarat. Now the Department  have switched over to contract basis
 for executing their civil work.  The Committee is of the view that the Department should ensure that there is no
 compromise as far as quality of work is concerned and if the Department find the quality of construction of civil work
 not up to the standard, the Department should not hesitate to switch over to its earlier pattern. To ensure the quality of
 the construction work, the Committee recommends that the Government should give, the Department which has been
 the master in the field, freedom to adopt pattern for executing the civil work.
(Para 46)
 
BEAUTIFICATION OF LIGHTHOUSES
 
The Committee recommends that the Department of Lighthouse and Lightships should explore the possibility of
 development of Lighthouses with a view to attract tourist thereby beautifying them and take initiative to beautify the
 Lighthouses keeping tourism in the mind, without compromising the safety and security of Lighthouses so that the
 Department can earn some revenue.
(Para 48)