 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country’ 
(Presented to the 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August , 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country’ 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
352 
  
‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country’  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT  
‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-vi 
 4. REPORT                                1-47 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   48-68  
6. ANNEXURES         69-125 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
126-161

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. (vacant )* 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer  
 
*Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar w.e.f. 28.07.2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty-Second Report on 'Functioning of Major Ports in the 
Country’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the representat ives of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways, on the subject on 24 
th  April, 2023. The Committee also heard the 
views of the representatives of Indian Private Port s & Terminals Association (IPPTA) and 
Indian Ports Association (IPA), in its meeting held  on 17 th  May, 2023. The Committee in its 
third meeting on the subject, held on 16 th  June, 2023, heard the views of Jaigarh Port and 
Pipavav Gujarat Port. Further, the Committee heard the views of the Dedicated Freight 
Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL) on t he subject, in its meeting held on 26 th  
June, 2023.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways; Indian Private Ports & Termin als Association; Indian Ports 
Association; Jaigarh Port; Pipavav Gujarat Port; an d Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation 
of India Limited, for placing before the Committee,  the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 9 th  
August, 2023.  
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
August 9, 2023                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Sravana 18, 1945 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
3D  Three Dimensional 
AECT  Adani Ennore Container Terminal  
AGV  Automated Guided Vehicles  
APSEZ  Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone  
ASI  Archaeological Survey of India 
BMCTPL  Bharat Mumbai Container Terminals Private Limited 
BOT  Build-Operator-Transfer 
C4NGP  Centre of Excellence in Modelling and Simulation of Next 
Generation Ports  
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CAPEX  Capital expenditures  
CB  Coal Berth 
CCTPL  Chennai Container Terminal Private Limited 
CEUs  Coastal Economic Units 
ChPA  Chennai Port Authority 
CISF  Central Industrial Security Force 
CITPL  Chennai International Container Terminal Private Limited 
COD  Commercial Operations Date 
COE  Centre of Excellence 
CONCOR  Container Corporation of India Ltd.  
CoPA  Cochin Port Authority 
CoPT  Cochin Port Trust 
COT  Cochin Oil Terminal  
CPCP  Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan  
CSC  Conciliation & Settlement Committee  
CT  Container Terminal 
DBFOT  Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer 
DFC  Dedicated Freight Corridor 
DFCCIL  Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited  
DPA  Deendayal Port Authority 
DPIIT  Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPW  Dubai Ports World 
DTEPA  Dahanu Taluka Environmental Protection Authority 
DWT  Deadweight tonnage 
E.Co. Rly  East Coast Railways 
EEDI  Energy Efficiency Design Index 
EJC  East Dock Junction 
EoDB  Ease of Doing Business 
EPC  Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
EPCG  Export Promotion Capital Goods  
EPIs  Environment Performance Indicators 
EQ  East Quay 
EV  Electronic Vehicle 

iv 
 
EXIM  Export Import 
FTP  Foreign Trade Policy 
FY  Financial Year 
GCB  General Cargo Berth 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
GHG  Greenhouse Gas  
GIS  Geographic Information Systems 
HDC  Haldia Dock Complex 
HMC  Harbour Mobile Crane 
ICTT  International Container Transshipment Terminal 
IGM  Import General Manifest  
IMO  International Maritime Organization 
INR  Indian Rupees 
IOCL  Indian Oil Corporation Limited  
IOHP  Iron Ore Handling Plant  
IPA  Indian Ports Association 
IPPTA  Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association 
IWAI  Inland Waterways Authority of India 
JNPA  Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority 
JNPT  Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
KDS  Kolkata Dock System 
KLD  Kilo Litres per Day 
KoPT  Kolkata Port Trust (erstwhile SMPK - Shyama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port, Kolkata) 
KPL  Kamarajar Port Limited 
LED  Light Emitting Diode. 
LHD  Light House Dues  
LNG  Liquefied Natural Gas 
MARPOL  International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships 
MbPA  Mumbai Port Authority  
MbPT  Mumbai Port Trust 
MCA  Model Concession Agreement  
MCHP  Mechanised Coal Handling Plant 
MEIS  Merchandise Exports from India Scheme 
MGC  Minimum Guaranteed Cargo  
MHC  Mobile Harbour Crane 
MICT  Maintenance of International Cruise Terminal 
MIV  Maritime India Vision  
MLD  Million Litres per Day 
MLT  Mean Low Tide 
MMB  Maharashtra Maritime Board 
MMLP  Multi Modal Logistic Parks 
MMT  Million Metric Tonnes 
MMTPA  Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum 
MoCI  Ministry of Commerce and Industry  

v 
 
MoPS&W  Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoR  Ministry of Railways 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MPA  Maritime & Port Authority of Singapore 
MPA Act  Major Ports Authority Act 
MoPT  Mormugao Port Trust 
MRPL  Manglore Refinery Petrochemicals 
MT  Metric Tonnes 
MTPA  Million Tonnes Per Annum 
NCB  North Cargo Berth 
NH  National Highway 
NHAI  National Highways Authority of India 
NIL  Nothing in line/zero 
NLP  National Logistics Portal  
NMPA  New Mangalore Port Authority  
NCoEGPS  National Centre of Excellence for Green Port and Shipping  
NMPT  New Mangalore Port Trust 
NOC  No Objection Certificate 
NPAs  Non Performing Assets 
NSD  Netaji Subhash Dock  
NSDC  National Skill Development Corporation  
NSICT  Nhava Sheva International Container Terminal 
NTB  North Tanker Berth 
OCR  Optical Character Recognition  
OEC  Ore Exchange Complex  
ONGC  Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
OOT  Offshore Oil Terminal 
OSBD  Output Per Ship Berth Day  
PAP  Project Affected People 
PCS  Port Community System 
PGA  Participating Government Agencies  
PLC  Programmable Logic Controllers  
POL  Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants 
POS  Port Operating System 
PPA  Paradip Port Authority 
PPP  Public Private Partnership 
RFID  Radio Frequency Identification Document 
RFQ  Request for Quote 
RMQC  Rail Mounted Quay Crane 
Ro-Ro/Ro-Pax  Roll on - Roll off Passenger 
RoB  Road Over Bridge 
RTYGC  Rubber-Tyred Yard Gantry Crane 
SAROD  Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goals 

vi 
 
SEIS  Services Exports from India Scheme  
SEZ  Special Economic Zone 
SIOTL  Sical Iron Ore Terminals Limited 
SIPC  Smart Industrial Port City 
SMPA  Shyama Prasad Mookerjee Port Authority 
SMPK/SMPT  Shyama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust, Kolkata 
SMTP  Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 
SoR  Scale of Rates  
SQB  South Quay Berth 
STP  Sewage Treatment Plants 
TAMP  Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
TANGEDCO  Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation 
TEU  Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit 
TKM  Tonne-Kilometer 
TNEB  Tamil Nadu Electricity Board  
TOS  Terminal Operating System 
TRT  Turn-Around Time 
UAE  United Arab Emirates 
UNEDIFACT  United Nations rules for Electronic Data Interchange for 
Administration, Commerce and Transport 
UOMT  Upgradation, Operation and Maintenance & Transfer 
USA  United States of America 
USD/ US$  United States Dollar 
VGCB  Vizag General Cargo Berth  
VOCA/VOCPA  V. O. Chidambaranar Port Authority 
VOCPT  V. O. Chidambaranar Port Trust 
VPA  Vishakhapatnam Port Authority 
VPPL  Vadhavan Port Projects Ltd 
VRC  Vessel-Related Charges 
WPI  Wholesale Price Index 
WQ  West Quay 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
 
 
Ports play a pivotal role in the economic developme nt of a country. They serve as 
important gateways for international trade, facilit ating the movement of goods and 
commodities between countries. The main functions o f the early ports were cargo handling 
and storage, gradually expanding to packaging and d istribution. The role and function of 
ports have evolved over time along with the evoluti on of maritime transport technology. The 
development of container transportation in the earl y 1980s witnessed a sea change in the role 
of ports from traditional services to value-added l ogistics services, eventually leading to the 
emergence of a new intermodal transport system.   
 
2. A modern seaport is not merely a transit area bu t a crucial link in a global supply 
chain ecosystem. Today, ports compete for seamless integration in supply chains to create 
added value to the cargo passing through the port. The share of the major and non-major 
ports of India in cargo traffic reflects the realit y of the changing roles of the Ports. The Major 
Ports of India are facing stiff competition from th e ports styled as Minor Ports though the 
distinction is only in terms of jurisdiction. The major ports a re under the direct administrative 
control of the Central Government  and fall in the Union List in the 7 th  Schedule of the 
Constitution. Ports other than the major ones are u nder the jurisdiction of the respective State 
Maritime Board and fall in the Concurrent List.  
 
3. Though port traffic in India registered a steady  rise year after year, reflecting the 
country’s growing international trade, yet the shar e of non-major ports in the handling of 
overall traffic has been steadily increasing compar ed to the major ports. Of the total traffic 
handled by all Indian ports, the Major Ports handle  55% whereas the Minor Ports handle 
45%. The impressive performance of the non-major po rts is reflective of the greater 
operational efficiencies, freedom to fix tariffs, a vailability of vast storage space at nominal 
prices, longer concession periods, low waterfront r oyalties and so on. In contrast, the major 
ports suffer from old and inadequate infrastructure , low draft depths and poor hinterland 
connectivity. Further, major ports under the Tariff  Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) regime 
earlier and various other regulatory controls strug gle to sustain in the tough competition vis-
à-vis non-major ports . 
 
4. To enable the Major Ports to be competitive with  the private players in the sector and 
to infuse professionalism and transparency in the g overnance of the Ports, the Major Port 
Authorities Act, 2021 was passed which bestowed on the Major Ports greater autonomy. As a 
result, the control of TAMP has been diminished and  the Port Authority (erstwhile Port 
Trust) now has the power to enter into contracts an d fix the tariffs as per the market 
conditions, enabling them to compete with the priva te players. Further, to harness the private 
sector's potential, the Government has formulated p olicies to attract them for infrastructure 
development through Public Private Partnerships (PPP). 

2 
 
5. The Major Port Authorities Act and the Indian Po rts Act are the two principal statu tes 
in the sector, which provide for the constitution o f the major port authorities and the 
administration, control and management of the ports . The Indian Ports Act also contains 
provisions for the operation, pilotage and other related issues for the non-major ports.   
 
6. The earlier Major Port Trusts were administered by their respective Board of Trustees 
headed by the Chairman, and the Members of the Boar d were nominated by the Government 
of India from various stakeholders of the port. Con sequent upon the enactment of the Major 
Port Authorities Act 2021, the board for each major  port will now include representatives 
from the state government, the Ministry of Railways, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of 
Customs, and the Department of Revenue as members. In addition, the board will have a 
government nominee member and a representative of t he employees of the Major Port 
Authority. 
 
7. There are 12 major ports and about 213 non-major  ports along India's vast coastline, 
which is approximately 7,517 km. Six Major Ports, viz.,  Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port 
(SMP), Kolkata, Paradip Port, Visakhapatnam Port, K amarajar Port (Ennore), Chennai Port 
and V.O. Chidambaranar Port, are on the east coast and the other Six Major Ports, viz., 
Cochin Port, New Mangalore Port, Mormugao Port, Mum bai Port, Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
(Sheva, Navi Mumbai) and Deendayal Port (erstwhile Kandla) are on the west coast.  
 
8. The oldest Major Port of India is the Kolkata Po rt, now called the Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port. It is also the country's only Major  Riverine port. The second oldest port, 
Mumbai Port, is also India's largest Natural port a nd harbour. Out of the 12 Major Ports, the 
Kamarajar Port or the Ennore Port in Tamil Nadu is the only corporatized port registered as a 
Company.  
 
9. To study the impact of the various policy initia tives taken by the Government on the 
functioning of the Major Ports, the PPP partnership s entered into by the Major Ports and the 
technological advancements introduced to improve po rt performances, the Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transpo rt, Tourism and Culture decided to 
take up the subject "Functioning of Major Ports in the Country" for examination and report 
thereon. As a sequel to an examination of the subje ct, the Committee called for Background 
Notes and Replies to Questionnaires formulated to o btain exhaustive information on the 
relevant topics relating to port performance and de velopment. The Committee heard the 
views of the Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping  and Waterways on the subject in its 
meeting held on the 24 
th   April 2023, the representatives of the Indian Por ts Association and 
the Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association on 17 th   May 2023,  the representatives of 
the Minor private ports, the Gujarat Pipavav Port a nd the JSW Jaigarh Port, Maharashtra on 
the 16 th  June 2023 and the representatives of Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India 
Limited (DFCCIL) on the 26 th  June, 2023.  
 
 

3 
 
II. PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF MAJOR PORTS  
10. Operational efficiency at ports is contingent u pon the following four efficiency 
parameters: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. The Ministry informed that the major challenges  in improving performance across the 
efficiency parameters at major ports include lack o f adequate drafts at ports, dependence on 
tides, poor mechanisation, insufficient number of e quipment and other facilities, lack of 
skilled manpower, inadequate allocation of storage space, lack of enough land availability, 
lack of proper evacuation facilities, old flotilla, to name only a few.  
The following table shows the performance parameter s of all Major Ports over the last ten 
years. 
 
Year \ Parameter 
 Avg. Total 
TRT 
(In Hours) 
Average Output 
Per Ship 
Berthday 
(In Tonnes) 
Traffic 
(in 000’ tonnes) 
FY13-14 93.59 12468 555487 
FY14-15 96 12458 581344 
FY15-16 87.36 13156 606465 
FY16-17 82.31 14576 648398 
FY17-18 64.43 15333 679371 
FY18-19 59.51 16541 699099 
FY19-20 56.13 16419 704927 
FY20-21 55.99 15373 672680 
FY21-22 52.87 16068 720052 
FY22-23 52.43 17239 796290 
(Source – M/o Ports, Shipping & Waterways) 
 
 
 
Efficiency 
Parameters 
Average Output per ship berth day (OSBD): The average OSBD 
measured in tonnes of cargo. 
Idle Time at Berth: The time when a vessel remains idle at berth 
expressed as a percentage of the total time of the vessel at berth. 
Lower idle time would mean early completion of cargo handling 
and readiness for more vessels. 
Pre berthing detention: The time during which a ship waits before 
getting entry into a berth.  
Turn-round Time (TRT): Total time spent by a ship since its entry 
till its departure.  

4 
 
Annexure-I details the origin, location, type of cargo, numbe r of container terminals,   
berths, capacity and other details of the 12 Major Ports in India. Annexure II  details the 
various Performance Parameters of the individual Ma jor Ports and comparisons with global 
standards. 
 
TRAFFIC HANDLED BY MAJOR PORTS  
12. The Ministry informed that the total traffic ha ndled by all ports, both Major and 
Minor, was 1445 MT against a total capacity of 2627  MT per annum. The Committee 
observes that the total traffic handled by the Major Ports in 2022-23 was 796 MT, an increase 
of 10.41% over the preceding year of 720 MT, while the traffic handled by Minor Ports was 
650 MT. In all, the share of Major Ports in total c argo handled was 55% and that of Minor 
Ports was 45%. In his deposition, the Secretary inf ormed the Committee that this incremental 
increase of 10% in the total traffic handled by the  Major Ports is the highest ever increase in 
cargo handling. The Secretary also informed that in  2022-23, the Major Ports had reversed 
the trend of their declining market share as in 2021-22, major ports handled 54 per cent of the 
total cargo, and the non-major ports, all combined, handled 46 per cent.   
 
13. The Committee observes that the cargo handling of the Major Ports has been 
steadily increasing over the years, and only in the last year has there been an increase of 
10%. On a query by the Committee, the Ministry repl ied that to augment the volume of 
cargo handling, the Port Authorities have also expl ored the possibility of generating 
new cargo to reduce the gap between the actual traf fic and the capacity. Major Ports 
also organize trade meets to attract traffic from t heir hinterland/region. Several steps 
have also been taken to boost coastal shipping.   
 
14. The Committee also observes that the increase o f 10% has come primarily due to 
JNPA’s impressive performance, followed by Paradip and Deendayal Port. There is 
only a marginal increase in the figures of the rema ining Ports, while the Mormugao 
Port has witnessed a decline in traffic. The growth trend in the market share of cargo is, 
therefore, confined to only three of the Major Port s while the remaining show barely 
perceptible improvements. The Committee underscores the need for better performance 
by the remaining nine Major Ports and recommends th at the Ministry come out with a 
focused and calibrated strategy to raise the cargo handling performance of such Major 
Ports . 
 
15. The Committee observes that India occupies the 11 
th  position globally regarding 
container traffic handled. Massive Container Ships invariably require deep drafts, and 
the ports must remain alive to their requirements. At present, most Indian Ports have 
drafts of about 14 mts, with only a few having 16 m ts drafts, while Container Ships 
require drafts of upto 18-20 mts. 
 
 
 

5 
 
CAPACITY OF MAJOR PORTS  
16. There are no two views that the capacity of Maj or Ports has increased over the years. 
However, the capacity utilisation was only around 4 9%. The Ministry informed the 
Committee that the total capacity of both major and  non-major ports in the country is 2627 
million tonnes per annum, of which about 1,600 mill ion tonnes per annum is the capacity of 
the major ports, and the other 1000 million tonnes per annum is the capacity of the non-major 
ports. The capacity utilisation of the major ports is about 49 %, and that of the non-major 
ports is around 64%. 
 
17. The Secretary, while responding to a query duri ng deposition before the Committee 
said that in the Ports Sector, 70% of capacity util isation is considered to be saturation and the 
beginning of congestion in the ports. The Major Por ts continuously augment their cargo 
handling capacity to meet the ever growing needs of  the economy. In 2015, the capacity was 
only 872 MT and in 2022, it has grown to touch 1,60 0 MT. The Secretary further elucidated 
that had the capacity not been expanded by nearly 8 00 MT in the last eight years, the ports 
would have reached 90% of their capacity and got ch oked. There are ports in which the 
capacity utilisation has touched even 70 per cent, but, on average, the capacity utilisation is 
around 49 per cent for the major ports. The only ex ception is the Goa port which has only 
27% capacity and is in a negative growth trajectory . The future target of capacity addition is 
to achieve 2000+ MTPA by 2030. Several capacity aug mentation projects are already under 
implementation, like the mechanisation of berths, m odernisation of facilities, improving 
productivity and efficiency, bringing in best practices at the ports, etc.  
 
18. The Committee observes that while port capacity  is considered to be saturated at 
70-75% of capacity, some of the Major Ports are fun ctioning far below the mark. 
Mormugao operates at only 27% capacity, while Chenn ai and VoCA operate just at 
32%.  
 
19. The Committee observes that there is still much  untapped potential to be 
harnessed so as to increase the capacity of most of  the Major Ports. The Committee 
points out that the capacity utilization of the Non -Major Ports in India has remained at 
64%, which is much higher than the average capacity utilization in the Major Ports and 
recommends that the Major Ports may set targets to increase the utilization of their 
existing capabilities to an optimum level.  
 
TURNAROUND TIME AND AVERAGE SHIP OUTPUT PER BERTH DAY 
20. The Ministry informed that the targets set in M aritime India Vision 2030 for Average 
Vessel Turn Around Time and Turn Around Time (Conta iners) are < 40 hours and <20 hrs, 
respectively and for Average Ship Berth day Output, it is >30000 Tonnes. The average vessel 
turnaround time at major ports is 52 hours, whereas  the average container turnaround time is 
28 hours. Presently, only the Turn Around Time (Con tainers) of JNPA is 24 hours and the 
Ship Berth Day Output of Paradip Port during 2022-2 3 is 31050 Tonnes. The Ministry has 
further informed that the Global Comparison of Indi an Ports on the “Turn Around 

6 
 
Time” parameter, as published in World Bank’s Logis tic Performance Index Report 2023, 
acknowledges Indian Ports “Turn Around Time” as 0.9  days which is better than USA (1.5 
days), UAE (1.1 days) Singapore (1.0 days), Russian  Federation (1.8 days), Malaysia (1.0), 
Ireland(1.2 days), Indonesia (1.1 days), New Zealand (1.1 days) and South Africa (2.8 days).  
 
21. The Ministry informed that various parameters f or reducing dwell time and 
transaction costs in the Major Ports had been ident ified and implemented. These include the 
elimination of manual forms, providing land for acc ommodation of laboratories of 
Participating Government Agencies (PGAs), facilitat ion of Direct Port Delivery and Direct 
Port Entry, Installation of Container Scanners, iss uance of E-delivery orders, installation of 
RFID based Gate-automation System, NLP-Marine, etc. 
 
22. 
The Committee observes that of all the Major Ports,  only the JNPA has achieved 
a world-class Turn Around time of 24 hours for Containers. The  Committee commends 
the JNPA for this seminal achievement and exhorts t he other Major Ports to follow the 
good practices of the JNPA to improve their respect ive Turn Around times. Though the 
best global TRT is 18 hours, JNPA compares with the  top international ports like Shanghai, 
Jebel Ali, Singapore and Rotterdam. India has moved  up six places in the Logistics 
Performance Index of the World Bank from 44 th  rank to 38 th  rank due to the creditable 
performance of the JNPA. 
 
23. Upon enquiry by the Committee at its meeting he ld with the JNPA authorities in 
Mumbai on 5th July, 2023  on the reasons for the reduction in the JNPA’s Turn Around Time, 
the JNPA authorities informed that this achievement  could be possible due to increase in 
capacity, simplification of processes and procedure s and most importantly, due to 
digitalisation.  
 
24. The JNPA has taken up rail and road connectivit y projects and constructed a new 
Centralized Parking Plaza for container tractor-tra ilers with Customs facilitation to promote 
ease of doing business.    
 
25. The Committee has been informed that the Averag e Vessel Turn Around Time (TRT) 
for all Major Ports has come down to 52 hours from the earlier 80-90 hours which shows that 
the operational efficiency has improved. The effort s made by major ports in terms of 
mechanisation and automation have started yielding results . The Committee notes that 
while the TRT may have come down considerably from 80-90 hours, there has been 
only marginal improvement in the last five years de spite the massive investments in 
technology, mechanisation and infrastructure. Of th e 12 Major Ports, only 3-4 are 
functioning well with acceptable performances. The performance of other Major Ports 
in Turn Around Time must attract the undivided atte ntion of the respective Port 
authorities in the larger interest of ensuring greater operational efficiency.  

7 
 
26. Against this backdrop, the Committee calls upon  the Port authorities to redouble 
their efforts on multiple fronts, lest achieving th e goal of less than 20 hours Turn 
Around Time as envisioned in the Maritime Vision 2030 would remain elusive.   
 
27. The Committee also notes that the Average Ship Output Per Berth Day, like the 
TRT, shows only a marginal increase for many ports,  and some ports have even shown 
a decline in output. 
 Though the Paradip Port has crossed the threshold of 30,000 tonnes, 
yet unless all Major Ports project discernible increase in their performance parameters, 
the efforts of individual Ports would not help achi eve the objectives.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry takes special efforts towards monitoring the ground 
situation at ports that impede the performance progress . 
 
28. The Committee notes that every year, each Major  Port enters into an MoU with 
the Ministry in which targeted efficiency parameter s are agreed upon. The Committee 
desires to know the targets set for all four effici ency parameters and whether the ports 
have achieved the same. The Committee observes that  due to infrastructure 
development and technological advancements, a proportional increase in productivity is 
only expected. As such productivity enhancement is invariably contingent upon and 
commensurate with the volume of investment. The Com mittee draws the attention of 
the Ministry to the imperative need for targeted pe rformance by the major ports as 
agreed to in the MoU and recommends that each Major  Port may fix a target 
proportional to the amount of investments in infrastructural development.   
 
29. The Committee observes a significant correlatio n between the world-class 
performance of JNPA and the fact that all 10 Contai ner Terminals under JNPA are 
functioning under PPP basis and all its Container b erths are mechanized. The PPP model has 
brought in efficiencies ordinarily associated with the private sector, which along with 
mechanization and increased connectivity, has helpe d the JNPA improve its productivity and 
performance parameters.   
 
30. The Committee observes that mechanization of be rths, minimum dwell time, 
skilled labour, and port connectivity for reduction  in evacuation time are essential to 
reduce the Turnaround time and recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to 
bring in greater PPP partnerships for mechanization of berths.  
 
31. The Committee has also been informed about the lack of availability of skilled 
workforce in the port sector that hampers productiv ity growth. The Committee 
recommends that Logistics Skills may be included in  the training programmes being 
conducted under the auspices of the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) to 
cater to the ever dynamic needs of the port sector . 
 
 
 

8 
 
DRAFTS OF INDIAN PORTS VERSUS FOREIGN PORTS  
32. Maritime India Vision 2030 has suggested that 1 6 meter deep drafts would be 
essential to improve the cargo handling capacity of  Indian Mega Ports. Most of the Major 
ports have already achieved a draft of 14 meters, a nd some other ports, namely Kamarajar, 
Paradip, Deendayal and Cochin, are striving to achi eve much deeper drafts of up to 18 
meters. To ensure the smooth movement of ships, the  Ports regularly take up maintenance 
dredging of channels and berths. 
 
33. The Committee observes that the world over, the  shipping industry is moving 
towards mega-size vessels with ships of 20,000 TEU and above. While a Capesize vessel 
requires upwards of 18m draft, the draft at Indian ports is in the range of 14-16 meters 
only, owing to siltation. The Committee observes th at the geographical and 
topographical limitations are identical for both th e public and private ports in India, 
but the private  ports have been able to develop drafts matching wi th world-class ports 
whereas the public ports have lagged behind. The Gu jarat Pipavav port has a draft of 
18.5 metres and plans to extend it to 20.5 metres. The Committee, while acknowledging 
the high dredging costs, underscores that the ports  drafts must be in sync with the 
growing size of the ships in the interest of maximi zing the benefits of large ships in 
cargo handling. 
 
34. Ports must increase draft according to the resp ective cargo profile. Indian 
container terminals must target an 18m+ draft.  Wit h the evolving ship types and 
increasing port parcel sizes, loading and discharge  rates must be enhanced. The 
Committee also emphasizes that greater ship sizes a nd container loads need increased 
mechanization at Indian ports to improve the loadin g and unloading ecosystem. Dual-
cycle cranes and Automated Guided Vehicles (AGVs) m ay be introduced in ports to 
ensure incremental productivity.  
 
35. The Committee observes that the Indian Private Ports and Terminals 
Association (IPPTA) had stated in its deposition be fore the Committee that most of the 
tugs deployed by major ports had outlived their eff ective life and are operating beyond 
economic conditions. The service levels rendered by  them do not match the Industry 
Standards. Private Tug Companies should be encourag ed to render towage services at 
Major Ports in line with the international practice s. The Committee calls upon the 
Ministry to consider this issue on merit. 
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR PORTS  
S.No. Year Net Surplus (Rs. In Crore) 
1 FY 2018-19 2804.25 
2 FY 2019-20 4493.71 
3 FY 2020-21 4124.13 
4 FY 2021-22 4131.38 
5 FY 2022-23 6992.53 

9 
 
36. The Ministry informed that the operating ratio,  the rupee spent for every rupee earned, 
has come down to Rs. 48 from Rs. 53 in 2020-21. Tha t is, Rs. 48 is being spent for every 
hundred rupee-earned. The operating income in 2022- 23 was Rs. 18,198 crores, and the 
'operating surplus' is around Rs. 9,365 crores. (Annexure-III)  
 
37. The 'operating surplus' is the difference betwe en the 'operating income' and the 
'operating expenditure.’ However, the Net Surplus i s Rs. 6,993 crores because some of the 
old ports have legacy pension liabilities, and a lo t of the surplus gets used up for pension 
liabilities under the old pension scheme. After 199 6, most port operations were privatized, 
and the pension liabilities were significantly less . The Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port in Goa 
and the Cochin ports have financial problems due to  pension liabilities and other issues. The 
Ministry also informed that currently, there are no  proposals for mergers, acquisitions or 
other alternatives to make these ports profitable. However, the government is exploring all 
options, such as tourism-related activities, the development of cruise tourism and the creation 
of transshipment hubs to improve the performance of these ports.   
 
38. Mumbai  Port – At its meeting with the Mumbai Port Authorities in Mumbai on 5th 
July 2023 , the Committee discussed the new developments in Mu mbai Port and plans for 
profitability.  A fifth oil berth has been develope d at Jawahar Dweep, off the Mumbai coast, 
with a capacity of 22 MMTPA, the largest among all Major Ports. A third Chemical berth is 
being constructed at Pir Pau Jetty in Mumbai. Fish Jetty is being expanded with the Centre's 
funding to reduce the waiting and berthing time for  fishing vessels. A dedicated goods rail 
line had been proposed from Wadala to Kurla. Howeve r, the project was only half completed 
because it involved the rehabilitation of Project A ffected Persons, and the matter was under 
discussion with Railways.  
 
39. The Port has 33,544 pensioners, and the pension  fund liability is more than Rs. 13,000 
crores. The Port authorities also informed that the  Port is in a transitional phase. Due to the 
nearby JNPA port, there was no scope for container or any other cargo except for liquid bulk 
cargo. The Port had a large Ship Breaking facility second only to Alang, which is almost 
closed now. When enquired by the Committee regardin g the proposed solution to the 
financial problems being faced by the port, the Por t authorities informed that the Mumbai 
Port has some land bank and the only solution for this Port is the monetization of land by way 
of township development around the port area. Tourism-related activities like cruises, marina, 
water parks etc can be developed to further its economic prospects.  
 
40. Upon enquiry by the Committee about the cruise tourism facilities, the Port 
authorities informed that an International Cruise T erminal with a facility of handling cruises 
up to 5000 passengers was being constructed on EPC basis and was expected to be completed 
by October 2023. In 2021-22, the traffic handled wa s 47 cruise ships with 98,342 passengers 
and is expected to increase up to 500 cruise ships with a capacity to handle 7,50,000 
passengers per annum after the completion of the new Cruise Terminal.  
 

10 
 
41. A proposed Ropeway on the Eastern Waterfront de velopment between Sewri and 
Elephanta Island is going to be the world's longest  Ropeway over sea. However, requisite 
clearance from ASI is awaited.  
 
42. Though the Ropeway may not damage the Elephanta  Caves, yet as per the stipulation 
being enforced by the ASI, there should be at least  1 km distance of the Ropeway from the 
Caves. The project is, therefore, currently ‘on hol d’ and the same will be resumed only after 
the passage of The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) 
Bill in Parliament. 
 
43. The Committee notes the huge pension liabilitie s of the Mumbai port. However, 
it feels that such liabilities did not emerge in a day and are known from the time it got 
accumulated. Necessary contingency planning should have been effected and due 
mechanism put in place. The Committee appreciates t hat the port has now limited 
induction to technical and professional posts but n otes that the present sanctioned 
strength of port employees at 7,462 is still much h igher than JNPA and private ports of 
Mundra and JSW Jaigarh.  
 
44. The Committee observes that automation being cr itical to productivity 
enhancement is also necessary to reduce the staff s trength of the port. But, the 
digitalization process is still ongoing in the port  with Port Enterprise Business System, 
GIS-based Estate Operations Management System, and Integrated Access Surveillance 
System. The Committee recommends that the Port impl ements the digitization and 
automation programme in a time bound manner without any further delay.   
 
45. The Committee also observes that expansion in C ruise Tourism after completion 
of the International Cruise Terminal would boost th e revenue accrued significantly. 
However, the Port should adopt proactive marketing strategies for promotion of cruise 
tourism by building appropriate interface with rele vant stakeholders. The Committee 
observes that the Ropeway project has innate potent ial for tourism promotion and 
recommends that the Port may take up with the ASI for early resolution of the issue.  
 
 
46. The Committee observes that the Mumbai Port has  a sizeable land bank and 
recommends that land monetization options may be ex plored in the interest of creating 
a credible industrial ecosystem that supports the Port while strengthening its resources. 
 
47.  Cochin Port  - The situation and possible solution for Cochin p ort is identical to that 
of Mumbai Port, that is, legacy pension liabilities  and less scope for diversification of cargo. 
For the year 2022-23, the Capacity utilisation of C ochin Port was only 42.46%. Cochin Port 
has land for monetisation and a container terminal that can be developed as a major 
transhipment hub. However, Cochin Port may face sev ere competition from the under-
construction Vizhinjam port, which is more favourab ly located with a draft of 17.00 m plus, 
making it an ideal transhipment hub. 

11 
 
48. The Committee observes that Cochin port has much th e same problems as that 
of the Mumbai port. Like the Mumbai port, land mone tization could be one of the 
solutions. The Committee has learnt from media repo rts that the port is planning to 
lease land for logistics-related activities and rec ommends that the port may make all 
concerted efforts for maximum land monetization. Th e Committee has also learnt that 
the port plans to change the system of granting con cessions in vessel-related charges to 
ships calling at International Container Transshipm ent Terminal (ICTT) by shifting to 
a cargo-based discount scheme instead of a call-bas ed discount scheme. The Committee 
observes that due to the economic crisis in Sri Lan ka, many ship operators would divert 
their ships to Cochin, and the port should take adv antage of such an opportunity by 
realigning its strategies. The Committee desires to  be apprised of the Concessions in 
Vessel-Related Charges (VRCs) offered to Containers and the impact thereof.  
However, two Members of the Committee opined that t he process of land monetization 
should not be done through giving control of valuab le land held by the Cochin Port 
Trust to private monopolies and businesses. The por t trust should use the land 
productively and produce profits through its initia tives and not hand over the valuable 
public land to private parties.  
  
49. Mormugao Port  - The financial position of the Mormugao Port at G oa is far from 
satisfactory after the Hon’ble Supreme Court ruling  prohibiting the iron ore mining. As a 
result, cargo handling reduced drastically from 43 million MT to 17.5 MT. The Port’s 
financial position got so severely impacted that ad equate money could not be put in for the 
pension fund of its 6,500 pensioners. At the Committee’s meeting with the Mormugao Port 
Authorities in Goa on 8th July, 2023 , the Port Authorities assured the Committee of the 
timely payment of pensions, which were presently be ing made from the Operational income. 
A Rs. 2400 crore pension fund is being developed for the future and every year, some amount 
of funds were being transferred to the pension fund . The pension was likely to be replenished 
if the old mines were revived after environment clearances and if the iron ore cargo increased 
to 25-30 million metric tons in Goa for four-five years. 
50. At the abovesaid meeting in Goa, the Port autho rities were asked about the alternate 
plans for the port if iron ore mining was not reviv ed. The Port Authorities informed that iron 
ore cargo from Karnataka was also possible, but to be financially viable, transporting a large 
amount of cargo by rail was essential. Land is also  available in Goa, but not in a prime area. 
However, the recent connectivity with the airport i n Goa by a six-lane highway is an added 
advantage for the port.   
 
51. Marketing efforts, modernization of Port infras tructure, development of cruise 
terminal, and ease of doing business measures such as RFID-based access control, NLP-
marine, etc. are some of the measures taken by Morm ugao Port to attract additional cargo 
volume  
52. The Committee observes that the iron ore in Goa  is of low-grade material for 
which beneficiation needs to be done before it is e xported. Moreover, a grade of only up 
to 62.5 per cent can be exported. The Committee obs erves that the Mormugao port 

12 
 
relied heavily on the revival of iron ore export fo r its sustenance. As dependence on one 
commodity is laden with risk for any port, the Comm ittee suggests that the port 
explores the possibility of other commodities, like  bauxite, gypsum etc. from Goa and 
other neighboring States for transportation. The Co mmittee observes that the 
Mormugao Port authorities had informed that transpo rtation of iron ore cargo from 
Karnataka could be a possible alternative in case t he iron ore mines in Goa were not 
revived. The Committee feels that as there are ports like Krishnapatnam, Kakinada and 
Vishakhapatnam which can handle the cargo, it is un likely that interstate cargo would 
come to Mormugao port unless attractive rates and c oncessions are offered by the Port. 
The Committee recommends that the Mormugao Port may  put in place, proactive 
strategies to attract cargo from neighbouring states. 
 
53. Regarding the development of the cruise termina l, at the meeting in Goa  with the 
Mormugao Port Authority, the Ministry of Tourism, t he State Government of Goa and 
various Tour Operators, the Committee was informed that there are only day cruises 
operating at present. The Committee had enquired ab out media reports on Goa port 
being dropped from the cruise circuit of three top cruise liners. The Committee was 
informed that there had been an incident with one c ruise liner due to an altercation 
with taxi drivers at the port gates. As such, the i ssue had been taken up with the Goa 
government. There was now better coordination with all parties, including the taxi 
drivers. The Committee observes that globally, the cruise industry was dominated by a 
few companies and such incidents would mar the pros pects of Goa in the international 
cruise circuit. The Committee observed that the lon g and beautiful coastline of Goa 
presents huge potential for cruise tourism. The suc cess of the cruise industry would 
depend on having an ideal ecosystem in which local conveyance plays a major role.  
 
54. Observing that the local conveyance in 
Goa was a State wide  problem, the 
Committee recommended that solutions like the devel opment of an app like “Savari” of 
Kerala which every taxi driver could join in Kerala, may be developed for Goa too.  
 
ISSUES IN OTHER MAJOR PORTS  
55. The Ministry also informed that Government port s have certain limitations compared 
to private ports. Though the Major Port Authorities  Act has provided for tariff fixation like 
private ports, a major port cannot offer differenti al rates to different customers to attract 
them. Certain ports make huge profits because they are favourably located to handle large 
cargo volumes and have better connectivity. On the other hand, there are ports struggling to 
attract cargo. 
 
56. The PPP model, however, has been very successfu l in the ports as it has brought up 
productivity, more cargo and revenues. The PPP mode l has the additional advantage of 
funding for better mechanization and better marketi ng strategies to counter the private ports. 
The thrust is on moving towards landlord model of port. Here there is no costs of operation to 
the Authority as the PPP operator carries out the entire port operations. 

13 
 
VISHAKAPATNAM PORT  
57. Visakhapatnam Port is the 3rd largest Port in t he country by capacity and 4th largest 
by traffic. However, its utilisation of capacity is at just 54%, much lower than Kolkata (71%), 
Mumbai (76%) and JNPA (74%). Upon query of the Committee, the Ministry informed about 
the following issues in the Port:- 
/head2right Visakhapatnam Port has very old infrastructure. The  berth layout is outdated and the 
back up area needed for cargo handling is totally i nadequate. The Port must invest 
heavily in increased mechanisation, upgrading the drafts, equipment, tugs, port railways 
and roads.  
 
/head2right Open storage of bulk cargo in Visakhapatnam Port is  causing pollution issues. There is 
an urgent need to develop covered sheds for handlin g bulk cargo to insulate the public 
from fugitive dust completely. Also, all manual han dling of bulk cargo must be phased 
out or limited to ensure that fugitive dust emissions are controlled. 
  
/head2right Volumes handled at Vizag General Cargo Berth (VGCB)  have been constrained by 
bottlenecks around the evacuation of cargo, mainly due to the paucity of railway rakes 
in the region and limited space made available by VPA for cargo storage.   
  
58. The Committee was informed that Strengthening a nd Mechanization of Berths, 
Improvement of Rail / Road connectivity and Logisti c Improvement were being undertaken 
to improve the performance of the Port (Details at Annexure VI). 
 
PARADIP PORT  
59. Paradip Port is the largest cargo-handling port  on the east coast and ranked first last 
year in terms of productivity. Out of 19 berths, th ere are six berths under PPP mode and all 
berths will be mechanised by 2030, which is the onl y way to improve productivity for a bulk 
handling port. Mechanisation will also keep polluti on under control. Pollution cannot be 
controlled by traditional semi-mechanised methods i n coal and iron ore handling, as it is a 
highly dusty cargo. Paradip Port handles, at any po int in time, almost two to three million 
tonnes of coal, which is stored in the port yard. T he growth rate of Paradip Port was 17 per 
cent last year, which is the highest growth rate in  the country. Upon query of the Committee, 
the Port authorities informed that the port has a v ery lean strength of only 520 people and 
about 135 people in handling along with 3000 contra ctual employees. After mechanisation, 
the employees will be diversified in other jobs.    
 
KANDLA PORT  
60. The largest port in the country in cargo handli ng, the port handled 137 MT of cargo 
last year, and this year’s target is 150 MT. Massiv e investments in infrastructure have been 
made in new roads, lighting, godowns, housing and r ailway. Three years before, the CAPEX 
was 250 crores. Last year it was 671 crores and the  target this year is 930 crores. As the level 
of mechanization in the berths was low, the berths were being mechanized by the port itself 
or on PPP mode. The Kandla port has the biggest inv estment in the port sector regarding the 

14 
 
Tuna Tekra Container Terminal. This will be a Termi nal with draft of 18 mts able to handle 
the biggest ships except mother ships and will have  a productivity of 2.19 Million TEUs per 
year. Upon query of the Committee regarding reports  of large-scale smuggling of drugs 
taking place in the country through ports especiall y from Kandla Port, the Port authorities 
informed that the norms which have been laid by the  law enforcing agencies like the 
Narcotics Control Bureau are enforced like scanners or narcotics sniffing dogs that have to be 
placed at the ports. Facilities have been provided at Kandla for marine police, the CISF, and 
customs to monitor the movement. 
 
61. The Committee notes that while the Mumbai, Coch in and Goa ports have faced 
financial difficulty due to some unique issues, mos t of the Major Ports suffer from 
common problems of outdated infrastructure, low cap acity utilization, and poor 
performance parameters. The Committee observes that  mechanization, connectivity 
and good evacuation capacity are essential for incr easing the performance of the ports 
and recommends that the Ports may endeavour to do the same with PPP partnerships .   
 
62. The Committee notes the benefits of the PPP mod el and recommends that all 
Major ports may make all efforts to achieve their targets of PPP partnerships as per the 
Maritime India Vision to improve their productivity and competitiveness.  
 
63. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry  makes every effort to 
implement the Landlord Port Model in the Major Ports.  
 
64. The Committee also observes that land is one of  the crucial resources of the port, 
which can be gainfully monetized. The Committee has  been informed that Ports have 
allotted the land parcels for various purposes such  as viz. liquid storage terminal, 
Godown / Warehouse, Salt Industries and Port-related Activities, etc. 
 
65. The Committee has been informed that the total land area available with the 12 
Major Ports is about 271043 acres. The land leased or sold by various Major ports is as 
given in Annexure – IV. 
 
66. The Committee desires to know about the land mo netization plans of the Major 
Ports, and whether any of the Ports have plans for industrial townships in the available 
port lands 
. Leasing port land to private investors on PPP basis  for setting up of 
industries/facilities would go a long way in promot ing the Port Led Industrialization 
agenda of the Government while accruing sizeable re venues for the ports to address 
their resource concerns.  
 
III. PORT MECHANIZATION AND MODERNIZATION 
67. The level of mechanisation at Indian ports, par ticularly major ports, is limited, and 
most of the commodities are handled by conventional  means. This has meant significantly 
higher turnaround time and cargo dwell time at thes e ports than the international standards, 

15 
 
thus, high overall logistics costs. Increased mecha nisation of berths equipped with high-
capacity cranes, conveyor systems, grab unloaders, etc. have the potential to  improve overall 
productivity. The Major Ports, however, are also co nstrained by the non-availability of funds 
to bring in large-scale mechanisation at their exis ting berths and depend on stevedores 
(persons employed at docks to load/unload cargos) t o handle cargoes. Further, the cargo 
throughput should reach a threshold value for the m echanisation of berths to make the 
investment a viable proposition. Some ports have ou tsourced the requirement by inviting the 
private sector to invest, install and operate mobil e harbour cranes, etc. while other ports have 
adopted the PPP route to achieve this objective. Annexure-V shows the status of 
mechanisation of berths at Major Ports.  
 
68. The Ministry informed that the mechanisation of  berths is a continuous process, and 
complete mechanisation of all berths in most of the  Major Ports is expected to be completed 
by 2030. As a part of the National Monetisation Pip eline Plan, Ports and the Government 
have proposed privatization of the existing berths.  Under this Plan, 31 port projects involving 
mechanisation and modernisation have been identifie d to be developed on PPP basis with an 
estimated capital cost of Rs. 12,828 crores to be completed by 2024-25. 
 
69. The Committee observes that only 35%  of total berths are mechanised in the 
Major Ports. Only Kandla port has all of its berths mechanised.   
 
70. The Committee finds it difficult to appreciate the position of the Ministry that all 
berths in the Major Ports would be mechanised by 20 30, i.e. in a span of seven years. 
The Maritime Vision Plan is to position India as a top maritime nation. For this, the 
Ministry should make all efforts for mechanisation and automation of all the Major 
Ports by that year.  
 
71. The Committee understands that the cargo should  reach a threshold for 
financial viability for the mechanisation of berths . The average capacity utilisation of 
the Major Ports is 49%, and many of the Major Ports  are operating at much below this 
average. The Committee wishes to know how the Ports  plan to increase their cargo 
handling capacity in the next few years to make the  investments viable in the sphere of 
mechanisation and modernisation.  
 
72. The Committee notes that 31 port projects invol ving mechanization and 
modernization have been identified to be developed on PPP basis to be completed by 
2024-25. The Committee would like to have the list of said 31 projects and the 
percentage of the total berths in all Ports which will be covered under this project.   
 
73. Mechanization of berths remained at the core of  the measures taken by the 
JNPA in reducing its Turn Around Time from 52 hrs t o 28 hours in a span of 05 years. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry as also the Major Ports take expeditious 

16 
 
action for the time-bound implementation of the 31 mechanisation projects and also 
draw up actionable plans for the mechanization of the remaining berths at the earliest.  
The Committee also recommends that the Major Ports may take the initiative to replace 
the old, outdated equipment at the old berths with modern equipments so as to enhance 
their productivity.  
 
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF MEGA PORTS, NEW PORTS AND TRANSH IPMENT 
HUBS 
74. Across the world, mega ports are cropping up, w ith better infrastructure, faster 
operations, lower operational costs, and higher cap acity to handle large cargo volumes and 
mega-ships.  
India needs to have mega-port and terminal infrastr ucture to handle Ultra-large ships, that 
seek speedy unloading of the large volumes they car ry. Ports need a higher draft, several 
large cranes, better yard management capability, in creased automation, more extensive 
storage facilities, more inland port connectivity and enhanced labour productivity. 
 
75. The Ministry informed that India has 05 Major P orts and 2 Non-Major Ports with over 
100 MTPA capacity. Two existing Major Ports i.e. De endayal Port and Paradip Port, have 
been identified to be transformed into Mega Ports h aving cargo handling capacity of 300+ 
MTPA. A new Vadhavan Port will also be developed as  the country’s Mega Port, having a 
cargo handling capacity of about 300 MTPA. 
 
76. The Ministry informed that the key challenges i n creating mega ports are Land 
Acquisition, Environmental Concerns, and Financing and detailed the various steps to 
address these challenges:- 
• Identifying locations which are possessing natural drafts up to 24 m with the 
availability of huge land banks and scope for devel oping industrial complexes close by 
and the required ecosystem like Special Economic Zo nes, Industrial Zones, Free Trade 
Warehousing Zones, Container Freight Stations, etc. 
• Stringent environmental policy/regulation is enforc ed to minimize the impact of port 
development on ecosystems. 
• Huge investments are required for developing such m ega ports, and the viability of 
developing such ports has to be established with gr ants/viability funding from the 
Government. 
• The Government has prioritized the development of p ort infrastructure, including the 
creation of deep draft channels, the construction o f modern berths, and the 
establishment of storage facilities.  
• Connectivities by water/rail/road to the hinterland  need to be established. Linkage 
through dedicated rail freight corridors will be of help. 
 
77. The Committee observes that the economies of sc ale in maritime trade have 
given rise to Mega ships or Capesize Ships, which n aturally require larger terminals 
and ports. Indian ports presently lack the infrastr ucture to deal with Capesize ships 

17 
 
which are vital to international maritime trade. As  Indian ports are gearing up to 
handle these giant ships by increasing their draft depths and modernizing the ports, 
India should also plan for developing Mega Ports to  handle the ever-increasing size of 
vessels and Containers. The Committee also recommen ds that while planning for the 
mega port, the Ministry may also arrange for linkag es with the local economy, creating 
industrial clusters to be economic drivers for the region.  
 
DEVELOPMENT OF VADHAVAN PORT  
78. The Ministry informed that the Union Cabinet ha d accorded its 'in-principle' approval 
on February 05, 2020, for setting up a deep draft s ea port at Vadhavan near Dahanu in 
Maharashtra. The port is about 150 km north of Mumb ai and has a deep draft of about 18-20 
metres, enabling it to cater to the largest capesiz e vessels. The Mumbai Port, a 150-year-old 
port in the middle of the city, is almost saturated .  At the Jawaharlal Nehru Port in Navi 
Mumbai, there is a scope for expansion of only one additional terminal, which is to be built in 
the sea. So the Vadhavan project was conceived to h ave a deep draft port to take the load off 
JNPA and the Mumbai port. The Vadhavan port will be  developed on the "Landlord model" 
as a Mega Port with a projected capacity of 308 MTPA 
 
79. JNPA has entered into a joint venture agreement  with Maharashtra Maritime Board 
(MMB) and has established a limited liability compa ny registered under the Companies Act, 
2013 namely Vadhavan Port Projects Ltd. (VPPL), wit h 74% and 26% equity stake, 
respectively to execute the Project. The total esti mated cost of the Project is Rs. 65,544.54 
crores. The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Cl imate Change asked for the conduct of 
17-18 kinds of studies on Environmental Impact Asse ssment and all of them except one have 
been conducted. However, Environment Clearance is still awaited. 
 
80. The port is located in Dahanu Taluka, and the D ahanu Taluka  Environmental 
Protection Agency has to hold a public hearing and furnish its NOC. The matter is also 
pending in the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The last hear ing of the Hon'ble Court was held on 
25.04.2023, and the case was adjourned.  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
81. The Committee observes that most of the Major P orts of India were constructed 
more than 50 years ago, some a century old. JNPA, t he 12 
th  Major port of India was 
developed in 1989 and no other major port has been developed in the last three decades. 
The Vadhavan port, with its advantages of a natural  draft of 18-20 m, proximity to the 
Mumbai Port and JNPA and to the upcoming Delhi Mumb ai Freight corridor, was a 
much-needed addition to India’s Major Ports.  
 
82. The Committee has learned from media reports th at the Dahanu Taluka 
Environment Protection Authority (DTEPA) has now gr anted No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) for the Port. The matter being sub-judice, th e Committee would like to be 
informed of any further developments on the issue.  

18 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSHIPMENT HUBS  
83. The Committee observes that Indian Ports handle  only 25% of Indian transhipment 
cargo, and international ports such as Colombo and Singapore handle the rest, leading to loss 
of revenue opportunities for India. The transhipmen t at ports outside India mostly happens 
regarding container traffic generated on India's So uth & East Coast. Colombo accounts for 
48% of Indian international cargo, Singapore 22% and Malaysia's Port Klang 10%. 
 
84. Ports on India's west coast are mostly gateway ports that send cargo containers 
directly to destinations. In contrast, those on the  east coast rely on transhipment at nearby 
hubs. Only a few ports in south India have the wate r depth to match global cargo handling 
efficiencies and function as a transhipment hub. Th e main ports currently handling the 
transhipment cargo are Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Cochi n Port, V.O. Chidambaranar Port, 
Kamarajar Port, Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port, and Mumbai Port.  
 
85. Exporters and importers in south India incur an  additional charge of 
/Rupee 5,000- /Rupee 6,000 
per TEU due to extra port handling at transhipment hubs, making them less competitive, 
adding huge costs to the economy and resulting in I ndian ports losing as much as /Rupee 1,500 
crore per year in business. India is also losing th e opportunity to become a large hub for 
Asia–Africa, Asia-US/ Europe container traffic trade. 
 
86. The major challenges in developing Indian ports  as transhipment hubs are as follows: 
(i) Lack of sufficient drafts at Indian ports is one of  the main reasons why big ships 
carrying transhipment containers cannot call at Ind ian ports. The shipping industry is 
moving towards mega-size vessels and above. 16 – 18 m drafts are required to handle 
these vessels, while a Capesize vessel requires 18m+ draft.  
(ii) Absence of modern and highly sophisticated equipmen t like Dual Cycle Cranes and 
AGVs -which can deliver incremental productivities in less time. 
(iii) Many Indian ports do not enjoy the locational advan tage like Colombo Port which 
enjoys a highly critical location advantage due to the proximity to the East-West Trade 
route, which is only 19 nautical miles away from the main route. 
(iv) With efficient cargo services and high operational performance, Colombo Port offers 
competitive Terminal Handling Charges, which makes it an attractive Hub in the 
region.   
 
87. With the focus on self-reliance from a cargo tr ade perspective, Maritime India Vision 
2030 (MIV 2030) has set the target of achieving 75%  of the total transhipment volumes at 
Indian Ports. Developing a transhipment hub in Indi a will create new revenue streams and 
solidify the presence of Indian ports on global maritime routes. 
 
88. The following projects are under implementation  to develop transhipment hubs: 
 
 
 

19 
 
A. Tuna Tekra Terminal:  
89. The Deendayal Port Authority is developing a Co ntainer Terminal at Tuna Tekra on 
BOT basis under PPP mode for Rs. 4540 crore. The pr oject was awarded on 01.03.2023. It 
will help Deendayal Port to emerge as a container transhipment hub. 
 
B. International Container Transhipment Terminal (ICTT), Cochin: 
 
90. The ICTT at Vallarpadam in Cochin was developed  on BOT basis, and commissioned 
in 2011. It is the first transhipment terminal in I ndia and is operated by DP World. The 
Government of India invested Rs.1,700 Crore for Cap ital dredging, providing road and rail 
connectivity to ICTT, while the BOT operator, M/s. DP World invested Rs.1,100 Crore 
towards infrastructure and equipment. Transhipment facility with ICTT at Cochin is already 
operational. However, the Terminal was designed wit h a draft of 14.5m. To accommodate 
deep draft vessels, the upgradation of the facility  is being undertaken by the Port and PPP 
concessionaire. The Terminal, with 605m quay length , has a capacity of 1 Million TEUs. 
During the year 2022-23, the Terminal handled 0.70 Million TEUs out of which the 
Transhipment Volume during the same period was 104666 TEUs.  
 
GALATHEA BAY 
 
91. The Ministry has identified Galathea Bay in And aman & Nicobar Islands to be 
developed as International Container Transhipment P ort. Some of the biggest ships pass 
through Galathea Bay, and there is a need to have a  hub which serves ports all along the Bay 
of Bengal. The port would have a draft of about 16 metres and, in the first phase, would 
handle 4 million TEUs in Container terms, ultimatel y going up to 16 million TEUs. 
Environmental clearance had been obtained for this port. However, after an order of the 
National Green Tribunal, a committee has been const ituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Clim ate Change to study the entire 
Environmental Clearance again and give their comments in two months.   
 
VIZINJAM 
 
92. Vizhinjam Port in Kerala is being developed as Transhipment facility by the 
Government of Kerala with Viability Gap Funding sup port from the Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India.    
 
VOC 
 
93. VOC Port is also planning to Develop “Berths I to IV (Outer) as Container 
Terminals” on PPP mode at the estimated cost of ~IN R 7000 crore. This facility is proposed 
to cater to both Gateway Traffic and Transhipment c argo. The Committee notes that India 
already has one Transhipment port in Cochin (Vallap adam) and another coming up in 
Thiruvananthapuram (Vizhinjam), which is just 225 k m from Vallarpadam and is already 
running at less than normative capacity . Upon query of the Committee regarding the distance 
required between two ports, the Ministry had inform ed that the proposal to keep a minimum 
distance separating ports was earlier discussed in the Maritime Development Council 
meeting. However, a conclusion is yet to be reached  on this aspect. The Ministry has also 

20 
 
informed that stipulating a minimum distance betwee n two ports can be counterproductive 
since what determines the need for a port is the hi nterland it can service and its industrial 
activity. Therefore, having two ports relatively cl ose to each other may be perfectly justified. 
More importantly, it also prevents monopolistic sit uations where the port users can be 
exploited. Therefore, ideally, restrictions should not be imposed for the development of any 
new port based on the proximity of another port. Ho wever, the decision to construct a new 
port should be taken after adequate assessment and studies about its feasibility. 
 
94. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry b ut feels that the distance 
between two ports should be a matter of considerati on as it impacts the overall 
productivity of both the old and also the upcoming ports. The Committee recommends 
that the distance between an upcoming port and anot her port in the region serving the 
same hinterland should form a part of the study bef ore establishing the need for a new 
port.  
 
95. The Committee also notes the reply of the Minis try regarding the environmental 
impact studies done and conservation plans proposed  in the upcoming Transhipment 
Hub at Galathea in Great Nicobar. As the proposed H ub is in an ecologically sensitive 
seismic zone, the Committee exhorts the Ministry to  evaluate all ecological 
considerations before project implementation.  
 
96. The Committee notes that one of the main proble ms obstructing the development 
of Transhipment in India emanates from the lack of deep drafts of Indian ports, 
especially those on the Eastern Coast and Southern coast. While dredging is necessary 
to deepen the drafts, the costs of dredging are cha rged to the shipping lines, adding to 
the cost of port calls in India compared to the foreign ports, thus, discouraging big ships 
from coming to Indian ports. The Committee has been  informed that foreign ports do 
not bear the costs of dredging, which are borne by respective Government. 
 
97. Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry ack nowledged that the Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee Port, Kolkata, receives a dredging  subsidy from the Government. 
But, the other Major Ports are responsible for thei r dredging expenditure, both capital 
and maintenance. To offset the higher Vessel Related Charges (VRCs) on account of 
dredging cost, the Government is working to improve  the efficiency of Indian ports by 
investing in new infrastructure and technology, whi ch can help reduce the cost of shipping 
goods and make Indian ports more competitive. The Committee desires to know why only 
the Kolkata port receives a dredging subsidy from t he Government . The Committee 
would like the Ministry to give a comparative data on the number of foreign 
governments which bear the cost of dredging and the  number of foreign ports which 
bear the cost of dredging themselves without any government help.  
 
98. If the former is a practice worldwide, the Comm ittee recommends that the 
Ministry may explore the possibility of government support for dredging in Major Ports 

21 
 
so that a globally uniform practice is followed so as to make our ports cost effective and 
competitive. 
 
99. The Committee also notes that solutions like Fl oating Cranes, which unload the 
cargo from Capesize Ships anchored in mid-sea into barges that take the cargo to the 
port, have helped ports like Kandla, a low draft po rt, to improve productivity and 
increase cargo volumes. The Committee desires to kn ow if such solutions can be applied 
at other ports. In particular, it recommends that t he Ministry looks into the solutions 
where dredging costs are prohibitive.  
 
100. The Committee also observes that in the early 2000s, the Container giant Maersk 
had shifted to the Tanjung Pelapas Terminal in Mala ysia from Singapore, which is one 
of the world’s largest transhipment hubs, which cha nged the face of the transhipment 
business in the entire region.  
 
101. The reason behind the move was stated to be th e offer of a stake to the Company. 
The Committee observes that the crisis in Sri Lanka  offers an opportunity to divert 
Transshipment operations from Colombo and recommend s that the Ministry explores 
the possibility of offering such attractive package  deals to Shipping Corporations to 
incentivize them to transfer their transhipment operations to Indian ports.    
 
102. The Committee recommends that the digitization  of ports be given utmost 
priority so that automation would reduce transhipment cost .   
 
103. The Committee also recommends that involving t he private sector by way of 
investment in infrastructure, provision of ancillar y services and streamlining of 
Immigration and Customs formalities, would be cruci al for developing Transhipment 
Hubs.  
 
V. PORT CONNECTIVITY 
104.  Port connectivity is one of the critical enablers for improving the efficiency of the 
maritime logistics ecosystem. By linking the port network with other connectivity modes 
such as rail, road, and air, India’s port trade com petitiveness can grow exponentially, 
giving it a significant edge. 
 
105. The Committee has been informed that all 12 ma jor ports are well connected by rail 
and road. As such, new projects are continuously ta ken up from time to time to augment 
connectivity in sync with the port development plan. 
 
106. Under the PM Gati Shaki, a Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan (CPCP) was 
prepared and shared by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) in 
September 2022, based on consultation with Major Po rts, State Maritime Boards, MoRTH / 
NHAI, MoR / Indian Railways, through coordinated ef forts made by all stakeholders. CPCP 

22 
 
incorporates total of 298 port connectivity projects, of which 191 are Sagarmala Projects (101 
road and 90 rail projects), and an additional 107 r oad and rail connectivity infrastructure gaps 
(60 roads and 47 rail). 
 
107. As of date, under Sagarmala Programme, 46 rail  and 23 road connectivity projects 
have been completed, and 31 rail and 35 road connec tivity projects are under implementation 
by various Implementing Agencies such as Indian Rai lways, Major Ports, Maritime Boards, 
NHAI / MoRTH, and State Road Development  Companies . These projects aim to enhance 
road and rail connectivity to major and non-major ports. 
 
108. The Committee has also been informed that the Dedicated Freight Container 
Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL) has connected  or will be connecting in future the 
Western and Eastern Freight Corridors with the Majo r Ports in both the Coastal areas. The 
connectivity provided by the DFFCIL and future plans is placed in Annexure –VI. 
 
109. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of t he DFCCIL for building the 
network of freight corridors, connecting the Major ports, which will present 
tremendous advantage in the connectivity of Major P orts and enhancing their 
productivity.  
 
110. The Committee has been informed that although most ports have a reasonably 
good 04 Lane Road Connectivity, Rail congestion is a concern in certain sectors, which 
affects freight movement. Combined with this, the a vailability of rakes has also 
adversely impacted the evacuation of cargo from/to ports.  
 
111. The Committee had also been informed in its me etings that despite having the 
requisite infrastructure and land, the Jaigarh port  could not handle containers due to 
lack of major rail connectivity. The Committee observes that one of the main factors for 
the low capacity utilization of the Ports pertains to absence of road and rail connectivity 
to the hinterland to cater to the emerging demands.  The need for good rail and road 
port connectivity for hassle-free cargo transport m ust assume importance. It should be 
the priority of the Ministry to ensure proper connectivity to all ports, which would drive 
up the cargo traffic and increase the revenues from  this sector. The Committee is 
pleased to note that the PM Gati Shakti Programme i s taking up 101 connectivity 
projects for both Major and Minor Ports, and the Sa garmala Programme is also 
addressing the road and rail connectivity infrastru cture gaps and recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that all such projects are impl emented on a priority basis in a 
time-bound manner.  
 
112. The Committee recommends that while conceiving  a Port project, connectivity 
issues should invariably form part of the integrate d planning for the project at the DPR 
stage and involve all the agencies like NHAI or the  Ministry of Railways. The 
Committee has been informed at its meetings that wh ile the mechanism for such 

23 
 
consultation exists, there are concerns with regard  to implementation. The Committee 
urges upon the Ministry to look into the concerns a nd ensure that all stakeholders and 
agencies are involved while planning for connectivity in a port project.   
 
VI.  PRIVATE PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS IN THE PORT S SECTOR  
113. The Ministry informed that the Maritime India Vision sets a target that, by 2030, more 
than 85 per cent of the cargo handled at the major ports should be by the PPP operators or the 
concessionaires. Currently, around 52-53 per cent o f the cargo handled at the major ports is 
being done by the PPP operators. 
 
114. Accordingly, the Ministry has been constantly working towards attracting private 
investment for infrastructure development and induc ing healthy competition in Port 
operations. For this, the Ministry has identified a  pipeline of 81 PPP projects with a total 
value of INR 42,400 crore from FY 2021-22 to FY 202 4-25. Out of this, 12 projects of value 
~INR 10,520 crore have already been awarded. Whereas the remaining projects are at various 
stages, i.e. under development/Inter-ministerial Consultation/Bidding Stage. 
 
115. The following investments have been made throu gh PPP mode in the major ports 
during the last five years- 
Year  No. of Projects  Value (INR Crore)  
2018-19 2 887.11 
2019-20 0 0 
2020-21 1 900 
2021-22 4 722 
2022-23 8 9,553.79 
Total  15  12,065  
 
116. Upon enquiry from the Committee, the Ministry informed that a total of 173 projects 
are at various stages of implementation at Major Po rts in India, with a total cost of Rs. 111, 
270 crore (approx). 
 
117. Details of the eight projects worth Rs. 9,544 crores which were awarded in FY22-23, 
have been placed in Annexure -VII . Annexure – VIII  shows the number of Sagarmala 
Projects and their status as on March, 2022 under the Major Ports.   
 
118. The Committee observes that the investments th rough PPP mode in the last five 
years are a mere 8% of the total investments made i n the projects at Major Ports. The 
Committee desires to know the status of the seven p rojects awarded from 2018-19 to 
2021-22.  
 
119. Regarding the Pipeline of 81 PPP projects for FY 2022-21 to FY 2024-25, only 12 
projects, which is less than 15%, have been awarded  by 2022-23, leaving 85% of the 81 
projects in the Pipeline to be awarded till the nex t financial year. The Committee also 

24 
 
observes that 298 projects have been taken up under  Sagarmala Scheme in the Major 
Ports out of which 140 have been completed, 78 are under implementation, 26 have 
been sanctioned, and the rest are still in planning  stage . The Committee feels that the 
Ministry is not making enough efforts to achieve th e targets set in the Maritime India 
Vision 2030 regarding PPP projects.  
 
120. The Committee notes that the Comptroller and A uditor General of India, in 
their 2015 Performance Audit report on the Public P rivate Partnership Projects in 
Major Ports, had commented that the PPP mode of imp lementation suffered delays 
mainly due to protracted time taken for finalizatio n of tenders, time taken for obtaining 
security clearance of shortlisted bidders, time tak en for the signing of Chartered 
Accountant (CA) and litigations by bidders during t he tender process. The Committee 
observes that with 69 projects yet to be awarded, the Ministry needs to ensure that there 
is timely implementation of the projects to achieve  the targeted timeline. The 
Committee understands that one of the primary objec tives of resorting to PPP is for 
faster development of infrastructure, and delays in  implementation of PPP projects 
defeat this very objective. The Committee recommends that the Ministry takes efforts to 
increase the percentage of PPP investments in major  ports and speed up the 
implementation of PPP projects in the Pipeline whic h are still in the under 
development/Inter-ministerial Consultation/Bidding stage.   
 
121. The Committee desires to know whether the PPP Cell in the Ministry is 
monitoring the projects on a regular basis and the effectiveness of such monitoring on 
the PPP projects.  
 
122. As required by the Committee, the Ministry pro vided statistics relating to the 
comparative performance of berths operated on PPP b asis to that of the Port’s own 
berths, which is placed at Annexure-IX. The Committ ee observes that the PPP berths, 
though less in number, outperform the Port’s own be rths in most ports. For example, in 
Chennai port, the 07 PPP berths handle a sizeable 6 3.68% of the total traffic, while the 
Port’s own 19 berths handle only 36.32%. In New Man galore Port, the 03 PPP berths 
handle a whopping 82.22% of the total traffic, whil e the Port’s own 14 berths handle a 
meagre 17.78%.   
 
123. The Committee observes that a capacity additio n of 103.03 MT has been made to 
the Major Ports in the last five years, in which an  investment of Rs. 12,065 crores in 15 
projects is under PPP mode. The Committee desires t o know the contribution of PPP 
projects to this capacity addition in the last five  years. The Committee also desires to 
know the planned capacity addition of the remaining  81 projects in the Pipeline for the 
years FY 2021-22 to FY 2024-25.  
 
124. The Committee has been informed that there is no dedicated investment 
mechanism for the maritime sector or even the infra structure sector that impinges on 

25 
 
the viability of project. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the 
need to create a dedicated Maritime Development Fun d for long-term financing of PPP 
projects in the maritime sector.  
 
VII. LOGISTICS AND EASE OF DOING BUSINESS  
125. Upon query by the Committee regarding the high  Logistics costs in India, currently 
constituting 13-14% of India’s GDP, as compared to 9% in China and 8% in US and Europe, 
which drive up the overall cost of doing business i n the Indian shipping sector, the Ministry 
informed that National Logistics Policy has been la unched by DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry (MoCI) with an objective to lower the cost of logistics from its current 14% of 
GDP to less than 10% by 2022. The policy aims at ma king Indian goods more competitive 
while also promoting economic growth and expanding job possibilities. The Policy 
establishes a broad, multi-jurisdictional, cross-sectoral framework for the growth of the entire 
logistics ecosystem to address concerns of high cost and inefficiency.  
 
126. In this respect, various interventions are bei ng taken up by MoRTH including 
continued expansion of the National Highways networ k in the country and Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase 1 Project where approx. ~34,800 Km s road network is under Development. 
Bharatmala scheme is reviving the entire road devel opment scenario and providing the 
required impetus for speedy implementation of new a ge highways and expressways thereby 
enhancing the speed of cargo movement across the nation. 
 
127. Additionally, 35 Multi-modal Logistics Parks ( MMLPs) on PPP have been identified 
by MoRTH for implementation. The MMLP at Chennai ha s already been awarded, and bids 
invited for MMLPs in Nagpur, Indore & Bengaluru; wi th another 10+ awards to be made by 
FY2025.  
 
128. Moreover, Ministry of Railways is preparing co mprehensive plans for multimodal 
connectivity to MMLP and Rail Gati Shakti Terminals . This will provide the much-needed 
impetus towards establishing cost efficient and sea mless multimodal network for cargo 
movement in the country. 
 
129. To bring down the overall cost of doing busine ss, most of the major ports have taken 
steps such as concessions in vessel and cargo relat ed charges and installation of RFID based 
access control system at gates for faster movement of trucks. Ports are also undertaking 
extensive mechanization of berths. Further, under E ase of Doing Business (EoDB), the ports 
have taken various measures in the areas like Infra structure improvement, simplification of 
process and digitalization to reduce overall logistics time and cost. 
 
130. The Committee observes that the main reasons f or high logistics cost in India are:– 
• The highly fragmented and unorganized nature of the  Indian logistics sector especially 
in Tier II and III cities. Lack of big players to o ffer cost advantage of scale drives up 
the logistics costs, along with hampering the free movement of trucks and price 

26 
 
settlements. 
• Absence of automation in logistics also leads to poor productivity. Unorganized players 
in the logistics market prefer to utilize the easil y available high amount of labour rather 
than invest in technology and automation. The unorg anized sector and lack of 
automation leads to low supply chain visibility and  no means to reduce the waiting 
times.   
 
131. In the ports sector the High Vessel related ch arges in the Major Ports were also 
related to higher maritime logistics cost - 
 
132. The Committee was informed by the IPPTA in its  deposition that the vessel related 
charges at Indian major ports are very high when co mpared to the charges at nearby non-
major ports and foreign ports. The share of non-maj or ports in the traffic handled gradually 
increased from about 10% in the beginning of this c entury to about 45% now. Much of the 
cargo was the diverted cargo from nearby major ports.  
 
133. High port tariffs make Indian ports uncompetit ive compared to their global peers in 
their bid to attract more large-size direct calls. Rival foreign transhipment hubs of Colombo, 
Sri Lanka; Jebel Ali, United Arab Emirates; Singapo re; and Port Klang, Malaysia, apply 
substantially lower marine charges than those at Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), Cochin, 
Chennai, Visakhapatnam, etc. 
 
134. Another charge which adds to the vessel relate d charges is the Light House Dues 
(LHD) – which is also very high compared to ports/h ubs in neighbouring countries. A 
comparison of the LHD between Cochin & Colombo is given at Annexure – X. 
  
135. The Committee observes that reduction in port charges is essential if maritime 
logistics costs are to be reduced. The Committee fu rther observes that the Port Call costs 
for India and the Light House Dues are nearly four times than that of the ports of other 
countries. The Committee has been informed that Ves sel Related Charges (VRCs) can be 
reduced only by reducing the Operating Expenses but  due to the salary payments, legacy 
pension payments and the requirement of discount of  50% in case of cruise vessels for 
promotion of cruise tourism, most ports have very l imited leeway of reducing the 
operating expenses. Therefore, reduction in Vessel Related Charges is an unsustainable 
proposition for ports.  
 
136. The Committee observes that since it is the ol der ports which have legacy 
pension issues and most of the newer ports have mai nly contractual employees and a 
fewer regular employees, pension liabilities cannot  be cited as a universal contributory 
factor for high operating expenses. Besides, salary  payments are obligation of every 
organization and cannot be a reason for high VRC. T he requirement of 50% discount 
on cruise tourism is relatively recent and does not  explain why the VRC has always 
been high in Indian ports. The Committee desires th at the Ministry finds ways and 

27 
 
means to reduce Vessel Related Charges and Lighthou se Dues to lower the logistics 
costs. The Committee also reiterates its earlier re commendation that the Ministry may 
explore the possibility of the government support f or dredging in Major Ports to curtail 
high VRC in ports.     
 
137. Upon a query of the Committee regarding provis ion of ancillary services by ports, the 
Ministry had informed that all ancillary activities  are happening at Major Ports through one 
agency or other. In case of PPP projects, the repai rs and maintenance of the facility has to be 
undertaken by the PPP operator. Activities like Customs brokerage and freight forwarding are 
undertaken by the exporters/importers through agenc ies involved in such activities. Ports 
have to take feedbacks from their port users and fi nd out if such services can be improved 
and accordingly take necessary action to implement them.   
 
138. The Committee recommends that each Major Port may make every effort to 
provide ancillary services to its users to improve the value addition in its supply chain.  
 
VIII. DIGITALISATION OF PORTS  
139. The Committee was also informed that the Port Operating System (POS), Terminal 
Operating System (TOS) and the National Logistics P ortal – Marine (NLP-M) have been 
implemented in all Major Ports.  
Other major Digital initiatives that are implemented in Major Ports are as follows: 
o Vessel Traffic Management System/Vessel Traffic Sys tem - to determine vessel 
positions, position of other traffic or meteorologi cal hazard warnings and extensive 
management of traffic within a port or waterway.   
o Enterprise Business System (Port Operation and alli ed system) - on cloud-based 
infrastructure to service delivery, operational exc ellence and transparency 
&Compliance. 
o Online (Radio Frequency Identification) RFID System  - to keep track of goods and the 
carriers, containers and pallets used to transport them. 
o Online Payment System – a system to collect the por t due seamlessly online and 
reduced transaction time. 
o Weighbridge System – for the flow of weight informa tion with multiple systems and 
avoid duplicate entries. 
o Geo-Information System – To enable stakeholders to know the vacant land and submit 
online requests for allotment, etc. 
o e-Office - Files/Receipt Management System with transparency along with security. 
 
140. Sagarmanthan Dashboard  for monitoring of Key Performance Indicators and 
Projects has been operationalised by the Ministry. A digital dashboard has been developed 
where all the information pertaining to projects, f inancial and operational performance and 
the daily performance of the ports, have been mappe d on this dashboard, and the Ministry 
makes use of this dashboard on a weekly basis to re view the project performance and 
progress in the projects being implemented by the various ports.  

28 
 
141. Sagar Setu App  has been launched to give real time information on  vessel related 
details and to facilitate digital payments of charges. 
 
142. National Logistics Portal (NLP) (Marine ) is a national maritime single window 
platform encompassing complete end-to-end logistics  solutions to help exporters, importers, 
and service providers exchange documents seamlessly  and transact business. It is operational 
at all Major Ports. 
  
143. NLP marine has been very effective in increasi ng the ease of doing business and 
improving efficiency and transparency by reducing c osts and time delays and achieving 
easier, faster, and more competitive offerings of s ervices. Going ahead, this Marine/NLP 
interface will be integrated in the national level NLP and it will become an integrated 
common platform all across different modes of transport in the country. 
 
Sagar Unnati  
144. Sagar Unnati has been implemented as Dashboard  for monitoring all Major Ports Key 
performance indicators like Turnaround Time, Traffi c Handled, Average Output per Ship 
Berth day etc. for facilitating Ministry and IPA.  
 
145. The data exchange is being carried out electro nically in the PPP Terminals between 
various stakeholders like Customs, Port Authority. Shipping line, Container Freight Station 
and Beneficial Cargo Owner. Due to integration with  customs, the cargos are getting cleared 
automatically through the systems without any manua l intervention. The Terminals are also 
exchanging Codeco messages with Customs so that the y will have information about the 
cargo gated in/Out from the system. The Terminals are receiving IGM, Shipping bills, SMTP, 
Out of charge, LeT export orders, Delivery Orders, Bill of entry & Allotment of Rotation 
number, etc. from customs, which enable automation of the clearance process. 
Berthing/unberthing details from port authorities a re received without any physical paper 
transaction. Presently, UNEDIFACT message is being tested with shipping line through NLP 
Marine which will enable the eventual replacement of paper transactions with Shipping lines. 
 
Port Community System (PCS)-  
146. The PCS is a centralized web application which  has already been introduced in the 
port sector that acts as a single window for port c ommunity members and stakeholders like 
Shipping lines/Agents, Surveyors, Stevedores, Banks , Container Freight Stations, Customs 
House agents, Importers, Exporters, Railways/CONCOR , Government regulatory agencies, 
etc to exchange messages electronically in a secure d way. The objective is to achieve a 
paperless regime in the port sector and reduce time  and cost in the ports sector. Now the PCS 
is being merged with National Logistics Portal-Mari ne which has wider coverage of 
stakeholders in the entire supply chain. 
 

29 
 
147. Following further automation/digital initiativ es are in process of implementation 
(some partially under implementation) which will ma ke the ports more productive and 
competitive: 
• Robotics  encompasses the use of robotics in container handl ing equipment such as 
automated mooring systems and automated ship-to-sho re cranes. With automated ship-
to-shore cranes, over 90% of the work duties are pe rformed autonomously, with the 
final movement of the spread guided by an operator from a remote-control room.   
• Process automation  involves the use of technology to automate process es external to 
cargo handling.   It typically involves gate system s in which Optical Character 
Recognition (OCR) and Radio Frequency Identificatio n (RFID) automate the 
inspection, clearance, and tracking of people and e quipment moving into, out of, and 
within a terminal, with supervision and exceptions handled from a control room. 
• Blockchain Technology has the potential to revolutionize the maritime ind ustry.  
Blockchain technology can play a significant role i n faster, safer, secure, and 
transparent transactions and faster cargo clearance  reducing costs and increasing 
efficiency in the maritime domain for all the stakeholders. 
• Big Data Analytics have immense possibilities and applications in shipping industry as 
shipping involves massive operations which can generate a huge amount of data.   
• Automation and Artificial Intelligence  is used to power AI driven applications that 
accelerate decision making processes and workflows.  For example container cranes at 
several ports are unmanned and pretty much fully au tomated. Aside from a few small 
processes, the whole operation is managed by comput ers. Moving forward, this could 
be used on a larger scale to speed up the shipping supply chain process. 
• Decision-making automation  involves using technology to guide and optimize 
decisions related to stowage and yard planning, con tainer positioning, and vehicle and 
equipment scheduling. It involves intelligent termi nal operating systems (TOS) 
technology to optimize planning, monitoring, asset utilization, and administrative tasks. 
 
148. The Committee was also informed that increasin g reliance on technology could also 
expose ports, ships, supply chains, etc. to cyber c riminals, and hackers for stealing data, for 
ransom or to take control of ports and other vital assets as there have been such attacks on 
ships and the ports  
i) The following steps are also undertaken to protect ports against cyber attacks, which 
are increasingly becoming an issue of concern in the maritime industry:- 
• Establish Asset Management System 
• Capacity Building on Cyber Security  
• Implement Multifactor authentication on all accounts. 
• Establish and Implement IT security policy 
• Regularly updating the Software 
• Use Strong Password as per the policy. 
• Establish Security Operation Centre and analysis traffic log file 
 

30 
 
149. The Committee is pleased to note the initiativ es taken for digitalisation as it will 
increase the efficiency and productivity of Indian ports, enabling them to compete on 
the global scale. Shipping has traditionally been a  conservative industry, slow to adapt 
to technological changes, mainly due to the enormou s and complex logistics chains 
characteristic of this industry. However, adopting new technology is critical to increase 
operational efficiencies and competitiveness .    
 
150. The Committee notes with satisfaction the impl ementation of Port Operating 
System (POS), Terminal Operating System (TOS) and t he National Logistics Portal – 
Marine (NLP-M) in all ports and the merging of Port  Community Systems with 
National Logistics Portal-Marine. The Committee not es that other technologies like 
Blockchain Technology, Automation, and Artificial I ntelligence are in the process of 
being implemented. The Committee would like to know  the status of implementation of 
cutting-edge technologies like Digital Twin, which can be used to monitor and manage 
port operations, fleet management, optimization of the end-to-end-supply chain, 
Advanced Monitoring systems to monitor the state of  the weather, Advanced Sensor 
Technology, Augmented Reality for maritime training , 3D Printing and other related 
technology-based applications .  
 
151. The Committee notes that the Port Authority of  Singapore (MPA) has opted to 
build a 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing Cent re (Centre of Excellence in 
Modelling and Simulation of Next Generation Ports C4NGP) that will allow it to build a 
digital twin port. Singapore has recently inaugurat ed the Tuas Port which when fully 
operational in the 2040s, is expected to be the wor ld’s largest fully automated container 
terminal in a single location, with an annual handl ing capacity of 65 million TEUs. The 
Rotterdam port with its digital transformation aims for ships to enter and leave the port 
autonomously in 2030. In Jebel Ali port after imple mentation of a Terminal Operating 
System, ZODIAC, the Container Terminal (CT3) will b e able to integrate with any 
Terminal that uses the same operating system and ca n become part of the largest global 
network of supply chains.   
 
152. Private ports and Terminals in India have embr aced the advanced technologies 
to surpass many of the Major Ports performances. Th e Committee has been informed 
that Digital twin technology is operational at the GTI Private Terminal at Nhava Sheva 
as well as the latest Terminal Operating Systems, n avigation simulation for training, 
etc.  
 
153. While the Committee appreciates the initiative s taken for digitalization, it urges 
upon the Major Ports to adopt the state-of-the-art technologies to remain globally 
competitive. To stay abreast of the rapidly evolvin g technology should be integral to the 
digitalisation efforts of the ports.   
 

31 
 
154. The Committee also observes that upgrading ski ll sets of employees and training 
programmes for the future workforce would be crucia l to keep pace with the 
digitalisation of the maritime sector. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and 
the Major Port Authorities should partner with Mari time Institutes for conduct of 
training and capacity building programmes for port employees.  
 
IX. GREEN SHIPPING 
155. The Committee notes that the United Nations Cl imate Change Conference (COP21) 
held in Paris adopted by 196 Parties, including Ind ia, on 12 December 2015 regarding 
globally agreed goals for action on climate change,  aims to keep the global surface 
temperature rise well below 2 
/uni2009°C above pre-industrial levels, while pursuing effo rts to keep 
below 1.5 /uni2009°C .    
 
156. Shipping plays a central role in global supply  chains and is a significant source of 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. The industry curren tly accounts for about 3% of CO2 
emissions but the enormous scale and volume of mari time transport means that its 
contribution to global CO2 emissions would continuo usly increase in the next decade. 
Decarbonization of the sector must receive top poli cy priority if the world is to achieve net 
zero emissions by 2050.    
 
157. The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) Initial Strategy on the reduction of 
GHG emissions from shipping has the goals as -  
• Cut annual greenhouse gas emissions from internatio nal shipping by at least half by 
2050, compared with their level in 2008, and work towards phasing out GHG emissions 
from shipping entirely as soon as possible in this century.  
• The Initial GHG Strategy envisages a reduction in c arbon intensity of international 
shipping (to reduce CO2 emissions per transport wor k), as an average across 
international shipping, by at least 40% by 2030, pu rsuing efforts towards 70% by 2050, 
compared to 2008.  
 
INDIAN INITIATIVES FOR GREEN SHIPPING  
158. The Committee was informed that environmental matters pertaining to port are being 
handled with focus and seriousness. Some of the act ivities which are unique to the port and 
maritime sector, that impact environment are as under: 
(a) Dredging (capital and maintenance) 
(b) Handling of coal, iron ore etc. 
(c) Handling of crude, POL and other dangerous cargo, r esultant fires/explosions/toxic 
release and marine spillage 
(d) Mechanical handling complexity and associated hazards 
(e) Traffic and congestion 
(f) Marine pollution due to operations of vessels and port infrastructure 
 

32 
 
159. The Committee was informed the Ministry intend s to increase the share of renewable 
energy to 60% of the total power demand of each of its Major Ports from a present share of 
less than 10%. It also aims to reduce its carbon em issions by 30% by 2030. Maritime India 
Vision also sets in a number of targets for develop ment of safe, sustainable and green 
maritime sector, and it is in line with the Pancham rit Commitments made in the COP-26 as 
far as decarbonization of the maritime sector is concerned for both ports and shipping sector. 
The following targets have been set by the Ministry  for establishing Green and Sustainable 
Ports: 
 
160. Some of the green initiatives undertaken by po rts are:- 
a) Usage of renewable energy 
b) Usage of shore supply 
c) Covert wharf crane from diesel to electrically operated 
d) Promotion of usage of wind turbines 
e) Provide green belt 
f) Rain water harvesting 
g) Reuse of treated sewage water for dust suppression, watering of plants 
h) Provide dust mitigation systems like mist cannon, w heel washing of trucks and 
sprinkling 
i) Promote India Cooling Action Plan whereby air condi tioner temperatures are regulated 
between 24 
◦C and 26 ◦C to reduce power consumption 
j) Promote LED lighting 
Sr. No.  EPIs  Target by 2030  Target by 2047  
1 % share of Renewable energy consumption at 
ports (self-generated + procurement from 
grid) 
>60% >90% 
2 % Port equipment/vehicles electrified >50% >90% 
3 % area under green belt >20% >33% 
4 % reduction in CO2 emission/ton of cargo 
(Baseline Year 2023) 
>30% >70% 
5 %GHG emission reduction in all 
coastal/ EXIM vessels 
>10% >50% 
6 % reduction in fresh- water consumption/ton 
of cargo (Baseline Year 2023) 
>20% - 
7 % recycle and reuse of consumed water >100% - 
8 % reduction in energy  consumption/ton of 
cargo (Baseline Year 2023) 
>20% - 
9 One no. of LNG bunkering station By year 2030 - 
10 Green hydrogen/Ammonia bunkers and 
refueling facilities 
By year 2035  
11 Adequate number of EV charging stations By year 2025 - 

33 
 
k) Repairing, refurbishing, and recycling existing mat erials and products for as long as 
possible 
 
161. The wind and solar power installations at the ports help to move towards more and 
more share of renewable energy in the power that is  being consumed by the major ports. 
Currently, the Major Ports use around 12-13 per cen t renewable energy. The target is to 
achieve the level of more than 60 per cent by 2030, and, by 2047, to become hundred per cent 
renewable, powered by renewable energy. 
 
162. Presently four Major Ports i.e. Deendayal, Vis akhapatnam, New Mangalore, and V.O. 
Chidambaranar Ports are surplus in renewable energy  generation. Other Ports are also using 
Solar Power and are in the process of developing th e infrastructure for the generation of 
renewable energy. 
 
163. Providing power to the ship from the shore is one of the important facilities which has 
the potential to reduce the carbon footprint of the  ports because 70 per cent of the carbon 
being emitted by the ships, idling at the berth. It is one of the major components of the carbon 
emission by the ports. Presently port vessels, coas tguard, navy, and customs are mainly 
provided the shore power. Thereafter efforts will b e made to bring coastal vessels, Exim 
vessels and cruise vessels onto shore power.   
  
NATIONAL HYDROGEN MISSION  
164. The Cochin Shipyard is building a hydrogen fue l cell powered ferry vessel as a pilot 
project. Fuel cell for the vessel is being manufactured through one of the indigenous partners. 
This fuel cell is under manufacturing and all tests  & trials for using the same for marine 
application will be completed by the end of August, 2023. 
 
165. Further, as envisaged in the National Hydrogen  Mission, MoPS&W has identified and 
nominated Paradip port, Deendayal Port and V.O. Chi dambaranar Port for developing them 
as Hydrogen Hubs, capable of handling, storage, and  generation of green hydrogen by the 
year 2030. So, the ports are also working on those targets providing bunkering, handling and 
storage facilities for low-carbon fuels, methanol, green ammonia, green hydrogen, etc. So, 
those initiatives are also in pipeline and are in different stages of planning. 
 
166. The Ministry has declared the establishment of  India's first National Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) for Green Port & Shipping (NCoEGPS ) to assist the Ministry and Indian 
Maritime industry on development of the necessary p olicy and regulatory framework and in 
developing an alternate technology adoption road ma p for Green Ports and Green Shipping 
which in turn aim to foster carbon neutrality and c ircular economy. The Ministry shall 
provide one time non-recurring grant of Rs.70.2 cro re for developing and establishing the 
NCoEPS. 

34 
 
167. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways  has launched the “Harit Sagar” 
Green Port Guidelines to reduce carbon intensity an d to develop an environment-friendly 
ecosystem at Major Ports with the participation of all stakeholders. 
 
168. Harit Sagar Guidelines - 2023 will provide com prehensive guidance to the Major 
Ports of the country for developing an action plan for achieving Sustainable Developmental 
Goals (SDG) which include obligations on developing  resilient infrastructure for safe, 
efficient and sustainable ports and promote environ mental reporting as a means of 
communicating environmentally compatible behavior to stakeholders.  
 
169. The Committee notes the targets set by the Min istry for Green and Sustainable 
Ports. As per the requirement of the Committee, the  Ministry has provided details of 
the status of the Environment Performance Indicator s of some of the Major Ports 
(Annexure XI). The Committee notes that the figures  present a dismal picture. Some 
Ports like Deendayal and New Mangalore Ports have a chieved 100% targets in 
renewable energy while many ports for example, Chen nai port, VoC Port, Mormugao 
Port have barely achieved 4-6% of the target. Parad ip Port has achieved only 0.60% of 
the target. The Committee further notes that the ta rget of usage of renewable energy in 
ports to 60% by 2030 i.e. within a span of seven ye ars appears to be unrealistic given 
that the usage of renewable energy at present by mo st Major Ports is in the range of 10-
12% only.     
 
170. The targets achieved so far by ports are very low in case of reduction in CO2 
emissions and reduction in GHG emissions. Besides, in case of Green 
Hydrogen/Ammonia bunkers, most Major Ports are stil l in the planning stage. The 
target of reduction in carbon emissions by 30% taki ng 2023 as the Baseline Year also 
appears to be over-optimistic as the only major initiative in this direction is the Shore to 
Ship Power supply.  
 
171. The target for percentage of Port Equipment/ve hicles electrified is more than 
50% by 2030 but the Cochin Port has achieved only 8 %, VoC Port 9% and Kamarajar 
5%. Mumbai and Mormugao have not yet achieved any target.   
 
172. The Committee would also like to know the numb er of EV charging Stations by 
2025 which would be considered adequate  as the data provided by the Ministry shows 
the present status to be 01 in JNPA, 02 in New Mang alore and 01 in Kamarajar Port 
only.   
 
173. Zero-carbon fuels and technologies are not cur rently available at the size, scale 
or price, the shipping industry needs for wide-scal e adoption. For a ship to be zero-
emissions, it must be capable of operating on fuels  like green hydrogen which produces 
zero carbon emissions. The Ministry has stated that  the Cochin Shipyard is building a 
hydrogen fuel cell powered ferry vessel as a pilot project and all tests & trials for using 

35 
 
the same for marine application will be completed b y end of August, 2023. At the time 
of Demands for Grants 2023-24, the Committee had be en informed that the project had 
been stalled and funds were unutilized due to non-a vailability of special grade 
aluminium plates. The Committee desires to know the exact status in the matter.   
 
174. The Committee observes that Shore to Ship Supp ly is a significant contributor to 
reduction in carbon emissions and recommends that t he facility be provided to all 
vessels including cruise ships and coastal vessels.  The Committee also observes that 
cargo like coal and iron ore cause a lot of dust po llution and recommends that all Major 
Ports should have covered sheds for the storage of such cargo to prevent pollution. The 
Committee hopes that the Ports endeavor to achieve 100% electrification of Port 
Equipment/Vehicles by 2030.  
 
175. The Committee observes that the Ministry has i ssued guidelines and set targets 
but does not appear to have formulated a Green Poli cy.  The Committee refers to the 
green initiatives of the Maritime and Port Authorit y (MPA) of Singapore and Port of 
Rotterdam placed at Annexure XII.     The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may form a similar blueprint for reduction of CO2 f rom different spheres of port 
activity rather than having a total reduction which  may be more difficult to implement.  
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may  form a Green Policy 
comprising green initiatives and targets for differ ent aspects of the port sector. The 
Committee also desires to know the infrastructure p lanned or developed for the green 
energy of the future as timely development of such infrastructure would be crucial for 
timely implementation of green policies. The Port o f Rotterdam for instance is working 
on a public hydrogen pipeline through the port whic h in the future will be connected to 
the national and international hydrogen network  
 
X. CRUISE TOURISM  
176. The Ministry informed that prior to Covid,  th ere was a 35 per cent year-on-year 
growth of cruise traffic in the country.  Now, post -Covid, from 2021 onwards, there has been 
an increase in cruise traffic but still the pre-Cov id growth has not been achieved.  Prior to 
Covid, there were 4.7 lakh passengers on cruises and now, about 3 lakh passengers.  
 
177. The Ministry further informed that the Governm ent has taken a number of steps in 
bringing in international cruises into the country.  The composite tariff that has been 
announced is the lowest cruise tariff as compared to anywhere else in the world. ( Annexure – 
XIII ).  A number of simplifications of immigration and customs processes have been effected 
which helped bring cruise tourists into the country.   
 
178. The Mumbai Port is making the largest cruise t erminal which will be having an area 
of 4.5 lakh square feet. It will be able to handle 200 ships in a year, up to ten lakh passengers.  
Similarly, a cruise terminal is coming up in Goa.  New Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai 
already have cruise terminals and some facilities w ill be upgraded at these terminals.   

36 
 
Visakhapatnam and Kolkata cruise terminals will com e up very soon.  Now the eastern part 
of India -- Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Puducherry - is  also witnessing a lot of demand from 
cruise industry. Similarly, the cruise industry’s d emand for Lakshadweep and Andaman and 
Nicobar is also peaking up. 
 
179. Upon enquiry by the Committee about the reason s for India lagging behind in cruise 
tourism, it was informed that the cruise infrastruc ture had not been improved when cruise 
ships became bigger in size .  Embarkation and disembarkation are extremely impor tant 
particularly when a cruise ship comes with 3000-500 0 passengers at a time.   Besides, India 
does not have dedicated cruise terminals whereas th e world over, there are dedicated cruise 
terminals operated by cruise lines.  India will reach that stage in about 5-10 years time.  
  
180. The Committee observed that Singapore cruises go to international waters and 
allow the casinos to be operated from there and the n return which is why such cruises 
are able to attract more tourists and enquired from  the Ministry whether similar cruise 
was operating in India.  The Ministry informed that the Cordelia cruise goes out beyond 
12 nautical miles which allows people to enjoy casi nos.  The Committee recommends 
that cruises could initiate from Mumbai to Mangalor e and to Goa via Cochin from 
where the ship could go to international waters to attract more tourists. 
 
XI. ACTS AND LEGISLATIONS, MODEL CONCESSIONAIRE AGR EEMENT 
AND THE ISSUES IN PRIVATE PUBLIC PARTNERSHIPS  
181. The Committee had been informed in its meeting s with the stakeholders that one of 
the most crucial issues impacting the viability of PPP projects is their inability to use tariff 
mechanism to face the ever-increasing competition i n the port sector from competing 
facilities both within the major ports as well as n earby non-major ports. Till recently, tariffs 
for PPP operators were being regulated by the Tarif f Authority for Major Ports (TAMP). The 
unviable rates fixed by TAMP have affected the viab ility of many of the PPP Projects 
governed under the Tariff Guidelines issued in 2008 , 2013 and 2019. This has led to 
negativity in the investor’s perception and is one of the main factors for the lukewarm 
response in the bidding process in the port sector over the last few years.  
 
182. Keeping the above facts in mind, the Governmen t has abolished TAMP and provided 
market-based tariff freedom to PPP Operators throug h enactment of Major Port Authorities 
Act, 2021 which made some key changes like the intr oduction of the Landlord Port Model of 
Development and accordance of market-based tariff f reedom to the new concessionaires 
under Public Private Partnership Mode. The role of TAMP has ceased in fixation of 
tariffs/SoRs. However it may be associated in advis ory capacity and resolution of past cases 
of tariff fixation as the MPA Act 2021 is not applicable with retrospective effect  
 
LANDLORD PORT MODEL 
 
183. The landlord port model is a port management m odel in which both public and private 
sectors are engaged in the management of the port.  The Port Authority retains ownership of 

37 
 
the land and leases the infrastructure particularly  the terminals to private companies which 
handle the port operations .  In June 2022, Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority port became the 
first 100% Landlord Major Port of India.  The Landlord Port Model aims at - 
/head2right decentralizing decision making to infuse profession alism in governance of Major 
Ports.  
/head2right imparting faster and transparent decision making be nefiting the stakeholders and 
enhance the project execution capability.  
/head2right reorienting the governance model in central ports i n line with the successful global 
practices.  
/head2right bringing transparency in operations of Major Ports.  
The Ministry also informed the Committee that to fu rther complement the landlord 
port model, the Public Private Partnership mode is being promoted in infrastructure 
projects aimed for expansion, modernization and up- gradation of Major Ports in the 
country with a view to keep the ports abreast with new technologies. 
 
184. The following  policy related reforms have also been done initiate d for strengthening 
and encouraging PPP in port sector: 
(1) Revision of Model Concession Agreement (MCA), 2 021  
MoPSW has announced the revised Model Concession Ag reement (MCA) - 2021 on 18th 
November, 2021. It has not only provided more clarity for the responsibilities and obligations 
of authority and private party, but also introduced  clauses related to the termination payment 
prior to Commercial Operations Date (COD), change i n cargo due to unforeseen 
circumstances as well as change in law. These claus es among others should enhance Ease of 
Doing Business (EoDB).  
(2) Formulation of Tariff Guidelines, 2021  
In December 2021, new tari 
ﬀ guidelines have been issued which allow the conces sionaires at 
Major Ports to set tari ﬀs as per market dynamics and sharing of revenue wit h the Port 
Authority as per the bid condition and Concession Agreement.  
(3) Formulation of the Guidelines for dealing with stressed public private 
partnership Projects at Major Ports  
 On 10 th  May, 2022, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Water ways has issued the 'Guidelines 
for dealing with stressed PPP Projects at Major Por ts’ for reviving the stuck projects and 
unlocking blocked capacity. 
(4) Establishment of the Society for Affordable Res olution of Disputes - Ports 
(SAROD-Ports)   
In order to seek speedy, a 
ﬀordable, just and reasonable redressal of dispute/d i ﬀerences 
between Major Port Trusts and Concessionaire/Contra ctor arising out of and during the 
course of execution of various contracts, a Society  for A ﬀordable Resolution of Disputes - 
Ports (SAROD-Ports) has been formed under the Socie ties Registration Act, 1860 on 30th 
January 2020. 
(5) Constitution of Conciliation and Settlement Com mittee for Major Ports 
succeeds in settling decade long commercial disputes. 
 

38 
 
185. An alternate dispute resolution mechanism has been set up for Major Ports by Indian 
Ports Association(IPA) (an apex body of Major Ports  under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MPSW)) i n October 2021 through appointment 
of a Conciliation & Settlement Committee (CSC) comp rising independent experts with the 
intention of achieving the settlement among the sta keholders in the least possible time, 
thereby saving on financial burden on the industry players as well. 
 
186. The Committee observes that the JNPA, the firs t Landlord Port in the country, 
is a good Landlord Port model that showcases the ad vantages which the Major Ports 
can benefit from.   JNPA, the top Container Port of  the country, ranks 54 in the global 
rankings and the efficiencies brought to the port have enabled it to achieve performance 
parameters which are far ahead of the rest of the Major Ports.   
 
187. The Committee observes that the operational co st of a PPP operated berth will 
be substantially lower compared to a port operated berth due to several reasons like less 
number of staff employed, improved  productivity du e to adoption of technology, etc.  
There is no cost involved to the Port Authority as the entire cost of port operations is 
undertaken by the PPP operator.  The Landlord Port Model has been a successful global 
practice and the Committee recommends that the Mini stry may make all-out efforts to 
implement the model in the remaining Major Ports.  
 
MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT, (MCA) 2021 
188. The Committee was informed that the salient fe atures of the new MCA are as follows: 
• To reduce risk to the lenders and make the project more bankable, provision of 
compensation for Concessionaire’s event of default before Commercial Operations 
Date (COD) has been added.  
• Provision which lays out process for extension of c oncession period on the basis of 
performance and mutual agreement has been introduced.  
• Provision has been made for flexibility to the conc essionaires to fix their tariff based 
on market conditions which will enable the private terminals at Major Ports to 
compete for cargo. 
• Provision of change in cargo due to change in law o r unforeseen events has been 
introduced for the first time. The concessionaire d id not have flexibility to handle 
different cargo and the asset constructed was not b eing utilized optimally. This 
provision will impart the flexibility to undertake change in cargo in such situation and 
reduces risk for the concessionaire. Overall, more clarity has been provided in terms 
of responsibilities of both public as well as private party while balancing the risk 
The Committee has been informed that the revised Mo del Concession Agreement, 
2021, however, is applicable only to all the future  PPP projects at major ports, as well 
as projects which are already approved by the Gover nment but were under bidding 
stage on the date of notification of new MCA. The N ew MCA is not retrospective as 
PPP projects awarded before new MCA notification ar e governed by their respective 
concession agreements.  

39 
 
ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION O F THE NEW 
MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT 
189. The Committee was informed by the representati ves of the IPPTA of the following 
issues arising due to the prospective application of the new MCA:- 
• The new concessionaires are being given the land at  a very nominal price but the old 
concessionaries still pay very exorbitant prices wh ich increase periodically over a 
period of time.    Due to the existing situation,  a lot of migration of traffic is taking 
place from all the existing operators to the new op erators because the new operators 
are able to offer the services at much more liberalised tariffs.   
• For old concessionaires, the Port Authority is taki ng a revenue share as well as lease 
rental. 
 
190. Upon query by the Committee, the representativ es of the Indian Ports Association 
clarified that in the old Concession agreements por ts charged land lease rentals and took a 
share of percentage of the total revenue from the C oncessionaire. Both the land lease rentals 
and the revenue share are fixed.  In the new Conces sion Agreement, the land is either free or 
nominally charged. Upon further query by the Commit tee, the Ministry has informed that as 
per the Policy Guidelines for Land Management, the annual lease rent for PPP projects is 
determined based on latest Schedule of Rates (SoR) with the approved rate of annual 
escalation to be indicated to the bidders at the bi dding stage itself.  For land that is not for 
PPP projects, the final price is determined over an d above the Reserve Price based on a 
tender-cum-auction.  
• Presence of two sets of operators in the same port,  one having market freedom in 
fixation of tariffs and the other bound by a regulatory mechanism stifles the growth of 
the latter as there will be diversion of traffic le ading to underutilization of facilities 
created at huge cost. 
• In the absence of market freedom in fixation of cha rges, the existing concessionaires 
will not be able to compete with the neighbouring n on-major ports that enjoy market 
flexibility in the pricing and can well vary charge s depending on ‘demand and 
supply’. The fact that the share of the non-major ports has increased rapidly from 35.6 
% in 2010-11 to around 48% in 2021-22 bears testimony to this.  
 
191. The Committee had requested the Ministry to gi ve its comments on the issue of 
extending the benefits of the MCA, 2021 to both the  existing as well as new 
Concessionaires.  The Ministry has put forth the ar guments that the PPP projects are 
executed through Concession Agreements which are le gally binding and are governed 
by the policies that are applicable in that time pe riod. Any post- bid changes in the 
Concession Agreement is open to litigation.  The Mi nistry has also informed that a 
Committee consisting of the Chairmen of VoCPA, ChPA  & JNPA was constituted in 
May, 2023 for deliberation on whether the provision s of MCA, 2021 can be made 
retrospective and the report of that Committee is awaited.  
 

40 
 
192. The Committee observes that the within the pas t two decades, the Model 
Concessionaire Agreement has been changed thrice, i n 2008, 2018 and 2021 
(Comparative statement of the provisions of the thr ee MCAs placed at Annexure XIV).  
The first revision came after a decade and brought only minor changes in a few of the 
provisions.  The second revision came within 03 yea rs and brought about a major 
overhaul in existing regulations, with the introduc tion of market based tariff fixation, 
abolition of the authority of TAMP, provisions for change in cargo, etc. It is not 
surprising that the existing Concessionaires find t hemselves in a disadvantageous 
position vis-a-vis the new Concessionaires under the MCA, 2021. 
 
193. The Committee also observes that the new Agree ment was issued with the 
purpose of countering the lukewarm response of the private sector in PPP projects and 
to provide a framework to increase PPP participatio n to boost port performances. The 
Committee observes that in 2019, on the issue of pe riodic revision of SoR (Schedule of 
Rates) for land, it had been decided not to apply r evision of SoR for land every 05 years 
for PPP projects as it may not be in the overall in terest of the Major Ports.  The 
Committee feels that the retrospective application of the MCA, 2021 should be 
examined in the same spirit. The Concessions given to the private operators generally 
are passed on to exporters/importers by leveraging costs and therefore the general 
public can only benefit by these measures.  The Com mittee feels that the Ministry may 
take these concerns into account while examining th e requests of the existing 
Concessionaires.  
 
194. The Committee notes that the issue is under ex amination by a Committee 
consisting of the Chairmen of various Major Ports a nd desires that the Ministry may 
update the Committee on its outcome.  
 
195. ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE ADVERSE PROVISIONS I N THE MODEL 
CONCESSION AGREEMNT 
/xrhombus Debt Due  - Under Article 1.1, Debt Due definition is amende d to provide that it 
should not exceed 85% of the Total Project Cost whi ch will deter the Lenders from 
lending beyond certain limits. 
 
/xrhombus Total project Cost 
Under Article 1.1, ‘’Total Project Cost” means the lowest of-  
(a) The capital cost of the Project as set forth in  Financial Package at the date of 
Financial Close,  
(b) The actual capital cost of the project upon com pletion approved by Independent 
Engineer & Statutory Auditor and submitted to autho rity at the time of issuing 
Completion Certificate and 
(c) A sum of Rs. ****** crores (Rupees ******* cror es). 
 This would effectively 
mean that the compensation in the event of terminat ion is limited to the Estimated 
Project Cost. This departs from the provisions in the existing projects awarded prior to 

41 
 
2018, where the Concession Agreement allows the Act ual Project Cost to be taken 
into consideration. This provision deters Developer s from investing as the Lenders 
demand additional securities with higher interest r ates as they would like to cover 
100% of their loans.   
 
/xrhombus Adjusted Equity 
Under Article 1.1, a new Term ‘Adjusted Equity’ has been defined to mean the Equity 
adjusted to reflect the change in its value on acco unt of depreciation and variations in 
price index. The Adjusted Equity after the 4th anni versary of COD shall be Base 
Adjusted Equity reduced by 0.22% each month till th e end of the Concession period. 
This reduces the compensation payable to the conces sionaire in case of default on 
account of the Concessioning Authority 
 
/xrhombus Payment of Royalty-100@ WPI escalation 
Under Article 9.2 (a), the payment criterion has no w been changed from the revenue sharing 
model to royalty model, which was adopted in the in itial years of privatisation, and replaced 
subsequently by revenue sharing model, as the royal ty model proved to be unsuccessful. 
Adopting the royalty model again with annual escalation by 100% of the WPI is going to hurt 
the concessionaires badly. 
 
/xrhombus Royalty payment linked to MGC 
Under Article 9.2 (a), the Concessionaire will have  to pay for the shortfall in the Minimum 
Guaranteed Cargo handled in a year. Often, the quan tum of traffic handled is beyond the 
control of the concessionaire. In view of this, the  requirement of paying for shortfall was 
dispensed with in the earlier MCAs in the revenue s haring model.The concept of MGT has 
lost its relevance with excess capacity available at major ports.  
 
/xrhombus Creation of Charge 
Under the previous MCA, the Concessionaire possesse s the ownership of all the assets 
created by it till the end of the Concession Period  and is entitled to create a charge on its 
rights, title and interest in assets created by the Concessionaire in favour of the Lenders.  This 
clause has been deleted. Revised clause has been ad ded to the effect that the concessionaire 
shall not assign its rights, title or interest in t he Agreement and in Project Assets in favour of 
any persons. The current definition of Project Assets offers limited scope for lenders to create 
charge over project assets and the lenders would no t come forward to finance the project 
unless additional securities and high interest rate s are agreed to. This would make the project 
financially unviable for the Developers (Article 10).   
 
/xrhombus Compensation in case of Termination 
Under Article 17.1 (c), if the termination is due t o Concessioning Authority’s Event of 
default, the compensation payable by the Concession ing Authority to the Concessionaire 
shall be an amount equal to 90% of the Debt Due les s Insurance Cover; and 150% of the 
Adjusted Equity and 115% of the Additional Terminat ion Payment. By deducting insurance 

42 
 
cover from the debt due, the compensation payable can become negative. This is unfair to the 
Concessionaires and the Lenders as while the assets  are taken over by the Authority, 
compensation payable is restricted.   
 
196. The benefits under the Services Exports from I ndia (SEIS) Scheme have been 
removed from the ports sector.   SEIS aims to make our exports competitive in terms of price 
and promotes export of services from India. Under S EIS Scheme, exporters of selected 
services are entitled to a 3% / 5% / 7% incentive o n the Net Foreign exchange earned in the 
form of Duty Credit Scrips. These SEIS scrips can b e used to pay Import duty or can be 
encashed by selling it to any Importer.   
 
197. Last year, when the Ministry of Commerce first  extended the validity of the FTP for 
the last year of FTP 2015-2020, benefits under the MEIS (a similar scheme meant for 
merchandise exports) were allowed to continue until  a new scheme replaced it. However, the 
SEIS was not extended.  
 
REVIEW PROVISIONS UNDER MAJOR CONCESSION ACT 
198. The Committee has been informed by the IPPTA t hat Port Authorities are reluctant to 
make any changes in provisions of the Concession Ag reements even when there is full 
justification on the plea that these may be constru ed as post bid change inviting attraction of 
vigilance/audit agencies. 
 
199. The Committee has been informed of the followi ng arguments in favour of allowing 
changes in the provisions of the Concession Agreements:- 
 
/head2right Most Concession Agreements contain the following review provisions -  
“Amendments, Modifications or Alterations 
No amendments, modifications or alterations of or any addition to the terms and conditions of 
this Agreement shall be valid unless the same be in writing and agreed to by the Parties.” 
If such provisions are built into the Concession Ag reements, it can only mean that the 
Agreement can be changed in the course of the contract.  
 
/head2right In a contract of 30-year duration, every change can not be anticipated at the bidding 
stage. If the Agreements are completely inflexible and no changes in provisions are 
allowed, this may result in some of the Projects be ing turned into Non-Performing 
Assets (NPAs). 
 
200. Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry ha s submitted that the MCA, 2021 
has been made more investor friendly.  In the new M CA, 2021 the total project cost 
shall be deemed to be modified to the extent of var iation in Price Index occurring in 
respect of Adjusted Equity as defined in Article 1. 1,  The revised MCA, 2021 also 
provides for payment of Royalty by private operator s to port on per Million  Ton of 
Cargo handled instead of Percentage of Gross Revenu e Basis.  As per Article 9.2 clause 

43 
 
(c), royalty per MT of Cargo/TEUs will be indexed t o as per variations in the Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI) annually as declared by the Minis try of Commerce and Industry.  
The royalty payment to ports will undergo the same variation as WPI variation which is 
a rise for general inflation and is not an increase  on royalty.  Regarding Schemes like 
Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) and Service E xport from India Scheme 
(SEIS), they are operated by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.  
 
201. The Committee observes that while clauses rela ting to Amendments, 
Modifications etc are built into almost every agree ment or contract, at the same time 
Agreements have a certain sanctity and adherence to  its conditions is always expected.  
A Concession Agreement is signed, knowing fully wel l the duration of the contract, the 
market conditions and the risks involved and it is expected that the Concessionaire 
evaluated all costs and benefits at the time of the agreement.  
  
202. As such, Private Public Partnerships require a  framework that would enable the 
private sector partner to secure a reasonable retur n while enabling value addition for 
public resources.  This can only be achieved by est ablishing clear and transparent 
norms for the PPP and by entering into unambiguous and specific contractual 
relationship . Concession Agreements are generally made for 30 yea rs and with the 
rapidly changing market scenario, every change cann ot be anticipated at the bidding 
stage in contracts spanning three decades. In fact private players are now looking for 
even longer Concession periods in the port sector.  The Adani Ports and Special 
Economic Zone (APSEZ) has won a bid to build a Gree nfield port in Tajpur, West 
Bengal for a Concession period of 99 years.  The MC A, 2021 also has provisions for 45 
years Concession Period for multi-phase investments . The port sector is capital 
intensive and longer Concession periods which would  lead to gestation for a larger 
Capital cycle may become the norm in future. It is unimaginable that the conditions 
prevailing at the time of the Agreement would remain the same in the next century. 
 
203. Regarding the argument that the Port Authoriti es are reluctant to make changes 
due to audit/vigilance, the Committee observes that  the issue of Royalty or revenue 
share raised above had, in fact been raised  by the  CAG in its 2015 Performance Audit 
Report of Public Private Partnership Projects.  The  project under examination of the 
CAG was the agreement of the JNPA with the Nhava Sh eva International Container 
Terminal (NSICT) for operation of a Container Terminal where the JNPA had switched 
to the revenue sharing model after 18 years of oper ation from the earlier royalty model 
due to high royalty rate per TEU which increased pr ogressively.  The CAG had 
commented adversely on the design deficiencies of t he model due to which the port had 
to migrate to the revenue share mode after 18 years  of operation.  The CAG had also 
commented that a PPP Project would succeed only if the risks are uniformly 
apportioned between the two parties and that a Conc ession Agreement is unlikely to 
succeed if it has conditions which are harsh on the operator. 
 

44 
 
204. In the considered opinion of the Committee, mu ch of the issues arising from the 
Concession Agreements can be avoided by adopting th e right models for the project 
from the beginning and ensuring that the Concession aire Agreements retain an element 
of flexibility to incorporate necessary changes whi ch would benefit both parties.  Rigid 
Agreements have the potential to defeat the purpose  of successful PPP partnerships. 
While the provisions of the Agreement should be lar gely adhered to, no purpose is 
served by an unyielding observance of faulty policies.  The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may examine the issues raised by the I PPTA in the light of the above 
position.  
 
XII. INITIATIVES FOR LEGAL DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION  
205. Maritime arbitration has the advantages of fle xibility, specialization, confidentiality 
and the possibility for the parties to determine ev ery aspect of the procedure according to 
their needs.  
 
206. The Committee was informed that 
Article 19 of the Model Concession Agreement   
has the mechanism for dispute resolution. In case of a dispute between the parties,  the parties 
shall first meet so as to discuss and resolve the m atter in mutual agreement. If this fails, the 
Concessionaire may agree to refer the matter to a C onciliation and Settlement committee 
established by the Concessioning Authority in line with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 
2015. In case both these processes fail, the dispute shall be referred to SAROD – Ports. In the 
event of constitution of a statutory Adjudicatory B oard as per provisions of Major Port 
Authorities Act, 2021 or such other forum with powe rs to receive and adjudicate upon 
disputes between the Concessionaire and the Concessioning Authority, all disputes not settled 
through conciliation, can alternatively be referred  to the Adjudicatory Board or such other 
forum with mutual consent of the parties in accorda nce with the applicable laws. Both parties 
can challenge the award in a Court of Law in case t hey are aggrieved with award. The 
Committee was informed about the problems with the above dispute resolution mechanisms-   
1) Dispute Resolution for Existing Concessionaires - T he existing concession 
agreements/licence agreements have provisions relating to Dispute Resolution. As per 
these provisions, if there is any dispute or differ ences claims of any kind arise, the 
Parties should first meet together promptly in an e ffort to resolve such issues. The 
Parties may, in appropriate cases agree to refer th e matter to an Expert appointed by 
them with mutual consent. Failing amicable settleme nt or settlement with the 
assistance of an Expert, the dispute may be finally  settled through Arbitration under 
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. However, in m any cases, Ports are not 
honouring the opinion given by the Expert and also not agreeing to refer the matter 
for Arbitration. This has made the attempts of the concessionaires to settle the 
disputes amicably difficult. 
2) Dispute Resolution For new Concessionaires- For new  Concessionaires,  Government 
has introduced a Society for Affordable Redressal o f Disputes (SAROD Ports) which 
acts as an arbitration mechanism at affordable cost s.  The success of this mechanism 
is to be tested, as new concessions have been award ed only recently.Approaching 

45 
 
SAROD Ports depends on mutual agreement between the  Port Authority and the 
Concessionaire. At present, none of the Concessionaire has approached SAROD Ports 
3) Adjudicatory Board - By way of enactment of Major P ort Authorities Act, 2021, a 
new mechanism of Adjudicatory Board has been introd uced. It is headed by a 
Presiding Officer assisted by two Members. The Pres iding Officer shall be either a 
retired Supreme Court Judge or a retired Chief Just ice of a High Court. The Members 
shall be either retired Chief Secretary of a State or retired Secretary of the Central 
Government, having at least 20 years of experience in the field of finance, commerce, 
administration, maritime, shipping or port related matters. However, the Presiding 
Officer has not yet been appointed and the efficacy of this Board in resolving disputes 
is yet to be tested. 
4) Conciliation and Settlement Committees - In the mea nwhile, Government came up 
with another new Mechanism called Conciliation and Settlement Committee headed 
by retired Secretary level Officers and Independent  Experts. The Committee has been 
functioning successfully and is able to resolve som e of the pending disputes. 
However, some of the issues could not be settled as  Government has not accepted the 
Settlement reached through this mechanism. In some cases, the Port Authorities are 
not agreeing to refer the cases to these Committees.  
 
207. The Committee observes that there are various mechanisms for adjudication of 
maritime disputes but none have proved to be very s uccessful. The Committee has been 
informed by the IPPTA in its deposition that there is a dire need to develop a robust 
consultative mechanism to deal with ticklish issues  and uncertainties inherent in long term 
contracts. The IPPTA acknowledged that at the polic y and regulatory level on private sector 
participation, the Government does seek the comment s of the stakeholders on draft policies 
proposed. But they seldom consult on the final poli cy being issued leading to difficulties 
because once the policy is promulgated, the Governm ent is very reluctant to bring out any 
changes.   
  
208. The Committee observes that a thorough discuss ion on all aspects of a proposed 
policy with all stakeholders and taking into consid eration the viewpoints of the 
stakeholders should be sufficient to make a policy which would address all the concerns 
of the stakeholders to the extent possible.  It is understandable that once a policy is in 
place, the Government does not wish to make frequen t changes in it.  However, the 
success of the PPP projects is essential for the achievement of the Maritime India Vision 
and the Ministry should make every effort to addres s the stakeholders concerns. The 
Committee recommends that in case of contentious issues emerging from the discussions 
with the stakeholders, the Ministry may again consu lt the stakeholders and try to 
resolve their concerns.  The Committee also recomme nds that the Ministry may explore 
the possibility of creating a standing mechanism co nsisting of representatives of the 
Ministry, concerned Port and the PPP Operators to d iscuss outstanding issues at 
specified periodic intervals so that issues can be settled at an early stage without 
resorting to arbitration which has not proved to be very successful.  

46 
 
209. The Committee has been informed by the IPPTA t hat in many cases, the Ports 
have not honoured the verdict of the Expert called for amicable settlement and have 
also refused to refer the issue to arbitration. The  Committee would like to have the 
views of the Ministry on this issue.  The Committee  desires to have a list of such cases 
where amicable settlement was not reached through d iscussion and it was not referred 
to arbitration or the Conciliation Committees.  The  Committee wishes to know the 
action taken by the Ministry in such cases for resolution of the issues. 
 
210. The Committee observes that the Adjudicatory B oard was introduced under the 
Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 and yet no Board h as been formed as yet.  The 
Committee desires to know the reasons for non forma tion of the Board and 
recommends that the same may be constituted at the earliest.  
 
211. Of the dispute mechanisms, it appears that onl y the Conciliation and Settlement 
Committees have had reasonable success in the resolution of disputes.  The Ministry has 
provided information that out of 43 cases   referre d to the CSC, 15 have been resolved 
while 8 are at final stages of settlement. The Comm ittee recommends that the Ministry 
may provide all assistance to such Committee for th eir functioning and ensure that Port 
Authorities have no hesitation either in referring the disputes to these Committees or in 
implementing their decisions.  
 
212. The Committee also notes that the vision is to  have 85% PPP partnerships in 
Major Port projects by 2030.  The increase in the n umber of partnerships would throw 
up more issues between the parties which would need  successful arbitration otherwise 
more projects would get bogged down in arbitration issues.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry pay adequate attention  to resolution of arbitration issues 
and setting up of successful forums for arbitration for implementation of PPP projects 
 
XIII. PORT EMPLOYEES WELFARE  
213. Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry ga ve details of the sanctioned 
strength of employees and vacancies at the 12 Major  Ports (ANNEXURE XV).  The 
Committee observes that a majority of the Major Ports have a shortfall of vacancies and 
some like the Mumbai Port, SMPK, Cochin Port,  Para dip Port and Chennai Port have 
about half of the sanctioned posts vacant.  The Com mittee desires to be informed about 
the reason for the large number of vacancies, the duration for which the posts have been 
vacant and the timeline by which the vacancies are likely to be filled up.   The 
Committee observes that JNPA and SMPK have employed  a large number of 
contractual workers, presumably against the vacant regular posts.  The Committee also 
observes that there appears to be a great disparity in the number of employed personnel 
across the ports.  For instance, Kamarajar Port, Vo C Port and JNPA have sanctioned 
strengths of only 92, 458 and 1660 employees respec tively while Mumbai port and 
SMPK have sanctioned strengths of 7417 and 10,096 o f which as stated earlier about 
half are vacant.  Even keeping in view the varying capacities and traffic handled by the 

47 
 
ports, the disparity in number of employees is stri king.   The Committee observes that 
automation and mechanization of  operations in port s like JNPA have reduced the 
employee strength.  The private ports of Pippavav a nd Jaigarh in Gujarat have 
employee strengths of 500 and 1700, respectively.  
 
214. The Committee recommends that ports which have  a huge number of vacancies 
especially Mumbai Port and SMPK may review their sa nctioned strength and take 
action to either fill the vacancies if necessary or  abolish posts which are lying vacant for 
a long time.    The Committee also exhorts the port s to expedite mechanization so that 
the employee strength could be restricted to only the essential posts.   
 
215. The Committee notes the different Welfare Sche mes for the Shipbuilding, 
Shipbreaking and Dock Workers.  The Committee desir es to know whether residential 
quarters are provided to the employees and whether skill development courses are 
offered for upgradation of their skills.  The Committee also desires to know whether the 
contractual workers are given the same benefits as regular workers.   
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
 
 The Committee observes that the cargo handling of the Major Ports has been 
steadily increasing over the years, and only in the last year has there been an increase of 
10%. On a query by the Committee, the Ministry repl ied that to augment the volume of 
cargo handling, the Port Authorities have also expl ored the possibility of generating 
new cargo to reduce the gap between the actual traf fic and the capacity. Major Ports 
also organize trade meets to attract traffic from t heir hinterland/region. Several steps 
have also been taken to boost coastal shipping.   
(Para 13) 
 The Committee also observes that the increase of 1 0% has come primarily due to 
JNPA’s impressive performance, followed by Paradip and Deendayal Port. There is 
only a marginal increase in the figures of the rema ining Ports, while the Mormugao 
Port has witnessed a decline in traffic. The growth trend in the market share of cargo is, 
therefore, confined to only three of the Major Port s while the remaining show barely 
perceptible improvements. The Committee underscores the need for better performance 
by the remaining nine Major Ports and recommends th at the Ministry come out with a 
focused and calibrated strategy to raise the cargo handling performance of such Major 
Ports . 
(Para 14) 
 The Committee observes that India occupies the 11 th  position globally regarding 
container traffic handled. Massive Container Ships invariably require deep drafts, and 
the ports must remain alive to their requirements. At present, most Indian Ports have 
drafts of about 14 mts, with only a few having 16 m ts drafts, while Container Ships 
require drafts of upto 18-20 mts.  
 (Para 15) 
CAPACITY OF MAJOR PORTS  
 The Committee observes that while port capacity is  considered to be saturated at 
70-75% of capacity, some of the Major Ports are fun ctioning far below the mark. 
Mormugao operates at only 27% capacity, while Chenn ai and VoCA operate just at 
32%.  
(Para 18) 
 The Committee observes that there is still much un tapped potential to be 
harnessed so as to increase the capacity of most of  the Major Ports. The Committee 
points out that the capacity utilization of the Non -Major Ports in India has remained at 
64%, which is much higher than the average capacity utilization in the Major Ports and 

49 
 
recommends that the Major Ports may set targets to increase the utilization of their 
existing capabilities to an optimum level.  
(Para 19) 
TURNAROUND TIME AND AVERAGE SHIP OUTPUT PER BERTH DAY 
The Committee observes that of all the Major Ports,  only the JNPA has achieved a 
world-class Turn Around time of 24 hours for Contai ners. The Committee commends 
the JNPA for this seminal achievement and exhorts t he other Major Ports to follow the 
good practices of the JNPA to improve their respective Turn Around times.  
(Para 22) 
The Committee notes that while the TRT may have come down considerably from 80-90 
hours, there has been only marginal improvement in the last five years despite the 
massive investments in technology, mechanisation an d infrastructure. Of the 12 Major 
Ports, only 3-4 are functioning well with acceptabl e performances. The performance of 
other Major Ports in Turn Around Time must attract the undivided attention of the 
respective Port authorities in the larger interest of ensuring greater operational 
efficiency. 
(Para 25) 
 Against this backdrop, the Committee calls upon th e Port authorities to redouble 
their efforts on multiple fronts, lest achieving th e goal of less than 20 hours Turn 
Around Time as envisioned in the Maritime Vision 2030 would remain elusive.   
(Para 26) 
 The Committee also notes that the Average Ship Out put Per Berth Day, like the 
TRT, shows only a marginal increase for many ports,  and some ports have even shown 
a decline in output. Though the Paradip Port has crossed the threshold of 30,000 tonnes, 
yet unless all Major Ports project discernible increase in their performance parameters, 
the efforts of individual Ports would not help achi eve the objectives.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry takes special efforts towards monitoring the ground 
situation at ports that impede the performance progress . 
(Para 27) 
 The Committee notes that every year, each Major Po rt enters into an MoU with 
the Ministry in which targeted efficiency parameter s are agreed upon. The Committee 
desires to know the targets set for all four effici ency parameters and whether the ports 
have achieved the same. The Committee observes that  due to infrastructure 
development and technological advancements, a proportional increase in productivity is 
only expected. As such productivity enhancement is invariably contingent upon and 
commensurate with the volume of investment. The Com mittee draws the attention of 
the Ministry to the imperative need for targeted pe rformance by the major ports as 

50 
 
agreed to in the MoU and recommends that each Major  Port may fix a target 
proportional to the amount of investments in infrastructural development.   
(Para 28) 
 The Committee observes that mechanization of berth s, minimum dwell time, 
skilled labour, and port connectivity for reduction  in evacuation time are essential to 
reduce the Turnaround time and recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to 
bring in greater PPP partnerships for mechanization of berths.  
(Para 30) 
 The Committee has also been informed about the lac k of availability of skilled 
workforce in the port sector that hampers productiv ity growth. The Committee 
recommends that Logistics Skills may be included in  the training programmes being 
conducted under the auspices of the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) to 
cater to the ever dynamic needs of the port sector . 
(Para 31) 
DRAFTS OF INDIAN PORTS VERSUS FOREIGN PORTS  
 The Committee observes that the world over, the sh ipping industry is moving 
towards mega-size vessels with ships of 20,000 TEU and above. While a Capesize vessel 
requires upwards of 18m draft, the draft at Indian ports is in the range of 14-16 meters 
only, owing to siltation. The Committee observes th at the geographical and 
topographical limitations being 
 are  identical for both the public and private por ts in 
India, how  but the private ports have been able to develop dr afts matching with world-
class ports whereas the public ports have lagged be hind. The Gujarat Pipavav port has 
a draft of 18.5 metres and plans to extend it to 20 .5 metres. The Committee, while 
acknowledging the high dredging costs, underscores that the ports drafts must be in 
sync with the growing size of the ships in the inte rest of maximizing the benefits of large 
ships in cargo handling. 
(Para 33) 
 Ports must increase draft according to the respect ive cargo profile. Indian 
container terminals must target an 18m+ draft. With  the evolving ship types and 
increasing port parcel sizes, loading and discharge  rates must be enhanced. The 
Committee also emphasizes that greater ship sizes a nd container loads need increased 
mechanization at Indian ports to improve the loadin g and unloading ecosystem. Dual-
cycle cranes and Automated Guided Vehicles (AGVs) m ay be introduced in ports to 
ensure incremental productivity.  
(Para 34) 
 The Committee observes that the Indian Private Por ts and Terminals 
Association (IPPTA) had stated in its deposition be fore the Committee that most of the 

51 
 
tugs deployed by major ports had outlived their eff ective life and are operating beyond 
economic conditions. The service levels rendered by  them do not match the Industry 
Standards. Private Tug Companies should be encourag ed to render towage services at 
Major Ports in line with the international practice s. The Committee calls upon the 
Ministry to consider this issue on merit. 
(Para 35) 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR PORTS  
 The Committee notes the huge pension liabilities o f the Mumbai port. However, 
it feels that such liabilities did not emerge in a day and are known from the time it got 
accumulated. Necessary contingency planning should have been effected and due 
mechanism put in place. The Committee appreciates t hat the port has now limited 
induction to technical and professional posts but n otes that the present sanctioned 
strength of port employees at 7,462 is still much h igher than JNPA and private ports of 
Mundra and JSW Jaigarh.  
(Para 43) 
 The Committee observes that automation being criti cal to productivity 
enhancement is also necessary to reduce the staff s trength of the port. But, the 
digitalization process is still ongoing in the port  with Port Enterprise Business System, 
GIS-based Estate Operations Management System, and Integrated Access Surveillance 
System. The Committee recommends that the Port impl ements the digitization and 
automation programme in a time bound manner without any further delay.   
(Para 44) 
 The Committee also observes that expansion in Crui se Tourism after completion 
of the International Cruise Terminal would boost th e revenue accrued significantly. 
However, the Port should adopt proactive marketing strategies for promotion of cruise 
tourism by building appropriate interface with rele vant stakeholders. The Committee 
observes that the Ropeway project has innate potent ial for tourism promotion and 
recommends that the Port may take up with the ASI for early resolution of the issue.   
(Para 45) 
 The Committee observes that the Mumbai Port has a sizeable land bank and 
recommends that land monetization options may be ex plored in the interest of creating 
a credible industrial ecosystem that supports the Port while strengthening its resources. 
(Para 46) 
 The Committee observes that Cochin port has much t he same problems as that 
of the Mumbai port. Like the Mumbai port, land mone tization could be one of the 
solutions. The Committee has learnt from media repo rts that the port is planning to 
lease land for logistics-related activities and rec ommends that the port may make all 

52 
 
concerted efforts for maximum land monetization. Th e Committee has also learnt that 
the port plans to change the system of granting con cessions in vessel-related charges to 
ships calling at International Container Transshipm ent Terminal (ICTT) by shifting to 
a cargo-based discount scheme instead of a call-bas ed discount scheme. The Committee 
observes that due to the economic crisis in Sri Lan ka, many ship operators would divert 
their ships to Cochin, and the port should take adv antage of such an opportunity by 
realigning its strategies. The Committee desires to  be apprised of the Concessions in 
Vessel-Related Charges (VRCs) offered to Containers and the impact thereof. However, 
two Members of the Committee opined that the proces s of land monetization should not 
be done through giving control of valuable land hel d by the Cochin Port Trust to 
private monopolies and businesses. The port trust s hould use the land productively and 
produce profits through its initiatives and not han d over the valuable public land to 
private parties.  
 (Para 48) 
 The Committee observes that the iron ore in Goa is  of low-grade material for 
which beneficiation needs to be done before it is e xported. Moreover, a grade of only up 
to 62.5 per cent can be exported. The Committee obs erves that the Mormugao port 
relied heavily on the revival of iron ore export fo r its sustenance. As dependence on one 
commodity is laden with risk for any port, the Comm ittee suggests that the port 
explores the possibility of other commodities, like  bauxite, gypsum etc. from Goa and 
other neighboring States for transportation. The Co mmittee observes that the 
Mormugao Port authorities had informed that transpo rtation of iron ore cargo from 
Karnataka could be a possible alternative in case t he iron ore mines in Goa were not 
revived. The Committee feels that as there are ports like Krishnapatnam, Kakinada and 
Vishakhapatnam which can handle the cargo, it is un likely that interstate cargo would 
come to Mormugao port unless attractive rates and c oncessions are offered by the Port. 
The Committee recommends that the Mormugao Port may  put in place, proactive 
strategies to attract cargo from neighbouring states. 
(Para 52) 
 Regarding the development of the cruise terminal, at the meeting in Goa  with the 
Mormugao Port Authority, the Ministry of Tourism, t he State Government of Goa and 
various Tour Operators, the Committee was informed that there are only day cruises 
operating at present. The Committee had enquired ab out media reports on Goa port 
being dropped from the cruise circuit of three top cruise liners. The Committee was 
informed that there had been an incident with one c ruise liner due to an altercation 
with taxi drivers at the port gates. As such, the i ssue had been taken up with the Goa 
government. There was now better coordination with all parties, including the taxi 
drivers. The Committee observes that globally, the cruise industry was dominated by a 
few companies and such incidents would mar the pros pects of Goa in the international 
cruise circuit. The Committee observed that the lon g and beautiful coastline of Goa 

53 
 
presents huge potential for cruise tourism. The suc cess of the cruise industry would 
depend on having an ideal ecosystem in which local conveyance plays a major role.  
(Para 53) 
 Observing that the local conveyance in Goa was a S tate wide problem, the 
Committee recommended that solutions like the devel opment of an app like “Savari” of 
Kerala which every taxi driver could join in Kerala, may be developed for Goa too.  
(Para 54) 
ISSUES IN OTHER MAJOR PORTS  
 The Committee notes that while the Mumbai, Cochin and Goa ports have faced 
financial difficulty due to some unique issues, mos t of the Major Ports suffer from 
common problems of outdated infrastructure, low cap acity utilization, and poor 
performance Parameters. The Committee observes that  mechanization, connectivity 
and good evacuation capacity are essential for incr easing the performance of the ports 
and recommends that the Ports may endeavour to do the same with PPP partnerships .   
(Para 61) 
 The Committee notes the benefits of the PPP model and recommends that all 
Major ports may make all efforts to achieve their targets of PPP partnerships as per the 
Maritime India Vision to improve their productivity and competitiveness.  
(Para 62) 
 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry ma kes every effort to 
implement the Landlord Port Model in the Major Ports.  
(Para 63) 
 The Committee also observes that land is one of th e crucial resources of the port, 
which can be gainfully monetized. The Committee has  been informed that Ports have 
allotted the land parcels for various purposes such  as viz. liquid storage terminal, 
Godown / Warehouse, Salt Industries and Port-related Activities, etc. 
(Para 64) 
 The Committee has been informed that the total lan d area available with the 12 
Major Ports is about 271043 acres. The land leased or sold by various Major ports is as 
given in Annexure – IV. 
(Para 65) 
 The Committee desires to know about the land monet ization plans of the Major 
Ports, and whether any of the Ports have plans for industrial townships in the available 
port lands . Leasing port land to private investors on PPP basis  for setting up of 

54 
 
industries/facilities would go a long way in promot ing the Port Led Industrialization 
agenda of the Government while accruing sizeable re venues for the ports to address 
their resource concerns.  
(Para 66) 
III. PORT MECHANIZATION AND MODERNIZATION 
 The Committee observes that only 35% of total bert hs are mechanised in the 
Major Ports. Only Kandla port has all of its berths mechanised.   
(Para 69) 
 The Committee finds it difficult to appreciate the  position of the Ministry that all 
berths in the Major Ports would be mechanised by 20 30, i.e. in a span of seven years. 
The Maritime Vision Plan is to position India as a top maritime nation. For this, the 
Ministry should make all efforts for mechanisation and automation of all the Major 
Ports by that year.  
(Para 70) 
 The Committee understands that the cargo should re ach a threshold for financial 
viability for the mechanisation of berths. The aver age capacity utilisation of the Major 
Ports is 49%, and many of the Major Ports are opera ting at much below this average. 
The Committee wishes to know how the Ports plan to increase their cargo handling 
capacity in the next few years to make the investme nts viable in the sphere of 
mechanisation and modernisation.  
(Para 71) 
 The Committee notes that 31 port projects involvin g mechanization and 
modernization have been identified to be developed on PPP basis to be completed by 
2024-25. The Committee would like to have the list of said 31 projects and the 
percentage of the total berths in all Ports which will be covered under this project.   
(Para 72) 
 Mechanization of berths remained at the core of th e measures taken by the 
JNPA in reducing its Turn Around Time from 52 hrs t o 28 hours in a span of 05 years. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry as also the Major Ports take expeditious 
action for the time-bound implementation of the 31 mechanisation projects and also 
draw up actionable plans for the mechanization of the remaining berths at the earliest.  
The Committee also recommends that the Major Ports may take the initiative to replace 
the old, outdated equipment at the old berths with modern equipments so as to enhance 
their productivity.  
(Para 73) 

55 
 
 
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF MEGA PORTS, NEW PORTS AND TRANSH IPMENT 
HUBS 
 The Committee observes that the economies of scale  in maritime trade have 
given rise to Mega ships or Capesize Ships, which n aturally require larger terminals 
and ports. Indian ports presently lack the infrastr ucture to deal with Capesize ships 
which are vital to international maritime trade. As  Indian ports are gearing up to 
handle these giant ships by increasing their draft depths and modernizing the ports, 
India should also plan for developing Mega Ports to  handle the ever-increasing size of 
vessels and Containers. The Committee also recommen ds that while planning for the 
mega port, the Ministry may also arrange for linkag es with the local economy, creating 
industrial clusters to be economic drivers for the region.  
(Para 77) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 The Committee observes that most of the Major Port s of India were constructed 
more than 50 years ago, some a century old. JNPA, t he 12 
th  Major port of India was 
developed in 1989 and no other major port has been developed in the last three decades. 
The Vadhavan port, with its advantages of a natural  draft of 18-20 m, proximity to the 
Mumbai Port and JNPA and to the upcoming Delhi Mumb ai Freight corridor, was a 
much-needed addition to India’s Major Ports.  
(Para 81) 
 The Committee has learned from media reports that the Dahanu Taluka 
Environment Protection Authority (DTEPA) has now gr anted No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) for the Port. The matter being sub-judice, th e Committee would like to be 
informed of any further developments on the issue.  
(Para 82) 
DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSHIPMENT HUBS  
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but feels that the distance 
between two ports should be a matter of considerati on as it impacts the overall 
productivity of both the old and also the upcoming ports. The Committee recommends 
that the distance between an upcoming port and anot her port in the region serving the 
same hinterland should form a part of the study bef ore establishing the need for a new 
port.  
(Para 94) 
 The Committee also notes the reply of the Ministry  regarding the environmental 
impact studies done and conservation plans proposed  in the upcoming Transhipment 
Hub at Galathea in Great Nicobar. As the proposed H ub is in an ecologically sensitive 

56 
 
seismic zone, the Committee exhorts the Ministry to  evaluate all ecological 
considerations before project implementation.  
(Para 95) 
 The Committee notes that one of the main problems obstructing the development 
of Transhipment in India emanates from the lack of deep drafts of Indian ports, 
especially those on the Eastern Coast and Southern coast. While dredging is necessary 
to deepen the drafts, the costs of dredging are cha rged to the shipping lines, adding to 
the cost of port calls in India compared to the foreign ports, thus, discouraging big ships 
from coming to Indian ports. The Committee has been  informed that foreign ports do 
not bear the costs of dredging, which are borne by respective Government. 
(Para 96) 
 Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry acknow ledged that the Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee Port, Kolkata, receives a dredging  subsidy from the Government. 
But, the other Major Ports are responsible for thei r dredging expenditure, both capital 
and maintenance. The Committee desires to know why only the Kolkata port receives a 
dredging subsidy from the Government . The Committee would like the Ministry to give 
a comparative data on the number of foreign governm ents which bear the cost of 
dredging and the number of foreign ports which bear  the cost of dredging themselves 
without any government help.  
(Para 97) 
 If the former is a practice worldwide, the Committ ee recommends that the 
Ministry may explore the possibility of government support for dredging in Major Ports 
so that a globally uniform practice is followed so as to make our ports cost effective and 
competitive. 
(Para 98) 
 The Committee also notes that solutions like Float ing Cranes, which unload the 
cargo from Capesize Ships anchored in mid-sea into barges that take the cargo to the 
port, have helped ports like Kandla, a low draft po rt, to improve productivity and 
increase cargo volumes. The Committee desires to kn ow if such solutions can be applied 
at other ports. In particular, it recommends that t he Ministry looks into the solutions 
where dredging costs are prohibitive.  
(Para 99) 
 The Committee also observes that in the early 2000 s, the Container giant Maersk 
had shifted to the Tanjung Pelapas Terminal in Mala ysia from Singapore, which is one 
of the world’s largest transhipment hubs, which cha nged the face of the transhipment 
business in the entire region.  
(Para 100) 

57 
 
 The reason behind the move was stated to be the of fer of a stake to the Company. 
The Committee observes that the crisis in Sri Lanka  offers an opportunity to divert 
Transshipment operations from Colombo and recommend s that the Ministry explores 
the possibility of offering such attractive package  deals to Shipping Corporations to 
incentivize them to transfer their transhipment operations to Indian ports.    
(Para 101) 
 The Committee recommends that the digitization of ports be given utmost 
priority so that automation would reduce transhipment cost .   
(Para 102) 
 The Committee also recommends that involving the p rivate sector by way of 
investment in infrastructure, provision of ancillar y services and streamlining of 
Immigration and Customs formalities, would be cruci al for developing Transhipment 
Hubs.  
(Para 103) 
V.  PORT CONNECTIVITY 
 Port connectivity is one of the critical enablers for improving the efficiency of the 
maritime logistics ecosystem. By linking the port network with other connectivity modes 
such as rail, road, and air, India’s port trade com petitiveness can grow exponentially, 
giving it a significant edge. 
(Para 104) 
 The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the D FCCIL for building the 
network of freight corridors, connecting the Major ports, which will present 
tremendous advantage in the connectivity of Major P orts and enhancing their 
productivity.  
(Para 109) 
 The Committee has been informed that although most  ports have a reasonably 
good 04 Lane Road Connectivity, Rail congestion is a concern in certain sectors, which 
affects freight movement. Combined with this, the a vailability of rakes has also 
adversely impacted the evacuation of cargo from/to ports.  
(Para 110) 
 The Committee had also been informed in its meetin gs that despite having the 
requisite infrastructure and land, the Jaigarh port  could not handle containers due to 
lack of major rail connectivity. The Committee observes that one of the main factors for 
the low capacity utilization of the Ports pertains to absence of road and rail connectivity 
to the hinterland to cater to the emerging demands.  The need for good rail and road 
port connectivity for hassle-free cargo transport m ust assume importance. It should be 

58 
 
the priority of the Ministry to ensure proper connectivity to all ports, which would drive 
up the cargo traffic and increase the revenues from  this sector. The Committee is 
pleased to note that the PM Gati Shakti Programme i s taking up 101 connectivity 
projects for both Major and Minor Ports, and the Sa garmala Programme is also 
addressing the road and rail connectivity infrastru cture gaps and recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that all such projects are impl emented on a priority basis in a 
time-bound manner.  
(Para 111) 
 The Committee recommends that while conceiving a P ort project, connectivity 
issues should invariably form part of the integrate d planning for the project at the DPR 
stage and involve all the agencies like NHAI or the  Ministry of Railways. The 
Committee has been informed at its meetings that wh ile the mechanism for such 
consultation exists, there are concerns with regard  to implementation. The Committee 
urges upon the Ministry to look into the concerns a nd ensure that all stakeholders and 
agencies are involved while planning for connectivity in a port project.   
(Para 112) 
VI.  PRIVATE PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS IN THE PORT S SECTOR  
118. The Committee observes that the investments th rough PPP mode in the last five 
years are a mere 8% of the total investments made i n the projects at Major Ports. The 
Committee desires to know the status of the seven p rojects awarded from 2018-19 to 
2021-22.  
(Para 118) 
 Regarding the Pipeline of 81 PPP projects for FY 2 022-21 to FY 2024-25, only 12 
projects, which is less than 15%, have been awarded  by 2022-23, leaving 85% of the 81 
projects in the Pipeline to be awarded till the nex t financial year. The Committee also 
observes that 298 projects have been taken up under  Sagarmala Scheme in the Major 
Ports out of which 140 have been completed, 78 are under implementation, 26 have 
been sanctioned, and the rest are still in planning  stage . The Committee feels that the 
Ministry is not making enough efforts to achieve th e targets set in the Maritime India 
Vision 2030 regarding PPP projects.  
(Para 119) 
 The Committee notes that the Comptroller and Audit or General of India, in 
their 2015 Performance Audit report on the Public P rivate Partnership Projects in 
Major Ports, had commented that the PPP mode of imp lementation suffered delays 
mainly due to protracted time taken for finalizatio n of tenders, time taken for obtaining 
security clearance of shortlisted bidders, time tak en for the signing of Chartered 
Accountant (CA) and litigations by bidders during t he tender process. The Committee 
observes that with 69 projects yet to be awarded, the Ministry needs to ensure that there 

59 
 
is timely implementation of the projects to achieve  the targeted timeline. The 
Committee understands that one of the primary objec tives of resorting to PPP is for 
faster development of infrastructure, and delays in  implementation of PPP projects 
defeat this very objective. The Committee recommends that the Ministry takes efforts to 
increase the percentage of PPP investments in major  ports and speed up the 
implementation of PPP projects in the Pipeline whic h are still in the under 
development/Inter-ministerial Consultation/Bidding stage.   
(Para 120) 
 The Committee desires to know whether the PPP Cell  in the Ministry is 
monitoring the projects on a regular basis and the effectiveness of such monitoring on 
the PPP projects.  
(Para 121) 
 As required by the Committee, the Ministry provide d statistics relating to the 
comparative performance of berths operated on PPP b asis to that of the Port’s own 
berths, which is placed at Annexure-IX. The Committ ee observes that the PPP berths, 
though less in number, outperform the Port’s own be rths in most ports. For example, in 
Chennai port, the 07 PPP berths handle a sizeable 6 3.68% of the total traffic, while the 
Port’s own 19 berths handle only 36.32%. In New Man galore Port, the 03 PPP berths 
handle a whopping 82.22% of the total traffic, whil e the Port’s own 14 berths handle a 
meagre 17.78%.   
(Para 122) 
 The Committee observes that a capacity addition of  103.03 MT has been made to 
the Major Ports in the last five years, in which an  investment of Rs. 12,065 crores in 15 
projects is under PPP mode. The Committee desires t o know the contribution of PPP 
projects to this capacity addition in the last five  years. The Committee also desires to 
know the planned capacity addition of the remaining  81 projects in the Pipeline for the 
years FY 2021-22 to FY 2024-25.  
(Para 123) 
 The Committee has been informed that there is no d edicated investment 
mechanism for the maritime sector or even the infra structure sector that impinges on 
the viability of project. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the 
need to create a dedicated Maritime Development Fun d for long-term financing of PPP 
projects in the maritime sector.  
(Para 124) 
VII. LOGISTICS AND EASE OF DOING BUSINESS  
 The Committee observes that since it is  the older  ports which have legacy 
pension issues and most of the newer ports have mai nly contractual employees and a 

60 
 
fewer regular employees, pension liabilities cannot  be cited as a universal contributory 
factor for high operating expenses. Besides, salary  payments are obligation of every 
organization and cannot be a reason for high VRC. T he requirement of 50% discount 
on cruise tourism is relatively recent and does not  explain why the VRC has always 
been high in Indian ports. The Committee desires th at the Ministry finds ways and 
means to reduce Vessel Related Charges and Lighthou se Dues to lower the logistics 
costs. The Committee also reiterates its earlier re commendation that the Ministry may 
explore the possibility of the government support f or dredging in Major Ports to curtail 
high VRC in ports.     
(Para 136) 
 The Committee recommends that each Major Port may make every effort to 
provide ancillary services to its users to improve the value addition in its supply chain.  
(Para 138)  
VIII. DIGITALISATION OF PORTS  
 The Committee is pleased to note the initiatives t aken for digitalisation as it will 
increase the efficiency and productivity of Indian ports, enabling them to compete on 
the global scale. Shipping has traditionally been a  conservative industry, slow to adapt 
to technological changes, mainly due to the enormou s and complex logistics chains 
characteristic of this industry. However, adopting new technology is critical to increase 
operational efficiencies and competitiveness .    
(Para 149) 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction the implemen tation of Port Operating 
System (POS), Terminal Operating System (TOS) and t he National Logistics Portal – 
Marine (NLP-M) in all ports and the merging of Port  Community Systems with 
National Logistics Portal-Marine. The Committee not es that other technologies like 
Blockchain Technology, Automation, and Artificial I ntelligence are in the process of 
being implemented. The Committee would like to know  the status of implementation of 
cutting-edge technologies like Digital Twin, which can be used to monitor and manage 
port operations, fleet management, optimization of the end-to-end-supply chain, 
Advanced Monitoring systems to monitor the state of  the weather, Advanced Sensor 
Technology, Augmented Reality for maritime training , 3D Printing and other related 
technology-based applications .  
(Para 150) 
 The Committee notes that the Port Authority of Sin gapore (MPA) has opted to 
build a 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing Cent re (Centre of Excellence in 
Modelling and Simulation of Next Generation Ports C4NGP) that will allow it to build a 
digital twin port. Singapore has recently inaugurat ed the Tuas Port which when fully 
operational in the 2040s, is expected to be the wor ld’s largest fully automated container 

61 
 
terminal in a single location, with an annual handl ing capacity of 65 million TEUs. The 
Rotterdam port with its digital transformation aims for ships to enter and leave the port 
autonomously in 2030. In Jebel Ali port after imple mentation of a Terminal Operating 
System, ZODIAC, the Container Terminal (CT3) will b e able to integrate with any 
Terminal that uses the same operating system and ca n become part of the largest global 
network of supply chains.   
)Para  151) 
 Private ports and Terminals in India have embraced  the advanced technologies 
to surpass many of the Major Ports performances. Th e Committee has been informed 
that Digital twin technology is operational at the GTI Private Terminal at Nhava Sheva 
as well as the latest Terminal Operating Systems, n avigation simulation for training, 
etc.  
(Para 152) 
 While the Committee appreciates the initiatives ta ken for digitalization, it urges 
upon the Major Ports to adopt the state-of-the-art technologies to remain globally 
competitive. To stay abreast of the rapidly evolvin g technology should be integral to the 
digitalisation efforts of the ports.  
(Para 153) 
 The Committee also observes that upgrading skill s ets of employees and training 
programmes for the future workforce would be crucia l to keep pace with the 
digitalisation of the maritime sector. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and 
the Major Port Authorities should partner with Mari time Institutes for conduct of 
training and capacity building programmes for port employees.  
(Para 154) 
IX. GREEN SHIPPING 
169. The Committee notes the targets set by the Min istry for Green and Sustainable 
Ports. As per the requirement of the Committee, the  Ministry has provided details of 
the status of the Environment Performance Indicator s of some of the Major Ports 
(Annexure XI). The Committee notes that the figures  present a dismal picture. Some 
Ports like Deendayal and New Mangalore Ports have a chieved 100% targets in 
renewable energy while many ports for example, Chen nai port, VoC Port, Mormugao 
Port have barely achieved 4-6% of the target. Parad ip Port has achieved only 0.60% of 
the target. The Committee further notes that the ta rget of usage of renewable energy in 
ports to 60% by 2030 i.e. within a span of seven ye ars appears to be unrealistic given 
that the usage of renewable energy at present by mo st Major Ports is in the range of 10-
12% only.     
(Para 169) 

62 
 
 The targets achieved so far by ports are very low in case of reduction in CO2 
emissions and reduction in GHG emissions. Besides, in case of Green 
Hydrogen/Ammonia bunkers, most Major Ports are stil l in the planning stage. The 
target of reduction in carbon emissions by 30% taki ng 2023 as the Baseline Year also 
appears to be over-optimistic as the only major initiative in this direction is the Shore to 
Ship Power supply.  
(Para 170) 
 The target for percentage of Port Equipment/vehicl es electrified is more than 
50% by 2030 but the Cochin Port has achieved only 8 %, VoC Port 9% and Kamarajar 
5%. Mumbai and Mormugao have not yet achieved any target.   
(Para 171) 
 The Committee would also like to know the number o f EV charging Stations by 
2025 which would be considered adequate  as the data provided by the Ministry shows 
the present status to be 01 in JNPA, 02 in New Mang alore and 01 in Kamarajar Port 
only.   
(Para 172) 
 Zero-carbon fuels and technologies are not current ly available at the size, scale 
or price, the shipping industry needs for wide-scal e adoption. For a ship to be zero-
emissions, it must be capable of operating on fuels  like green hydrogen which produces 
zero carbon emissions. The Ministry has stated that  the Cochin Shipyard is building a 
hydrogen fuel cell powered ferry vessel as a pilot project and all tests & trials for using 
the same for marine application will be completed b y end of August, 2023. At the time 
of Demands for Grants 2023-24, the Committee had be en informed that the project had 
been stalled and funds were unutilized due to non-a vailability of special grade 
aluminium plates. The Committee desires to know the exact status in the matter.   
(Para 173) 
 The Committee observes that Shore to Ship Supply i s a significant contributor to 
reduction in carbon emissions and recommends that t he facility be provided to all 
vessels including cruise ships and coastal vessels.  The Committee also observes that 
cargo like coal and iron ore cause a lot of dust po llution and recommends that all Major 
Ports should have covered sheds for the storage of such cargo to prevent pollution. The 
Committee hopes that the Ports endeavor to achieve 100% electrification of Port 
Equipment/Vehicles by 2030.  
(Para 174) 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry has issue d guidelines and set targets 
but does not appear to have formulated a Green Poli cy.  The Committee refers to the 
green initiatives of the Maritime and Port Authorit y (MPA) of Singapore and Port of 

63 
 
Rotterdam placed at Annexure XII. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
form a similar blueprint for reduction of CO2 from different spheres of port activity 
rather than having a total reduction which may be m ore difficult to implement. The 
Committee also recommends that the Ministry may for m a Green Policy comprising 
green initiatives and targets for different aspects  of the port sector. The Committee also 
desires to know the infrastructure planned or devel oped for the green energy of the 
future as timely development of such infrastructure  would be crucial for timely 
implementation of green policies. The Port of Rotte rdam for instance is working on a 
public hydrogen pipeline through the port which in the future will be connected to the 
national and international hydrogen network  
(Para 175) 
X. CRUISE TOURISM  
 The Committee observed that Singapore cruises go t o international waters and 
allow the casinos to be operated from there and the n return which is why such cruises 
are able to attract more tourists and enquired from  the Ministry whether similar cruise 
was operating in India.  The Ministry informed that the Cordelia cruise goes out beyond 
12 nautical miles which allows people to enjoy casi nos.  The Committee recommends 
that cruises could initiate from Mumbai to Mangalor e and to Goa via Cochin from 
where the ship could go to international waters to attract more tourists. 
(Para 180) 
XI.  ACTS AND LEGISLATIONS, MODEL CONCESSIONAIRE AG REEMENT 
AND THE ISSUES IN PRIVATE PUBLIC PARTNERSHIPS  
 The Committee observes that the JNPA, the first La ndlord Port in the country, is 
a good Landlord Port model that showcases the advan tages which the Major Ports can 
benefit from. JNPA, the top Container Port of the c ountry, ranks 54 in the global 
rankings and the efficiencies brought to the port have enabled it to achieve performance 
Parameters which are far ahead of the rest of the Major Ports.   
(Para 186) 
 The Committee observes that the operational cost o f a PPP operated berth will 
be substantially lower compared to a port operated berth due to several reasons like less 
number of staff employed, improved  productivity du e to adoption of technology, etc.  
There is no cost involved to the Port Authority as the entire cost of port operations is 
undertaken by the PPP operator.  The Landlord Port Model has been a successful global 
practice and the Committee recommends that the Mini stry may make all-out efforts to 
implement the model in the remaining Major Ports.  
(Para 187) 

64 
 
ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION O F THE NEW 
MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT 
 The Committee had requested the Ministry to give i ts comments on the issue of 
extending the benefits of the MCA, 2021 to both the  existing as well as new 
Concessionaires.  The Ministry has put forth the ar guments that the PPP projects are 
executed through Concession Agreements which are le gally binding and are governed 
by the policies that are applicable in that time pe riod. Any post- bid changes in the 
Concession Agreement is open to litigation.  The Mi nistry has also informed that a 
Committee consisting of the Chairmen of VoCPA, ChPA  & JNPA was constituted in 
May, 2023 for deliberation on whether the provision s of MCA, 2021 can be made 
retrospective and the report of that Committee is awaited.  
(Para 191) 
 The Committee observes that the within the past tw o decades, the Model 
Concessionaire Agreement has been changed thrice, i n 2008, 2018 and 2021 
(Comparative statement of the provisions of the thr ee MCAs placed at Annexure XIV).  
The first revision came after a decade and brought only minor changes in a few of the 
provisions. The second revision came within 03 year s and brought about a major 
overhaul in existing regulations, with the introduc tion of market based tariff fixation, 
abolition of the authority of TAMP, provisions for change in cargo, etc. It is not 
surprising that the existing Concessionaires find t hemselves in a disadvantageous 
position vis-a-vis the new Concessionaires under the MCA, 2021. 
(Para 192) 
 The Committee also observes that the new Agreement  was issued with the 
purpose of countering the lukewarm response of the private sector in PPP projects and 
to provide a framework to increase PPP participatio n to boost port performances. The 
Committee observes that in 2019, on the issue of pe riodic revision of SoR (Schedule of 
Rates) for land, it had been decided not to apply r evision of SoR for land every 05 years 
for PPP projects as it may not be in the overall in terest of the Major Ports.  The 
Committee feels that the retrospective application of the MCA, 2021 should be 
examined in the same spirit. The Concessions given to the private operators generally 
are passed on to exporters/importers by leveraging costs and therefore the general 
public can only benefit by these measures.  The Com mittee feels that the Ministry may 
take these concerns into account while examining th e requests of the existing 
Concessionaires.  
(Para 193) 
 The Committee notes that the issue is under examin ation by a Committee 
consisting of the Chairmen of various Major Ports a nd desires that the Ministry may 
update the Committee on its outcome.  
(Para 194) 

65 
 
 Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry has su bmitted that the MCA, 2021 
has been made more investor friendly.  In the new M CA, 2021 the total project cost 
shall be deemed to be modified to the extent of var iation in Price Index occurring in 
respect of Adjusted Equity as defined in Article 1. 1,  The revised MCA, 2021 also 
provides for payment of Royalty by private operator s to port on per Million  Ton of 
Cargo handled instead of Percentage of Gross Revenu e Basis. As per Article 9.2 clause 
(c), royalty per MT of Cargo/TEUs will be indexed t o as per variations in the Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI) annually as declared by the Minis try of Commerce and Industry. 
The royalty payment to ports will undergo the same variation as WPI variation which is 
a rise for general inflation and is  not an increas e on royalty.  Regarding Schemes like 
Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) and Service E xport from India Scheme 
(SEIS), they are operated by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.  
(Para 200) 
 The Committee observes that while clauses relating  to Amendments, 
Modifications etc are built into almost every agree ment or contract, at the same time 
Agreements have a certain sanctity and adherence to  its conditions is always expected. 
A Concession Agreement is signed, knowing fully wel l the duration of the contract, the 
market conditions and the risks involved and it is expected that the Concessionaire 
evaluated all costs and benefits at the time of the agreement.  
 (Para 201) 
 As such, Private Public Partnerships require a fra mework that would enable the 
private sector partner to secure a reasonable retur n while enabling value addition for 
public resources. This can only be achieved by establishing clear and transparent norms 
for the PPP and by entering into unambiguous and sp ecific contractual relationship . 
Concession Agreements are generally made for 30 yea rs and with the rapidly changing 
market scenario, every change cannot be anticipated  at the bidding stage in contracts 
spanning three decades. In fact private players are  now looking for even longer 
Concession periods in the port sector. The Adani Po rts and Special Economic Zone 
(APSEZ) has won a bid to build a Greenfield port in  Tajpur, West Bengal for a 
Concession period of 99 years. The MCA, 2021 also h as provisions for 45 years 
Concession Period for multi-phase investments. The port sector is capital intensive and 
longer Concession periods which would lead to gesta tion for a larger Capital cycle may 
become the norm in future. It is unimaginable that the conditions prevailing at the time 
of the Agreement would remain the same in the next century. 
(Para 202) 
 Regarding the argument that the Port Authorities a re reluctant to make changes 
due to audit/vigilance, the Committee observes that  the issue of Royalty or revenue 
share raised above had, in fact been raised  by the  CAG in its 2015 Performance Audit 
Report of Public Private Partnership Projects. The project under examination of the 

66 
 
CAG was the agreement of the JNPA with the Nhava Sh eva International Container 
Terminal (NSICT) for operation of a Container Terminal where the JNPA had switched 
to the revenue sharing model after 18 years of oper ation from the earlier royalty model 
due to high royalty rate per TEU which increased pr ogressively. The CAG had 
commented adversely on the design deficiencies of t he model due to which the port had 
to migrate to the revenue share mode after 18 years  of operation. The CAG had also 
commented that a PPP Project would succeed only if the risks are uniformly 
apportioned between the two parties and that a Conc ession Agreement is unlikely to 
succeed if it has conditions which are harsh on the operator. 
(Para 203) 
 In the considered opinion of the Committee, much o f the issues arising from the 
Concession Agreements can be avoided by adopting th e right models for the project 
from the beginning and ensuring that the Concession aire Agreements retain an element 
of flexibility to incorporate necessary changes whi ch would benefit both parties.  Rigid 
Agreements have the potential to defeat the purpose  of successful PPP partnerships. 
While the provisions of the Agreement should be lar gely adhered to, no purpose is 
served by an unyielding observance of faulty policies.  The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may examine the issues raised by the I PPTA in the light of the above 
position.  
(Para 204) 
XII. INITIATIVES FOR LEGAL DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION   
 The Committee observes that a thorough discussion on all aspects of a proposed 
policy with all stakeholders and taking into consid eration the viewpoints of the 
stakeholders should be sufficient to make a policy which would address all the concerns 
of the stakeholders to the extent possible.  It is understandable that once a policy is in 
place, the Government does not wish to make frequen t changes in it.  However, the 
success of the PPP projects is essential for the achievement of the Maritime India Vision 
and the Ministry should make every effort to addres s the stakeholders concerns. The 
Committee recommends that in case of contentious issues emerging from the discussions 
with the stakeholders, the Ministry may again consu lt the stakeholders and try to 
resolve their concerns.  The Committee also recomme nds that the Ministry may explore 
the possibility of creating a standing mechanism co nsisting of representatives of the 
Ministry, concerned Port and the PPP Operators to d iscuss outstanding issues at 
specified periodic intervals so that issues can be settled at an early stage without 
resorting to arbitration which has not proved to be very successful.  
(Para 208) 
 The Committee has been informed by the IPPTA that in many cases, the Ports 
have not honoured the verdict of the Expert called for amicable settlement and have 
also refused to refer the issue to arbitration.  Th e Committee would like to have the 

67 
 
views of the Ministry on this issue.  The Committee  desires to have a list of such cases 
where amicable settlement was not reached through d iscussion and it was not referred 
to arbitration or the Conciliation Committees.  The  Committee wishes to know the 
action taken by the Ministry in such cases for resolution of the issues. 
(Para 209) 
 The Committee observes that the Adjudicatory Board  was introduced under the 
Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 and yet no Board h as been formed as yet. The 
Committee desires to know the reasons for non forma tion of the Board and 
recommends that the same may be constituted at the earliest.  
(Para 210) 
 Of the dispute mechanisms, it appears that only th e Conciliation and Settlement 
Committees have had reasonable success in the resolution of disputes.  The Ministry has 
provided information that out of 43 cases   referre d to the CSC, 15 have been resolved 
while 8 are at final stages of settlement. The Comm ittee recommends that the Ministry 
may provide all assistance to such Committee for th eir functioning and ensure that Port 
Authorities have no hesitation either in referring the disputes to these Committees or in 
implementing their decisions.  
(Para 211) 
 The Committee also notes that the vision is to hav e 85% PPP partnerships in 
Major Port projects by 2030.  The increase in the n umber of partnerships would throw 
up more issues between the parties which would need  successful arbitration otherwise 
more projects would get bogged down in arbitration issues. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry pay adequate attention  to resolution of arbitration issues 
and setting up of successful forums for arbitration for implementation of PPP projects 
(Para 212) 
XIII. PORT EMPLOYEES WELFARE  
 Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry gave d etails of the sanctioned 
strength of employees and vacancies at the 12 Major  Ports (ANNEXURE XV). The 
Committee observes that a majority of the Major Ports have a shortfall of vacancies and 
some like the Mumbai Port, SMPK, Cochin Port,  Para dip Port and Chennai Port have 
about half of the sanctioned posts vacant. The Comm ittee desires to be informed about 
the reason for the large number of vacancies, the duration for which the posts have been 
vacant and the timeline by which the vacancies are likely to be filled up. The Committee 
observes that JNPA and SMPK have employed a large n umber of contractual workers, 
presumably against the vacant regular posts. The Co mmittee also observes that there 
appears to be a great disparity in the number of em ployed personnel across the ports. 
For instance, Kamarajar Port, VoC Port and JNPA hav e sanctioned strengths of only 
92, 458 and 1660 employees respectively while Mumba i port and SMPK have 

68 
 
sanctioned strengths of 7417 and 10,096 of which as stated earlier about half are vacant. 
Even keeping in view the varying capacities and tra ffic handled by the ports, the 
disparity in number of employees is striking. The C ommittee observes that automation 
and mechanization of operations in ports like JNPA have reduced the employee 
strength. The private ports of Pippavav and Jaigarh  in Gujarat have employee 
strengths of 500 and 1700, respectively.  
(Para 213) 
 The Committee recommends that ports which have a h uge number of vacancies 
especially Mumbai Port and SMPK may review their sa nctioned strength and take 
action to either fill the vacancies if necessary or  abolish posts which are lying vacant for 
a long time. The Committee also exhorts the ports t o expedite mechanization so that the 
employee strength could be restricted to only the essential posts.   
(Para 214) 
 The Committee notes the different Welfare Schemes for the Shipbuilding, Ship 
breaking and Dock Workers. The Committee desires to  know whether residential 
quarters are provided to the employees and whether skill development courses are 
offered for upgradation of their skills. The Commit tee also desires to know whether the 
contractual workers are given the same benefits as regular workers.  
(Para 215) 
* * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Details of 12 Major Ports in India 
S. No. Name of Port Location of 
Port 
Year of 
Origin 
Draft Length 
(in meters) 
Capacity 
2020-21 (In 
MTPA) 
1 SMPK 
East Coast, 
Kolkata, West 
Bengal 
1870 7.2-7.5 90.8 
2 Paradip Port East Coast, 
Odisha 1966 14.5 259 
3 Vizag 
East Coast, 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
1963 14.5 to 18.1 134 
4 Kamarajar East Coast, 
Tamil Nadu 2001 13.5 to 16 91 
5 Chennai East Coast, 
Tamil Nadu 1875 13 to 17 135 
6 VOCPT 
East Coast, 
Tuticorin, 
Tamil Nadu 
1974 14.2 to 13.7 111 
7 Cochin West Coast, 
Kochi, Kerala 1940 14.5 78.6 
8 New Mangalore West Coast, 
Karnataka 1975 14 105 
9 Mormugao West Coast, 
Goa 1885 14.4 63.4 
10 Mumbai West Coast, 
Maharashtra 
1872, 
Second 
Oldest Port 
14 84 
11 JNPT West Coast, 
Gujarat 1989 15 141 
12 Deendayal West Coast, 
Gujarat 1955 13 to 15 267 
Total   1561 
Sources: Annual Report Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 2021-22 
Annual Reports of various Major Ports  
World Port Source-The Port of Kolkata  
MoPSW PPT 24.04.2023  
 

71 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF MAJOR PORTS 
 
TABLE SHOWING CARGO HANDLED FOR THE LAST THREE YEARS  
(IN MTPA) 
 
Total Cargo handled by 12 Major Ports in India from 2020-21 to 2021-22 
S.No  Name of Port  
Total Traffic Handled 
(in MMT) 
Capacity 
2021-22 
(In 
MTPA) 
Capacity 
2022-23 
(In 
MTPA) 
Capacity 
Utilization-
2022-23 
(%) 
2020-
21 
2021-
22 
2022-
23 
1 SMPK  KDS  61.36 58.175   
66 90.77 92.77 71 HDC  
2 Paradip Port 114.55  116.13  135 259 289.75 47 
3 Vizag 69.84 69.03 74 134.18 143.68 51 
4 Kamarajar 25.89 38.74 42 91 91 46 
5 Chennai 43.55 48.56 44 135 136 32 
6 VOCPT 31.79 34.12 35 111.46 111.46 32 
7 Cochin 31.50 34.55 36 78.6 79.9 46 
8 New 
Mangalore 36.50 39.30 41 104.73 114.96 36 
9 Mormugao 21.99 18.46 17 63.4 63.4 27 
10 Mumbai 53.32 59.89 64 84 84 76 
11 JNPT 64.81 76.00 104 141.37 141.37 74 
12 Deendayal 117.57  127.10  137 267.1 269.1 51 
Total 672.67  720.06  795 1560.61 1617.39 49 
 
TABLE SHOWING CAPACITY OF MAJOR PORTS FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS    
(FY 2019-2023) 
Year Capacity (In MTPA) 
FY 2018-19 1514.09 
FY 2019-20 1534.91 
FY 2020-21 1560.61 
FY 2021-22 1597.59 
FY 2022-23 1617.39 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
DETAILS REGARDING AVERAGE TURNAROUND (TRT) OF THE MAJOR 
PORTS (IN HOURS) AND AVERAGE SHIP OUTPUT PER BERTH DAY OF 
MAJOR PORTS 
 
Port Name Period Avg. Total 
TRT 
(In Hours) 
Average Output Per 
Ship Berthday (In 
Tonnes) 
VOCPA FY18-19 47.04 15353 
Visakhapatnam FY18-19 60.22 13790 
SMPA(KDS) FY18-19 92.08 4408 
SMPA(HDC) FY18-19 72.95 9593 
Paradip FY18-19 60.35 26197 
New Mangalore FY18-19 46.21 18126 
Mumbai FY18-19 60.42 10409 
Mormugao FY18-19 63.06 12163 
Kamarajar FY18-19 47.27 24258 
JNPA FY18-19 51.22 26498 
Deendayal FY18-19 72.23 17363 
Cochin FY18-19 35.21 22839 
Chennai FY18-19 47.41 17288 
VOCPA FY19-20 44.88 15056 
Visakhapatnam FY19-20 58.27 14901 
SMPA(KDS) FY19-20 78.29 4215 
SMPA(HDC) FY19-20 86.88 10121 
Paradip FY19-20 56.1 25091 
New Mangalore FY19-20 45.63 15774 
Mumbai FY19-20 53.25 10993 
Mormugao FY19-20 62.96 13258 
Kamarajar FY19-20 44.4 23421 
JNPA FY19-20 29.52 27677 
Deendayal FY19-20 70.56 16890 
Cochin FY19-20 34.7 23709 
Chennai FY19-20 48.01 16470 
VOCPA FY20-21 46.08 15696 
Visakhapatnam FY20-21 66.09 12865 
SMPA(KDS) FY20-21 76.22 3948 
SMPA(HDC) FY20-21 74.16 9153 

73 
 
Paradip FY20-21 58.1 23943 
New Mangalore FY20-21 45.89 15690 
Mumbai FY20-21 59.07 10694 
Mormugao FY20-21 75.66 12431 
Kamarajar FY20-21 42.97 21326 
JNPA FY20-21 28.56 26875 
Deendayal FY20-21 67.92 14497 
Cochin FY20-21 35.83 22513 
Chennai FY20-21 51.38 15928 
VOCPA FY21-22 48.48 16811 
Visakhapatnam FY21-22 73.83 11923 
SMPA(KDS) FY21-22 66.27 3968 
SMPA(HDC) FY21-22 51.36 10428 
Paradip FY21-22 53.16 27295 
New Mangalore FY21-22 45.99 16465 
Mumbai FY21-22 73 9091 
Mormugao FY21-22 71.77 11824 
Kamarajar FY21-22 46.38 24292 
JNPA FY21-22 28.08 28938 
Deendayal FY21-22 60.96 15501 
Cochin FY21-22 34.64 24457 
Chennai FY21-22 53.19 15497 
VOCPA FY22-23 46.8 15852 
Visakhapatnam FY22-23 73.19 12421 
SMPA(KDS) FY22-23 55.68 4590 
SMPA(HDC) FY22-23 50.8 11211 
Paradip FY22-23 46.27 31050 
New Mangalore FY22-23 43.09 18489 
Mumbai FY22-23 67.42 10035 
Mormugao FY22-23 61.47 15699 
Kamarajar FY22-23 45.4 26075 
JNPA FY22-23 28.47 27643 
Deendayal FY22-23 77.28 16074 
Cochin FY22-23 33.41 24517 
Chennai FY22-23 48.22 15648 
 
 

 
COMPARISON OF TURN AROUND TIME WITH GLOBAL STANDARDS 
 
Source: Logistics Performance Index (LPI) Report 
 
(i) Average Container throughput of Major Ports 
Major Port-wise Container Traffic (in 000' Tonnes and 000' TEUs) 
S.No.  Port 
Name 
1 SMPK 
2 Paradip 
3 Vizag 
4 Kamarajar  
5 Chennai 
6 VOCP 
7 Cochin 
8 New 
Mangalore  
9 Mormugao  
10 Mumbai 
11 JNP 
12 Deendayal  
All Ports 
(Source: Basic Port Statistics of India 2020 
74 
OF TURN AROUND TIME WITH GLOBAL STANDARDS 
Source: Logistics Performance Index (LPI) Report -2023 
CONTAINER FREIGHT VOLUME 
Average Container throughput of Major Ports  
wise Container Traffic (in 000' Tonnes and 000' TEUs) 
2019-20 2020-21 Capacity of 
Ports in 
MTPA) 
000' 
Tonnes  
000' 
TEUs  
000' 
Tonnes  
000' 
TEUs  
12799 844 11164 687 90.77 
222 12 279 16 259 
8649 409 8178 481 134.18 
 2524 128 3871 198 
26710 1384 26768 1387 135 
16436 804 15023 762 111.46 
8628 620 9550 690 78.6 
 2278 153 2291 150 104.73 
 418 32 307 22 63.4 
60940 5031 57746 4677 
291 27 255 25 141.37 
 6967 447 8279 515 267.1 
146862  9891 143711  9610 1560.61 
(Source: Basic Port Statistics of India 2020 -21) 
OF TURN AROUND TIME WITH GLOBAL STANDARDS  
 
wise Container Traffic (in 000' Tonnes and 000' TEUs)  
Capacity of 
Ports in 
MTPA)  
90.77  
259  
134.18  
91 
135  
111.46  
78.6  
104.73  
63.4  
84 
141.37  
267.1  
1560.61  


75 
 
The ranking of countries in terms of volume of container port traffic in Twenty-foot 
equivalent unit (TEU) according to data from the World Bank 
Rank Country Container port traffic in TEUs Year 
1 China  242,030,000 2019 
2 United States  55,518,880 2019 
3 Singapore  37,983,000 2019 
4 South Korea  28,955,300 2019 
5 Malaysia  26,215,100 2019 
6 Japan  21,708,860 2019 
7 Germany  19,596,420 2019 
8 United Arab Emirates  19,171,000 2019 
9 Hong Kong  18,360,000 2019 
10 Spain  17,372,960 2019 
11 India  17,053,200 2019 
12 Netherlands  14,986,800 2019 
13 Indonesia  14,763,630 2019 
14 Vietnam  13,658,930 2019 
15 Belgium  13,570,790 2019 
16 Turkey  11,679,100 2019 
17 Brazil  10,982,130 2019 
18 Thailand  10,755,780 2019 
19 United Kingdom  10,276,500 2019 
20 Italy  10,014,210 2019 
 World 795,947,290 2019 
 
COMPARISON OF JNPA/SINGAPORE AND PARADIP/QINGDAO PORTS IN 
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS 
PARAMETERS  JNPA SINGAPORE  
CONTAINER THROUGHPUT (IN 
TEUs) 
6 million + 37.5 million  
Turnaround Time (Container)  22 hrs 18 hrs 
Draft (in mts) 15 18 
Global Rank  54 31 
 
PARAMETERS  PARADIP *  QINGDAO* 

76 
 
CONTAINER THROUGHPUT (IN 
TEUs) 
135.3  million + 630  million  
Turnaround Time (Container)  52 hrs 40.8 hrs 
Draft (in mts) 14.5 17 
Global Rank  NA 42 
* Both Paradip and Qingdao are bulk cargo ports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 
ANNEXURE III 
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR PORTS 
 
Operating Ratio (%)- Major Ports 
(Operational Expenditure to Total Income) 
 
 
 
 
Operating Surplus - Major Ports 
(Difference between Operating Income & Operating Expenditure) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3599 4297 4980 
5856 6413 6756 6926 
7843 
9365 
0
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
6000 
7000 
8000 
9000 
10000 
64.68 60.91 58.35 55.29 53.97 53.18 52.85 51 48.54 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
FY14-15 FY15-16 FY16-17 FY17-18 FY18-19 FY19-20 FY20-21 FY21-22FY22-23 

78 
 
ANNEXURE IV  
S. No. Port Land leased or sold 
1 Chennai Port Nil 
2 Cochin Port 1055 acres leased 
3 Deendayal Port 14755 acres allotted 
4 JNPA 291 acres leased 
5 Kamarajar Port 507.19 acres leased 
6 Mumbai Port Nil 
7 Mormugao Port 71.59 acres leased 
8 New Mangalore Port 479 acres  leased 
9 Paradip Port 1061 acres leased 
10 Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port 27.75 acres of HDC a nd 22.93 acres of KDS 
11 VO Chidambaranar Port 1432 acres allotted 
12 Visakhapatnam Port 3579.62 acres leased 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
STATUS OF MECHANISATION OF BERTHS 
S.No. Name 
of Port 
Status Total number of berths  
1 ChPA 58% of CCTPL and CITPL, 32% of 
liquid cargo handling, 4% of break-
bulk cargo and 6% of dry bulk cargo  
are mechanized 
26 
2 CoPA 9 berths mechanized and 3 berths 
partly mechanized 
22 
3 DPA Berth No.14 has been planned to be 
mechanized and 04 new HMC 
proposed to be procured 
35 
4 JNPA All the container berths (10) are 
installed with 37 Nos. of rail mounted 
quay cranes and Liquid berth (2) are 
installed with marine loading arms 
17 
5 KPL All berths are mechanized 8 
6 MbPA 5 Berths at Jawahar Dweep (JD) and 2 
Berths at Pir Pau (PP) are already 
mechanized 
9 
7 MPA 3 berths have been mechanized. 2 more 
to be awarded on PPP basis 
31  
8 NMPA 9 berths are mechanized 17 
9 PPA 14 berths out of 18 berths are 
mechanized 
21 
10 SMPA 4 berths have been mechanized and 
one more has been awarded on PPP 
basis 
35 berths 
11 VOCPA 7 berths mechanized 16 
12 VPA Berth No. 7, 8, 9 and I to VI are 
mechanised. North Cargo Berth-III and 
Berth No. 9 are in process of 
mechanisation. 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
ANNEXURE VI 
 
Major Ports Connectivity and Services to be provided to Cargo Handlers  
Major Ports of Western and Eastern Coast of India are connected to DFC network with feeder 
routes as shown in table below: 
State  Port  Feeder Route  
Gujarat Mundra Mundra Port-Gandhidham-New Chadotar 
Kandla Kandla Port-Gandhi Dham- Palanpur 
Pipavav Pipavav-Suredranagar-Viramgram-Mehsana 
Dahej Bharuch -Dahej 
Hazira Hazira-Surat 
Maharashtra JNPT New JNPT(Terminal Station) 
Vadhavan (Proposed) Connectivity being planned by I R 
Nandgaon(Proposed) Connectivity being planned by IR  
West Bengal Diamond Harbor Dankuni--Diamond Harbour  
Haldia Dankuni-Andul-Panskura-Haldia 
  
Existing feeder routes and their connectivity betwe en proposed DFC junctions and existing 
ports are shown in line diagram at Annexure-III. 
  
Future Plans 
: 
(i)   As for the connectivity with other ports of East Co ast and mine rich regions, three future 
Dedicated Freight Corridors, namely East Cost (Khar agpur-Vijaywada), East West (Palghar-
Bhusawal-Dankuni&Rajkharswan-Andal) and North South  (Itarsi-Vijaywada) are being 
planned.  As per directions of Ministry of Railways , preparation of Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) of the following routes are under consideration. The port connectivity is also included 
in the DPRs. The details are indicated at point No.12 (para-II). 
  
S. No.  New DFC  Length            
       (in KMs)  
1. East Coast Corridor – Kharagpur to Vijaywada 111 5 
2. 
(a) East-West Sub Corridor  
(i)-Bhusawal-Dankuni and extended from *Bhusawal to 
Palghar 
1673 + 498 
=2171 
(b) East-West Sub Corridor  
(ii)-Rajkharswan – Kalipahari – Andal  
195 
Sub Total for East-West Both Corridor  2366  
3. North – South Sub Corridor – Vijaywada – Nagpur – Itarsi 975 
  
(ii)  Proposed East Coast Corridor passes through three s tates- West Bengal, Odisha, and 
Andhra Pradesh. These states have Coast line around 1000 km with important ports at Haldia, 

81 
 
Dhamra, Paradeep, Visakhapatnam, Gangavaram and Kak inada. Many new ports like 
Gopalpur, Astaranga, Subarnarekha &Bhavanpadu are a lso under development. Proposed 
East Coast Corridor can connect these ports to hint erlands through feeder routes to provide 
faster movement of freight traffic.The sanctioning of this corridor will significantly enhance 
the port connectivity and throughput of goods from these ports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

82 
 
ANNEXURE VII 
 
  Details of the 8 PPP projects worth Rs. 9,544 crores which have been awarded in 
FY22-23  
S. 
No. Port Project Name and Monetization value Project 
of FY 
 Status 
1 JNPA 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority (JNPA) - Container 
Terminal on UOMT basis  
(~ INR 865 Crore) 
2021-22 
 Project awarded 
on 28.06.2022. 
2 PPA 
Paradip Port Authority (PPA), Odisha – Deepening 
and optimization of Inner Harbour including 
Western Dock  
(~ INR3000 Crore) 
2021-22 
Project Awarded 
on 27.5.2022 
3 VPA 
Visakhapatnam Port Authority (VPA)- Development   
of WQ-7& 8 on DBFOT basis  
 (~ INR 288 Cr) 
2021-22 
Project Awarded 
on 25.1.2023 
4 VoCPA 
V.O. Chidambaranar Port Authority(VOCPA) -  
Development of Berth No. 9 as Container Terminal 
on DBFOT basis  
(~lNR 437 Crore) 
2021-22 
Project Awarded 
on 08.08.2022 
5 DPA 
Development of Container Terminal   at   Tuna 
Tekra, Deendayal Port on BOT basis under PPP 
mode 
(~INR 4,244 crore) 
2022 –23 
 Project Awarded 
on 27.01.2023 
6 JNPA 
Operationalization of Coastal Berth and Shallow 
Water Berth 
(~INR 344crore) 
2022 –23 
 Project Awarded 
on 27.10.2022 
7 VPA Mechanization of EQ-7 berth  
(~INR200Crore) 2022 –23 
 Project Awarded 
on 30.01.2023 
8 VPA Mechanization of Berth WQ-6 
(~INR 166 Crore) 2022 –23 
 Project Awarded 
on 30.01.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
ANNEXURE-VIII 
 
STATUS OF SAGARMALA PROJECTS UNDER THE VARIOUS MAJOR PORTS 
S.No. 
Name of Project 
Project 
Cost (Rs. 
Cr) 
Implementing 
Agency 
Project Status: 
March 22 
1 
Development  of Cruise 
Passenger Facilitation Centre at 
Chennai Port Authority 
18 Chennai Port 
Authority Completed 
2 
Development of Storage area for 
container at Mormugao 15 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 
3 Additional Transshipment at Goa  56 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 
4 
RFID Implementation - 
Mormugao 5 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 
5 
Refurbishment and Capacity 
enhancement of  Coastal liquid 
terminal - COT and NTB at CoPT 
 
20 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
6 
5th Oil Berth at Jawahar Dweep - 
JD5 including capital dredging 1050 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
7 
Bunkering Terminal at Jawahar 
Dweep 50 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
8 
Offshore Container Terminal - 
Mumbai Port 1286 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
9 
Redevelopment - Facelift of 
Indira Dock - Mumbai Port  55 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
10 
Upgrading and modernisation of 
International Cruise Terminal at 
BPX - Indira Dock - Mumbai 
303 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
11 
Setting up of a Floating Storage 
and Regasification Unit -FSRU - 
Mumbai 
2600 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
12 
Multi User Liquid Terminal at 
Puthuvypeen - Cochin Port 240 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
13 
Development of Marina at Prince 
Dock - Mumbai 364.84 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
14 RFID - Paradip 10 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
15 
2 nos of Harbour mobile cranes - 
Paradip 70 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
16 
Deep Draft Iron Ore Export Berth 
on BOT basis - Paradip 740 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 

84 
 
17 
Multi Purpose Berth to handle 
clean cargo including container 
on BOT basis at Paradip port 
431 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
18 
Mechanisation of EQ1- EQ2 and 
EQ3 Berths on BOT basis at 
Paradip Port 
1438 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
19 
Development of IWT Terminal at 
Paradip Port 80 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
20 
New Deep Draft Coal Import 
Berth on BOT basis at Paradip 656 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
21 
Development of Cruise Berthing 
Facilities cum Cruise Passenger 
Facilitation Centre near Boat 
Train Pier Jetty-Cochin 
28 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
22 
LPG Terminal at South oil jetty 
in Paradip 690 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
23 
Capital Dredging of BOT basin - 
Paradip 86 Paradip Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
24 
Drive through Container Scanner 
-1 No. - V. O . Chidambaranar 50 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
25 
RFID - V. O . Chidambaranar 5 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
26 
Mechanization of Berth IX  at V. 
O . Chidambaranar 93 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
27 
Development and Operation of a 
full-fledged Truck Parking 
Terminal adjacent to NH7A 
opposite to Fisheries college at V. 
O . Chidambaranar 
25 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
28 
Construction of North Cargo 
berth-
II for handling bulk cargoes 
on DBFOT basis - V. O . 
Chidambaranar 
335 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
29 
Conversion of 8th berth as 
container terminal on BOT basis 
for a period of 30 years - V. O . 
Chidambaranar 
312 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
30 Provision of Scanner - Cochin 15 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 

85 
 
31 
Coastal berth with dredged depth 
of 10.0m to handle vessels up to 
15000 DWT -length 150m at 
VoCPT 
36 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
32 
Development of a PPP berth for 
construction material 65 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
33 
Upgradation of Existing Coal 
Jetty -CJ1 and CJ2 at V. O . 
Chidambaranar 
98 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
34 
Deployment of Additional 
Harbour Mobile Cranes at III and 
IV berth - V. O . Chidambaranar 
Port 
29 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
35 
Construction of NCB3 at VOCPT  37 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
36 
Extension of existing container 
terminal at VPT on DBFOT basis 
 633 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
37 
Conversion of existing berths 
EQ-2- EQ-3- EQ-4 and part of 
EQ-5 into two numbers of berths 
- Visakhapatnam 
182 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
38 
Upgradation of OB 1 and 2 for 
Iron Ore Handling - Phase 1 395 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
39 
Development of WQ N -WQ-7 
and WQ-8 - Visakhapatnam 243 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
40 
Development of New Berth EQ 
1A - Visakhapatnam 313 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
41 
RFID system - Visakhapatnam 
Port 7 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
42 
Container scanners - 
Visakhapatnam Port 30 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
43 
Supply- Erection- Testing and 
commissioning of 2 HMCs of 
capacity greater than 100MT at 
east quay berth - Visakhapatnam 
Port 
39 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
44 
Construction of coastal Berth at 
VPT 43 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
45 
Improving the capacity utilisation 
of OR-I & OR-II berths in inner 168 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation  

86 
 
harbour of Visakhapatnam Port 
46 New Port at Vadhavan 65544.55 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
47 Coastal Cargo Berth at ChPT 80 Chennai Port 
Authority Completed 
48 RFID Implementation at KPL 12 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
49 
Multi Cargo Terminal at KPL on 
DBFOT -Design- Build- Finance-
 
Operate and Transfer basis 
164.37 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
50 LNG Import Terminal at Ennore 5151 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
51 
RoB cum Flyover at Ranichak 
level crossing at KoPT 127.8 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
52 Flyover at JNPT Y Junction 102 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
53 
Development of Ro-Ro Terminal 
cum GCB-2 at KPL 188.13 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation 
 
54 
Capital Dredging Phase 4 at KPL 
-To provide 18m deep draft 153.5 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation 
 
55 
Southern port Access road 
connectivity to Ennore port 195 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation 
 
56 RoB on Kandla-Kutch Road  256 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
57 
Evacuation road for Container 
Terminal -330m extension to 
DPW terminal at JNPT 
101 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
58 
Road circulation plan for ease of 
movement of break bulk cargo at 
Mormugao 
34 Mormugao Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
59 
Construction of Coal berth 4 at 
KPL 290.67 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
60 
Construction of Container 
Terminal Phase 1 Stage 1 and 2 at 
KPL 
1270 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation  
61 
Additional TNEB Coal Berth CB 
3 at Ennore Port 254.34 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
62 
Construction of IOCL Oil jetty on 
Captive basis at KPL 921 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation  
63 
Strengthening of existing 
revetment at eastern seashore of 63 Chennai Port 
Authority Completed 

87 
 
Chennai Port 
64 
Improvement of road 
connectivity to facilitate trade and 
port users at KoPT 
15 
Syama Prasad 
Mukerjee Port 
Authority 
Completed 
65 
Development of paved storage 
yard at Chennai Port for handling 
export cargo 
54 Chennai Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
66 
Mobile X-ray Container Scanner 
-1 no systems at KPL 35 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
67 
Development of Rail 
Connectivity for BOT berths at 
Paradip [JSW is implementing 
the project] 
79.7 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
68 
Electrification of east yard 
revamped lines. 23.489 TKM 20 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
69 Capital Dredging Phase 3 at KPL  334 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
70 
Road Connectivity to Hare island 
-V. O . Chidambaranar Port 12 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
71 
Fly over bridge from  Sea-horses 
junction area to dock area at 
Visakhapatnam Port 
259.15 Vishakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Development 
72 
Construction of Container Pre-
Stacking Yard in the area of Port 
access road - KPL 
24 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
73 
Modification of existing Iron Ore 
Terminal to handle coal -SIOTL -
 
KPL 
228 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation  
74 
Upgradation of the track 10-12-
14-16-18-19-20-21- 22 and 23 at 
EJC yard of KoPT 
47 
Syama Prasad 
Mukerjee Port 
Authority 
Completed 
75 
Multi-User Liquid Terminal-II at 
Ennore 393 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Sanction of 
Project 
76 
Upgrade of existing rail network 
at Kolkata Dock System 9 
Syama Prasad 
Mukerjee Port 
Authority 
Completed 
77 
Railway line between 
Marshalling Yard and Hare Island 
 98 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 

88 
 
78 
Railway line at west of western 
yard 1 -earlier common rail yard 
and providing paving block 
platform in between new track 
and western yard I - Chennai 
14 Chennai Port 
Authority Completed 
79 
Providing a direct connection 
between OEC and Western Sector 
jointing at   NAD Curve from 
E.Co. Rly. 
22 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
80 
Connection of dead end line at 
North of RandD yard to Eastern 
Grid -Third line from E.Co.Rlys. 
24 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
81 
Upgradation of platform no. 2 
and 3 in the Port Marshalling 
Yard at NMPT 
5 New Mangalore 
Port Authority Completed 
82 
Upgradation of Railway line 1 
and 2 at NMPT 5 New Mangalore 
Port Authority Completed 
83 
3rd line rail connectivty from 
Jasai to JNPT 126 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
84 
JNPT  Part I Development of 
DFC compliant Common Rail 
YardJNPT  Part II Development 
of DFC compliant Common Rail 
Yard, Modification to ROB 
330 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority Completed 
85 
Rail connectivity to berth No. 13- 
14- 15 and 16 from take-off point 
to west end of berth at Kandla 
Port. 
127.29 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
86 
Rail Connectivity to 4th Terminal 
being developed by BMCTPL -
PSA 
50 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority Completed 
87 
2nd Railway Line from 
Durgachak take off point to ‘A’ 
cabin at Durgachak at HDC 
117 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
88 
Extension of line No. 11 to 15 to 
full length at RandD yard. 18 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
89 
Last mile rail connectivity to 
Enayam Port in Kanyakumari 
district 
300 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under 
Development 
90 
Electrification of VPT railway 
lines 45.143 TKM 22.01 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 

89 
 
91 
Capital Dredging Phase-V for 
providing water depth of - 16 m 
CD for the proposed Ro-Ro cum 
GCB 2- LNG- MLT 2 and IOCL 
Captive Jetty berths at KPL 
250 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Sanction of 
Project 
92 
Northern Rail Link connecting 
north of Minjur to KPL 300 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Development 
93 
Augmentation-doubling of 
southern rail connectivity to KPL 
 86.5 Kamarajar Port 
Limited - IPRCL  
Under 
Implementation  
94 
Construction of Container 
Terminal Phase 2 at KPL 2000 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Under Concept 
 
95 
Full rake wagon handling line 
with paving 30m wide at 
Mormugao 
18 Mormugao Port 
Authority Completed 
96 
Ro-Ro and General Cargo Berth-
3 at KPL 350 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Under Concept 
 
97 
Construction of Bunker berth at 
Chennai Port 44 Chennai Port 
Authority Completed 
98 
JNPT Container Terminal 4 - 
Phase 1 4719 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
99 Tamil Nadu Maritime cluster 500 Chennai Port 
Authority Under Concept  
100 
Procurement of 15 RTYGCs at 
port owned Container Terminal - 
JNPT 
160 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
101 
Smart Industrial Port City -SIPC 
at Kandla – Gandhidham – 
Adipur Complex 
1147 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
102 
Development of Smart Industrial 
Port City -SIPC Paradip 7600 Paradip Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
103 
Restructuring of JNPT Yard for 
Optimal Yard Utilisation 115 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
104 
Construction of passenger boat 
landing jetty at Kanhoji Angre 
Island 
7.68 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
105 
Development of Fishing Harbour 
at Kulai 197 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
106 
Deepening and widening of JNPT 
and Mumbai Channel Phase -II 1963 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
107 
Phase II of Multi Model Logistics 
Hub - Visakhapatnam Port 262 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
108 Development of SEZ at JNPT 565 Jawaharlal Nehru  Completed 

90 
 
Port Authority  
109 
Construction of widening the 
Korampallam Surplus course 
bridge and rail over bridge -RoB 
including widening of road from 
western boundary to TTPS 
42 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
110 
Construction of ROB at 
Vallarpadam – Cochin 36 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
111 
Providing Signalling and 
Telecommunication system for 
Railway Network at Mormugao 
Port 
14 Mormugao Port 
Authority Completed 
112 
Development of  Dry port cum 
Multi- Modal Terminal at 
Jolarpet 
200 Chennai Port 
Authority Under Concept 
 
113 
Construction of Central Truck 
Parking  Terminal at JNPT 149 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
114 
Setting up of LNG facilities at 
HDC 700 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Under Concept 
 
115 
Construction of Coastal Berth at 
JNPT 143 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
116 
Development of Additional 
Liquid Cargo Jetty - JNPT 199.64 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
117 
JNPT Container Terminal 4 - 
Phase 2 3196 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
118 Various Signalling works at VPT  24 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
119 
Development of  Coastal road to 
the East of container Terminal II 
at Chennai Port 
63 Chennai Port 
Authority Completed 
120 
Development of Oil Jetty 7 at Old 
Kandla 42.38 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
121 
Container Terminal at Berth Nos. 
11 and 12 at Kandla Port on PPP 
Mode 
160 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
122 
Development of lighthouse in 
Kanhoji Angre Island 47 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
123 
Development of Liquid Terminal 
facilities consisting of SPM and 2 
product jetties at OOT- Vadinar- 
Kandla Port on captive use basis 
448 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
124 Deployment of two Mobile 93 Deendayal Port Comp leted 

91 
 
Harbour Cranes - Kandla Port Authority 
125 
Mechanisation of Fertilizer 
Handling Facility at Kandla 461 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
126 
Construction of 14th berth for 
Multipurpose Cargo at Kandla 138 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
127 
Construction of Major Fishing 
Harbour at Vasco Bay- MoPT 104 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Under Concept 
 
128 
River mouth dredging of 
Mahanadi at Paradip fishing 
harbour  
21 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
129 
Dry Port at Niphad in Nashik 
District 235 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
130 
Construction of 16th berth for 
Multipurpose Cargo at Kandla 150 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
131 
Dry Port at Ranjani Village in 
Sangli district 214 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Under Concept 
 
132 Dry Port at Wardha 469.92 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation  
133 Dry Port at Jalna 327 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation  
134 
Development of  Oil Jetty 8 at 
Old Kandla 99 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
135 
Construction of boundary wall 
and windscreen at Western side 
of Dock, Chiranjibpur and 
Durgachak areas 
43.27 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation 
 
136 
Upgrading to accommodate full 
rake length at 7 Netaji Subash 
Dock and its yard under KDS- 
KoPT 
16.5 
Syama Prasad 
Mukerjee Port 
Authority 
Completed 
137 
Multi-Skill Development Centre 
at JNPT 3 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
138 
Development of New EQ-10 
berth - Visakhapatnam 55.38 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
139 
Ship Repair Operations and 
Management of Ship Repair 
Facility at 7 Indira dock- MbPT 
80 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
140 
Dredging the dock basin for 
coastal cargo berth at VOCPT -
Dredging in front of dedicated 
coastal berth 
98 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 

92 
 
141 
Coastal Employment Unit -CEU 
at VoCPT 500 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
142 
International Cruise Terminal  at 
Ernakulam Wharf 25.72 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
143 
Passenger Jetty at Vasco Bay- 
MoPT 21 Mormugao Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
144 
Dedicated goods line between 
Wadala and Kurla for freight 
movement from MbPT 
176.81 Mumbai Port 
Authority 
Under 
Development 
145 
Installation of 2 MHCs at 
Berth13- HDC 50 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
146 
Multipurpose Jetty at Chhoti 
Chowpatty -Marine Drive 45 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
147 
Development of Ecological and 
Cultural Park at Sewree 5 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
148 
Development of Hughe Dry Dock 
at MbPT 115 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
149 
Ropeway between Sewri fort and 
Elephanta Island in Mumbai 
harbour 
700 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
150 
Installation of RFID facilities at 
HDC 16 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
151 
Deployment of 2 floating cranes 
near Sagar 65 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
152 
Road cum Flyover serving as 2nd 
exit to the Paradip port 93 Paradip Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
153 
Connectivity of IOHP and MCHP 
at PPT 66.47 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
154 
Deepening and optimization of 
Inner Harbour facilities including 
Western dock Captive berth (1 
nos) 
3004.63 Paradip Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
155 
Reconstruction of Q1 Berth  at 
Mattancherry Wharf 5.02 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
156 
Refurbishment of South Tanker 
Berth 29.22 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
157 
Truck parking at Liquid Storage 
Tank Farm area 10.27 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
158 
Construction of Oil Jetty 9 at 
Kandla 123.4 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 

93 
 
159 
Mini Bulk Carrier Facility on 
upstream of 3rd Oil Jetty at HDC 
-Floating Cargo Handling Jetty 
73 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
160 
Ferry service from Baina to 
Panaji 5 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 
161 Container scanners - JNPT 75 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
162 Extended port gate at Balagarh 320 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
163 
Procurement of 1 no. Rail 
Mounted Quay Crane -RMQC at 
HDC 
61.31 Haldia Dock 
Complex  
Under 
Implementation 
 
164 
Construction of 1.5 Lakh 
sq.meters of Hardstand inside 
HDC 
51.02 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
165 
Container Scanner KoPT and 
HDC 40 Kolkata Port 
Authority Completed 
166 Container scanners - PPT 40 Paradip Port 
Authority  Completed 
167 
Mobile rubber tyred  electrically 
operated  hopper  38.08 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Completed 
168 
Strengthening of existing  EQ-7 
berth to handle vessels of 14.5 m 
draft 
16.5 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Completed 
169 
Cruise-cum-coastal cargo 
terminal 77 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
170 
Floating Restaurant at Girgaum 
Chowpatty 10 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
171 
2 Floating Restaurants at 
Gateway of India 40 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
172 
Development of domestic cruise 
terminal 15 Mumbai Port 
Authority  Completed 
173 Tank Farm at JD5- MbPT 700 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation  
174 
Replacement of Fendering 
System at lead in Jetty - HDC 28 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
175 
Improvement of road 
connectivity to facilitate trade and 
port users at KoPT, Phase-2 
88 
Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port 
Authority 
Completed 
176 
Removal of 2 No.s Mooring of 
Spiral in the area of Cruise Berth 13.87 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 

94 
 
- Mormugao 
177 
Development of hardstand 
storage area of 1.13 Lakh sqm 
behind Berth No. 13 at HDC 
44 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
178 
Setting up of Outer Terminal-2 
for handling of liquid bulk cargo 
at Haldia Dock Complex 
81.24 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Completed 
179 
Setting up of Liquid Cargo 
Handling facilities at 
Shalukkhali- Haldia Dock-II 
172.52 Haldia Dock 
Complex  
Under 
Implementation 
 
180 
Khidderpore Dry Docks 
Rejuvenation 35 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
181 Mechanisation of Berth3 at HDC  298.26 Haldia Dock 
Complex  
Under 
Implementation  
182 
Construction of berth18 in 
western dock Arm at NMPT 94 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  Completed 
183 Implementation of RFID - NMPT  6.17 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  Completed 
184 
Mechanisation of Berth 18 - now 
16 for handling bulk cargo at 
NMPT 
469 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  Completed 
185 
Installation- Commissioning and 
maintenance of RFID based gate 
access system for vehicle entry-
exit - Cochin 
1 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
186 
Development of 30 acres of stack 
yard and ancillary roads for 
parking of Ro-Ro cargoes and 
cars - NMPT 
22 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  Completed 
187 
Implementation of Mobile X-Ray 
Container Scanner at NMPT 40 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  Completed 
188 
Mechanization of Berth 14 and 
Backup area for handling 
Container Terminal at NMPT 
258 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  Completed 
189 
Providing Railway Double line 
track (Twin Single Line) between 
Holding Yard -I and Kamarajar 
Port, Alteration of existing 
Electronic Interlocking 
7.23 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 
190 
Construction of Port Internal 
Roads, Parking Bay, Rest Shelter, 51.56 Kamarajar Port 
Limited Completed 

95 
 
etc. 
191 
Reconstruction of Bay Number 4 
and 5 of the CPY or 
reconstruction of damaged 
portions of Bay Number 1 CPY - 
excluding rail line portion and 
other allied works 
12.44 Kolkata Port 
Authority Completed 
192 
Sprinkling system inside cargo 
jetty area for coal dust 
suppression in coal yard 
20.8 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
193 
Retrofitting of existing cargo 
berth no. 1 to 5 34.19 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
194 
Mechanized fertilizer handling 
facility at Berth No. 14, 
Deendayal Port 
300.28 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
195 
Construction of Dr. Babsheb 
Ambedkar Convention Centre, 
Gandhidham 
33.08 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
196 
Development of oil jetty to 
handle liquid cargo and ship 
bunkering terminal at old kandla 
233.5 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
197 
Construction of flyover near 
North Gate Complex on container 
road in JN Ports 
127 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
198 
Development of basic amenities 
in land to be allotted under 12.5% 
scheme of Government of 
Maharashtra to JNP PAPs 
(development scheme for PAPs 
358 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
199 Construction of Berth no. 17 225 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation  
200 
Development of international and 
domestic cruise terminal and 
allied facilities at Mormugao 
Ports 
74.11 Mormugao Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
201 
Design, build 5 MLD capacity 
desalination plant at VOC Ports 
Authority, Tuticorin, and 
operation and maintenance for 20 
years 
275 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
202 Reconstruction of South Coal 19.19 Cochin Port Comp leted 

96 
 
Berth at Cochin Port for handling 
chemicals 
Authority 
203 
Management, Operation and 
Maintenance of Kanhoji Angre 
Island as Tourist Destination  on 
PPP basis 
50 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
204 
Construction of Third Chemical 
Berth at Pirpau, MbPT 161 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
205 
Development, operation & 
Maintenance of container 
terminal on Berth No 15 & 16 on 
PPP mode 
2000 Deendayal Port 
Authority Under Concept 
 
206 
Mechanisation of EQ-7 Berth / 
Multiple Cargoes 200 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
207 Oil Jetty No.10 123.12 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
208 Oil Jetty No.11 361.7 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
209 
Rejuvenation of Khidderpore 
Docks (KPD-I WEST) through 
PPP mode on Build, Equip, 
Operate and Transfe 
181.81 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
210 
Replacement and revamping of 
pipeline projects in oil jetty area, 
Kandla 
170 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
211 
Construction of covered storage 
sheds 160 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority DPR Preparation 
 
212 
Floating Jetty at River Mandovi 
& Chapora river (for IWAI) 
.(Four Nos Floating Jetty on EPC 
basis 
9.6 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 
213 
Development of 9th berth as a 
container terminal on BOT basis 
 435 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
214 
Mechanization of NCB III for dry 
bulk cargoes on BOT basis 420 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under Concept  
215 
Mechanisation of SQB berth- 
Paradip 75 Paradip Port 
Authority  Under Concept 
 
216 Container Terminal at JNPT 661 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation  

97 
 
217 
Construction of Jetty and allied 
facilities for Indian Coast Guard 
at Cochin Port 
120 Cochin Port 
Authority Completed 
218 
Floating crane facility at 
Diamond Harbor 66 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
219 
FSRU for LNG handling at 
NMPT 710 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  DPR Preparation 
 
220 Hooghly Ship Building  150 Kolkata Port 
Authority DPR Preparation  
221 
LNG terminal at VOC Port. 1000 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under Concept  
222 
DEVELOPMENT OF A 
CONTAINER TERMINAL AT 
TUNA-TEKRA, KANDLA ON 
BOT BASIS 
4243.64 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
223 
Development of berthing 
facilities off tekra near Tuna, 
Kandla Phase-II  
1100 Deendayal Port 
Authority Under Concept 
 
224 
DEVELOPMENT OF 
MULTIPURPOSE CARGO 
OTHER THAN CONTAINER & 
LIQUID BERTH OFF TUNA 
TEKRA OUTSIDE KANDLA 
CREEK AT KANDLA ON BOT 
BASIS 
1552.57 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
225 
Upgradation of the facilities at 
Berth No.9 by providing Marine 
unloading arms of higher 
capacity, Strengthening of the 
Berth, Deepening of the draft to 
14 mtrs and Improving the 
pipeline connectivity to enhance 
the output and capacity utilization 
 
100 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  DPR Preparation  
226 
Refurbishing of the Berth No.10 
for dedicated usage of MRPL 50 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  DPR Preparation 
 
227 
Refurbishing of the Berth NO.11 
for dedicated usage of MRPL. 50 New Mangalore 
Port Authority  DPR Preparation 
 
228 
Strengthening and Mechanization 
of Berth 7, 8 NSD on DBFOT 
basis  
340 Kolkata Port 
Authority Under Concept 
 
229 Mechanization of Berths 4 & 5 270 Kolkata Port Under Concept  

98 
 
NSD on DBFOT basis Authority 
230 
Construction and Mechanization 
of Container berths at KDS Outer 
Terminal 
182 Kolkata Port 
Authority Under Concept  
231 Mechanization of Berth No. 10 350 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Under Concept  
232 Mechanization of Berth No. 5 325 Haldia Dock 
Complex  Under Concept  
233 
Operation and Maintenance of 
International Cruise 
Terminal(MICT) on DBFOT 
Basis 
192 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
234 
Redevelopment of berth 9 & 
barge berths at Mormugao Port 842 Mormugao Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
235 
Operation and maintenance of 
Berth nos. 10 & 11 on PPP basis. 
 200 Mormugao Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
236 
Conversion of 1, 2, 3, & 4 berths 2144 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
DPR Preparation  
237 
Mechanisation of coal jetty by 
TANGEDCO 325 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
238 
Mechanization of CQ-1 & 2 (2 
Berths) 1103 Paradip Port 
Authority  Under Concept 
 
239 Mahanadi Riverine Port (Phase-I)  2562 Paradip Port 
Authority  DPR Preparation  
240 NCB Berth 100 Cochin Port 
Authority DPR Preparation  
241 
Mechanisation of WQ-7 & WQ-8 
berths (Bulk cargo) - PPP 288.47 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
242 Development of Cruise Terminal  103 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
243 Award of WQ6  on PPP 250 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
244 
Development of EQ6 berth and 
mechanisation on PPP  250 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Under Concept 
 
245 
Upgrading Berth WQ 2-5 to 
handle fully loaded Panamax 
ships 
600 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority Under Concept 
 
246 
Deepening of NCB III and IV 900 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 

99 
 
247 Malabar Cement Terminal 160 Cochin Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
248 
Upgradation of Inner Harbour - 330  
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
DPR Preparation 
 
249 Deep Draft Bulk Berth       
250 
Port at Kanyakumari 27570 
V. O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port Authority 
Under Concept  
251 
Upgradation and modification of 
track in Kamarajar Port Ltd. 27.38 Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation 
 
252 
S & T Maintenance work in KPL 
for three years 7.96 Cr Kamarajar Port 
Limited 
Under 
Implementation 
 
253 
A Road cum Flyover crossing the 
BOT Rail Tracks to have 
unobstructed access to the MCHP 
Areas 
38.18 Paradip Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
254 
Upgradation of rail network 
inside Cargo jetty – Civil and P. 
way Work 
45.51 Deendayal Port 
Authority Completed 
255 
ONGC Bridge Extension work 
inside JNPT holding yard 12.5 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
256 
Inspection, Measurement, 
correcting parameters and 
recouping deficient components 
of rail tracks at KDS 
14.04 
Syama Prasad 
Mukerjee Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
257 
Operationalisation of coastal 
berth at JNPT 125 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
258 
Sea Plane Lakshwadeep- 
Adjoining islands 200 Kolkata Port 
Authority DPR Preparation 
 
259 
Sea Plane Surat Hub: Surat- 
Dwarka 200 Kolkata Port 
Authority DPR Preparation 
 
260 Sea Plane Surat- Kandla 200 Kolkata Port 
Authority DPR Preparation  
261 Sea Plane Surat- Mandvi 200 Kolkata Port 
Authority DPR Preparation  
262 
Watertaxi : Domestic cruise 
terminal- Vashi Sagar- Airoli 
Hovercraft- Thane Jetty 
Hovercraft 
400 Mumbai Port 
Authority  DPR Preparation 
 
263 
Watertaxi :Fort Gateway 
Hovercraft ramp-Domestic cruise 400 Mumbai Port 
Authority  DPR Preparation 
 

100 
 
terminatl(DCT)-Belapur jetty 
264 
Watertaxi: Belapur jetty- 
Kalamboli Panvel 400 Mumbai Port 
Authority  DPR Preparation 
 
265 
Improvement to Immigration 
Office and Deeping of Cruise 
Berth for facilitating Biggersize 
vesses. 
13.16 Mormugao Port 
Authority  Completed 
266 RoRo Terminal at SPM 100 Kolkata Port 
Authority Under Concept  
267 RoRo Terminal at VPT 100 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority DPR Preparation  
268 Port Hospital at Mumbai Port 693 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation  
269 Fisheries Harbour at Cochin port 101.02 Cochin Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
270 
Fish Jetty at Mallet Bunder, 
Mazgaon. 96.6 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
271 Port Hospital at Kolkata port 350 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
272 
2nd Full rake handling line RD 
8A with 30m paving 7.83 Mormugao Port 
Authority Completed 
273 
Construction of an Up-Ramp at 
MPT  Railway yard Baina. 26.13 Mormugao Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
274 
Berthing facility for ROPAX/RO-
RO vessel at Shallow Water 
Berth in JN Port 
46.34 Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Authority  Completed 
275 
Construction and Maintenance of 
Ro-Pax Facility at Hazira, 
Gujarat 
69.06 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
276 
CONSTRUCTION OF RORO / 
ROPAX FACILITY AT 
MULDWARKA, DISTRICT 
GIR SOMNATH, GUJARAT 
144.3 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
277 
Construction and Maintenance of 
Ro-Pax Facility at Pipavav, 
Gujarat 
170.06 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
278 
Modernisation of Chennai 
Fishing Harbour Project 99.85 Chennai Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
279 
Modernisation of Visakhapatnam 
Fishing Harbour 151.81 Visakhapatnam 
Port Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 

101 
 
280 
Construction of 12m wide 
concrete road connecting berth 5 
6 7 8 & 9 to new entry / exit road 
 
11.52 Mormugao Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
281 
Upgradation and modernization 
of Fishing Harbour at Paradip in 
Odisha 
108.9 Paradip Port 
Authority  
Under 
Implementation 
 
282 
Total reconstruction of Berth No 
6 at NSD 17.94 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
283 
Renovation of Bascule Bridge at 
Kolkata Dock System of Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee Port, Kolkata 
40.32 
Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port 
Authority 
Under 
Development 
284 
Construction and upgradation of 
level crossing at different areas of 
KDS 
4.47 
Syama Prasad 
Mukerjee Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
285 
Development of drainage 
network at Dock Zone, Haldia 
Dock Complex (Phase-
II, Eastern 
side of dock basin) 
67.46 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation  
286 
Development of paver block 
topped hardstand inside dock 
zone HDC, SMPK 
25 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation 
 
287 
Setting up of  two covered 
storage sheds inside dock zone 41.32 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation 
 
288 
Modernization of Fire fighting 
system at dock zone, HDC, 
SMPK 
36.5 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation 
 
289 
Development of Outer Container 
Terminal at HDC,  SMPK in PPP 
mode 
980 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation 
 
290 
Modification of Coal Handling 
Plant for handling Iron Ore fines 
& Iron Pellets 
50 Haldia Dock 
Complex  DPR Preparation 
 
291 
SCADA and PLC automation 
system at Marine Oil Terminal at 
Mumbai Port 
22.58 Mumbai Port 
Authority  
Sanction of 
Project 
292 
Development of RORO facilities 
for handling propylene and other 
cargo at Cochin Port 
10.56 Cochin Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
293 
Development of Onshore Power 
Supply at COPT 22.34 Cochin Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
294 
Upgradation of Dredging at 
Ghogha Ghannel, Turning Gircle 45.81 Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 

102 
 
and Approach Channel to achieve 
depth of (-) 7 Metre   
295 
Development of River Cruise 
terminal and river 
tourism facility 
along with riverfront 
beautification works at KDS, 
SMP, Kolkata 
75.82 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation 
 
296 
Design, Engineering & 
Construction for Rehabilitation of 
No.7, NSD Old Berth including 
Development of Backyard at N.S. 
Dock of KDS - SMP, Kolkata 
80.74 Kolkata Port 
Authority 
Under 
Implementation  
297 
Supply, fabricate, transport, 
handle and erect in position the 
floating Pontoon similar to the 
existing Pontoon at Ghogha 
33.27  Deendayal Port 
Authority 
Sanction of 
Project 
298 
Development of Dry Dock at 
Timber Pond-Boat basin at 
Chennai port or Development of 
Marina 
315 Chennai Port 
Authority Under Concept 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
ANNEXURE - IX 
 
Comparative performance of berths operated on PPP basis and berths operated by the 
Port Authorities on various parameters.  
   PORT  No. of 
PPP 
Berths 
Traffic 
handled 
by 
PPP 
Berths 
(MTPA)  
Percentage 
of Total 
Traffic 
handled by 
PPP Berths 
(%) 
No. 
of Port 
Owned 
berths 
Traffic 
handled 
by Port's 
Own 
Berths 
(MTPA) 
Percentage 
of Total 
Traffic 
handled by 
Port's own 
Berths 
(%) 
SMP, KOLKATA 0 0.000 0.00 35 15.298 100.00 
HALDIA 2 5.240 12.22 15 37.637 87.78 
PARADIP 13 59.881 51.56 9 56.252 48.44 
VISAKHAPATNAM  8 38.875 56.32 18 30.155 43.68 
KAMARAJAR 7 36.970 95.43 1 1.772 4.57 
CHENNAI 7 30.925 63.68 19 17.639 36.32 
V.O. 
CHIDAMBARANAR 
 
6 22.916 67.16 9 11.203 32.84 
COCHIN 5 26.593 76.97 15 7.957 23.03 
NEW MANGALORE  3 32.310 82.22 14 6.986 17.78 
MORMUGAO 3 10.902 59.07 6 7.554 40.93 
MUMBAI 2 2.730 4.56 31 57.161 95.44 
JNPA 10 68.899 90.66 6 7.097 9.34 
DEENDAYAL 14 70.193 55.23 20 56.907 44.77 
TOTAL: 80 406.434  56.45 198 313.618 43.55 
Source: IPA Major Port Profile 2021-22  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

104 
 
ANNEXURE – X  
 
(All values in USD) 
Charges  
Mainline Vessel  Feeder Vessel  Coastal Vessel  
GRT 95366 / TEU 
9365 / 24HR PORT 
STAY  
GRT 25535 / TEU 
2442 / 24HR PORT 
STAY  
GRT 21339 / TEU 1725 
/ 24HR PORT STAY  
Cochin*  Colombo  Cochin*  Colombo  Cochin*  Colombo  
Lighthouse 
Dues 
(LHD)* 
12,135 3,230 3,164 884 0 714 
 
Due to the above, Port Call Costs are higher in Ind ia than in Foreign Ports. Port Call costs 
work out to USD 108,437 and USD 64,592 respectively  at the New and Old Terminals of 
Nhava Sheva as compared to USD 12,043 at Port Klang , USD 16,158 at Jebel Ali, USD 
17,235 at Singapore and USD 19,308 at Colombo.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

105 
 
ANNEXURE XI 
Present Status of the targets set by Establishing Green and Sustainable Ports by the 
Ministry 
 
Environment Performance Indicators (EPIs) Status  
 
Sr. 
No 
. 
EPIs  Target 
by 2030  
Target 
by 2047  
Port Wise Present Status  
Deendayal  JN Port  Mumbai  Mormug 
ao  
1 % share of Renewable 
energy consumption at 
ports (self-generated + 
procurement from grid) 
 
>60% >90% 100% 28%  30%- self 
generated 
60%-
procurement 
from grid.   
  
6% 
  
2 % Port 
equipment/vehicles 
electrified 
>50% >90% 33%.  of 
Port 
equipment 
are 
electrified. 
43% of 
Port 
equipme 
nt are 
electrical 
 
Baseline 
Study 
completed 
  
 
Nil 
  
3 % area under green belt  >20% >33% Plantation 
in  an area 
of 189.52 
acres. 31.79% 
 85,000 
bamboo 
planation is 
targeted this 
monsoon 
2023. 
  
 
5% 
  
4 % reduction in CO2 
emission/ton of cargo 
(Baseline Year 2023) 
>30% >70% The 
baseline 
estimation 
study in 
progress 
-3.91% 
  
*April to 
May-23 
GHG 
baseline 
emission 
study 
completed.  
 
  
Baseline 
study is 
in 
progress 
5 %GHG emission 
reduction in all coastal/ 
EXIM vessels 
>10% >50% Feasiblility 
strudy will 
be 
explored.  
Feasibili 
ty Study 
for 
Shore 
Power 
Supply 
(SPS) is 
in 
progress 
 
- Baseline 
study is 
in 
progress 
6 % reduction in fresh- >20% - Baseline 1.1% Under   

106 
 
 
Environment Performance Indicators(EPIs) Status  
water consumption / 
ton of cargo (Baseline 
Year 2023) 
Study 
under 
progress 
planning 
stage. 
 
5% 
  
7 % recycle and reuse of 
consumed water 
>100% - Water is 
treated in 
the 
township 
area and 
used  in 
gardening 
42.37% 
0.09 MLD 
capacity is 
planned 
before Dec 
2023. 
  
 
20% 
  
8 % reduction in energy  
consumption / ton of 
cargo (Baseline Year 
2023) 
>20% - 3000 Nos. 
of 
Convention 
al 
HPSV repl 
acement 
done. 
replacemen 
t in other 
areas in 
progress 
-0.51% 
  
*April to 
May-23 
Baseline 
study 
completed. 
  
  
 
Nil 
  
9 One no. of LNG 
bunkering station 
By year 
2030 
- Under 
exploration 
of the 
Possibility 
- 
Feasibility 
stage 
 Nil  
10  Green hydrogen / 
Ammonia bunkers and 
refueling facilities 
By year 
2035 
  Under 
MoU 
signing 
stage 
- 
Feasibility 
stage 
 Nil  
11  Adequate number of 
EV charging stations 
By year 
2025 
- Under 
MoU 
signing 
stage 
One 
Chargin 
g Station 
 
In Process  Nil  
Sr. 
No.  
EPIs  Target 
by 2030  
Target 
by 
2047  
Port Wise Present Status  
New 
Mangalore  
Cochin  VOC Port  Chennai  
1 % share of 
Renewable energy 
consumption at ports 
>60% >90% 100% 16.06% 4.6% 4 % 

107 
 
(self-generated + 
procurement from 
grid) 
 
2 
% Port 
equipment/vehicles 
electrified 
>50% >90% 18% 8.00% 9% 2 Nos. of 
RTGCs 
with hybrid 
models are 
electrically 
operated 
cranes. 
3 % area under green 
belt 
>20% >33% 33% 8.54% 13.34% 10%  
  
4 % reduction in CO2 
emission/ton of 
cargo (Baseline Year 
2023) 
>30% >70% 2.8% Nil Under 
planning  
18.66% 
5 %GHG emission 
reduction in all 
coastal/ EXIM 
vessels 
>10% >50% Exploring 
Possibility 
Nil Under 
planning  
NIL 
6 % reduction in fresh-
water consumption / 
ton of cargo 
(Baseline Year 
2023) 
>20% - 80% Nil Under 
planning  
0% 
7 % recycle and reuse 
of consumed water 
>100% - 90% Nil Under 
planning  
12 % 
  
8 % reduction in 
energy  consumption 
/ ton of cargo 
(Baseline Year 
2023) 
>20% - 20% Nil 0.41 unit 
/ton for May 
2023 
5% 
9 One no. of LNG 
bunkering station 
By year 
2030 
- NIL Nil Under 
process 
0 
10 Green hydrogen / 
Ammonia bunkers 
and refueling 
facilities 
By year 
2035 
  NIL Nil Process of 
selecting 
Consultant 
for pilot 
project 
‘10TPD 
Green 
Hydrogen 
0 

108 
 
  
 
Environment Performance Indicators(EPIs) Status 
 
Plant’ is 
initiated. 
11 Adequate number of 
EV charging stations  
By year 
2025 
- 02 NIL Work Order 
for Supply 
of 5 
Nos. of 
Charging 
Stations has 
 
been issued  
  
0 
Sr. 
No.  
EPIs  Targe 
t by 
2030  
Targe 
t by 
2047  
Port Wise Present Status  
Kamarajar  Visakhapatna 
m 
Paradip  Syama 
Prasad 
Mookerjee  
 
1 % share of 
Renewable energy 
consumption at 
ports (self-
generated + 
procurement from 
grid) 
>60% 
 >90%  50% >60% 0.60% 160 KW RE 
Installation 
 
2 % Port 
equipment/vehicle 
s electrified 
>50% 
 >90%  5% >10% 70%  01 No. 
crane 
electrified 
  
 
3 % area under 
green belt 
>20%  >33%  22.82% >20% 11% 30%  
4 % reduction in 
CO2 emission/ton 
of cargo (Baseline 
Year 2023) 
>30%  >70%  Internal 
study is in 
 progress 
>5% Under 
 study 
Under study 
 
 
5 %GHG emission 
reduction in all 
coastal/ EXIM 
vessels 
>10% 
 >50%  Installation 
of shore  
Power 
supply 
facility is 
available for 
>2% Under  
study  
Under study  
 

109 
 
harbor crafts 
and 
installation 
is in 
progress for 
 
coastal 
vessels. 
6 % reduction in 
fresh-water 
consumption / ton 
of cargo (Baseline 
Year 2023) 
>20%  - Internal 
study is in  
progress 
>25% Not 
applicable 
- 100% 
recycled 
water is 
used for 
water 
sprinkling 
 
Under study  
 
7 % recycle and 
reuse of 
consumed water 
>100 
% 
- Port has 
installed 
83KLD 
STPs and 
treated STP 
water is 
reused for 
green 
belt 
developmen 
t 
100% 100% One STP of 
150 KLD 
capacity 
 
8 % reduction in 
energy  
consumption / ton 
of cargo (Baseline 
Year 2023) 
>20%  - Internal 
study is in 
 progress 
>5% 32% Under study 
 
 
9 One no. of LNG 
bunkering station 
By 
year 
2030 
- Internal 
study is in 
 progress 
NIL 0 Planning 
Stage 
 
10 Green hydrogen / 
Ammonia bunkers 
and refueling 
facilities 
By 
year 
2035 
  Internal 
study is in 
 progress 
NIL 0 Planning 
Stage 
 
11 Adequate number 
of EV charging 
stations 
By 
year 
2025 
- One no. of 
EV  
station has 
installed 
NIL 0 Planning 
Stage 
 

110 
 
ANNEXURE XII 
Maritime and Port Authority (MPA) of Singapore gree n initiative comprising four 
programmes : 
• Green Ship Programme 
• Green Port Programme 
• Green Energy and Technology Programme 
• Green Awareness Programme 
 
These are voluntary programmes designed to recognis e and provide incentives to companies 
that adopt clean and green shipping practices over and above the minimum required by 
International Maritime Organization (IMO) Conventions.  
 
Under the Green Ship Programme and Green Port Progr amme, the MPA provides 
concessions in registration fees, annual tonnage ta xes and port dues for ships that exceed the 
IMO’s MARPOL EEDI requirements by 10% or more and adopt engine capable of using low 
carbon or zero carbon fuels.  
 
The MARITIME SINGAPORE DECARBONISATION BLUEPRINT co mprises voluntary 
programmes to recognize and provide incentives to c ompanies that adopt clean and green 
shipping practices over and above the minimum required by IMO obligations. 
(Source: Website of Maritime &Port Authority of Singapore) 
 
The Port of Rotterdam Authority’s CO2 reduction targets are the following 
Emission 
category  
(GHG-
protocol) 
Description % of CO2 reduction 
2019-2030 
Scope 1 + 2 Vessels and vehicles, procurement of electricity 
and district heat -/- 90% 
Scope 3 Air travel, commuting -/- 60% 
Scope 3 Contracts with contractors (fuels), real es tate -/- 45% 
Scope 3 Shipping -/- 20% 
(Source: Website of Rotterdam Port Authority) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

111 
 
ANNEXURE XIII 
 
The port charges for a Cruise Ship is $ 0.085 per G RT ('Fixed Rate') and $ 6 per 
passenger ("Head Tax") for the first 12 hours of st ay. Ports will not charge any other rate like 
berth hire, port dues, pilotage, passenger fee, etc. 
  
The period exceeding 12 hours stay, the fixed charges on Cruise Ships will be equal to 
the Berth Hire Charges payable as per SOR  
             
Based on Cruise Tariff recovered at some of the Cruise Ports across the globe through 
which Cruise Ships normally call Indian Cruise Port s namely Muscat, Doha, Singapore, 
Dubai, and Abu Dhabi, Cruise Tariff recovered in In dia are lowest among the above Cruise 
Ports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 
ANNEXURE XIV 
 
MCA 2021, 2018, 2008 -Key differences 
 2018 MCA 2021 MCA 2008 MCA 
A Concession Period- Article 2.2 in MCA 2021 
 
30 years. No 
provision for 
extension 
30 years for single phase and 45 years for multi-
phase investments 
On the 25th year, the concessionaire can request 
for extension in CP. Concessionaire to 
participate in the bidding. Can match the highest 
bid if his bid is within 10% of the highest bid. 
Cannot participate if was in material default of 
the provisions in the agreement and cumulative 
damages imposed exceeds 20%. 
30 years. No 
provision for 
extension 
B Conditions Precedent – Article 3.1 in MCA 2021 
 
180 days for 
fulfilling the 
requirements 
under the 
Condition 
Precedent. 
The revised MCA 2021 document provides a 
period of 180 days for fulfilling the 
requirements under the Condition Precedent. 
Concessioning Authority can increase 
this period upto 270 days depending on the 
nature of Conditions Precedent and the 
project requirements, considering rational 
demand from bidders 
90 days for 
fulfilling the 
requirements 
under the 
Condition 
Precedent.. 
Can be 
extended 
depending 
on the nature 
of the 
project 
C Deemed Performance Security- Article 4.2 in MCA 2 021 
 No provision 
After 6 months from COD, performance 
security to be replaced with deemed 
performance security. Will constitute the first 
and exclusive charge on an equivalent balance 
in the Escrow Account and on all amounts due 
and payable by the Concessionaire to the 
Concessioning Authority.  Concessioning 
Authority shall be entitled to enforce the 
Deemed Performance Security through a 
withdrawal from the Escrow Account or by 
making a deduction from the amounts due and 
payable to it. 
No provision 
D Tariff- Article 8 in MCA 2021 
 Upfront tariff Concessionaire shall fix the Tariff based on Upfront 

113 
 
fixed by TAMP market conditions and on such other c onditions, 
if any, as may be notified and made applicable 
by a competent authority, under the provisions 
of the MPA Act. 
MPA Act, Section 27 proviso clause states that 
‘Provided that, in case of Public Private 
Partnership projects after the commencement of 
this Act, concessionaire shall fix the tariff based  
on market conditions and on such other 
conditions as may be notified: 
Provided further that the revenue share and 
other conditions would be as per the provisions 
of the specific concession agreement between 
the Board and the Public Private Partnership 
concessionaire appointed under the Public 
Private Partnership project’ 
tariff fixed 
by TAMP 
E License Fee- Article 9.1 in MCA 2021 
 
License fee shall 
be on annual 
basis based on 
Port’s scale of 
rates. 
The Concessionaire shall, as consideration for 
the use, in its capacity as a bare licensee of the 
Project Site and the equipment comprised in the 
Port’s Assets, made available in accordance 
with Article 2.4, pay to the Concessioning 
Authority Re 1 (the “License Fee”). 
License fee 
shall be on 
annual basis 
based on 
Port’s scale 
of rates. 
F Additional Utilities and Services- Article 9.3 in  MCA 2021 
 
The charges in 
case of additional 
land will be 2.00 
times of scale of 
rates as 
applicable at the 
time of giving 
additional land. 
The charges in case of additional land will be 
1.20 times of scale of rates as applicable at the 
time of giving additional land. 
The charges 
in case of 
additional 
land will be 
2.00 times of 
scale of rates 
as applicable 
at the time of 
giving 
additional 
land. 
G Change in cargo and business plan due to change i n law- Article 13.2.1 in MCA 2021 
 No provision 
If as a result of Change in Law, the 
Concessionaire is unable to continue to handle 
the Cargo for which the Concession was 
originally awarded, the Concessioning 
Authority and the Concessionaire shall meet and 
the Committee would assess the aggregate 
No provision 

114 
 
financial effect on the Concessionaire and 
propose remedies as per the business revival 
plan including but not limited to an appropriate 
extension of the Concession Period and/or the 
new cargo that the Concessionaire may handle. 
Any such extension, if applicable, in the 
Concession Period shall be limited to a 
maximum of [10 (ten)] years. 
H Change in cargo and business plan due to Unforeseen  events- Article 13.2.2 in MCA 
2021 
 No provision 
Committee is empowered to undertake or cause 
to undertake a business revival plan to assess 
and recommend: 
• The business revival plan with the 
recommendation of handling of new cargo; 
• Provide recommendation on the viability 
of the business revival plan after a holistic 
consideration of all possible risks and rewards 
to all the stakeholders including but not limited 
to the Concessioning Authority, Concessionaire, 
Senior Lenders and Users including but not 
limited to impact on/of competition at the Port. 
in case the business revival plan involves 
infusion of additional debt, the lenders may 
have to endorse the business revival plan and 
provide the same in writing to the Committee; 
If applicable and accepted by the Concessioning 
Authority, the new Royalty or the Minimum 
Guaranteed Traffic from the Concessionaire to 
the Concessioning Authority; 
• Any other remedies what-so-ever, as 
mutually agreed by both Parties. 
No provision 
I Compensation on termination due to Force Majeure Event- Article 17 in MCA 2021 
 
 
Non Political 
Event  - 
compensation 
to Concessionair 
e - lower of the 
Book Value or 
the Debt Due 
LESS any 
amount due to 
 
i. Non Political Event - Termination Payment  
to  Concessionaire - 90% of the Debt Due 
LESS any amount due to the Concessioning 
Authority by the Concessionaire LESS all 
insurance claims received or admitted. 
 
ii. due to an Other Event  - Termination 
Payment to  Concessionaire 
 
 
Non-Political 
Event-  
compensation 
payable to the 
Concessionair 
e shall be the 
lower of the 
Book Value 
or  the  Debt  

115 
 
the 
Concessioning 
Authority LESS 
all insurance 
claims received 
or admitted. 
 
due to an Other 
Event  - 
Termination 
Payment to  
Concessionaire – 
higher of the 
Book Value or 
the Debt Due 
LESS any 
amount due to 
the 
Concessioning 
Authority by the 
Concessionaire 
under this 
Agreement LESS 
all insurance 
claims received 
or admitted. 
Provided, the 
Book Value or 
the Debt Due, as 
the case may be 
shall not exceed 
the Total Project 
Cost. 
 
Due to a 
Political Event - 
compensation 
payable to the 
Concessionaire 
shall be the same 
as that stipulated 
for termination 
due to a 
shall be Aggregate of: 
a) Debt Due less Insurance Cover; provided 
that if any insurance claims forming part of the 
Insurance Cover are not admitted and paid, 
then 80% of such unpaid claims shall be 
included in the computation of Debt Due; 
b) 110% of the Adjusted Equity; and 
c) an amount equivalent to the Additional 
Termination Payment less Insurance Cover; 
provided that if any insurance claims forming 
part of the Insurance Cover are not admitted 
and paid, then 80% of such unpaid claims shall 
be included in computation of the amount 
payable hereunder. 
 
iii. due to a Political Event-  Termination 
Payment to the Concessionaire shall be the 
same as that stipulated for termination due to a 
Concessioning Authority Event of Default. 
Provided, no Termination Payment shall be 
payable to the Concessionaire if the 
Concessionaire fails to maintain Insurance 
Cover as contemplated under Article 12 of this 
Agreement. 
Due  LESS  
any  amount  
due  to  
the Concessio 
ning 
Authority  by  
the  
Concessionair 
eunder  this  
Agreement  
LESS  all 
insurance 
claims 
received or 
admitted 
 
Other Event 
- 
compensation 
payable to 
the  
Concessionair 
e  shall  be  
the  higher  
of  the  Book  
Value  or  the 
Debt Due 
LESS any 
amount due 
to the 
Concessionin 
g Authority 
by the  
Concessionair 
e  under  this  
Agreement  
LESS  all  
insurance 
claims 
received or 
admitted. 
 
Provided, the 

116 
 
Concessioning 
Authority Event 
of Default 
Book Value 
or the Debt 
Due, as the 
case may be 
shall not 
exceed the 
Actual 
Project Cost. 
 
Other events - 
the  
compensation 
payable by  
the  
Concessionin 
g Authority 
shall be equal 
to  the  
aggregate  of  
(i)  Debt  
Due  plus  
(ii)  150%  
(one  
hundred  and  
fifty percent) 
Equity. 
J Termination due to Concessionaire Event of Defaul t- Article 17.1 (b) in MCA 2021 
 
 
After COD , 
compensation 
payable to the 
Concessionaire 
shall be the 
lowest of: 
i)the Book 
Value; 
ii) 90% (ninety 
percent) of Debt 
Due; 
(iii) the Total 
Project Cost; 
Provided, no 
compensation 
 
after the COD  - Termination Payment payable 
to the Concessionaire shall be an amount equal 
to: 
a) 90% of the Debt Due less Insurance Cover; 
and 
b) 70% of the amount representing the 
Additional Termination Payment: 
(i)        Provided that if any insurance claims 
forming part of the Insurance Cover are not 
admitted and paid, then 80% of such unpaid 
claims shall be included in the computation of 
Debt Due 
 
(ii) 
Default during the Construction Period  - no 
 
If  the  
termination  
is  after  the  
Date  of  
Commercial 
  
Operation ,  
due  to  a 
Concessiona 
ire  Event  
of  Default,  
the  
compensatio 
n  payable  
by  the 

117 
 
shall be payable 
to the 
Concessionaire if 
the 
Concessionaire 
fails to maintain 
Insurance Cover 
 
Default during 
construction 
period – no 
payment  
Termination Payment payable for and in respect 
of expenditure comprising the first 30% of the 
Total Project Cost and in the event of 
expenditure exceeding such 30% and forming 
part of Debt Due, the provisions of Clause 
42.3.1 shall, to the extent applicable to Debt 
Due, apply in respect of the expenditure 
exceeding such 30%. Provided, no Termination 
Payment shall be payable to the Concessionaire 
if the Concessionaire fails to maintain Insurance 
Cover as contemplated under Article 12 of this 
Agreement. 
Concessioni 
ng Authority 
to the 
Concessiona 
ire shall be 
the lowest 
of: 
 
(i)        the 
Book Value; 
(ii)        90% 
(ninety 
percent) of 
Debt Due; 
(iii)      the 
Actual 
Project Cost; 
Provided, no 
compensatio 
n shall be 
payable 
to the 
Concessiona 
ire if the 
Concessiona 
ire  fails  to  
maintain  
Insurance  
Cover  as  
contemplate 
d  under 
Article 12 of 
this 
Agreement. 
K Termination due to Concessioning Authority Event of  Default- Article 17.1 (c) in 
MCA 2021 
 
 
Compensation 
payable by the 
Concessioning 
Authority shall 
be equal to the 
aggregate of (i) 
 
The Termination Payment payable by the 
Concessioning Authority shall be equal to the 
aggregate of: 
(i)  Debt Due less Insurance Cover; 
(ii)  150% of the Adjusted Equity; and 
(iii)  115% of the amount representing the 
 
If  the  
termination  
is  due  to  a  
Concessioni 
ng  
Authority  

118 
 
Debt Due plus 
(ii) 150% (one 
hundred and fifty 
percent) Equity. 
Additional Termination Payment Event  of  
Default, the  
compensatio 
n payable 
by  the  
Concessioni 
ng Authority 
shall be 
equal 
to  the  
aggregate  
of  (i)  Debt  
Due  plus  
(ii)  150%  
(one  
hundred  
and  fifty 
percent) 
Equity 
L Additional Terminal Payment- Article 17.8 in MCA 2021  
 No provision 
(i) Payment due and payable in respect of 
Specified Assets which are constructed, 
acquired or installed after the 5th (fifth) 
anniversary of COD but no later than the 20th 
(twentieth) anniversary of the Date of Award of 
Concession, shall be limited to the lowest of: 
(ii)        Adjusted Depreciated Value thereof; 
(iii)      the replacement value thereof, as 
assessed by an Approved Valuer, who shall be 
selected and appointed by the Concessioning 
Authority, within 15 (fifteen) days of 
termination, for submitting his assessment 
within 30 (thirty) days of his appointment 
hereunder; and 
(iv)      40% of Total Project Cost. 
No provision 
M KPI for Concessioning Authority- Appendix 19 in M CA 2021  
 Not provided KPI for Concessioning Authority to be given 
and LD applicable for shortfall in performance Not provided 
N Shareholding- Article 11 in MCA 2021 
 
 
Concessionaire 
shall ensure that 
 
Concessionaire shall ensure that the Applicant/ 
members of the Consortium maintain 
 
Concessiona 
ire shall 

119 
 
the Applicant/ 
members of the 
Consortium 
maintain 
Management 
Control at least 
until expiry of 
the two (2) years 
after COD as 
also maintain 
their equity 
holding in the 
Concessionaire 
such that: 
 
(a) Selected 
Bidder/Consortiu 
m Members 
together with 
its/their 
Associates hold 
not less than 51% 
(Fifty One 
Percent) of its 
issued and paid 
up equity and 
that no member 
of Consortium 
whose technical 
and financial 
capacity was 
evaluated for the 
purposes of Pre-
qualifications in 
response to 
Request for 
Qualification 
shall hold less 
than 26% 
(Twenty Six 
Percent) of such 
equity until 
expiry of two (2) 
Management Control at least until expiry of the 
one (1) year after COD as also maintain their 
equity holding in the Concessionaire such that : 
 
(a)        Selected Bidder/Consortium Members 
together with its/their Associates hold not less 
than 51% of its issued and paid up equity and 
that no member of Consortium whose technical 
and financial capacity was evaluated for the 
purposes of Pre-qualifications in response to 
Request for Qualification shall hold less than 
26% of such equity until expiry of one (1) year 
after COD. 
 
At any time, after expiry of the aforesaid share 
holding period, lead member can approach 
Concession Authority for approval proposing a 
new entity/ consortium. 
 
Concession Authority may at its sole discretion 
consider and approve it subject to the 
entity/consortium meeting the eligibility criteria 
as prescribed in Bid Document for the Project; 
and 
 
(b) M/s [ 
/uni25CF] (“Lead Member”) of the Consortium 
(original or new as the case may be) legally and 
beneficially holds at any time not less than 50% 
of the Consortium’s holding in the paid-up 
equity capital of the Concessionaire. 
 
Any Transfer of shareholding in the 
Concessionaire and/or direct or indirect change 
in the Management Control of the 
Concessionaire, including by way of a 
restructuring or amalgamation, shall only be 
with the prior written approval of the 
Concessioning Authority which consent shall 
not be withheld except 
(i) for reasons of national security; or 
(ii) [if the Person proposed for assuming such 
Management Control would by virtue of the 
restrictions imposed under the Applicable Law 
ensure that 
the 
Applicant/ 
members of 
the 
Consortium 
maintain 
Management 
Control at 
least until 
expiry of (3) 
Three years 
from the 
Date of 
Commercial 
Operation as 
also 
maintain 
their equity 
holding in 
the 
Concessiona 
ire such that: 
 
 
(a)        The  
Applicant/m 
embers  of  
the  
Consortium  
legally  and  
beneficially  
hold not less 
than 51% 
(fifty  one 
percent) of 
its paid up 
equity  
capital until 
3 
(three) years 
after Date of 
Commercial 

120 
 
years after COD. 
 
At any time, after 
expiry of the 
aforesaid share 
holding period, 
lead member can 
approach 
Authority for 
approval 
proposing a new 
entity/ 
consortium. 
Authority may at 
its sole discretion 
consider and 
approve it 
subject to the 
entity/consortium 
meeting the 
eligibility criteria 
as prescribed in 
Bid Document 
for the Project; 
and 
 
(b) M/s [ 
/uni25CF] 
(“Lead 
Member”) of the 
Consortium 
(original or new 
as the case may 
be) legally and 
beneficially 
holds at any time 
not less than 50% 
(fifty percent) of 
the Consortium’s 
holding in the 
paid up equity 
capital of the 
Concessionaire, 
including by way 
or the conditions of bidding (including 
restrictions to avoid anti-competitive and 
monopolistic practice) and/or public policy be 
disqualified from undertaking the Project.] 
Operations 
and not less 
than 26% 
 
(twenty  six  
percent)  of  
its  paid  up  
equity  
capital  
during  the  
balance 
 
Concession 
Period; and 
 
 
 
(b)        M/s 
[
/uni25CF] (“Lead 
Member”) 
legally and 
beneficially 
holds at any 
time not less  
than  50%  
(fifty  
percent)  of  
the  
Consortium’ 
s  holding  
in  the  paid  
up equity 
capital of the 
Concessiona 
ire. 

121 
 
of a restructuring 
or amalgamation, 
shall only be 
with the prior 
written approval 
of the 
Concessioning 
Authority. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

122 
 
ANNEXURE XV 
 
Sr. 
No.  
Port Name Details of Employees working in Major Por ts   
1. Kamarajar Port Limited, 
Chennai 
 
A. PERMANENT EMPLOYEES – 92 Nos.  
B. TEMPORARY BASIS :- 
(1) CONTRACT BASIS – 03 NOS  
(2) EMPLOYEES DEPLOYED FROM CHENNAI PORT 
AUTHORITY – 35 NOS 
 
     C. VACANCIES – 64 NOS  
  
  
2. 
  
  
Mumbai Port Authority 
(MbPA)  
Class  Sanctioned 
Strength  
Operated 
Strength  
Vacancies    
I 417 248 169   
II 26 22 4   
III 3905 2088 1817   
IV 3069 1341 1728   
Total  7417  3699  3718    
3. Mormugao Port 
Authority (MoPA) 
Classification  Sanctioned 
Strength  
Present 
Strength  
Vacant Posts    
Class I  122 77 45   
Class II  85 71 14   
Class III  1379 858 521   
Class IV  504 202 302   
SUB TOTAL  2090  1208  882    
4. Deendayal Port Authority 
(DPA) 
Category  Sanctioned 
Strength  
Present 
Strength  
Vacant Position    
Class I  120 73 47   
Class II  63 50 13   
Class III  1292 797 495   
Class IV  837 426 411   
Total  2312 1346 966   
Shore Workers  -- 55 --   
CHD Workers  -- 304  
 
-- 
  
5. 
  
V.O.  Chidambaranar 
Port Authority (VoCPA) 
 
Group  Working 
Strength  
Vacant    

123 
 
  Class - I 57 48   
Class – II  48 14   
Class – III  198 381   
Class – IV  62 122   
TOTAL  365  565    
CHD    
Class – III  53 --    
Class – IV  40 --    
TOTAL  93  --    
Total 
contractual 
employees in 
VOCPA.  
24  --    
6. Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
Authority (JNPA) 
Category  Employee 
Strength  
Vacant    
Chairperson & 
Dy. 
Chairperson  
2 (i) The total vacancies in JNPA is 
301 against sanctioned strength of 
1660 in all the above category. 
  
(ii) Apart from the Permanent 
employees, the JNPA has awarded 
contracts to various local Project 
Affected Persons (PAP) labour 
Co.Op. Societies such as 
Housekeeping, gardening, 
Electrical and Civil maintenance 
assistance, township cleaning, 
school, hospital, general premises 
related conservancy work etc. Total 
of 820 contract workers who are 
PAPs and local residents are 
deployed through these PAP labour 
Co. Op. societies for the 
aforementioned work. 
 
 
 
 
  
Class-I 131    
Class-II  26    
Class-III  573    
Class-IV  55    
Total  787  
  
7. Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port 
Authority (SMPK)    
Category  Sanctioned 
Strength  
Present 
Strength  
Vacant  
   Syama Prasad Mookerjee Class-I 1712 864 848 

124 
 
Port Authority (including 
KDS+ HDC+ SMPK) 
  
  
Class-II 490 240 250 
Class-III 5482 2726 2756 
Class-IV 2412 1008 1404 
Total 10096  4838  5258  
  Contractually engaged persons working against various categories    
Name of Port  KDS  HDC  SMPK    
Equivalent to Class-I 90 49 139   
Equivalent to Class-II 32 20 52   
Equivalent to Class-III 179 129 308   
Equivalent to Class-IV 922 50 972   
Total  1223  248  1471    
8. New Mangalore Port 
Authority (NMPA)  
Category  Sanctioned Strength  Present 
Strength  
Vacant    
Class-I 82 55 27   
Class-II 93 64 29   
Class-III 380 195 185   
Class-IV 58 27 31   
Total 613  341  272    
9. Cochin Port 
Authority (CoPA)  
Category  Sanctioned Strength  Present 
Strength  
Vacant    
Class-I 146 81 65   
Class-II 100 80 20   
Class-III 1437 746 691   
Class-IV 204 45 159   
Total 1887  952  935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
10.  Visakhapatnam Port 
Authority  
Category  Sanctioned Strength  Present 
Strength  
Vacant    
Class-I 222 135 87   
Class-II 110 97 13   
Class-III 2007 1359 648   
Class-IV 1474 1010 464   
    Total 3813  2601  1212    
11.  Paradip Port Authority 
(PPA)  
Category  Sanctioned Strength  Present 
Strength  
Vacant    
    Class-I 144 91 53   

125 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Class-II 127 52 75   
Class-III 1114 316 798   
Class-IV 567 42 525   
CHE (Class-III) 0 0 0   
CHE (Class-IV) 6 6 0   
Female cleaning 
Workers 
9 9 0   
Total 1967  516  1451    
12.  
  
Chennai Port Authority 
(ChPA)  
  
Details of Employees (Permanent basis)  
  
  
  
Details of 
Employees 
(Temporary 
Basis)  
Details of 
Employees 
(Contract 
Basis)  
  
Working 
strength- 3090 Vacancy- 1872 6 27 
 
 
 
*  *  *  * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

127 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 24th April, 2023 in Room No. 53, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
8. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Prince Raj 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Dushyant Singh 
14. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 

128 
 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
i. Shri Sudhansh Pant, Secretary; 
ii. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha, Additional Secretary; 
iii. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary; 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that he had taken 
the decision to cancel the Study tour to Gangtok, Guwahati and Tawang as neither the Joint 
Secretary nor the Director was available for the tour. Since the Memb ers would be put to 
inconvenience in the absence of senior officers, the decision to cancel the tour was taken. 
Thereafter a discussion took place regarding the issues in planning tours and the Chairman 
directed that in future, senior officers of the rank of Director/Joint Secretary would accompany 
the tour in accordance with the norms framed by the Hon'ble Chairman and it was the 
responsibility of the Secretariat to ensure that the Members would not be put to any hardship 
during the tour.  
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.      The Chairman informed that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping & Waterways on the subject ‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country’. The 
Chairman remarked that it had been seven years since the launch of Sagarmala, the flagship 
programme of the Ministry,  and desired to know the progress made in Port Modernization and 
Connectivity, Port Led Industrialization, Operational Efficiency and Ease of Doing Business at 
Major Ports and the challenges still existing in these areas. He further desired that the Secretary 
may brief the Committee on the following points: 
i. Landlord Port model of governance and its anticipated impact on the autonomy and 
functioning of Major Ports; 
ii. Status and progress of the upcoming 13th port - Wadhawan in Maharashtra;  
iii. Development of Transshipment hubs at Indian ports; 
iv. Financial performance of Major Ports; 
v. Details of the number of PPP projects undertaken at each Major Port; 
vi. New legislations or amendments to existing legislations proposed to improve the 
functioning of the ports; 
vii. Details of ‘Green Ports Policy’ and the targets set to establish green/sustainable ports; 

129 
 
viii. Steps taken to create SMART ports, implementation of the Port Community System 
(PCS) paperless regime and digitization at Major Ports; and 
ix. Policy guidelines on land management at ports, the status of the ‘One Time Settlement 
Scheme’ and the success of the dispute settlement institution mechanism, ‘SAROD-
PORTS’. 
4.         The Committee was infor med about the legislative framework governing the Major and 
Non-Major ports wherein Major Ports feature in the Union List and are generally governed by 
Ministries. Non-Major Ports feature in the Concurrent List and come under State Governments 
and are gove rned either by State Maritime Boards or directly by the State Government.  The 
Major Port Authority Act, 2021  is applicable to all the Major Ports and contains provisions for 
their constitution, administration, control, and management while  the Indian Ports  Act, 1908 is 
applicable to both Major and Non -Major Ports and contains provisions related to the notification 
of ports, pilotage and other operations.   
5. The Committee was informed that there are total 225 ports on the approximately 7,517 
km Indian coastline out of which, 12 are Major Ports and 213 are Non-Major Ports.  Both east 
and west coasts have 6 Major Ports each ; Kolkata, Paradip, Visakhapatnam, Kamarajar, Chennai 
& V.O. Chidambaranar on the east coast and   Cochin, New Mangalore, Mormugao, Mumbai, 
JNPA & Deendayal on the west coast. The total traffic cargo handled by all the ports, both Major 
and Non-Major in 2022-23 was 1445 Million Tonnes (MT) out of which 795 MT was handled by 
Major Ports and 650 MT by Non-Major ports. The capacity utilization was 49% and 64% for 
Major and Non-Major Ports respectively. 
6. The Secretary, MoPS&W informed the Committee that the Major Ports have achieved 
historic all-time high performance of improvement in terms of cargo handling and significant 
improvements in several other parameters. The total traffic cargo handled by all the ports, both 
Major and Non-Major, in 2022-23 is 1,445 MT of which 795 MT is the share of Major Ports and 
650 MT is the share of Non-Major Ports. The earlier trend where Non-Major Ports had greater 
share in cargo handling has been revised after much effort. The Committee was also apprised 
about the following achievements and improvements in the FY 2022-23: 
 Highest Ever Total Cargo handled by Major Ports – 795 Million Tonnes; 
 Total Capacity of Ports -2627 Million Tonnes per Annum (1617 MTPA for Major Ports 
and 1010 MTPA for Non-Major Ports);  
 Best Ever Vessel Turn Around Time – 52 Hours; 

130 
 
 Highest Ever Output per Ship Berth Day – 17239 Tonnes; 
 Best Ever Operating Ratio – 48.54 %; 
 Highest Container Throughput at JNPA – More than 6 million TEUs; 
 Highest Ever Vessels handled – 21846; 
 9 PPP projects worth Rs. 9,544 crores awarded; and 
 Operating Surplus, i.e. the difference between Operating income and expenditure, is 
about Rs. 9,365 crores. 
7. The Ministry informed the Committee that the above figures are the averages for all 12 
ports. The Paradip Port has exceeded 30,000 tonnes per day in Cargo Volume and Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port (JNPA) has achieved a Turnaround time of 24.8 hours, comparable with the global  
best ports like Shanghai and Singapore. 
8. The Ministry further informed that a number of initiatives are being taken by the Major 
Ports to move towards Sustainable Development Goals and to decarbonize the operations at the 
ports in line with the Maritime In dia Vision 2030 and the Panchamrit Commitments made in the 
UN Climate Change Conference in Glasgow (COP -26). The Ministry highlighted the following 
green initiatives taken by the Major Ports :- 
 Wind and Solar Energy installations at Major ports for increasing the share of renewable 
energy ; 
 Port Vessels/ Vehicles’ /Equipment retro-fitted with electrically powered equipment in 
transition to Green Fuel; 
 Shore to Ship Power Supply to reduce carbon footprint of ports ;  
 Port activities like bunkering, handling and storage facilities for low carbon fuels under 
the National Green Hydrogen Mission; and 
 Other Initiatives-Use of Energy Efficient Products i.e. LED Lamps, BLDC Fans and 5 
Star Air Conditioners. The Committee was also informed that the Ministry was due t o 
launch "Harit Sagar" guidelines for Green ports in a few days' time to ensure the 
achievement of the Maritime India Vision for 60% green renewable energy use by Major 
Ports by 2030. 
9.         The Committee was also informed of the initiatives taken by the Ministry for developing 
digital tools and dashboards for real -time data exchange to promote Ease of Doing Business.   
The Committee was apprised about ‘Sagarmanthan’ - a digital dashb oard to monitor both the 
operational and financial performance of  ports, used by the Ministry for weekly reviews and the 

131 
 
‘National Logistic Portal’ (NLP Marine) for maritime stakeholders - a single integrated digital 
window to access information on various  regulatory bodies, shipping line, port/terminal 
operators and services such as cargo, banking financial, etc. 
10.       The Ministry also informed that to provide more autonomy to ports, the Tariff Authority 
for Major Ports (TAMP) has been abolished and t ariffs are now fixed based on the market 
dynamics. The Model Concession Agreements have been realigned with the market requirements 
to benefit both cargo and port owners.  
11.       Some Members pointed out that the presentation did not have data regarding international 
ports for comparison with the performance parameters of Indian ports.  The Chairman directed 
the Ministry to collect the information and submit the same to the Committee. 
12.       A Member remarked that all the Major ports were constructed m ore than 50 years back 
but till date not more than 45 -50% of their capacity has been utilised. He enquired about the 
reasons for such non -utilisation of capacities. The Secretary responded that in the port sector, 
capacity utilisation of 70 per cent is con sidered to be saturation. In the last eight years the 
capacity of ports has increased from 872 MT to 1600 MT. A 50% utilisation means that there is 
additional capacity to handle more cargo and without such addition, the ports would be 
congested. 
13.       Upon enquiry by a Member on the development of new ports, the Secretary informed that 
a new Port at Vadhavan, about 150 kms north of Mumbai is being developed.  Environmental 
Impact Assessment studies have all been done except one and the Dahanu Taluka Envi ronmental 
Protection Agency has to do public hearings and give its NOC. JNPA is the nodal agency 
developing the Vadhavan port.  The new port would be a deep draft port with 18 -20 metres of 
draft which would enable even the largest capsize vessels to come to the port. 
14.       The Secretary also informed about the progress in the development of a new 
Transshipment Hub in Greater Nicobar Island called Galathea Bay. Environmental clearance had 
been obtained for this project but due to some issues, the National  Green Tribunal (NGT) has 
ordered the constitution of a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change to review the Environmental clearance.   The 
Chairman remarked that only about 25% of Indian cargo  transshipment was being handled by 
Indian ports leading to a loss in revenue. 
15.       A Member requested for details of all the 225 Major and Non -Major Ports in the country 
and the estimated goods imported and exported by these ports.  He also enquired about the status 

132 
 
of Goa port after the curtailment of iron ore exports. The Secretary acknowledged that Goa is the 
only port having a negative growth trajectory with only 27% capacity utilisation. Prior to 2012 -
13, 80% cargo volume in Goa came from iron ore  exports. However, due to a Supreme Court 
order in 2012-13, iron-ore mining was stopped at Goa Port and its capacity utilisation as well as 
its financial performance declined.  
16.       A Member enquired about the status of connectivity between the Major Ports and the 
mainland to ensure full capacity utilisation of the ports. 
17.       One Member enquired whether the National Logistics Policy of the Ministry was in 
tandem with the Multi-Modal Logistics Policy of the MoRTH and requested details on the same.  
18.       A Member pointed out that bunkering capacity and details of PPP model of business, the 
structure, the investments and their value addition had not been given in the 
presentation. Another Member commented that the presentation was focussed on ca rgo handling 
and there was little information about the lighthouse and its tourism prospects and Ease of Doing 
Business initiatives. 
19.       Members also asked about the following issues - 
 Skill development initiatives for Indian students/entrepreneurs/start-ups in the field of 
renewable energy; 
 The expected impact of the 9544 crores worth PPP projects on employment opportunities 
 Status on the development of Hydrogen fuel cells under the ‘Green port initiatives; 
 Increasing draft levels and berthing capacity at Indian ports; 
 Linking Barmer in Rajasthan to Kandla Port; 
 Details of Cochin Port and ways to enhance its utilisation capacity; and 
 Number of permanent/temporary employees at all Major ports and vacancies. 
20.       The Chairman pointed out that the logistics cost in India is higher than in any other 
country and asked the Ministry to give their suggestions for reducing logistics costs, especially in 
landlocked states. He also asked the Ministry to give their comments on various issues like the 
justification of private participation, digital initiatives, efficiency parameters and land use in 
ports etc and stated that a Study Tour would be planned in which the Committee would inspect 
one or more ports to study the issues. The Chairman also enquired wheth er the Dredging 
Corporation of India comes within the jurisdiction of the Ministry and the reasons for the 
proposals for its privatisation despite being a profit -making entity. The Secretary informed that 

133 
 
instead of disinvestment, four Major Ports, JNPA, V ishakhapatnam, Paradip and Kandla have 
bought a stake in the Corporation. 
21.       The Secretary took note of all queries and suggestions made by the Members. The 
Chairman gave a list of eleven questions on the subject to the Ministry and  directed that written 
replies to the eleven questions and also to the points which had not been answered may be sent 
within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
22.       The Chairman informed that in the next meeting, the Committee would take up the 
subject of ‘Functioning of National Akademis and Other Cultural Institutions.’ 
23.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
24.       The meeting adjourned at 5.02 PM. 
   
New Delhi,                                                                                                               Swarabji B. 
24th April, 2023                                                                                                       Director 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

134 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
03:30 P.M. 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways  
  
 S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Sudhansh Pant Secretary 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Bhushan Kumar Joint Secretary 
5. Shri H.N. Aswath Development Adviser (Ports) 
6. Shri Agrim Kaushal Advisor 
7. Shri Rajiv Jalota Chairperson, Mumbai Port Authority 
8. Shri T.K. Ramachandran Chairperson, Vo Chidambaranar Port Authority 
9. Shri S.K. Mehta Chairperson, Deendayal Port Authority 
10. Shri P.L. Haranadh Chairperson, Paradip Port Authority and Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port Authority 
11. Shri Ajay Pal Singh Sirohi Joint Director (Parl.) 
  
  
* * * * 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

135 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXII 
TWENTY SECOND MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11:00  A.M. on Wednesday, the 17 th May, 2023 in Committee 
Room -A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Shri Anto Antony 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Dushyant Singh 
14. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Indian Ports Association (IPA)  
i. Shri Rajiv Jalota, Chairman (IPA). 
Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association (IPPTA)  
ii. Shri Manish Gupta, Secretary (IPPTA). 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 

136 
 
  
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of 
the Indian Ports Association (IPA) and Indian Private Ports and Terminals Associa tion (IPPTA) on 
the subject ‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country.’ The Chairman asked the representatives of 
IPA and IPPTA to brief the Committee on various aspects of functioning and modernisation of 
ports. 
3. Through his presentation, the Secretary, IPA informed the Committee that the IPA is a 
society of the 12 Major Ports in the country. 
4.  The Committee was informed that in the FY 2022 -23, the Major Ports had a total Operating 
Income of Rs. 18,198 Crores and an Operating Surplus of Rs. 9,365 Crores. H owever, the Net 
Surplus was Rs. 6,993/ - Crores because a lot of the surplus has to be put into the pension fund to 
meet pension liabilities. Due to pension liabilities, three major ports —Mumbai, Mormugao, and 
Cochin—are currently having financial difficult ies. They have also explained various activities 
undertaken by them to improve the profitability of ports. 
5. The Committee was also apprised of the major achievements in the performance of various 
Major Ports in the FY 2022-23. 
6.         The Committee was i nformed about the comparative statistics of the Major Ports and top 
global ports. The Port of Singapore ranks 31 st globally with a draft of 18 Meters, 18 hour TRT and 
37.5 Million Twenty -foot Equivalent Units (MTEU) and Qingdao Port (China) with a draft of  17 
Meters, 40.8 hour TRT and 630 MTEU ranks 42 nd globally while India’s JNPA ranks 54 th with a 
draft of 15 Meters, 22 hour TRT and 6 million plus MTEU. However, due to its impressive 
turnaround time (TAT) of just 22 hours (equal to 0.9 days) JNPA has jump ed nine places in the 
Overall Performance Index according to the Logistics Performance Index Report, 2023 of the World 
Bank. The total handling capacity of JNPA will get increased to about 10.4 million metric tons 
which will be the maximum the port can han dle. Therefore, JNPA has begun planning for the 
forthcoming port of Vadhavan in Maharashtra, which will have a draft of 18 to 20 meters, 9 berths 
each measuring one kilometer in length and a maximum capacity of around 24.5 million TEUs.  
7.         The Com mittee was informed that the privatization of berths helps in increasing the 
efficiency and productivity of ports.  The Chairman of Paradip Port informed that all berths in 
Paradip Port, the largest cargo handling port on the east coast, are proposed to be  mechanized by 
2030. He also informed that mechanization is the only way to control pollution as the port handles 

137 
 
coal and iron ore which are highly dusty cargos. Upon query by the Chairman regarding the effect of 
mechanization on employees, it was informe d that the Paradip port has a very lean staff with the 
majority of staff employed on contractual basis and after mechanization, the staff will be diversified.  
8.         The Chairman of the Kandla Port informed that the port was the largest in terms of ca rgo 
handling. Massive investment has been made in infrastructure for new roads, godowns, railways, 
and housing.  
9.         The Committee was informed that ‘Harit Sagar’ Green Port Guidelines, 2023  have been 
launched to achieve zero carbon emission goals and to increase India’s share of renewable energy to 
60% by 2030. The Committee was further informed that IPA has launched ‘Sagar Setu,’ a national 
maritime single window platform encompassing complete end -to-end logistics solutions as the 
International Mar itime Organization (IMO) has announced that from 1 st January 2024, it will be 
mandatory for ports around the world to operate Maritime Single Windows  (MSWs) for the 
electronic exchange of information required on ships. 
10.       The Committee was also info rmed that India aims to increase cruise passenger traffic from 
0.4 million at present to 4 million and the economic potential of Cruise tourism is expected to go up 
from USD 110 million at present to USD 5.5 billion in the years to come.  
11.       The Secretary-General of the Indian Private Port and Terminals Association, through written 
and oral submissions, enumerated the various issues faced by the Private operators:- 
 Concession agreements signed between PPP Operators and the Port Authorities are heavil y 
skewed in favour of the Ports due to: 
a. The inefficient and inequitable allocation of risks in PPPs; 
b. Lack of flexibility in contractual arrangements; and 
c. Lack of robust review mechanism keeping in pace with the dynamic changes in trade. 
 Existing Concessionaires should be allowed to migrate to the New Model Concession 
Agreement, 2021, by signing Supplementary Agreements, in order to opt   for the benefits given 
to new Concessionaires like lease rentals, freedom in fixation of Tariffs etc. This would  give a 
level playing field to both the existing and new Concessionaires. Upon a query by the Chairman 
regarding the land lease rentals, the Secretary -General, IPPTA informed that revenue share is 
being paid by the Concessionaires to the Port    Authority which should cover all the expenditure 
from the point of view of the concession. However lease rentals are also being charged 
separately for the old Concessionaires under the Agreements of 2008, 2013 and 2019 while as 
per the new Concession Agreement, land is to be given at a very nominal rate.    

138 
 
 High port charges for mainline ship calls make Indian ports uncompetitive compared to global 
ports.   
 The success of a port depends on proper rail and road connectivity without which port / terminal 
assets are unde rutilized, thus increasing the pre -berthing delay of vessels. Connectivity plans 
should be part of the project scope from the initial stage itself.  
 Additional charges such as Railway Terminal Charges, and Siding Charges collected by Ports 
increase the overall logistics costs. 
 Non-resolution of various disputes between the Port Authorities and the Concessionaires. The 
new Dispute Resolution Mechanism of SAROD -Ports is applicable to new Concessionaires. 
Further, though the Government has set up Conciliation and Settlement Committees , the Ports 
sometimes withhold their consent to refer the disputes to these Committees.  
 Lack of institutional mechanism for providing long-term and liberalised financing.  
 Lack of regulatory measures for preventing unhealthy compe tition between Major Ports and 
Non-Major Ports and integrated planning of development of infrastructure  
 Dredging expenditure is met by the ports themselves which add to the marine related charges. As 
per international practice, dredging expenditure is borne by the Government. 
12.       A Member queried whether Singapore port is government owned and was informed that 
there is a government authority though terminals are private. The Member also asked about the 
advantages and disadvantages of the transition f rom Port Trust to Port Authority, the differences 
between the old and new Concession Agreements and whether any objections had been raised 
regarding the old terms and conditions. The representatives of the IPA informed that some problems 
had not been anticipated at the time of signing of the agreements but due to changes in scenario over 
the years, modifications were sought in the agreements. New model concession agreements were 
announced in 2008 and 2018 and then in 2021. There is an inbuilt review mechani sm in the 
concessionaire agreements. Port authorities are however reluctant to review old agreements.  
13.       A Member sought clarification regarding the performance of the berths operated on the PPP 
model and also about the effectiveness of the review mechanism. The representative of the IPPTA 
informed that the present mechanism is not invoked at all because, from the Port Authority’s point 
of view, any change is a post –bid change. However, the Concessionaires' argument is that review 
provisions are inbuilt in every agreement which can be invoked for future changes.  
14.    A Member further queried how the tariff freedom granted to the new Concessionaires would 
benefit the people and the nation. The representative of the IPPTA opined that in a market-driven 

139 
 
economy, market forces would invariably determine the type of cargo to be handled by the ports, the 
tariffs etc but the revenue generated would benefit the nation.  
15.       Another Member raised the issue of large -scale smuggling of drugs t hrough ports especially 
the Kandla port and wanted to know the steps being taken to stop smuggling of drugs through our 
ports.  The representatives of IPA stated that    ports   have to take whatever cargo comes in the port 
and have very little ability to m onitor the cargo but norms laid by the law enforcing agencies are 
adhered to. The ports only have the responsibility to provide the infrastructure as required by the 
Narcotics Control Bureau. The Bureau also has its offices and staff posted at ports for ch ecking for 
narcotics coming into the ports.   
16.       Another Member commented that presently, PPP projects are handling about 51 per cent of 
cargo in major ports and enquired about the number of berths in Paradip Port under PPP mode. He 
was informed tha t 6 of the total 19 berths in Paradip port were under PPP mode. Upon enquiry by 
the Member about the process of selection of companies, it was informed that after the approval of 
the Government, open tender is issued. With regard to Paradip Port, there wer e four private 
operators for the 6 PPP berths.  
17.       The representative of the IPA informed that 90% of traditional berths are either non -
mechanized or semi -mechanized. Upon enquiry about the problems in mechanization, he further 
informed that Governm ent ports do not have the same flexibility as a PPP operator. The Member 
commented that a comparative study was essential to find solutions for such problems.  
18.       The Chairman stated that a list of ten questions on various topics like average vessel  
turnaround time, achievement of Maritime India Vision 2030, port competitiveness,   transshipment 
hubs,  development of Visakhapatnam port etc. and replies to these questions could be sent within a 
week’s time.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
19.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
20.       The meeting adjourned at 12.48 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                                     Swarabji B. 
17th May, 2023                                                                                                                  Director 
  
 

140 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
11:00 A.M. 
Indian Ports Association (IPA)  
  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Rajiv Jalota Chairman 
2. Shri P. L. Harnadh Vice-Chairman 
3. Shri S. K. Mehta Chairman, Deen Dayal Port Authority 
4. Shri Vikas Narwal Managing Director 
5. Ms. S. Santhi Executive Director 
6. Shri Vikrant Rai Engineer (Ship Survey), Dte. General of Shipping 
7. Shri Girish Thomas General Manager (Operations), Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority 
  
Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association (IPPTA)  
  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Manish Gupta Secretary 
2. Shri Ravi Kumar 
Regidi Secretary-General 
  
  
  
* * * * 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 

141 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXV 
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING 
  
 The Committee met at 10:30  A.M. on Friday, the 16 th June, 2023 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A.A. Rahim 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
12. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  

142 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Private Ports  
(i) Shri Girish Aggarwal, Managing Director, APM Terminals (APMT) Pipavav Port; 
(ii) Shri Santosh Breed, Chief Finance Officer, APMT Pipavav Port; and 
(iii) Shri Karun Kant Dave, Senior Vice -President & Unit Head, JSW Jaigarh Port Limited 
and Dharamtar Port Private Limited.  
 
The Ch airman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them that the 
agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of the JSW Jaigarh Port and Gujarat 
Pipavav Port on the subject ‘Functioning of Major Ports in the Country’ and that the 
representative of the Mundra Port was unable to come due to the cyclone in Gujarat.   
2. The Chairman then welcomed the senior officers of the two Private ports and asked them 
to brief the Committee on the following:- 
 Performance parameters of the two ports and measur es taken to improve the logistics 
performance of the port, technology advancements and digitization  
 Connectivity of the port to the hinterland and gaps in infrastructure 
 Tariff Policy, Vessel related charges and other Port charges 
 Drafts of the two Ports and the dredging expenditure 
 Basic infrastructure and land acquisition issues in Greenfield projects 
 Challenges in the Public Private Partnerships in the operation of Private Terminals at 
Major Ports and Model Concessionaire Agreements 
 Suggestions for amendments in Legislation to improve the legal ecosystem for ports  
3. Through his presentation, the Managing Director, APMT Gujarat Pipavav informed the 
Committee of the following features of Pipavav Port :- 
 Pipavav is India’s First Private Port, developed under a 30 -year Concession Agreement 
with GM Baxi Group and is the main gateway to the northern hinterland.   
 First joint venture under a Public Private Project with Indian Railways to form Pipavav 
Railway Corporation Ltd (270 Km rail line) 
  First Port to connect to Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) and handles 70% cargo by 
rail.  
 Rated as India’s Most efficient port for the second consecutive year by a World Bank 
agency 
 APMT has a measurable impact on local job creation; it has emplo yed over 2500 people 

143 
 
at the Pipavav port, among which, 90% are Gujarati people from surrounding villages. 
 APMT Pipavav has 2 Container berths with capacity to handle up to 1.35 Million TEUs, 
 a  Dry Bulk  Berth with capacity of 4 Million tonnes of dry bulk  cargo, a Liquid Berth 
with capacity to handle upto 2 Million Tonnes of liquid cargo and a RoRo facility with 
capacity of handling about 2,50,000 cars per year.   The port also has 12 Rail Sidings and 
17 Warehouses.  
 A new liquid berth for INR 720 Crores i s under development at the Port which will 
increase the liquid cargo handling capacity of Port to 5.2 MMT. 
 Utilisation capacity was 55-6-% 
 The port has about 500 regular employees.  
4.        The Committee was apprised about the sustainability initiatives taken by the Port under 
the Gujarat Green Gateway project, namely, conversion of cranes from diesel to electric, 
commissioning of 1000 Kilo Watt rooftop solar power plant inside the port premises reusing 
treated wastewater for plantation of 250,000+ trees and that 40% of energy was sourced from 
green sources.  The target was to make Pipavav a Green Port by 2030.  
5.        The Committee was also informed about the following digital and technological 
advancements achieved by the APMT Pipavav: 
i. Integrated Operations Centres  
ii. Advanced analytics: 
 Predictive maintenance 
 Supply chain planning 
iii. Artificial intelligence: 
 Automated planning, despatching & execution 
iv. Automation: 
 Machine learning approach using digital history 
 Intelligent assets (onboard) 
 Digital Twin 
6.        The representative explained that the focus on technology was very strong to further 
improve productivity.  Digital twin was already operational at one of the Company’s terminals at 
Nhava Sheva, World -class N4 Terminal Operating System and PrimeRo ute had been 
implemented to improve efficiency and reduce the Port Stay Hour of Customer vessels.  
7.        The Committee was informed about the CSR initiatives of the port which cover: 

144 
 
 72+ major water conservation structures (12 check dams, 07 farm ponds , 58 RRWHS, 
pond deepening & desilting); 
 Benefit of port medical facility & ambulance support to over 2000 villagers; 
 Women are trained in nursing, electrical, BPO, LED trade under the Saksham scheme and 
 Providing clean drinking water to villages. 
8.        A Member pointed out that the Port did not appear to have Skilling Programmes for 
industry-specific skills like Crane Operators or Forklift Operators and cited the example of 
Germany where every port had such training.   He suggested that the Port could tie up with the 
National Skill Development Council.  
9.      The Committee was also informed about the challenges faced by the Port, such as, the 
underdeveloped eco-system predominantly agricultural but with good potential for industry, poor 
road connectivity, and uncompetitive rail freight since nearly 65% of the cargo in India moves by 
road and customers are unwilling to shift to rail freight due to the high costs as compared to road 
freight. A Member commented that the cost of road freight per tonn e per kilometre ranged from 
Rs. 3-Rs. 3.5 whereas the freight charges of railways should be less than Rs. 1.   He asked for a 
comparative chart of the basic fare of DFC with roads and railways as the Committee would be 
hearing the DFCCIL soon.  
10.      The Committee was also informed that the grant of subsidy to designated ports for Liquid 
cargo handling is putting other ports in a disadvantageous position; Permits and clearance delays 
and the cessation of benefits of SEIS to exporters are the other problems faced by Private ports.  
11.      The representative of the Pipavav Port further briefed the Committee on the Dedicated 
Freight Corridor remarking that it would be a game changer as  the infrastructure which has been 
created by the Railways is going to gi ve seamless access to the northern hinterland which is the 
main market of the Port and efficiencies that would reduce the transportation costs. A Member 
asked whether the DFC was presently in operation till Pipavav and was informed that the 
Pipavav port was connected by the DFC to Surendranagar and onwards to the mainline through a 
feeder line. Katuwas near Rewari in Haryana was the starting point of the DFC which connects 
the port.  The DFC was presently operational and was already a game changer because trains that 
used to take 72 hours to come to the port now come in 30 hours and are double -stack electrified 
trains.  The Member commented that the DFC was the biggest project in the country and its 
biggest impact would be on changing the logistical costs.  

145 
 
12.      A Member asked about the future plans of the Port as the Concession Period was due to 
expire soon and was informed that the Government of Gujarat was in the process of formulating 
a policy on it. The Member commented that there should be a compara tive chart with figures 
from other ports including top foreign ports regarding the investments in technology, asset 
utilization, efficiency parameters etc.  
13.      Through his presentation, the Sr. Vice -President, of JSW Jaigarh Port  informed the 
Committee that the port at Jaigarh has a cargo handling capacity of 55 MMTPA with 70% 
capacity utilization and is the highest sugar exporter amongst the private ports in India. It has 7 
berths and a dedicated specialised MBC loading facility f or Inland waterway transportation.   
Twenty-five per cent plus of Indian coastal movement is being done from Jaigarh to Dharamtar.   
The Jaigarh Port has a draft of 18.5 meters with infrastructure designed for 20.5 metres and the 
cost of dredging was around 300 Crores. The port can handle Capesize ships and Triple E size 
vessels for Containers with its world -class infrastructure. The CAGR growth of volume handled 
in Jaigarh Port is around 15 per cent year on year 
14.      JSW also operates India’s largest sta te-of-the-art Riverine port Dharamtar in Maharashtra 
situated on the banks of Amba River that has a capacity of 34 MMTPA and draft of 3.5 meters,   
the country’s first Floating Storage and Regasification Unit (FSRU) based LNG terminal at 
Jaigarh Port  and the single largest coal export facility in India at Paradip. The Jaigarh port has a 
strategic location and serves Central India as well as Andhra Pradesh and Goa.   
15.      The Committee was informed about the digital initiatives and technological advancements 
in the Jaigarh Port: 
 Enhancing Port Community Systems, iPortman management system 
 IoT and Sensor Integration 
 Digital Road Map 
 Integrated Digital Platform  
 IOT and Predictive Maintenance (PM)  
 Metaverse (AR/VR) for operational and Safety training  
 Digital Logistics Management Systems (DLMS)  
 NLP (Marine) System upgradation to reduce logistics costs to 9%, Indian Customs 
Electronic Data Interchange Gateway (ICEGATE) customs interactions and EoDB 
initiatives for stakeholders 
 Smart Gate Automation & WB Aut omation for TAT monitoring,  controlled truck 

146 
 
movements and reducing congestion and TAT/TRT, paperless work etc. 
 Electronic Control on Cargo Delivery for Engineering Control on cargo delivery to 
Group Company, less human intervention and increased productivity 
 System Upgradation - Lock Mobile & Allow Limited Application, Visitor Management 
System, One click report for customer 
 Navigation simulation for training purposes  
16.      The Committee was also informed about the Port’s commitment to sustainable  initiatives 
like covershed operations, dust suppression systems, shore to ship power, LED lights etc.  It was 
however pointed out that the Ministry stipulates that bio -fuel should be bought from a certified 
supplier whereas there are no certified bio-fuel suppliers in the country.  
17.      The Committee was informed that JSW Jaigarh port has 125 regular employees and 1498 
contractual employees while JSW Dharamtar has 97 regular and 451 contractual employees. The 
Port’s CSR initiatives like training girls in the BPO industry, sea -cage fishing etc were 
highlighted. The representatives of both ports informed the Committee that they had their own 
residential colonies with facilities for employees within the townships, all statutory benefits and 
welfare measures and constant training programmes for the employees.  
18.      A Member enquired about the greater number of contractual employees versus the regular 
employees and was informed that this was because the jobs of the port industry workers were 
mostly seasonal in nature. The contractual employees were also given the same benefits as the 
regular ones. Upon enquiry whether CSR funds can be provided beyond the state, it was 
informed that though focus was on surrounding areas, there were no limitations. Upon enqu iry 
by a Member about employment prospects after training,  it was clarified that the girls being 
imparted vocational training under CSR programmes were finding employment outside. The 
Member commented that though the Gujarat Pipavav port had existed for 25 years, there were no 
hospitals or medical facilities for the employees. The representatives opined that running a 
hospital needed help from the local administration; another Member suggested that the Port 
could build a Hospital and get an NGO to run it.  
19.      Regarding the gaps in connectivity, the Committee was informed that the  Jaigarh Port is 
connected to Pune -Bengaluru Highway.  The Mumbai -Goa Highway -66, about 40 kms away 
from Jaigarh port is under construction but Container traffic can be moved o n the Highway only 
if it is 4 lanes.  Both these Highways have parallel railway lines, one being Konkan Railway and 
the other being the Central Railway line from Pune to Bengaluru.   However, there is no rail link 

147 
 
between these two lines which is the bigges t hurdle hampering the full potential of this port.  If 
two sanctioned projects of Railways at Chiplun Karad and Vaibhavwadi Kolhapur or an Inland 
Waterway connection to the Chiplun Industrial Area is given, the port can be developed as a Hub 
and Spoke Model.  
20.      Regarding port -led industrialisation, the  Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change (MoEFCC) is giving environment clearances for particular cargo with quantity 
restrictions which are not good for Ease of Doing Business. The Shipping industry is not static 
like the Manufacturing industry it always varies with Government p olicies and market 
conditions. Applying for MoEFCC’s consent for cargo change would delay the process by 
almost a year.  The representative suggested that MoEFCC should  revert to its earlier policy of 
giving a blanket 80 million capacity to handle broad cargos.  
21.      Upon enquiry by the Chairman about the tariff policy and suggested changes, the 
representative of the Jaigarh port stated that the Concessionaire Agreement of the Port was with 
the Maharashtra Maritime Board and was for 50 years duration.   He opined that market-driven 
tariff was best for minor ports as this facility has also been provided to major ports, though there 
is a disparity between the older Concessionaires and the new ones. The representative of the 
Gujarat Pipavav port also stated that with in the same port, different tariff regimes are applicable 
to different terminals which creates disparity and opined that all tariff regimes should be market -
based.  
22.      The Chairman asked the representatives to reply to the ten questions handed over t o them 
and the questions raised in the meeting within a week.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
23. The Committee decided to take up the following three subjects for examination. 
 Development of niche tourism including spiritual tourism, theme -based tourist ci rcuits 
and potential tourist spots; 
 Development and expansion of existing and new national inland waterways; and 
 Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India. 
24.      The Committee further decided to undertake a study visit to Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh), 
Bengaluru (Karnataka) and Goa from 3 rd to 7 th July 2023 for detailed examination of various 
subjects under consideration and mandate of the Committee  viz., Functioning of Archaeological 
Survey of India with reference to the State of Karnataka; Development of Niche Tourism 
(including Spiritual Tourism), Theme -based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots in the 

148 
 
States of Andhra Pradesh & Goa; Development and Expansion of Existing and New National 
Inland Waterways, with reference to the States of Andhra Pradesh & Goa; Construction of Road -
Over-Bridges (ROBs), Road-Under-Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads and Review of Road Survey 
Guidelines etc., with reference to the State of Goa; and Visit to Manohar International Airport, 
Mopa, Goa on Development of the Airport and Facilities available to the passengers. During the 
visit, the Committee will hold elaborate deliberations with various stakeholders and 
representatives of the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Goa and Karnataka on the issues 
related thereto, as per the Tour programme.  The Committee authorized the Chairman of the 
Committee to seek necessary approvals from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the 
purpose. 
25.      A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
26.      The meeting adjourned at 12.48 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                          Swarabji B. 
16th June, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

149 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXVI 
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th June, 2023 in Committee Room -
4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.    Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy - Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A.A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 

150 
 
Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited 
(i) Shri Ravindra Kumar Jain, Managing Director, Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of 
India Limited (DFCCIL) 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
(i) Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Secretary, Ministry of Tourism 
    (Complete list of witnesses is attached as per Annexure-I)  
  
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them that the 
agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation 
of India Limited (DFCCIL), Ministry of Railways on the subject ‘Functioning of Major Ports in 
the Country’ and the second item on the agenda is to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism on 
the subject 'Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist 
Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots. 
3.        The Committee further decided to undertake a Study Visit to Mumbai and Goa from 5 th to 
8th July, 2023 for detailed examination of various subjects under consideration and mandate of 
the Committee. During the visit, the Committee will also hold elaborate deliberations with 
various stakeholders and representatives of the State Governments of Maha rashtra and Goa on 
the issues related thereto, as per the Tour programme. The Committee authorized the Chairman 
of the Committee to seek the necessary approval from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for 
the purpose. 
(After the representatives of DFCCIL took their seats) 
4.        The Chairman welcomed the representatives of DFCCIL and stated that the Committee 
had been apprised of the connectivity issues faced by the ports to the hinterland which impedes 
the productivity and performance parameters of the po rts.  He asked DFCCILto brief the 
Committee on  the following:- 
 Last-mile connectivity and the high logistics costs in India 
 The number of seaports in India connected to the Eastern and Western Freight Corridors; 
 Impact of the connectivity provided by DFC on logistics costs; 
 Comparison of the freight charges of DFC with road and rail cargo tariffs; 
 Reasons behind the delay in the implementation of the DFC project which started in 
2006; 

151 
 
 Status of completion of the Eastern and Western Freight Corridors; 
 Cost escalation due to the delay and the details of new Corridors to be undertaken in 
Phase II of the Project; 
 The problems anticipated as regards the shifting/redesignating the entire supply chain 
developed on the road mode to rail mode; and 
 The steps taken to prevent congestion and accidents at both corridors. 
5.        The representatives of DFCCIL, through their presentation, informed the Committee of 
the total length of DFCs in the country, allocation and funding, ports connected to DFCs, DPR 
status of DFC projects, etc. as given in Annexure–II. 
6.  The representatives of DFCCIL informed that Ports like Kandla, Mundra, Pipavav, and 
Hazira have been connected to the DFCs through the feeder routes. 33 Good Sheds (7 in EDFC 
and 26 in WDFC) have also been developed. The Detailed Project Report (DPR) has b een 
prepared for EDFC and WDFC projects, namely, Kharagpur -Vijayawada of about 1,078 km, 
Palghar-Bhusawal-Dankuni and Rajkharswan-Andal of 2,106 km and Itarasi -Vijayawada of 931 
km, which will provide direct connectivity to ports, namely, Dhamra, Paradip a nd Gopalpur in 
Odisha, Visakhapatnam, Gangavaram and Kakinada in Andhra Pradesh.  
7.  Members enquired about the reason for the non -inclusion of Cochin and Vizhinjam Port 
in the DFC network.  DFCCIL informed that under the National Rail Plan -Vision 2030, the total 
length of future DFC would be 7,800 kilometers by the year 2050, which will cover the 
remaining areas.  
8. Members raised various queries such as: 
 Need for Road Under Bridges/underpass/tunnel facility etc. on DFC for easy movement 
of cattle; 
 Lack of connectivity of Ports in South India to DFCs; 
 Need for a chart depicting freight costs levied by Indian Railways and DFCCIL 
separately; 
 Need for a Feeder route/line connecting North Eastern Region of the country to the 
Stations of Sonnagar-Dankuni of the EDFC;  
 Provision of Wagons to coastal area fishermen of Pipavav and Kandla Ports; 
 Key areas and the responsibilities of DFCCIL as far as employment is concerned; and 
 Profit gained/losses incurred by the DFCCIL in the development of DFCs and the 
challenges faced in this regard. 

152 
 
9. The representatives of DFCCIL responded to some of the queries raised by the Members 
and took note of the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman directed that written 
replies to the points which had not been answered and t o the questions forwarded by him may be 
sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(After the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and other officials took their seats) 
10. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism. He then remarked that 
despite India being a 365 -day tourist destination offering a diverse array of products for Niche 
Tourism as well as various Theme -based Tourist Circuits and diverse geographica l features, the 
tourism potential still remains untapped. He queried about the reasons why India has been unable 
to fully exploit its potential for Niche Tourism as compared to its smaller neighbours, namely, 
Thailand, Nepal, and Bhutan who are achieving t remendous success in becoming the top golf, 
mountain, and sustainable tourism destinations respectively. He further queried about the areas 
identified for the development of Niche Tourism in the country, the number of Niche Tourism 
projects under implement ation, particularly in three important categories of Tourism - Medical, 
MICE, and Spiritual Tourism, challenges faced in developing a destination as a Niche Tourism 
hub and the coordination mechanisms employed by the Ministry with various State 
Governments/ Departments/ agencies. The Chairman asked the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the number of projects completed and those which are under development under 
the Theme-based Tourist Circuits identified under the ‘Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS) Phase -
1’ along with their physical and financial progress and the time and cost overruns, the status of 
Spiritual Circuit projects and further plans for their development.   He also enquired into the 
reasons for the SDS moving away from Theme -based tourist circuits and focusing on revamping 
Destination Tourism, potential tourist spots identified under the ‘SDS -2.0’ and the criteria 
employed for selection, steps taken for the welfare of local communities and creation of 
employment opportunities in the areas identified for the Scheme. 
11. The Chairman then remarked that many States like Assam, Gujarat, Kerala, Rajasthan, 
Punjab, Goa, Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Tripura have granted 'industry' status to tourism, which provide s benefits such as electricity 
tariff, lower local taxes, availability of land on subsidized rates, etc. But the hotel and resort 
industry being capital-intensive require huge investments and has long gestation periods.   Hence, 
the Ministry should take up the issue with the State/Central Government to grant the hotel and 
resort industry the ‘infrastructure’ status to enable it to avail longer credit terms, greater 
investments, and better access to commercial borrowings as well as tax benefits/concessions. H e 
also queried about the reason for the delay in the implementation of the Draft National Tourism 
Policy which was released in July, 2022.  
12. Through her presentation, the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee 
that the Ministry is current ly promoting ten Niche Tourism Products, namely, Sustainable 

153 
 
Tourism, Rural Tourism, Adventure Tourism, Eco -tourism, Meetings Incentives Conferences & 
Exhibitions (MICE), and Wedding Tourism, Cruise Tourism, Medical & Wellness, Film Tourism 
and Golf Touris m and Spiritual Tourism.   The Ministry informed the Committee of the steps 
taken for each Niche product, viz. formulation of National strategies in consultation with State 
Governments and Industry, guidelines and framework for each Niche tourism product, and 
launch of Travel for LIFE Programme under Sustainable Tourism. The Ministry has also 
launched the Best Tour ism Village Competition to identify the potential areas which received 
751 applications from Rural Tourism Villages.   E-Conference Visa was also granted for the 
MICE events.  Also, the Ministry has launched a new Incredible India film on MICE Tourism 
and is preparing for a much bigger digital campaign for MICE Tourism.   
13. The Ministry further informed that it is jointly working with other Central Ministries on 
the Niche tourism areas which fall under their jurisdiction.   It is working with (i) the Minist ry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change for   Eco-Tourism, (ii) the Ministry of Shipping, Ports, 
and Waterways, for developing coastal areas/destinations under Cruise Tourism, (iii)   the M/o 
Health and Family Welfare Medical to promote Wellness Tourism a nd (iv) the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting for Film Tourism.   
14. The Committee was informed that State Governments are spearheading the promotion 
and marketing of various Spiritual Tourism destinations to attract both domestic and 
international visitors.   The Ministry is also promoting various tourism destinations through its 3 
Schemes, namely, Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS), PRASHAD, and Central Financial 
Assistance for Central Agencies.   Under the SDS, 15 thematic circuits have been identified an d 
76 projects have been  sanctioned to date. Out of this 23 sanctioned projects worth Rs. 1365.01 
Crore belong to Spiritual Circuit, including Krishna Circuit, Buddhist Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, 
Ramayana Circuit, and Tirthankara Circuit. The revamped SDS 2.0 has 55 destinations identified 
across 32 States/UTs for development. The Committee was also informed of various successful 
projects of the Ministry under the SDS 1.0 in the States of Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Puducherry, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand, and Vadnagar (Gujarat). 
15. The Committee was informed that PRASHAD, which was launched in 2015 to create 
infrastructure for pilgrimage/spiritual tourism, has been allocated Rs. 1630.05 Crores for 46 
sanctioned projects. Apart from its own website and the Incredible India website under the 
digital initiatives for tourism promotion, the Ministry has also set up the ‘Utsav Portal’ to 
provide live streaming of various destinations and their festivals. The Committee was further 
informed that the Ministry is promoting pote ntial tourist spots through its website as well as 
organizing tourism -related National Festivals such as ‘Bharat Parv,’ and ‘Paryatan Parv,’ 
conducting online and social media campaigns.  
16. The Ministry further informed that it is working on identifying 10 to 12 tourist 
destinations for which it has created a value chain focusing on tourism mapping. It is also 
looking into incentivizing ‘Green tourism’, which has been one of the major points of discussion 

154 
 
in G-20 meetings. In the G-20 Tourism Working Group, the Ministry created the Goa Road Map 
giving recommendations for Sustainable and Responsible Tourism, best digitization practices of 
various countries, skill development, and tourism Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs). 
17. A Member commented o n the frequent changes in the Swadesh Darshan Scheme from a 
circuit to a single location and the lack of institutional memory regarding past issues and 
decisions. He also raised issues regarding the lack of an inclusive consultation process in 
deciding the 55 tourist spots and equitable distribution of tourist spots in various States.   The 
Secretary informed that 50 new destinations which were also announced in the Budget 2023, will 
be selected in challenge mode and are in an advanced stage of finalization.  The principles 
governing the selection process are the inclusion of states which have not been represented so far 
while keeping a balance between such states and other states.   
18. Another Member queried about the status of the request made by the State Government 
of Andhra Pradesh to develop Gandikota village situated in the Kadapa district of Andhra 
Pradesh, which is also known as the 'Grand Canyon of India,' as a heritage site. In reply, 
Secretary, M/o Tourism informed that Gandikota incidentally was a part of the 'Adopt a Heritage' 
Scheme which was given to the Dalmia Bharat Group, the status of which will be given to the 
Committee. 
19. A Member enquired about the lack of development of Sitamarhi the birthplace of Sita in 
Bihar.  He was informed that a  concept proposal has been requested from the State Government 
and the same was awaited.       
20. Members also queried about the procedure and time taken to issue a visa for MICE, 
Medical and Wellness Tourism, steps taken to relax the norms of obtaining a  medical visa, the 
details of leading countries with the highest number of medical tourists visiting India and the list 
of 156 countries for which e-visa has been restored by Ministry of Home Affairs. A Member also 
queried about the details of sectors and clusters identified for development under Rural Tourism 
and the steps taken to address the language barrier in promoting the same. Members also raised 
various queries regarding:- 
 Lack of basic amenities, such as sanitation facilities, clean water, healthcare services, and 
tourist-friendly infrastructure, such as well -placed signboards, transportation and parking 
facilities, tourist information and helpline centers at tourist destinations and lack of 
coordination among State and Central Governments; 
 Lack of medical facilities at the adventure tourism destinations; 
 Need for development of coastal connectivity infrastructure such as “Roll On -Roll Off" 
(RoRo) ferry services around the 16,00 km coastline of the State of Gujarat under Cruise 
Tourism; 

155 
 
 Developing a tourism destination providing Ayurveda -inspired wellness cuisine of 
various Indian States; 
 Promotion of the State of Manipur as the birthplace of modern polo; 
 Allocating special funds and devising a special master plan to explore responsible 
tourism in the State of Kerala; 
 Challenges and issues faced in obtaining permission from the Forest Department 
regarding carrying out adventure tourism activities such as river rafting, kayaking etc. in 
the forests; 
 Promoting Dolphin watching points at the Ganga River flowing between Patna to 
Bhagalpur in Bihar as a tourism destination; and 
 Developing a very strong Tourism Rating System in India to curb manipulation.  
 
21. The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of 
the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points 
which had not been answered and to the questions forwarded by him may be sent within a week. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
22.      A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
23.      The meeting adjourned at 6:12 PM. 
  
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                           Swarabji B. 
26th June, 2023                                                                                                               Director 
  
  
  
  
Annexure-I 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
26th June, 2023  

156 
 
3:00 P.M. 
  
Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL) 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Ravindra Kumar Jain Managing Director 
2. Shri Nanduri Srinivas Director (Operations & Business Development) 
3. Shri Amit Saurastri General Manager 
4. Shri Love Shukla Joint General Manager 
  
3:45 P.M. 
  
Ministry of Tourism 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Ms. V. Vidyavathi Secretary 
2. Ms. Manisha Saxena Director General  
3. Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Gyan Bhushan Sr. Economic Advisor 
5. Shri M. R. Synram Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Anita Baghel Additional Director General 
7. Shri Prashant Ranjan Director 
8. Shri Shreevats Sanjay Deputy Director General  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
Annexure-II 

157 
 
Details of Information given to the Committee by the representatives of DFCCIL through 
their presentation and during deliberations with the Committee 
1.  DFCCIL is a  PSU of the Ministry of Railways  and is responsible for funding, constructing 
and commissioning of DFCs, their Operation and Maintenance, business development for higher 
rail, modal share, reduction in logistics costs and development of New DFCs. 
2. Indian Railways’ network of Golden Quadrilateral (Delhi – Chennai – Mumbai – Howrah) 
along the diagonal rail routes accounts for just 16% of the railway route, but carries 52% of the 
railway’s passenger traffic and earns 58% of revenue of freight traffic.   Railway Modal Share in 
the developed countries is more than 45% whereas in India, it is about 26%.    . 
3.    The total stretch of the WDFC and EDFC is 3,300 km which passes through 9 States and 72 
Districts. 11,000 hectares of land has been acquired by DFCCIL throughout the entire stretch of 
India and more than 250 million cubic metre of earthwork has to be done for the construction of 
this project. DFCCIL has currently been provided with an allocation of Rs. 1,24,000 Crore out of 
which Rs. 51,200 Cr. is jointly funded by World Bank and Indian Railways for the E astern DFC 
of length 1,337 kms (Ludhiana via Dadri to Sonnagar) and Rs. 72,800 Cr. is jointly funded by 
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and Indian Railways for the Western DFC of 
length 1,506 kms (Mumbai to Dadri). The remaining 538 km in EDFC is yet to be sanctioned.  
4. 30% land out of the total 70% acquired, is Greenfield.   4.265m container height in WDFC has 
been provided to give wider and bigger stock in the same capacity, whereas, in EDFC, it has 
been envisaged that it would be better to  have a wagon height of 1.5m. The current Axle load is 
proposed to be increased to 32.5 tonnes from the present 25 tonnes. The Signaling system is 
provided at every two kilometres while the ‘Kavach’ System is yet to be installed.  
5.        DFCCIL has constructed 543 major bridges,  4,643 minor bridges and 53 Rail flyovers. It 
has also constructed 304 Road Over Bridges (ROBs), and 557 Rail Over Bridges (RUBs), due to 
which 861 level crossings have been eliminated to enable seamless transportation. DFCCIL has  
built 114 Greenfield Stations, and the state -of-the-art Western and Eastern Operation Control 
Centres at Ahmedabad and Prayagraj respectively. Indian Railways is also upgrading its own 
feeder routes connecting to the DFCs to ensure that the traffic origin ating from non-DFC routes, 
but passing through it is routed through DFCs. Existing freight trains can also move on the DFC 
tracks.  DFCCIL has also proposed to develop New DFCs of about 4,315 km in length.  
6.        The DFCs would be able to carry faster,  heavier, longer hauls. DFCs have achieved more 
than 60 kmph average speed as compared to goods trains average speed of 25 kmph. In the 
Indian railway network, freight operations are marred by the preferences given to the passenger 
trains due to traffic congestion.  In the DFC train operations will become smooth and a scheduled 
time table would be possible. When the entire DFC network becomes operational, it will save 
457 million -ton CO2 over a 30 -year period and it would also lead to quantum jump in 

158 
 
transportation capacity i.e. 120 trains each way, reduction in logistics costs, connectivity to 
private sidings and freight terminals as well as major and minor ports.   
7.        The DFCCIL will construct 6 private freight terminals on PPP basis which will beco me 
loading points for line capacity augmentation. 
8.      The DFCCIL is working on two MMLPs at Dadri and Rewari in coordination with the 
National Industrial Corridor Development Corporation (NICDC) and MMLPs are being 
developed with the coordination of various Ministries/Departments.  
9. The sanctioned strength of DFCCIL is 5,998 but DFCCIL is operating with approximately 
3,000 personnel only.  
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

159 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIX 
THIRTY SECOND MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 09th August, 2023 in Committee Room-
4, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri A.A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 
 Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
15. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
19. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
20. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  

160 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following 
Reports:- 
(i) *    *     *      * 
(ii) Functioning of Major Ports in the Country; and  
(iii) *     *      *     * 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one . Two Members 
raised a point of dissent on one of the recommendations in the draft report on ‘Functioning of 
Major Ports in the Country’. The Committee took note of the points and reflected them 
appropriately in the report. After a brief discussion, the Committee ad opted the aforesaid three 
draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor modifications of typographical and 
factual errors and formatting, if need be in all the Reports. 
 
3.       The Committee authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P., and in his absence, Shri 
A.A. Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Ram Margani Bharat , M.P. and in his absen ce, Shri Chhedi 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 
4.       *      *      *      *1 
 
5.       The Meeting adjourned at 3:21 P.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
09th August, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
                                                           
1 Relates to other matters 

161 
 
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
 