Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Eighty Ninth Report on the Development of National 
Waterways-Potentials and Challenges
REPORT NO. 
199
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th August, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

27
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the Development of National
Waterways-Potentials and Challenges
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1—18
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ............................... 19—22
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 3—26

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
12. Yogi Adityanath
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
18. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
19. Shri S. Pakkirappa
20. Shri Prabodh Panda
21. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
23. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri K. Sudhakaran
30. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Ninety Ninth  Report  on “Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Eighty Ninth
Report on the Development of National Waterways-Potentials and Challenges”.
2. The One Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 27
th February, 2013 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred and Ninety Ninth Report was received from the Ministry of Shipping on 29 th July, 2013.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23 rd August, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 23 , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Bhadrapada 01, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ASSOCHAM Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
CIWTC Central Inland Water Transport Corporation
CONCOR Containers Corporation of India
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme
DEA Department of Economic Affairs
DGLL Director General Lighthouses and Lightships
DPR Detailed Project Report
EOI Expression of Interest
EXIM Export and Import Trade
FACT Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited
FCI Food Corporation of India
FICCI Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
INC Inland Navigation Corporation
IREL Indian Rare Earths Limited
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India
IWT Inland Water Transport
JSMM Joint Standing Monitoring Mechanism
LAD Least Available Depth
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MMTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum
MS Act Merchant Shipping Act
NA TPAC National Transportation Planning and Research Centre
NER North Eastern Region
NINI National Inland Navigation Institute
NMDR National Maritime Development Programme
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation
NW National Waterway
ODC Over Dimensional Cargo
ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
PDC Project Development Consultant
PPP Public Private Participation
RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete
RIS River Information System
VGF Viability Gap Funding
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report on the
“Development of National Waterways – Potentials and Challenges” which was presented to the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on the 6
th February, 2013 and presented to both the Houses of
Parliament on the 27 th February, 2013.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Shipping vide their O.M.
dated the 29 th July, 2013 in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the
Report.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those observations/
recommendations which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should
be furnished to it at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of Shipping. The recommendations of
the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report, action taken thereon by the
Ministry and further recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken
has been given in the succeeding paragraph.
5. The Committee notes that Inland Water Transport (IWT) is a fuel efficient and environment
friendly mode of transportation. India is richly endowed with navigable waterways, comprising
rivers, canals, backwaters, creeks, etc. that can be developed as alternate mode of transportation
in the coming years.
(Para 71 of the 189
th Report)
Reply of the Government
6. Government is in agreement with the Committee’s observations and is taking necessary
measures to make the National Waterways navigable and a viable alternate mode of transport.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7.  The Committee notes that the Government is in agreement with the Committee’s
recommendation.
8. This Committee has always stood for developing water transport in a big way, which also
has immense potential. It has been emphasizing this through its recommendations given in various
reports, latest being its 177
th Report on Demands for Grants, 2012-13 of the Ministry of Shipping.
This inter alia  states that water transport has various advantages compared to road transport.
Water transport is cheaper, can handle huge volumes of cargo and has less impact on environment.
The Committee had felt that a strong inland water transport system would be able to handle an
efficient, cheaper and environment-friendly cargo transport system. The Committee had strongly
recommended to make available adequate resources in order to have a well-connected water
transport facilities throughout the country.
 (Para No. 72)
Reply of the Government
9. Government provides grants to Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) for development

2
of National Waterways in the country. Government also provides 100% funding to the North
Eastern States under Central Sector Scheme for the development of Waterways. By and large, there
is no financial crunch to develop IWT infrastructure on the National Waterways. An amount of
Rs.1500 crore has been earmarked for this sector during Twelfth Plan period. Government is also
exploring the possibility of assistance from World Bank as well as private sector in the development
of our National Waterways especially NW-4 and 5.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Shipping has received funds up
to the tune of Rs. 1500 crore to be expended during the Twelfth Five Year Plan and the
Ministry also observes that the said amount is adequate for the development of Inland
Water Transport. In view of this the Committee hopes that now the work will be expedited
in all the National Waterways declared till date.
NATIONAL POLICY
11. India has inland waterways with a navigable length of 14,500 km., but the Committee is
constrained to state that even though National IWT Policy document prepared in the Ninth Plan
prescribed for making efforts for pooling the resources through captive users and PSUs, with
liberal investments in IWT sector, the Government have failed to implement the vision of the policy
document in actual terms over these years. On the contrary, water transport has shrunk even in
those areas with great potential. The Committee also notes that lack of adequate policy support for
the sector was also compounding the problems, leading to IWT losing its competitive edge over
other modes of transport. The other modes of transport received policy support and huge
investment in developing its infrastructure, whereas the water transport seems to have been
neglected or has not received the required attention of the policy makers and the Government. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government of India should take necessary follow up
actions on the Inland Water Transport Policy Document of 2001 for the optimum utilization of our
potential in the water transport sector.
 (Para No.73)
Reply of the Government
12. The expenditure on IWT sector from Rs. 385 crore in the Tenth Plan has increased to
Rs. 560.48 crore in the Eleventh Plan. During the Twelfth Plan Inland Water Transport is one of
the thrust areas. A total allocation of Rs. 1500 has been made for the Twelfth Plan for the IWT
Sector. Action has already been taken on all the major policy items enumerated in IWT policy of
2001. Some of the important items on which action has been taken are as under:–
(a) The IWAI Act was amended to enable authority to enter into Joint Ventures. IWAI had
formed three Joint Ventures with two private sector companies.
(b) Depreciation rate for Inland Vessels was made at par with sea going vessels.
(c) Investors in Inland Waterways infrastructures are provided income tax rebate similar
to National Highways.
(d) Customs duty for certain equipments related to Inland Water Transport sector has been
reduced.
(e) IWAI Act has been amended to enable it to raise fund from the market through issue
of bonds etc.

3
Due to increase in the level of infrastructure available on NW-1, 2 and 3 under the above
mentioned policy, confidence of private sector has increased in the IWT sector. This is reflected
in the conclusion of Haldia-Farakka coal transportation project in which a private sector company
has invested about Rs.650 crore in creating IWT infrastructure. Under this project transportation
of 3 million tonnes of coal every year would be made from Haldia to the NTPC Power station at
Farakka. However, since the IWT sector has remained dormant for a long time, it is expected that
only gradually the IWT activity in the National Waterway would increase across the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13. The Committee takes note of all the encouraging developments taking place at IWT
Sector as detailed by the Ministry.
14. Having emphasized this, the Committee is of the view that IWT as a mode of transportation
cannot be considered in isolation. It needs to be integrated with other modes of transportation to
achieve maximum benefits. Centre-level coordination would be required for this. The Committee
also recommends that IWT operators should be given a level-playing field vis-à-vis those in other
modes-road and rail transports.
(Para No.74)
Reply of the Government
15. For an integrated approach to the development of IWT sector with other modes of
transport, a study was entrusted to M/s RITES on 4.2.2013. The report has been recently
submitted by RITES and is under examination in IWAI. Based on the outcome of the study,
necessary steps would be initiated for integrating the waterways with Rail and Road. In order to
provide level playing field to Inland Water Transport sector vis-a-vis Rail and Road, transportation
subsidy as available to road and rail for North Eastern Region (NER) has been made available to
IWT sector also. IWT has also recently been included in the scheme for subsidy for transportation
of fertilizers at par with road and railway.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16. The Committee would like to know about the details of recommendations made by
M/s RITES as submitted to the Ministry of Shipping. The Ministry may also inform this
Committee about the implementation status of the same.
17. The Committee notes that national highways are contributing about 40% of the road
accidents and trucks being the major contributor in this. The water transportation being the safest
mode can reduce the road accidents and resulting casualties significantly. It also reduces treatment
and rehabilitation costs to a great extent. Moreover, the land acquisition for the Highways/Roads
have been a major problem which is not only sensitive issue but also it is highly time taking and
costly exercise. There is shortage of free land for road construction. Switching to water mode,
therefore, would become the most viable option to reduce the dependency on roads, particularly
for bulk cargo transport. It has lot of tourist potential especially for pilgrimage, which is mainly
located on river sides.
 (Para No.75)
Reply of the Government
18. Ministry is in agreement with the recommendation of Committee. Ministry of Shipping has
already initiated steps for modal Shift of cargo from Rail and Road to Inland Waterways and
coastal shipping.

4
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed to its recommendation.
FUND ALLOCATIONS
20. Even in the operational waterways, the Committee notes, lack of maintenance and sufficient
funds are the main reasons for insignificant use of National Waterways. We have five national
waterways so far, of which only three are operational and rest of two are to be started since last
three years. The Committee recommends that adequate funds need to be allocated separately for
maintenance and development of the national waterway which are presently in use. The Committee
notes with dismay and express its unhappiness for not being able to operationalize NW-4 and 5 so
far. It is believed that these national waterways will be operationalized on PPP mode as has been
decided by the Planning Commission. This Committee does not know why this has been kept
languishing. The Committee feels that Planning Commission is not much interested in the
development of waterways in the country as their reluctance to allocate adequate budget has
resulted the two national waterways NW-4 and 5 remain on mere papers. To avoid further delay,
the Committee recommends to allocate adequate financial support soon for operationalizing these
waterways.
(Para No.76)
Reply of the Government
21. The IWAI is developing the first three National Waterways (NW-1, 2 and 3) for shipping
and navigation by providing a navigational channel with targeted depth and width for most part of
the year, aids for day and night navigation, and fixed/floating terminals at selected locations for
berthing and loading/unloading of vessels and inter-modal connectivity at a few selected locations.
Central Plan funds are being provided separately for maintenance and development of the first three
National Waterways to IWAI in their Annual budget. The commercially viable stretches of NW 4
and 5 are proposed to be developed under PPP mode with Viability Gap Funding (VGF). The report
of M/s Grant Thorton, which was appointed by Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), has been
received. The report is under examination in IWAI. Further, the Ministry of Shipping is also
considering availing technical and financial assistance from World Bank for the development of
National Waterways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Ministry has informed the Committee that commercially viable stretches of the
NW 4 and 5 are proposed to be developed under PPP mode. The Committee fails to
understand why only the commercially lucrative and viable stretches should go into private
hands through PPP. Does it mean that the non profitable and riskier sections would be left
to the Government (Inland Water Transport Authority of India). The Committee does not
agree with the idea of handing over only the profitable stretches of the  NW 4 and 5 to
private partners.  The Committee would also like to know about the observations made in
the report of M/s Grant Thorton, which was appointed by Department of Economic Affairs
(DEA), had been received by the Ministry of Shipping.
23. The Committee notes that severe dearth of infrastructure and lack of modernization are
the major factors bedeviling the Inland Water Transport sector in the country. The Committee
notes that Infrastructure creation requires continued efforts, better planning and larger quantum
of funds.
 (Para No. 77)

5
Reply of the Government
24. Investment in IWT sector has a long gestation and returns are over a period of time. To
ensure better planning and to adopt latest technology, Ministry of Shipping would take further steps
to strengthen IWAI especially its technical manpower. This would help in better conceptualization
and execution of projects on NWs. It is reiterated that sufficient allocation of plan funds for the
development of IWT sector has been made during Twelfth Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the reply.
26. The Committee also notes that not only the allocations made for IWT has been inadequate
but also till the end of Eleventh Plan expenditure of an amount of Rs. 1168 crore approximately
has been incurred. Further only an amount of Rs. 1500 crore has been allocated by the Planning
Commission, whereas, the working group has projected requirement of funds to the tune of
Rs. 10,500 crore for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. This trend can be observed in the previous Plan
periods like Eigth, Ninth and Tenth also. All the above periods, the Budget Estimates and the actual
expenditure incurred left huge gaps. It is a matter of concern for the Committee that even the
inadequate funds are also not being optimally utilized. Besides, there is no specific planning and
roadmap for mobilizing required investment for the creation of infrastructure and modernization of
the existing waterways and also operationalizing new ones that are pending. The Committee
recommends that government should come out with comprehensive projects for development of
IWT in the country in a time bound manner and sanctions for the same should be made accordingly.
(Para No.78)
Reply of the Government
27. The funds allocated to IWAI in its initial years were very meager. However, allocation of
funds improved from Ninth Plan onwards. Since its inception in 1986, till 2012-13, an amount of
Rs. 1794 crore has been allocated to IWAI. The expenditure pattern of IWAI has been increased
from the level of Rs. 35 crore in Eigth Plan to Rs. 151 crore in Ninth Plan to Rs. 385 crore in
Tenth Plan and Rs. 560 crore in Eleventh Plan period. During the Twelfth Five Year Plan an
allocation of Rs. 1500 crore has been made for IWT sector. During 2012-13, IWAI was able to
spend Rs. 146.02 crore. A Plan outlay of Rs. 200 crore has been provided for the current financial
year. IWAI has been advised to finalise suitable action plan to utilise the funds provided to them
during the Twelfth Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee notes that the Ministry has advised  the IWAI to finalise suitable
action-plan to utilise the funds provided to them during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee
further observes that the Ministry may also ensure compliance thereof.
29. In this connection, the Committee would like to reiterates its recommendation contained in its
130
th Report on the “National Waterway (Lakhipur- Bhanga stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007”.
The Committee had expressed its concern about the discontinuance of the centrally sponsored scheme
for IWT development in the country by the Planning Commission, the Committee was of the view
that the decision of the Planning Commission to convert the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for
IWT development into central sector scheme would adversely affect the pace of development of
Inland Water Transport in the country. The Committee had recommended for the revival of the
centrally sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT sector.
(Para No. 79)

6
Reply of the Government
30. The Planning Commission is being requested to reconsider its decision and reintroduce the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme especially in view of the fact that IWT is one of the thrust areas of
the Government during Twelfth Plan period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made earlier for the
revival of the centrally sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT sector. The
Committee notes that in pursuant to its recommendation the Ministry has approached the
Planning Commission  to reconsider its decision and reintroduce the centrally sponsored
scheme. The Committee desires that matter may be followed-up persistently till the final
decision is taken and also keep the Committee informed about the progress in the matter.
32. The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made on its 130
th Report, which
was about the proposed NW-6. The Committee was of the view that the proposed NW-6 would
boost the rural economy and provide IWT connectivity for movement of commodities between the
port of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh protocol route for transit and trade in hinterland
and Bangladesh. Besides decongestion of roads and fuel saving, it would provide port hinterland
connectivity, better environment corridor and generate employment among weaker sections and
increase tourism activities in the region. The Committee had recommend that the existing protocol
routes connecting NW-1 and NW-6 and NW-2 and NW-6 may be taken up with the Bangladesh
on an expeditious way to convert these waterways into international waterways for effective
transportation of inter-country movement of goods between hinterland cities and Bangladesh. But
in the process the security concern should not be compromised in any way.
(Para No. 80)
Reply of the Government
33. The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of River Barak) Bill 2013 has been
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 22.3.2013. The development of Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of river
Barak (NW-6) would provide an alternate connectivity to the North Eastern States of Manipur,
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. These States are dependent on only road/rail connectivity passing
through the narrow “chicken neck” at Siliguri. The proposed NW-6 shall provide port connectivity
with Kolkata and Haldia through the existing Indo-Bangladesh Protocol Route. For maintenance of
the stretches of the Indo-Protocol route, which is important for transit of cargo, the Government
of India pays 10 Crore Takas every year to Bangladesh. Government of India has already taken
up with the Bangladesh Government to develop the Protocol routes with adequate width and LAD
to enable at least 330 days in a year. A Joint Standing Monitoring Mechanism (JSMM) has already
been formed. The purpose of the JSMM is to identify the stretches where dredging and other river
conservancy work would be required to enable smooth transportation and transit of goods through
the Bangladesh side of the protocol route to destination in North Eastern part of the Country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee notes the reply.
DREDGING CHANNELS, TERMINALS AND NAVIGATION
35. The Committee notes that waterways do not have the required depth, width and vertical
(overboard) clearance which would allow vessels to pass through easily. It should be noted that
even if any stretch of waterway to be used is not navigable, the entire stretch becomes useless.

7
Moreover, the waterways should have all-weather operations. The Committee also notes that the
width of the canals varies from 9m to 20m. It makes movement of the barges (having width of
around 9 meters) very difficult in the narrow stretches. Also the presence of low-lying bridges
across the canals acts as hindrance for the movement of vessels with cargo. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that IWAI should make a policy standard for all the navigable canals in
order to ensure required depth and width in all the waterways.
(Para No. 81)
Reply of the Government
36. The IWAI has already classified all five NWs as per IWAI (classification of inland
waterways in India) Regulation; 2006.The developmental works are being carried out keeping in
view of the stipulations made under the above classification. Any cross structure coming up on
NWs has to follow prescribed horizontal and vertical clearance guidelines as per this notification.
It is the endeavour of the Government to ensure unhindered navigation and development of the
waterways to the standard as specified for NWs in IWAI (classification of Inland Waterways in
India) Regulation, 2006. The recommendation of the Committee to ensure required depth and width
in NWs has been noted for further necessary action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Ministry has given assurance to ensure required depth and width in National
Waterways. However, the Committee considers that it is an interim reply, pending the final
reply to come from the Ministry.
38. The Committee also recommends that periodical dredging of the waterway wherever
essential needs to be carried out by the IWAI/Major Ports to ensure that bulk cargoes can be
handled safety and without delay.
(Para No. 82)
Reply of the Government
39. Due to the alluvial nature of NW-1 and 2 with meandering and braided channels in the
upstream portion of the waterway as well simultaneous shoal formations, it is difficult to maintain
a permanent navigational channel. IWAI has, however, been carrying out maintenance dredging in
the NW-1 and 2 using its own dredgers. With maintenance dredging and bandalling it is providing
targeted LAD, in NW-1 and NW-2 for about 330 days in a year. On NW-3, which is not an alluvial
river, IWAI is undertaking capital dredging, after which depth can be maintained, all through the
year with nominal maintenance dredging.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply. Recommendations made at para 37 above may be
seen.
41. The Committee notes that the modern day navigation aids have been developed and
implemented by most of the major ports in the country. Therefore, the IWAI could seek the
expertise of the same from the major Ports like Mumbai Port Trust, Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust,
etc., for making the navigation along the waterways hassle free. Also the GPRS used by many
agencies also can be applied in the NWs to monitor the vessels. The IWAI may take the expertise
from the agencies which are working under the Ministry of Shipping in this field. The Committee
also recommends that initiatives need to be taken to facilitate night navigation in order to meet the
quantity requirements of the industries along the waterways.
(Para No. 83)

8
Reply of the Government
42. The IWAI has already provided night navigation facilities in Diamond Harbour-Ballia stretch
(1030 km.) of NW-1, Dhubri- Silghat stretch (442 km.) of NW-2 and entire stretch of NW-3
(205 km.). Besides, IWAI has already setup DGPS stations at three locations in NW-1 and at two
locations on NW-2. One more station on NW-1 and 2 more stations on NW-2 will be commissioned
shortly. With this, the entire stretch of NW-1 and 2 will have the coverage of DGPS signals. The
entire stretch of NW-3 has the coverage of DGPS signals received from the DGPS stations
established by Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships (DGLL). This project has been
implemented in consultation with DGLL. However, as recommended by the committee, IWAI would
seek advice of the Major Ports in case required for installing and operating modern navigational aids.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee is happy to note the progress made with regard to night navigation
facilities in NWs 1, 2 and 3 and hopes that steps would be taken up with regard to other
NWs and the same pace of work would be maintained in future also.
44. The Committee recommends that the road/rail bridges constructed over the canals/
waterways should not become hindrances in passing of a loaded barge. As the Committee has been
informed that a bridge at Kovilthottam around half a kilometer away from Chavara towards Cochin
side, which posed problems for the free movement on waterway for Indian Rare Earths Limited
(IREL). The Committee recommends that wherever possible, existing bridges should be redeveloped
for providing the required vertical clearance.
(Para No. 84)
Reply of the Government
45. As per section 14 (1) (e) of IWAI Act (82 of 1985) IWAI is empowered to remove or alter
any obstructions or impediment in the National Waterways which may impede the safe navigation
after making compensation to person(s) suffering damage by such removal or alteration. IWAI has
already taken action for reconstruction of the Kovilthottam foot over bridge and work has recently
been entrusted by IWAI to CPWD.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
46. The Committee appreciates that the IWAI has already taken action for
reconstruction of the Kovilthottam foot over bridge and the work has been already
entrusted by IWAI to CPWD. Committee hopes that it would be completed expeditiously.
47. The Committee also was informed that the fishing activities along the navigable canals are
causing hindrances to the vessel movements. The Committee notes that if the fishing nets are
removed from the waterway, it may cause conflict with the interests of the fishermen. The
Committee recommends that field visits should be organized to address the concerns of fishermen
and make them aware of the problems created by fishing nets.
(Para No. 85)
Reply of the Government
48. The fishing activities inside the ports water in major ports are strictly prohibited. On
NW-1 and NW-2, IWAI has not reported any major incident regarding laying of fishing nets in the
navigational channels. However, in case of NW-3, there have been incidents of fishing nets creating
obstruction for navigation in the water. The Authority has taken up this issue with the State
Government of Kerala. The State Government of Kerala has been apprised of the need to relocate

9
of the fishing net from the navigational channel. However, as recommended by the Committee,
IWAI has been requested to arrange field visit to sensitise the fishermen.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee notes that the Ministry has directed the IWAI to arrange for field
visits in order to sensitise the fishermen. The Committee would like to see the compliance
of IWAI in the matter. The Committee would also like to mention here that during its last
study visit to Kerala it was observed  that the same problem of blockage of navigational
channels due to laying of fishing nets is still continuing. In view of that, the Committee
observes that the matter may be considered on urgent basis.
OTHER USER AMENITIES
50. In order to ensure the optimum utilization of potential waterways, it is necessary that
River Terminals are connected to the hinterland by proper road terminals. The Committee
recommends that on the lines of Pandu terminal, good quality road links may be provided
connecting all other terminals of the National Waterways. Similarly, feasibility of rail connectivity
to terminals on each NW also needs to be worked out for a better cargo movement to and fro
using the waterways.
(Para No. 86)
Reply of the Government
51. All the terminals developed by IWAI on NW-1, 2 and 3 have road connectivity. However,
it is felt that some of these connecting roads need significant up-gradation. IWAI is taking action
on these on case to case basis. Further, in order to make/upgrade, rail/road connectivity to all
identified terminals of NWs, a study on “Integrated National Waterway Grid” has been awarded to
M/s RITES on 04.02.2013. The study is in progress. Implementation of the rail/road connectivity
will be taken up based on the outcome of the study and priority requirements.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes that pending the final report from the M/s RITES, the present
reply may be treated as an interim one. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the
final outcome of the study.
53. The Committee recommends that the terminal should have properly developed facilities such
as jetties for berthing of vessels, space for loading/unloading, storage area, space for vehicles
movement and parking, etc. These facilities are to be provided by the government. Apart from
these, the Government should encourage setting up of ancillary infrastructural facilities such as
custom bonded area within the terminals.
(Para No. 87)
Reply of the Government
54. Low and high level RCC jetties at Gaighat, Patna have been constructed on NW-1. Similarly,
low level jetty has been completed at Pandu Guwahati on NW-2 and high level jetty will be ready
by December, 2013. A number of floating terminals with open storage facilities have been set up
at strategic places on NW-1 and NW-2. On NW-3, 8 RCC jetties have been constructed with open
storage facilities and mechanical handling facilities and 9
th jetty at Alappuzha is under construction.
Pandu terminal has been notified as custom bonded area and facilities for customs clearance have
been established by Indian Customs Authorities at Pandu.

10
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee notes the reply.
56. The Committee also observes that last mile connectivity is one of the major hurdles in
switching to IWT. While, services are available for moving the cargo from one terminal to another
terminal, finding a service provider for last mile connectivity is difficult and not so cost-effective.
The existing service providers have to evolve an integrated logistics model wherein they take the
responsibility for end-to-end movement. This would remove the multiple interfaces with different
transport service providers that a shipper is subjected to. Moreover, the shipper would feel relieved
and can focus on its core business. The Committee recommends for a holistic approach in
providing such facilities in various waterways.
(Para No. 88)
Reply of the Government
57. The Ministry is in agreement with Committee. The last mile connectivity for each terminal is
part of the Terms of Reference (ToR) for the study on the Integrated National Waterway Grid being
conducted by IWAI through M/s RITES. Based on the outcome of the study, further action would
be taken on seamless and integrated connectivity of IWT with other modes of transportation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58. The Committee notes that the Ministry is in agreement with the recommendation;
it, however, desires to know about the outcome of the study on the Integrated National
Waterway Grid being conducted by IWAI through M/s RITES.
CARGO HANDLING
59. The Committee is constrained to note that despite huge potential, cargo transportation by
Inland Water Transport mode has not shown significant improvement on these National Waterways
as its share is only 0.15 percent in the country compared to 32 percent in Bangladesh or 9 percent
of China. The Committee also expresses its displeasure over the fact that no comparative cost-
output evaluation for transportation of cargo through this alternate mode of transport has been
carried out by the Government. The Committee is of the view that such evaluation would further
establish the support of Inland Water Transport over other mode of transports. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that realistic physical target for cargo transportation year-wise should be
fixed and time-bound action plan should be implemented in the IWT sector during the Twelfth Plan
period. The Committee hopes the target of 15 billion tonne /km. by 2017 may, at least, be achieved
so as to rejuvenate this sector.
(Para No. 89)
Reply of the Government
60. As per a study conducted by M/s RITES for Planning Commission, IWT sector in the
country in 2007-08 had 2.15% share in terms of tonnes but only 0.24% in terms of tonne km
which is quite low considering. Government is committed to increase the share of IWT in the
overall transport mix. IWAI will also take action for fixing year wise realistic physical target for
cargo transportation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
61. The Committee notes the reply that the IWAI will take action for fixing year-wise
realistic physical target for cargo transportation.

11
62. The Committee also notes that there are no regular services for movement of cargo through
IWT. Existing service providers cater to full shipload of cargo on charter basis. However, entities
with less than shipload, such as 1-2 TEUs, do not have the facility for moving the cargo same
day by IWT. For having the full load for a barge, the shipper would have to wait for 7-10 days.
This waiting time is not required in case of moving the containers by road, as the shipper can
move any number of containers same day. The Committee is of the view that regular barge
services between the ports and inland water terminal can resolve this problem.
(Para No. 90)
Reply of the Government
63. The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. The demonstration
voyages operated by IWAI in NW-1 and 2 by their own 300 MT capacity vessels were not much
encouraging as they were not economical. However, IWAI will try to encourage the barge owners
to start fixed schedule sailings between selected terminals, with 1000-1500 MT capacity vessels,
which may bring private sector participation. This, however, will depend on perceived commercial
viability of such operations. Based on the interaction, IWAI had with the barge owners/operators,
it is felt that the barge owners are presently looking for cargo commitment before investing into
ownership and operation of vessels.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
64. The Committee is also concerned about the limitations in the matter but desires that
efforts may be continued on a sustained basis in order to make the National Waterways
fully navigable.
CARGO TRANSPORTATION OF PSUs
65. The Committee recommends that bulk cargoes like, raw materials, chemicals, containers
and finished products from various industrial units need to be promoted by the IWT mode. Since
many agencies are currently depending solely on the road and rail modes of transports the new
alternative will be able to reduce the road congestions, accidents and dependency on rail movement
which is now facing congestion, lack of stalks etc., leading to delays.
(Para No. 91)
Reply of the Government
66. The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. IWAI is in consultation
with FCI, NTPC and fertilizer companies for movement of their bulk cargo through NWs. The
follow up action has already been initiated on the basis of these interactions.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
67. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has agreed with the
recommendation of the Committee and the follow-up action has been initiated at the
appropriate level.
68. The Committee observes that National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) is contributing
to the IWT a good share of its raw material movement at many of its thermal power stations.
Since the road and railway networks are causing hindrances for imported coal movement due to
shortage of rakes and congestion at ports, the IWT mode is found to be more suitable for
NTPC. The Committee recommends that NTPC’s project at Bongaigaon and Barah should be

12
assisted with the IWT system for coal movement and IWAI should complete the projects within
the schedule.
(Para No. 92)
Reply of the Government
69. The NTPC became interested in transporting imported coal by waterways for their Farakka
Power Plant only after a long and sustained persuasion. After successful selection of private sector
operator for Farrakka project, NTPC has showed interest for transporting imported coal for their
Barh and Bangaigaon power plants. For Barh project, IWAI has issued an EOI and after interacting
with prospective bidders RFP would be issued by IWAI. Due to small quantity (0.5 MMTPA) and
passage through Bangladesh waterways, Bongaigaon project does not appear very promising.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee notes that  for Barah project, IWAI has issued an Expression of
Interest and Bongaigaon project does not appear to be very promising.
71. The Committee, in view of the restrictions on the movement of dangerous raw materials
of Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) by road like Ammonia, Benzene, Sulphuric
acid, etc., recommends that, the opportunity may be explored for enhancing the cargo
transportation in the NW-3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IWAI should play a more
proactive role for promotion of national waterways and extend its support for such industries in
their requirements by partnering such ventures.
72. The Committee recommends that IWAI may take the matter with FACT so that bulk
movement of raw materials to its various plants could be carried out through the Inland Waterway
mode. The project will be able to handle the finished products of FACT also to various parts of
the country and to various sea ports. This mode will enable free movement of materials in a more
economic and hassle free manner and may be a mutual benefit for the agencies.
(Para No. 93 and 94)
Reply of the Government
73. The Director, IWAI, Kochi is in touch with FACT and various operators for movement of
their raw materials including hazardous cargo. However, market force will decide on the mode of
transportation of these goods based on cost and other parameters.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
74. The Committee observes that efforts should be made on a sustained basis to explore
and enhance cargo transportation using waterways.
75. The Committee is of the view that Food Corporation of India (FCI) could be a regular
beneficiary of the waterways as they have food grains movement round the year. The Committee
notes the initiative taken for transportation of food grains in Kolkata-Tripura through Ashuganj. The
Committee recommends that IWAI should make a feasibility report on the movement of food grains
through IWT mode on other parts of the country and the additional facilities required also should
be identified so that FCI could be made an active beneficiary of the waterways.
(Para No. 95)
Reply of the Government
76. The Ministry is already in touch with FCI and others for the movement of foodgrains from

13
Kolkata to Tripura through Ashuganj. An Indian delegation consisting of the representatives of
Ministry, FCI and IWAI visited Ashuganj to see the ground realities for transportation of foodgrains
from Kolkata to Tripura via Ashuganj. Recently, Bangladesh Government has accorded their
permission for movement of foodgrains through Ashuganj. Food Corporation of India (FCI) has
already taken appropriate action for the movement of foodgrains. Besides this Ministry has advised
IWAI to undertake a study to explore the possibility of transportation of food grain through IWT
mode in other parts of the country especially through NW-1 and II.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Committee notes the reply.
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS
78. The Committee recommends that linking of ports in Karnataka, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu also
should be worked out as these states are having in bound and out-bound bulk cargo potential. The
Committee recommends for developing the West coast – Kandla, Mumbai, Murmogao, Kochi – and
East coast – Kolkata, Paradip, Vishakhapatnam, Chennai – coastal freight corridors. Investing in
these corridors will augment scale and improve the economies for coastal shipping, making it an
attractive to other modes. Also, it will improve last mile road and rail connectivity to and from
ports.
(Para No. 96)
Reply of the Government
79. The Major Ports in Karnataka,Gujarat and Tamil Nadu are connected to each other and the
hinterland through the National Network of Indian Railways and National Highways. There are no
issues related to movement of goods into and out of these Ports, however, these Ports have taken
up number of last mile connectivity to improve the operational efficiency and reduce the dwell time
of the goods. Regarding development of Coastal Freight Corridors on the West Coast and East
Coast, there is no such proposal by NHAI, however, all the Major Ports are connected through a
4-lane road to the nearest National Highway. Indian Railways is also developing a dedicated freight
corridor from New Delhi to Nhava Sheva and New Delhi to Kolkata.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80.  The Committee notes the reply.
81.  The Committee is of the view that there is a need to encourage Inland Water Transport
for movement of containers from various ports. It also reduces the costs and time, if the customs
examined containers move directly to the ship. This may enable to decongest the already congested
roads and the transaction costs.
(Para No. 97)
Reply of the Government
82. The Committee’s recommendation is noted. It may be submitted that presently only Cochin,
Haldia and Kolkata Port and connected through the National Waterways. There is lot of scope for
movement of containers from one Port to other by Coastal Shipping. There are only few operators
transporting containers by smaller ships between the Major Ports as a transhipment cargo.
Movement of cargo by Coastal Shipping would certainly decongest the rail and road network and
eases transportation which will result in reduction of transport costs.

14
83. The Container Terminal at V allarpadam is already connected to the National Waterway
No. 3 and Kolkata and Haldia are connected to National Waterway No. 1. Other Ports in the
country are not connected to any National Waterways. However, coastal transport is possible for
which this Ministry has taken steps to formulate schemes to extend financial assistance to Maritime
States for development of infrastructure required for Coastal Shipping. All the Major Ports are
extending 40% concession in Port charges for the coastal vessels. Ministry of Shipping has also
instructed the Major Ports to accord priority berthing to the coastal vessels.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
84.  The Committee is happy to note that all the Major Ports are extending 40%
concession in Port charges for the coastal vessels and the Ministry of Shipping has also
instructed the Major Ports to accord priority berthing to the coastal vessels.
85. The Committee is of the view that if central and State Government concerned take the
necessary steps for the promotion of coastal transportation, the free movement of cargo in a cost-
effective manner will benefit the EXIM trade in the country.
(Para No. 98)
Reply of the Government
86. A Committee has been constituted to, inter-alia, formulate an incentive scheme for modal
shift of cargo from rail/road to coastal shipping/inland waterways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee would like to know more about the details of the Committee
constituted by the Ministry and their observations/recommendation on the modal shift of
cargo from rail/road to coastal shipping/inland waterways.
88. The Committee also recommends that as in the case of Vallarpadam Terminal, all the other
Ports including private ports of the country may be connected with the Inland Water Transport
system so that cargo movement from ports to other part of the territory can be met in a cost
effective manner.
(Para No. 99)
Reply of the Government
89.  The recommendations of the committee is noted. However, the private ports and other non
major ports do not come directly under the ambit of the Ministry of Shipping.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
90.  The Committee is grateful in reminding it that the private ports and non major
ports do not fall under the ambit of the Ministry of Shipping, but is certainly surprised
about not responding to its observation about the need for ensuring that ports are connected
with our waterways.
INDO-BANGLADESH PROTOCOL ON IWT
91. The Committee is of the view that container mode of transport should be promoted in the
area using multi-modal transit route through Bangladesh, which may ease the transport of essential
commodities to the North Eastern States of the country. Already NE Region is suffering
connectivity handicap with the mainland India. The Committee observes the land route currently
being use for the purpose through the chicken neck is over-stretched. The Committee recommends

15
that Containers Corporation of India (CONCOR) may take the initiatives in establishing necessary
terminals for the purpose.
(Para No. 100)
Reply of the Government
92. The feasibility study for assessing the commercial viability of movement of containers on
riverine routes on NWs has been completed. The study revealed that there is no feasibility of
running the container barges on riverine routes as of now. The consultants have suggested that
CONCOR may consider trial run on NW-2. Accordingly, IWAI has been asked to take necessary
steps for the trial run.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
93. The Committee would like to know the grounds/factors based on which our riverine
routes have been found non-feasible. The trial run should be done expeditiously by the IWAI
at the earliest so that interested parties could use this modal transport as early as possible.
94. The Committee also recommends that for establishing arrangements through Bangladesh, the
pre requisite is to develop a river port at Ashuganj on the Meghana River. The road network
connecting Ashuganj with the check-posts also need to be widened for ease of traffic there. Round
the clock navigation facilities need to be provided the protocol routes, if feasible, in all aspects.
(Para No. 101)
Reply of the Government
95.  Feasibility study/DPR for establishing a river port at Ashuganj is in progress through MEA.
The work has been awarded to M/s W APCOS. All related aspect including road connectivity is
included in the study. The issues regarding providing round the clock navigation facilities on the
Protocol route have been taken up with Bangladesh Authorities.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96. The Committee may be apprised about the final outcomes.
INDO-MYANMAR KALADAN MULTIMODAL TRANSIT TRANSPORT PROJECT
97. The Committee has been informed that Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Project will
connect the eastern Indian seaport of Kolkata with Sittwe port in Myanmar by sea; it will then link
Sittwe to Mizoram via river and road transport. This project will reduce distance from Kolkata to
Sittwe by approximately 1328 km and will reduce the need to transport good through the narrow
Siliguri corridor. The Committee recommends that Indo-Myanmar Kaladan Multimodal Transit
Transport Project may be considered for implementation.
(Para No. 102)
Reply of the Government
98. The KALADAN project is under implementation and the port/IWT components, for which IWAI
is Project Development Consultant (PDC) of MEA, are expected to be completed by June, 2014.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
99. The Committee is happy to note that the KALADAN project is under implementation
and for the port/IWT components IWAI is  appointed as the Project Development Consultant
which are expected to be completed by June, 2014.

16
MERGING OF CIWTC WITH IWAI
100. The Committee observes that periodically the assets and work assignments of CIWTC were
taken over by the IWAI without absorbing the employees working on those assets and work
assignment. This has finally resulted in the accumulation of large numbers of employees without
any work. The Committee therefore recommends that the IWAI should correct the mistake it has
committed over these years and should come forward to take the service of the experienced staff
of CIWTC in the IWT sector.
(Para No. 103)
Reply of the Government
101. A comprehensive proposal regarding merger of CIWTC with IWAI is under finalization for
seeking approval of the Cabinet.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee considers this as an interim reply and would like to know about the
final decision in this regard.
103. In this connection the Committee has conveyed its concern to the Government from time
to time. In its 177
th Report, the Committee has again and again considered the matter and expressed
its concern over the future of persons working in CIWTC. The Committee hoped that the staff
of CIWTC would not be forced to opt VRS against individual’s will and CIWTC would be emerged
with IWAI if the assets of CIWTC were taken over by it. The Committee also recommended that
till the merger process is completed adequate funds and manpower be made available to CIWTC
to carry out its operations.
(Para No. 104)
Reply of the Government
104.  The Ministry is regularly providing adequate funds for payment of salaries etc. for the
employees of CIWTC. A comprehensive proposal for merger of CIWTC with IWAI, along with the
proposal for an improved VRS package for its employees has been formulated for consideration of
the Cabinet. The VRS scheme is only on voluntary basis and will not be forced on the employees
against their will.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Committee notes the reply.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
106.  The Committee notes that National Inland Navigation Institute (NINI) is providing various
courses required in the water transport and aquatic navigation, dredging, repair and maintenance of
vessels, etc. The Committee hopes NINI is able to solve the shortage of vessel pilot as faced by
the Major Ports of the Country also. The Committee recommends the curriculum and the courses
offered must reflect the future requirements of the country.
(Para No. 105)
Reply of the Government
107. The NINI is presently conducting deck and engine rating courses for IWT vessels. Besides,
specialized courses for dredging, fire fighting and first aid, simulation courses on inland vessels and
marine vessels are also being conducted at NINI. The vessels pilots of major ports require

17
qualification as prescribed by MMD and MS Act and, therefore, this training is not being provided
at present in NINI. The recommendation regarding courses being offered to reflect the future
requirements have been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee notes the reply.
CRUISE TOURISM
109. River cruise tourism is a major tourist attraction with enormous potential for further
development in places like Guwahati, Goa, Mumbai, Kolkata and Kerala. The house boats and small
boats are also catering to the tourism needs. The Committee feels that the tourism will get required
boost when the waterway are fully developed and linked properly with various ports of the country.
This factor, therefore, should be kept in mind while planning for expansion and development of
water transport in the country.
(Para No. 106)
Reply of the Government
110. The development and promotion of tourism including river cruising and back water tourism
is primarily the responsibility of the concerned State Government/UT Administration. However, the
Ministry of Tourism provides Central assistance to various State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations for various tourism projects, including river tourism, subject to availability of
funds, inter-se priority and adherence to scheme guidelines. The recommendation of the Committee
has, however, been noted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
111. The Committee finds that the replies are too general in nature and observes that
specific stretches on different National Waterways should be identified and appropriate
wherewithal should also be provided for harnessing inland waterways for the purpose of
cruise tourism and back-water tourism. The specific details of such projects undertaken
should be intimated to the Committee.
112. The Committee would like to draw attention in this respect towards development of tourism
circuit proposed in Alappuzha, which is a river/backwater tourism spot for which the Government
of Kerala has planned a mega circuit project for development of backwaters and the same is under
consideration of the Ministry of Tourism for the grant of central financial assistance. The
Committee would like to know response of the Union Ministry in this regard.
(Para No. 107)
Reply of the Government
113. The declared stretch of NW-3 in and around Alappuzha has already been developed for
minimum 2 m. LAD throughout the year. Besides, the waterways are open for night navigation. The
Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned an amount of Rs. 4762.48 lakh to the State Government of
Kerala for the Development of Back Water circuit in Alappuzha in March, 2013 and released a sum
of Rs. 2,38,12,400/-, being 0.5% of the sanctioned amount as the first installment.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
114. The Committee desires that the work pertaining to the Development of Back Water
circuit in Alappuzha will be completed in a timely manner.

18
115. The Committee observes that the river tourism offers multi faceted tourism potentials like
hotel barges, river cruise ships, canal tourism, private boats, pilgrim tourism etc. Currently only a
very few stretches of the country are utilizing the potential in a limited manner. The Committee
recommends that states that have water transport potential may be sensitize to come forward with
more river tourism projects and IWAI may assist the States and Ministry of Tourism for making the
efforts a success. This may boost the revenue earnings from the inland waterways in the country.
(Para No. 108)
Reply of the Government
116. The Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the State
Governments, Union Territory Administrations, Central agencies and private sector for development
of tourism infrastructure in the country. Some of the schemes of Ministry of Tourism for building
infrastructure are:–
(a) Scheme for Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure.
(b) Development Scheme for product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits.
(c) Scheme for Assistance for Large Revenue Generating Projects.
117. Some of the river/back water tourism projects sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism during
the Eleventh plan are as under:
(i) Development of Circuit on rivers Godavari and Krishna in Andhra Pradesh with Central
assistance of Rs. 425.95 lakh in 2007-08. Development of Ganga Heritage River Cruise
in West Bengal in 2008-09 with Central assistance of Rs. 2042.35 lakh.
(ii) Mega project for Integrated Development of Infrastructure for Heritage and Hinterland
Tourism in Goa, including Mandovi and Zuari rivers in Goa with Central assistance of
Rs. 4762.68 lakh in the financial year 2012-13.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
118. The Committee notes the details  of the river/back water tourism projects detailed by
the Ministry and would further like to know whether these projects have met the physical
and financial targets and completed; how many work are still continuing and status of each
project. The details of the Twelfth Five Year Plan projects may also be given, as substantial
increase in fund allocation to IWT Sector has been made in the current Plan only.
119.  The Committee observes that the current organizational set up of the IWAI is not sufficient
enough to fulfill its objectives in a wider prospective. The Committee therefore recommends that
the IWAI need to be strengthened with experts having sufficient experience and professionals in the
fields like hydrography, navigation, civil engineering, mechanical engineering, naval architecture,
transport economics, etc. for the development and management of the Waterways, rather than it
be made a dumping ground for the Civil Servants.
(Para No. 109)
Reply of the Government
120.  The Ministry agrees with the view of the Committee to induct sufficiently experienced
professionals in the cadre of the IWAI. Accordingly IWAI has been advised to formulate a
comprehensive proposal in this regard taking into account their future requirement.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
121. The Committee considers this as an interim reply till concrete action plan is
prepared in this regard and informed to the Committee.

19
19
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those observations/
recommendations which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should
be furnished to it at the earliest. (Para:3)
The Committee notes that the Government is in agreement with the Committee’s
recommendation.                                                                             (Para:7)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Shipping has received  funds
up to the tune of Rs. 1500 crore to be expended during the Twelfth Five Year Plan and the
Ministry also observes that the said amount is adequate for the development of Inland
Water Transport. In view of this the Committee hopes that now the work will be expedited
in all the National Waterways declared till date. (Para:10)
NATIONAL POLICY
The Committee takes note of all the encouraging developments taking place at IWT
Sector as detailed by the Ministry.                                                       (Para:13)
The Committee would like to know about the details of recommendations made by
M/s RITES as submitted to the Ministry of Shipping. The Ministry may also inform this
Committee about the implementation status of the same. (Para:16)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed to its recommendation.
(Para:19)
FUND ALLOCATIONS
The Ministry has informed the Committee that commercially viable stretches of the
NW 4 and 5 are proposed to be developed under PPP mode. The Committee fails to
understand why only the commercially lucrative and viable stretches should go into private
hands through PPP. Does it mean that the non profitable and riskier sections would be left
to the Government (Inland Water Transport Authority of India). The Committee does not
agree with the idea of handing over only the profitable stretches of the  NW 4 and 5 to
private partners.  The Committee would also like to know about the observations made in
the report of M/s Grant Thorton, which was appointed by Department of Economic Affairs
(DEA), had been received by the Ministry of Shipping. (Para:22)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:25)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has advised  the IWAI to finalise suitable
action-plan to utilise the funds provided to them during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee
further observes that the Ministry may also ensure compliance thereof. (Para:28)
The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made earlier for the
revival of the centrally sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT sector. The
Committee notes that in pursuant to its recommendation the Ministry has approached the
Planning Commission  to reconsider its decision and reintroduce the centrally sponsored
scheme. The Committee desires that matter may be followed-up persistently till the final

20
decision is taken and also keep the Committee informed about the progress in the
matter. (Para:31)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:34)
DREDGING CHANNELS, TERMINALS AND NAVIGATION
The Ministry has given assurance to ensure required depth and width in National
Waterways. However, the Committee considers that it is an interim reply, pending the final
reply to come from the Ministry. (Para:37)
The Committee notes the reply. Recommendations made at para 37 above may be
seen.                                                                               (Para:40)
The Committee is happy to note the progress made with regard to night navigation
facilities in NWs 1, 2 and 3 and hopes that steps would be taken up with regard to other
NWs and the same pace of work would be maintained in future also. (Para:43)
The Committee appreciates that the IWAI has already taken action for
reconstruction of the Kovilthottam foot over bridge and the work has been already
entrusted by IWAI to CPWD. Committee hopes that it would be completed expeditiously.
(Para:46)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has directed the IWAI to arrange for field
visits in order to sensitise the fishermen. The Committee would like to see the compliance
of IWAI in the matter. The Committee would also like to mention here that during its last
study visit to Kerala it was observed  that the same problem of blockage of navigational
channels due to laying of fishing nets is still continuing. In view of that, the Committee
observes that the matter may be considered on urgent basis. (Para:49)
OTHER USER AMENITIES
The Committee notes that pending the final report from the M/s RITES, the present
reply may be treated as an interim one. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the
final outcome of the study. (Para:52)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:55)
The Committee notes that the Ministry is in agreement with the recommendation;
it, however, desires to know about the outcome of the study on the Integrated National
Waterway Grid being conducted by IWAI through M/s RITES. (Para:58)
CARGO HANDLING
The Committee notes the reply that the IWAI will take action for fixing year-wise
realistic physical target for cargo transportation. (Para:61)
The Committee is also concerned about the limitations in the matter but desires that
efforts may be continued on a sustained basis in order to make the National Waterways
fully navigable. (Para:64)
CARGO TRANSPORTATION OF PSUs
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has agreed with the
recommendation of the Committee and the follow-up action has been initiated at the
appropriate level. (Para:67)

21
The Committee notes that  for Barah project, IWAI has issued an Expression of
Interest and Bongaigaon project does not appear to be very promising. (Para:70)
The Committee observes that efforts should be made on a sustained basis to explore
and enhance cargo transportation using waterways. (Para:74)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:77)
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:80)
The Committee is happy to note that all the Major Ports are extending 40%
concession in Port charges for the coastal vessels and the Ministry of Shipping has also
instructed the Major Ports to accord priority berthing to the coastal vessels. (Para:84)
The Committee would like to know more about the details of the Committee
constituted by the Ministry and their observations/recommendation on the modal shift of
cargo from rail/road to coastal shipping/inland waterways. (Para:87)
The Committee is grateful in reminding it that the private ports and non major ports
do not fall under the ambit of the Ministry of Shipping, but is certainly surprised about not
responding to its observation about the need for ensuring that ports are connected with our
waterways. (Para:90)
INDO-BANGLADESH PROTOCOL ON IWT
The Committee would like to know the grounds/factors based on which our riverine
routes have been found non-feasible. The trial run should be done expeditiously by the
IWAI at the earliest so that interested parties could use this modal transport as early as
possible. (Para:93)
The Committee may be apprised about the final outcomes. (Para:96)
INDO-MYANMAR KALADAN MULTIMODAL TRANSIT TRANSPORT PROJECT
The Committee is happy to note that the KALADAN project is under implementation
and for the port/IWT components IWAI is  appointed as the Project Development Consultant
which are expected to be completed by June, 2014. (Para:99)
MERGING OF CIWTC WITH IWAI
The Committee considers this as an interim reply and would like to know about the
final decision in this regard. (Para:102)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:105)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the reply. (Para:108)
CRUISE TOURISM
The Committee finds that the replies are too general in nature and observes that
specific stretches on different National Waterways should be identified and appropriate
wherewithal should also be provided for harnessing inland waterways for the purpose of

22
cruise tourism and back-water tourism. The specific details of such projects undertaken
should be intimated to the Committee. (Para:111)
The Committee desires that the work pertaining to the Development of Back Water
circuit in Alappuzha will be completed in a timely manner. (Para:114)
The Committee notes the details  of the river/back water tourism projects detailed by
the Ministry and would further like to know whether these projects have met the physical
and financial targets and completed; how many work are still continuing and status of each
project. The details of the Twelfth Five Year Plan projects may also be given, as substantial
increase in fund allocation to IWT Sector has been made in the current Plan only.
(Para:118)
The Committee considers this as an interim reply till concrete action plan is
prepared in this regard and informed to the Committee. (Para:121)

23
MINUTES

24

25
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd August, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
10. Yogi Adityanath
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and requested them to offer their
comments/suggestions on the following draft Reports circulated to them:
(i) 198
th Report on “Management of Road Transport in National Capital Region: Issues
and Challenges”.
(ii) 199 th Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report
on the Development of National Waterways-Potentials and Challenges”; and
25

26
(iii) 200 th Report on “Development of Tourism, National Highways and Water Transport in
Kerala and Cochin Shipyard Limited”.
3. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera, M.P.
to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and S/Shri Prabodh Panda, M.P. and M. Krishnaswamy,
M.P. to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha on the 27
th August, 2013.
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.