 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
351
_ 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT  
‘Functioning of National Akademis and Other Cultural 
Institutions’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT  
‘Functioning of National Akademis and Other Cultural 
Institutions’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-42 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   43-55 
6. ANNEXURES         56-88 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
89-112

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Assistant Committee Officer  

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty-First Report on 'Functioning of National Akademis 
and Other Cultural Institutions’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of  Ministry of Culture and 
Administrative Heads of National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions , on the subject on 
9th May, 2023. The Committee also he ard the views of the Elected Heads of National 
Akademis and other Cultural Institutions, on the subject , in its meeting held on 29 th May, 
2023.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture; 
Administrative Heads;  and elected Heads of National Akademis and other Cultural 
Institutions, for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  20th 
July, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
July 20, 2023                                                            Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Asadha 29, 1945 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
A/V Audio/Visual 
AC Academic Council 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education  
BE Budget Estimates 
BECIL Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Limited 
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CENART The National Center for The Arts 
CERC Craft Education and Research Centre  
COTLit Centre for Oral and Tribal Literature  
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTSS Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme  
DG Director General 
DRP District Resource Person  
EAST Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely 
EB Executive Board 
G-20 Group of Twenty 
GC General Council 
GoI Government of India 
HH His Highness 
Mo I&B Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
IFD Integrated Finance Division 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
ITPO India Trade Promotion Organisation  
KF Kalakshetra Foundation 
LKA Lalit Kala Akademi 
MGMD Mera Gaon Meri Darohar  
MLA Member of Legislative Assembly 
MoC  Ministry of  Culture 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MP Member of Parliament 
MPLAD  Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
NBT National Book Trust 
NCAA National Cultural Audio-visual Archives  
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training  
NCR National Capital Region 
NECOL North East Centre for Oral Literature  
NEP National Education Policy 
NER North Eastern Region 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 

iv 
 
NM National Museum 
NSD National School of Drama 
NVLI National Virtual Libraries of India  
OTT Over the Top 
PG Post Graduate 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
QCI Quality Council of India  
R2R Routes2Roots 
RE Revised Estimate 
SA Sahitya Akademi  
SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  
SCSP Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
SNA Sangeet Natak Akademi 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SYA Scholarships to Young Artistes 
TIE  The Indus Entrepreneurs 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UK United Kingdom 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
USA United States of America 
UT Union Territory 
ZCC Zonal Cultural Centre 
 

Page 1 of 88 
 
Report 
Culture is the soul of any nation, and it is our duty to preserve, nurture, and promote our rich 
cultural heritage. In India, we are blessed with a diverse tapestry of cultures, languages, traditions, 
and art forms that have been passed down through generations. It is essential that we ensure the 
proper functioning of our cultural institutions, such as the various Akademis, which play a crucial 
role in preserving and promoting our cultural legacy. 
2. The primary mandate of the Ministry of Cult ure (MoC) is the preservation and conservation 
of ancient cultural heritage and the promotion of tangible and intangible heritage. MoC through its 
organizations is engaged in  the development of the country's rich heritage including art, music, 
dance, theat re, literature, and handicrafts as well as recognition of excellence in these fields. The 
Akademi Bureau of MoC has the overall administrativ e supervision of the following a utonomous 
bodies viz. Sangeet Natak  Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, National School of Dr ama, Lalit Kala 
Akademi, Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts a nd 
Kalakshetra Foundation. 
3. The Cultural Akademis are the most prestigious in the country and yet there is a growing 
apprehension that they have failed to fulfil their original mandate and have been ineffectual in 
popularising the arts among the  general population. The Committee notes that the promotion of arts 
and culture through Akademis and other Cultural Institutions lacks an integrated approac h since 
there are a host of overlapping functions. This results in duplication of efforts and prevents the 
optimum utilisation of resources. Allegations of administrat ive mismanagement and financial 
irregularities have been levelled against some of the Aka demis. Further, the issue of 
bureaucratisation of the functioning of cultural Akademis which stifles their creative dynamism 
arises from time to time. 
4. The Committee decided to examine these premium Cultural Institutions to understand their 
functioning a nd how to make them more accountable, effective, visible and relevant, without 
impairing their autonomy in any manner. During the course of the examination, the Committee heard 
the Ministry of Culture, Administrative Heads, and elected Heads of National Akademis and other 
Cultural Institutions in its meetings held on 9th May, 2023 and 29th May, 2023, respectively. 
 
 

Page 2 of 88 
 
I 
Objective and Mandate of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
5. Mandate of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA), was set up in  1952 as India's national ac ademy of music, dance 
and drama. It is  functioning as the apex body in the field of performing arts in the country, 
preserving and promoting the vast intangible heritage of India's diverse culture.  
Sahitya Akademi  (SA), India’s National Akademi of Letters , established in 1954 by the 
Government of India is the central institution for literature, literary dialogue, publication and 
promotion of literature in the country and the only institution that undertakes literary activities in 24 
languages including English. Sahitya Akademi confers 24 awards for original and creative writing 
every year.  
Lalit Kala Akademi  (LKA) which was inaugurated in 1954, is the N ational Academy of Art and 
Culture and focuses its activities in the field of visual arts  such as sculpture, graphics, ceramics and 
painting. It is an autonomous body, fully funded by the Ministry of Culture.  
The National School of Drama  (NSD) is one of t he foremost theatre training institutions in the 
world and the only one of its kind in India. It was set up by the Sangeet Natak  Akademi as one of its 
constituent units in 1959 and in 1975 became an independent, autonomous organisation fully 
financed by the Ministry of Culture.   
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training  (CCRT), established in 1979 is one of the premier 
institutions working in the field of linking education with culture. CCRT conducts a range of training 
programmes for in-service teachers, educators and administrators across India. 
The Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), established in the year 1987 is a major 
resource centre for arts and functions as a centre for research, academic pursuit and dissemination in 
the field of arts.  
Kalakshetra, as the name suggests, is a centre for artistic endeavour. Founded in 1936 by the vibrant 
visionary Rukmini Devi Arundale, the institution stands testimony to her dream of creating a space 
where the essence of Indian thought would find e xpression through artistic education, an institution 
she established with the vision “of imparting to the young the true spirit of Art, devoid of vulgarity 
and commercialism.” 

Page 3 of 88 
 
6. Achievements, Programmes and Initiatives of the National Akademis 
The Ministry submitted the following  with regard t o the efforts and ende avours of the Akademis in 
pursuance of their respective mandate: 
Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA), has been working relentlessly to achieve its mandate to preserve and 
promote the performing art forms of the country. It has successfully achieved its goal by promoting the 
performing arts through audio -video documentation, publications, and by supporting and promoting as 
well as recognizing the artists by giving production and publication grants, by organizing festivals, 
seminars, etc., at various levels, and through Akademi Fellowships and Awards for artists of all age 
categories. 
The Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) is an institution that has rendered service to the nation in the sphere of 
arts long before the world woke up to the global impact of Indian art.  Central to the Akademi’s mission 
is the encouragement of a deeper understanding and enjoyment of modern and contemporary art by the  
diverse local, national and international audience that it serves.  It is involved in a wide range of 
activities related to the promotion of art and artists through programmes and strategic partnerships by 
organizing Camps/ Workshops / Lecture s/ Seminars/Art Festivals/Exhibition/ Residency 
Programme/Cultural Exchange Programme/ Competition /Film Shows/Slide Shows etc. 
The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) has the mandate of propagation of Culture 
in Schools and Colleges and has provided training to 2,13,659 teachers across the country. The institute 
also ensures its presence in every corner of the country, under its District Resource Person (DRP) 
Scheme by appointing its trained teachers as DRP s who ensure the dissemination of art and culture at 
the grassroots level. Till date , CCRT has trained 10,11,497 under the “Extension Services and 
Community Feedback Programme”. 
The National School of Drama (NSD) has already trained over 1200 theatre Postgraduate Diploma 
students in the performing arts, not only in India but throughout the globe. Beside s regular teaching and 
training programmes, the premier drama institute also engages in extension activities and reaches to the 
nooks and corners of the country by extending support to theatre practitioners and theatre workers. NSD 
has consistently produced thespians and popular artists of silver screen and most of the students get 
employed in the respective fields of direction, production, acting and lighting etc. 

Page 4 of 88 
 
Sahitya Akademi  (SA), in the endeavour, to fulfil its objective of promoting literature has been 
conducting workshops seminars and felicitating talented writers of all age group s by conferring awards. 
Sahitya Akademi also undertakes translation of literary works in 24 Indian L anguages thereby 
popularizing the literature of one region across the country.  The Akademi has also published 7000 
books in 24 languages in the last seven decades.  It publishes original works and also works in 
translation-fiction, poetry, drama, essays an d criticism -covering classical, medieval, pre -modern and 
contemporary literature. 
The Indira Gandhi National Centre (IGNCA) for the Arts serve s as a major resource centre for the 
arts, specially written, oral and visual source materials. It has achieved maj or milestones in 
digitalization activities relating to manuscripts, microfilming, photographs, and reference cards. IGNCA 
has major functions and specializes as a R esearch Centre and has been in charge of supervising the 
installation of new artworks in the new Parliament. 
Kalakshetra Foundation (KF) has been steadfastly maintaining the standard and tradition of training 
in Bharatanatyam, Carnatic Music and craft education and the institution has been successful in 
popularizing the classical art forms in Ind ia and abroad. Most of the students have become successful 
and popular artists in their respective fields. 
The Ministry as well as the Heads of the National Akademis gave detailed presentation s on the 
achievements, initiatives and programmes of their respe ctive Akademis.  A detailed list of the various  
programmes and events organized by the Akademis is given in Annexure-I. 
The Committee appreciate s the efforts made by the Akademis in organizing various cultural 
programmes and events  to achieve their mandate to preserve and promote the diverse cultures 
and art forms of the country. 
Budgetary Allocation and issues 
7. The Committee notes that for Akademis/ Cultural Institutions, the Revised Estimate for 2022-23 
was Rs. 487 crore, whereas the Budget Estimate for 2023-24 has been reduced to Rs. 401 crore.  The 
break-up of BE allocation for 2023-24 vis-à-vis RE allocation for 2022-23 for the cultural institutions 
under the Head ‘Support to Akademis’ is tabulated below: 

Page 5 of 88 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Akademis BE 
( 2022-23) 
BE  
(2023-24) 
1 Sangeet NatakAkademi (SNA)  63.15 65.55 
2 Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA)  55.05 100.10 
3 National School of Drama (NSD)  69.75 48.55 
4 Sahitya Akademi 39.20 38.05 
5 Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA)  26.50 28.55 
6 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CRT)  24.95 25.45 
7 Kalakshetra Foundation  19.27 24.52 
8 Zonal Cultural Centres 67.48 70.50 
 
Grand Total  365.35 401.27 
                                                                    Source: Ministry of Culture 
 8. The Ministry submitted that the major reduction in BE 2023 -24 under ‘Support to Akademi ’, 
as compared to RE 2022 -23, is mainly attributed to the reduction of allocation to  the Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA). The funds in the RE 2022 -23 to IGNCA were augmented to 
Rs. 190 crore from Rs. 50 crore to undertake the “Parliament Art Work” in the new building of the 
Parliament. In the Current Fin ancial Year 2023-24, the allocation to IGNCA has been kept at Rs. 100 
crore. 
The Committee notes that the fund is allocated to the Akademis according to their requirements.  
This is depicted in the graph given below:  
 
 
 
 

Page 6 of 88 
 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
 
      Source: Ministry of Culture 
9. The Ministry stated that it has taken all efforts to increase  the budget allocation to the 
Akademis over the years. The major source of funds for the Akademis is the Budget allotted by the 
Government.  I n addition , some additional resources are raised through  the sale of publications, 
souvenirs and crafts, renting out of auditorium etc. 
10. The Committee notes that t he overall budget allocation for the Ministry of Culture is 
only 0.075% of the total budget, which is gros sly inadequate.  In particular, the combined 
budgetary allocation (2023-24) for the National Akademis is just Rs. 401 crore. The Committee 
in this regard,  recommends that the Ministry of Culture should increase the budget ary 
allocation to the National Akademis and other C ultural Institutions in order to increase their 
efficiency and outreach.  
11. Committee observes that  countries like China, the U.K. , U.S., Singapore and Australia 
spend roughly 2%-5% of their budget on the promotion of art and culture and a majority of the 
amount spent by these countries  on art and culture is sourced from non -government sources 
which is not the case in India.  
12. The Committee  recommends the Akademis to explore the option of CSR  (Corporate 
Social Responsibility)  Funds available for “protection of national heritage, art and culture 
including restoration of buildings and sites of historical importance and works of art; setting up 
public libraries; promotion and development of traditional arts and handicrafts;” as provided in 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
 (SNA)  
 (IGNCA)  
(NSD)  
Sahitya Akademi  
 (LKA)  
 (CCRT)  
Kalakshetra 
Foundation  
Zonal Cultural Centres 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
BE 2022-23  
BE 2023-24 

Page 7 of 88 
 
clause (v) of Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013  read with Section 135 .  The Committee 
recommends that some p ortion of the CSR Fund may be mandatorily earmarked for the 
development and promotion of Culture and Cultural Institutions. Government can think of 
making such amendments in the legislation related to CSR. 
13. In Committee’s view  a long -term guarantee of sustained funding will go a long way in 
creating a stable en vironment to implement ambitious plans.  Artistic e xcellence can flourish 
only in  good cultural infrastructure .  Thus , Committee  feels that Private partners can also 
provide financial support through sponsorships, grants, donations, or investments under PPP 
mode. 
14. Further, funds can also be raised as monetary benefits from YouTube channels and other 
OTT platforms.  Akademis can organize fundraising events  such as gal as, auctions, benefit 
concerts or cultural festivals. These events can attract donors, s ponsors, and supporters who are 
interested in experiencing cultural performances and supporting the academy's mission. 
15. Akademis must augment resources to become sustainable and resilient.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that i n order to develop a strong sustainable cultural environment, 
Akademis need to take significant steps  to attract investments from the Government and private 
sectors, to develop and maintain their cultural and social infrastructure . Akademis should start 
thinking outside the box  with ‘imagination and a v ision’ and draw up a plan to explore other 
suitable types of external financing. Investments should include audience engagement, supporting 
artists, and subsidizing performance to optimize public engagements. The Committee believes that 
along with tourists and visitors, citizens also constitute a major part of the consumers, who are 
willing to spend larger portions of their disposable income to seek entertainment . The Akademis 
should tap such potential of the citizens. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 8 of 88 
 
II 
Organizational Structure, Governance and Related Issues 
Election and Tenure of Heads of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
16. The Ministry informed the following with regard to the election and tenure of the Heads of 
the National Akademis: 
Sahitya Akademi (SA) 
The President of the Sahitya Akademi  is selected by the new General Council from a max imum 
three-person’s panel to be forwarded by the outgoing Executive Board. The outgoing Executive 
Board selects the panel from the names forwarded by the outgoing General Council. The President 
continues in office until the election of the new President by the new General Co uncil at its first 
meeting. The General Council has 100 representatives from different sources. The State 
Governments and Union Territories send three nominations each.   The Ministry also receives 
nominations of three names each from all 350 Central and St ate Universities where Humanities are 
being taught,  out of which representatives of twenty universities are selected on a rotation basis.   
There is also a provision for 24 language representatives and about 10 ex -officio members like Joint 
Secretary etc. The authority vests in the General Council of the Akademi which also elects the 
President of the Akademi for a period of five years. 
 
Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) 
The Lalit Kala Akademi  is an autonomous body, fully funded by the Ministry of Culture. It 
comprises of the General Council and Executive Board for three years and the term of the Chairman 
is for three years.  Chairman, Lalit Kala Akademi is appointed through a 3 -Member Search 
Committee, (one member is nominated by the General Council of the Akademi and the other two 
members shall be nominated by the Pre sident of India; and one out of three members may be a 
woman). The Search Commit tee submits recommendations of three  names to the President of India.  
The President of India appoints one out of the three names for Chairmanship. The General Council 
of the Akademi consist s of 65 Members.  The term of the members of the Executive Board as are 
elected by the General Co uncil or nominated by the Government of India or the Chairman for 
membership of the Executive Board is three years. 
 

Page 9 of 88 
 
Lalit Kala Akademi informed the  Committee that its administration was taken over by the Government 
of India in 2015. The government took over in order to form the General Council, Executive Board, 
Finance Committee and Programme Committee as there was no General Council or Executive Board in 
2013. The government handed over the administration to Lalit Kala Akademi in 2018 and  the Chairman 
was appointed. Thereafter, the General Council, the Executive Board and the Finance Committee were 
formed following due process. Now, all these Committees are in place. 
 
Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA) 
The Chairman, Sangeet Natak  Akademi, is appointed by the  President of India for a period of five 
years. The Sangeet Natak Akademi has 72 M embers, with one representative nominated by each S tate 
Government in addition to e xperts, Government nominees and E x-officio Members. The management 
of the Akademi is vested in its Governing Council which is elected for a period of five years. 
 
National School of Drama (NSD) 
In the case of the National School of Drama , Chairman is appointed by the President of India and the 
tenure of the appointment is four  years. NSD has a Society of 14 M embers to run the Akademi.  The 
Members of the Society are nominate d by the Central Government, Ministry of Culture/ Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
 
IGNCA 
IGNCA has a Board of Trustees and an Executive Council  drawn from the Board of Trustees.  The 
Executive Council is headed by  the President who is appointed by the Trustees  from amongst 
themselves. The tenure of appo intment of the President is ten years. The number of Members in the 
Governing Council ranges fr om 7 to 21.   The Members of the Executive Committee are  drawn from 
among the Trustees and function under a Chairman. 
 
CCRT  
The Chairman of CCRT is appointed by the Gov ernment of India, Ministry of Culture for a period of 
four years.  The Vice Chairman of CCRT is appointed by the Society, CCRT  from amongst its 
members. The Members are nominated by the Central Government, the Ministry of Culture  and their 
total number is 18. 
 
 
 

Page 10 of 88 
 
Kalakshetra Foundation 
Chairmen, Kalakshetra Foundation is  appointed by the Government of India, Ministry of Culture  for a 
period of five  years, respectively.  The Members  of Kalakshetra Foundation are 19  in number.  The 
Members are nominated by the Central Government, the Ministry of Culture. 
The representatives o f the Ministry, during the meeting, acknowledged that as most Akademis 
have been  in existence  since the 1950s, there is a need to change the age -old systems and the 
Ministry has taken cognizance of the same. 
 
The organizational structure of the National Akademis is given in the Table in Annexure-II 
Tenure of Chairman/President and Governing Bodies of the Cultural Institutions 
Nomenclatu
re LKA SA SNA IGNC
A NSD CCRT KF 
Chairman/President 
Chairman 
or President 
Chairma
n President Chairma
n President Chairman Chairma
n 
Chairp
erson 
Tenure 3 years 5 years 5 years 10 years 4 years 4 years 5 years 
General Council/Governing Body/Society 
General 
Council/ 
Governing 
Body/ 
Society  
Gen. 
Council 
Gen. 
Council 
Gen.  
Council Trustees Society Society Governi
ng Body 
Tenure 3 years 5 years 5 years 10 years 4 years 4 years 5 years 
Number of 
members  65 100 72 7 to 21 14 18 19 
Source: Ministry of Culture 
17. The Committee notes that  only the Chairman of Sahitya Akademi is elected.   The process 
for appointment of the Chairman/President as also their tenure varies between the Akademis. The 
tenure of the Governing Body is also different for the different Akademis, ranging between 3 years 

Page 11 of 88 
 
for Lalit Kala Akademi to 10 years for Kala kshetra Foundation.  T here are no fixed guidelines  
with regard to the number of members of the Governing Council,  the number of meetings to be 
held, etc.   Also, there are no people’s representatives in the Governing Council of the Akademis. 
18. The Committee observes that there are different parameters for different Akademis.  In 
Committee’s view, this lack of uniformity is not desirable as it leads to administrative and 
organisational inconsistencies among the various Akademis and Institutions. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends Government to formulate a policy emphasising uniformity among all the 
Akademis in terms of the tenure of the  Chairman/President, representation and election of the 
General Council, and the minimum number of meetings to be held each  year. If required, 
legislation governing the Akademis/ Institutions may be amended to ensure uniformity among the 
Akademis and their functionaries. 
19. Committee, further, suggests that  one Member of Parliament should be included on the 
Governing Board of each of the Institutions on the lines of All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
and other such institutions to assist the working of Akademis and to provide ground report s to the 
Akademis.  
20. The Committee also recommends that there i s a need to increase the involvement of States 
in the overall functioning of the National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions and this may 
be done by giving representation to all States in the administrative set -up and through 
collaboration with cultu ral bodies at the state level.  In this regard, proper consultations must be 
conducted with all States.  
Regional Centres and Zonal Cultural Centre (ZCCs) 
21. Ministry of Culture informed that it has established regional centres of all Akademis in various 
regions of India to enhance the reach of the Ministry among arti sts of all regions.  The details of the 
Regional Centres of the National Akademis are provided below: 
Sl. Akademies No. of 
Centres Location of the Regional Centres 
1 Indira Gandhi National Centre for the 
Arts (IGNCA) 9 Varanasi,Guwahati, Bengaluru,  Ranchi, 
Baroda, Goa, Thrissur, Puducherry, Kashmir 

Page 12 of 88 
 
2 Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) 7 Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Garhi, Kolkata, 
Lucknow, Agartala, Ahmedabad 
3 Sangeet NatakAkademi (SNA) 7 Imphal, Guwahati(2), Agartala, Bokaro, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Delhi 
4 Sahitya Akademi 5 Kolkata, Bangalore, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Agartala 
5 National School of Drama (NSD) 5 Varanasi, Agartala, Gangtok, Bangalore, 
Srinagar 
6 Centre for Cultural Resources and 
Training (CCRT) 4 Udaipur, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Damoh 
7 Kalakshetra Foundation -- -- 
 Grand Total 37  
 Source: Ministry of Culture 
22. The Ministry has also set up seven Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) with headquarters at Patiala, 
Nagpur, Udaipur, Prayagraj, Kokata, Dimapur and Thanjavur.  These ZCCs organize various cultural 
activities and programmes on a regular basis in their member states throughout the year.  The government 
provides regular annual grant-in-aid for conducting various activities and programmes to ZCCs.  However, 
no state and Union territory-wise funds are released by the Ministry for the purpose. 
23. Ministry informed that Akademis, from time to time, organise various activities in remote rural areas 
thereby enhancing local participation and reaching the artist s in the  hinterlands. Autonomous Bodies are 
supporting Tribal Artisans and Craft Persons , especially from rural & remote areas by providing  an 
honorarium for their valuable services and performances.  
24. Sahitya Akademi  has established a North East Centre for Oral Literature (NECOL) in Ag artala, 
especially for tribal oral literature and a Centre for Oral and Tribal Literature (COTLit) in Bhubaneswar.  
25. CCRT invites scholars and experts from rural and remote areas to conduct theoretical as well as 
skill-based practical classes for the trainees. Teachers participating in CCRT Training Programmes also 
come from various parts of the country including rural and remote areas. In CCRT Training programmes, 
teachers are encouraged to promote their local culture , t ribal and folk art & culture during  the session on 

Page 13 of 88 
 
regional cultural presentation. Lecture/lecture-demonstration session/practical classes are also conducted on 
Traditional Folk or Tribal arts as well as craft forms , music and dance with special reference to their origin 
and history. Scholarship and fellowship schemes have been set up across the country including tribal and 
rural areas for  the preservation and promotion of div erse, varied and rich Indian cultural heritage which is 
being manifested through various performing, literary and visual art forms.  
26. The Sangeet Natak  Akademi has three Constituent Units, two of which are dance teaching 
institutions Jawaharlal Nehru Ma nipur Dance Academy and Kathak Kendra and five regional centre s-
Kutiyattam Kendra in Thiruvananthapuram to promote the ancient dance form Kutiyattam , Sattriya Kendra, 
Guwahati for promoting the Sattriya traditions of Assam ,  North-East Centre, Guwahati for preserving the 
traditional and folk performing art traditions of north -eastern India, North -East Documentation Centre, 
Agartala for festival and field documentation in the North-east, Chhau Kendra, Chandankiyari for promoting 
the Chhau dances of eastern India. Sangeet Natak  Akademi is on the verge of inaugurating its Regional 
Centre in Hyderabad. 
27. Upon query by Members about the reason for  not having centres in many states, the Ministry 
informed that Zonal Cultural Centre s cater to cultural needs in places that do not have Regiona l Centres. 
Besides, the Akademis and CCRT conduct shows and workshops even in places where there are no centres. 
Map representing the presence of Regional Centres across the country 
 
Source: Ministry of Culture 


Page 14 of 88 
 
 
28. The Committee  observes that at present, only a few National Akademis and Cultural 
Institutions have established regional centres across the country.  States are not evenly covered in  so 
far as the establishment of regional Centres in the country is concerned. The map given above shows 
that t here is no representation of culturally rich region s like Mizoram, Nagaland , Himachal 
Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab,  Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh  and Madhya Pradesh . The 
Committee notes that  a substantial chunk of the population is left out of the reach  of the Cultural 
Institutions and Akademis. In Committee’s view, this has greatly restricted the active local presence 
of these national cultural bodies. 
29. The Committee notes most of the cultural institutions are headquartered in Delhi. The 
Committee reminds that these cultural bodies can be relocated to various other parts of the country 
to ensure Pan India presence of the Institutions. 
30. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need for establishing regional centres 
in each State as well as in remote areas like tribal areas to promote tribal culture, and in rural areas 
to promote village culture. Further, Regional Centres must be set up in all culturally rich regions to 
promote art and culture at grassroots level. The Committee a lso suggests that t here is  a need for 
cultural mapping of districts using the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). Regional Centres 
must cater to all the aspects of art and culture of that region. 
31. Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) provide facilities for the promotion of arts and culture in 
their respective regions. The Committee, h owever, observes that the functioning of ZCCs is not 
always uniform across the States, thereby defeating the very purpose of  fostering cultural activities 
equitably throughout the country.  The Committee also recommends that the National Akademis 
and other Cultural Institutions must collaborate with ZCCs to remove th is disparity across States.  
The Ministry of Culture needs to play a lead role  in such coordination works .  Ministry/ National 
Akademis must evolve a  mechanism to ensure effective coordination of efforts between National 
Akademis/Cultural Institutions and ZCCs 
32. The Committee takes note of IGNCA’s reply that the op ening of Regional Centres in more 
number of States would be feasible subject to  the allocation of more funds for staff  as well as 
establishment costs.  The Committee takes note of the fund constraints faced by the Institutions.  
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should seriously consider 
enhancing the budge tary allocation for the Akademi s.  The Committee also noted the suggestion 

Page 15 of 88 
 
from the National School of Drama,  requesting Hon’ble MPs to contribute funds from MP LAD 
funds which could be used in the enhancement of art and culture education.  
33. The Akademis, during the course of the discussion, agreed to the view that Members of 
Parliament and MLAs of the region can help the Akademis with outreach and accessibility to  the 
interior parts as they are more aware of the cultural spread in their regions.  The Committee 
appreciates that the views of  the Committee in this regard are  well taken by the Akademis.  
Popular participation is essential to propagate and preserve vario us forms of our culture. The 
elected representatives of the area can contribute immensely to popularize the art and art forms. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all MPs and MLAs of the region should be invited to 
the events organized by the respective organizations. Also, Ministry/ Akademis should actively 
involve Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
34. Committee recommends the Ministry/ Akademis  to attend the DISHA meetings.  
Representatives of the Ministry/Akademis sh ould be encouraged to attend the DISHA meetings 
for consultation with Members of Parliament, State Legislatures  and Local Governments 
(Panchayati Raj I nstitutions/Municipal Bodies). These Committees can monitor the 
implementation of the programmes and promote synergy and convergence for greater impact.  
They can also facilitate coordinated solutions to remove constraints, if any. 
Administrative Staff and Vacancies 
35. Committee notes that huge number s of posts  are lying vacant in all the A kademis, which 
adversely impact s the working of these organis ations. The Akademi -wise vacancy details are given 
below in tabular form: 
Name of Organisations Sanctioned Posts Filled Vacant 
Sangeet NatakAkademy 111 46 65 
Lalit Kala Akademi 170 71 99 
CCRT 78 37 41 
Kalakshetra Foundation  120 89 31 
IGNCA 248 160 88 
Sahitya Akademi 175 131 44 
National School of Drama 176 94 82 
Total 1078 628 450 
Source: Ministry of Culture 

Page 16 of 88 
 
36. Committee, further, notes that the vacancies in the Regional Centres of respective Akademis are 
also very large in number which hinders the efficiency of these Organisations. The Akademi -wise 
vacancy list is appended as Annexure-III. 
37. The Committee observes that the Government’s C ultural Institutions are affected  by 
vacancies and a lack of trained manpower.  Lack of manpower not only affects the working of 
these organizations but also hinders their efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Culture should urgently take measures to fill up t he said vacancies  at each level  
since manpower is the backbone of these Organisations.  The Committee also emphasizes that t he 
Ministry must conduct the recruitment process in a fair and transparent manner, adhering to 
equal opportunity for all and non-discrimination principles.  The Committee may be apprised of 
the recruitment process being followed in the Akademis and Cultural Institutions to fill in posts. 
38. The Committee desires the Ministry to complete the recruitment process and fill up all the 
vacancies within a fixed time period .  The Ministry may also apprise the Committee of the status 
of the matter.  
Cultural knowledge and Expertise of Staff 
 39. CCRT informed that all the senior officers of CCRT are also suitably qualified and experienced 
in the fields of Art and Culture.  However, only a small fraction of the administrative set-up, comprising 
of non -experienced personnel in the field of art and culture , are handling finance and administrativ e 
jobs.  They are also exposed to various manifestations of Indian art and culture , from time to time , 
through training programmes and events organized by CCRT.  Various Sub-Committees are constituted 
by the Chairman and Society, CCRT consists of Advisors from various fields, who render their expertise 
on specific matters from time to time. The Recruitment Rules of CCRT are very well defined in terms of 
recruitment of personnel having adequate cultural knowledge and were duly approved by the Ministry of 
Culture in February 2021. 
40. NSD informed that approximately 50% of the administrative set -up comprised of non -experts in 
the field of arts and culture. Efforts are being made to ensure that the Secretariat staff of NSD is gaining 
experience to adequate cultural knowledge and expertise.NSD is already having a panel of advisers duly 
approved by the Akademi Council which renders it expertise on specific matters. 

Page 17 of 88 
 
41. As far as Sahitya Akademi is concerned, the Secretary of the Akademi is selected based on his 
expertise in administration and knowledge of literature and culture to run a cultural organisation. 
Similarly, the other senior officials of the Akademi are being appointed, who have fulfilled the essential 
requirement of the post as per Akademi’s  Recruitment Rules. From time to time, the senior officials are 
guided by the General Council and Executive Board of the Akademi, who are eminent personalities in 
the field of literature.  All the Akademis and other Cultural Institutions have been constituted with  
different mandates and accordingly , their Recruitment Rules were framed. The Secretary of the 
respective institution should have adequate qualifications, administrative skills, cultural knowledge and 
expertise. As far as Sahitya Akademi is concerned, these were included in its Recruitment Rules. 
42. The organizational set -up of Sahitya Akademi comprises 100 General Council Members and a 
total of 251 experts in literature of 24 Indian languages recognized by the Akademi. All the publications 
and programmes of Sahitya Akademi are guid ed by these 251 experts who are members of the 24 
language Advisory Boards of the Akademi. 
43. Kalakshetra Foundation has about 90% of non -experts in the field of art and cultu re in the 
administrative set-up.  
44. The Committee notes that a  majority of the administrative staff have little 
knowledge/expertise in arts and culture management. The Committee feels that extensive training 
programmes are required for better expertise of staff to enable proficiency and compete ncy at 
scale, and across levels.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a comprehensive assessment 
of the training needs of the staff may be undertaken to identify the areas where they require skill 
development or additional knowledge in art and culture  and specific domains.  The Ministry can  
also establish mentoring or coa ching programmes where staff members are paired with 
experienced professionals in the field.   
Governance and related issues 
45. Committee also took up the issue of adm inistrative mismanagement and financial irregularities 
that happened in the Lalit Kala Akademis some years back. 
 
46. Lalit Kala Akademi apprised the Committee that the allegations levelled against the Akademi 
were mainly administrative in nature due to which its administration was taken over by the Government 
of India in 2015. Due process was followed in the Ministry and action, as deemed fit, was taken in each 

Page 18 of 88 
 
case. The Committee was informed that Government took over the control of the Lalit Kala Akademi in 
order to form the General Council, Executive Board, Finance Committee and Programme Committee as 
there was no General Council or Executive Board in 2013.  The g overnment handed over the 
administration to Lalit Kala Akademi in 2018 and the Chairman was appointed. Thereafter, the General 
Council, the Executive Board and the Finance Committee were formed following due process. The 
allegations were levelled because th ese Committees were not formed and the functions were being 
handled by the Chairman single -handedly.  Now, all these C ommittees are in place and functioning 
well. 
 
47. In the case of Kalakshetra Foundation, a dance teacher from the prestigious Kalakshetra dance 
school in Chennai was arrested on charges of  sexual harassment following a complaint by a former 
student. The arrest comes after over 200 students boycotted exams and protested on campus for two 
days during March, 2023, demanding action against four teachers accused of sexual harassment.  One 
assistant professor at the Rukmini Devi College of Fine Arts under the Kalakshetra Foundation, was 
booked for sexual harassment. 
 
48. Other organisations stated that there are no such issues in their organisations. However, common 
issues such as bureaucratic hurdles, lack of transparency, inefficient decision-making processes, 
insufficient human resource manag ement, lack of strategic and co ordinated planning and financial 
mismanagement are prevalent among all the organisations. 
 
49. Committee feels that resolving governance issues in National Akademis requires a 
systematic and proactive approach. First of all, Committee suggests identifying the specific areas 
where governance problems exist, acknowledging the issues, and committing to addressing them. 
Further, t here is a need to enhance transparency and accountability  and promote a culture of 
ethical conduct and integrity within the Akademis. 
 
50. Committee, further, flags that continuous monitoring and evaluation of the effectiveness of 
governance practices is also required at regular intervals. Akademis should seek feedback from 
stakeholders, conduct internal and external evaluations, and use the findings to identify areas for 
improvement. 
 

Page 19 of 88 
 
51. In cases where governance issues persist or are complex,  the Akademis should  consider 
seeking external expertise or consulting services. Independent evaluations or audits can provide 
valuable insights and recommendations for addressing governance challenges. 
52. Further, the Ministry/Akademis may also consider the possibility of adopting n ew 
technological advancements in administration for improving the day -to-day functioning of the 
Akademis. 
 
Segregation of Functions   
53. The Committee notes that t he Ministry of Culture through its organizations is engaged in the 
development and promotion of the country’s rich heritage including art, music, dance, theatre, literature 
and handicrafts as well as recognition of excellence in these fields.  The different autonomous cultural 
institutions have been tasked with specific components of  culture.  The Akademi Bureau of the Ministry 
of Culture has the overall administrative supervision of these autonomous bodies. 
54. The Committee feels that the function of the Akademis is to enable artists to create and 
express their creativity.  The role of the Ministry should be to help the organizations and their 
artists to realize the organizational vision and fulfil their mission. Its responsibility is to provide an 
atmosphere for artists to develop and realize their vision with resources that would otherwise be 
unavailable or greatly diminished in the face of lack of opportunities. The Committee notes that 
the 2014 High Powered Committee also expressed  that the Ministry has to work as a point of 
coordination for cultural expression and a catalyst for the dissemination of that expression 
through the encouragement and sponsorship of multifarious artistic activity . To t his end, 
Committee feels that there should be proper and clear segregation of functions among the 
Akademis. 
55. The Committee observes that segregation of functions is  also an important concept to 
internal control frameworks, financial reporting and regula tory compliance. The overall 
effectiveness of the organization depends on an effective internal administration, adequate division 
of responsibilities, and the requirement of a sufficient number of staff who are adequately trained.  
Separation of functions is an important mechanism to help reduce the risk of fraud, error and 
other financial misconduct .  In addition , it helps to promote accountability, transparency and 
ethical behaviour within the organization.  The Committee, therefore, recommends segregation of 
the purchasing, provisioning, financing and policy-making functions within the Akademis. 

Page 20 of 88 
 
56. Roles and responsibilities need to be clearly defined. The Heads of these institutions mu st 
be domain experts for such bodies.  They must be  persons with knowledge and work experience in 
the cultural domain of their institutions.  More autonomy and proper policy or guidelines to guide 
the working of these institutions will enable them to carry on their designated tasks efficiently and 
effectively. This will further create transparency and build stronger working relationships and 
clear dissemination of information across the organizations. 
57. The working of the cultural institutions and  the inherent gaps and discrepancies suggest 
that there is still significant room for improvement .    There is  a need to strengthen the technical 
and financial capacities of government departments responsible for cultural policy in order to 
enable them to harness potential synergies with all agencies.  Cooperation is needed to develop 
regulatory frameworks, policies and strategies.  Effective decentralization, government 
engagement and collaboration between the Government, Akademis and multi -stakeholders can 
improve policy design, implementation and monitoring for the cultural institutions by adhering to 
shared principles and developing complementary strategies.  This will strengthen informed and 
transparent systems of governance. 
 
  

Page 21 of 88 
 
III 
Challenges Faced by National Akademis 
58. The Committee  finds that the National Akademis and other cultural institutions face certain 
challenges which hinder the smooth functioning of these organisations . Some of these challenges have 
been detailed below: 
 
Synergy and coordination among the Institutions 
59. The Committee notes that the promotion of arts and culture through Akademis and other Cultural 
Institutions lacks an integrated approach since there are a host of overlapping functions. This results in 
duplication of efforts and prevents the optimum utilisation of resources. 
 
60. The Ministry informed that Akademis are meticulously working in the field of art and culture 
and organise various programmes which have a unique mandate of propagation of a rt and culture. All 
the Akademis under the Ministry try their level best to collaborate with other Akademis to augment their 
limited resources and enhance their capacities/ outreach, thereby trying to optimise the use of all the 
resources available w ith other A kademis and Cultural Institutions. Ministry is also in the process of 
streamlining the functions of all Akademis and has already commenced the work to identify the common 
resources that can be utilized effectively, like making use of  the infrastructure of one Akademi to be 
used for commencing  the activities of another. The platform of "Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav' was 
successfully used to bring the activities of all Akademis while conducting the events by the Ministry.  
 
61. The Ministry of Culture has already conducted a review of all the Akademi s and other 
institutions under it, through  the Quality Council of India (QCI) , to address the matters related to 
governance and manpower resources. 
 
62. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that Inter-Akademi cooperation is the need of 
the hour for a co ordinated and eff ective promotion of art and culture across the country.  
Akademis should establish formal channels of communicati on between different cultural 
Akademis. The Ministry can encourage the Akademis to share best practices, lessons learned, and 
resources with each other.  This can also resolve the issue of lack of infrastructure . Moreover, it 
can lead to optimum utiliz ation of resources. The Committee is also of the view tha t the Ministry 

Page 22 of 88 
 
can explore the streamlining o f the functions of the Akademis, defining separa te functions and 
compartmentalization of the same.  The committee notes that “Azadi Ka Amri t Mahotsav” was a 
stellar success in promoting and propagating our cultur e in various nook s and corner s of the 
country. The Committee reminds that the lessons lear ned in organising “Azadi Ka Amri t 
Mahotsav” should be further utilised to generate synergies among all the cultural institutions and 
those lessons may be converted in to institutional mechanisms to administer the Cultural 
Institutions and Akademis. 
 
63. Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must facilitate joint research 
projects, exchange programs and interdisciplinary collaborations between Akademis to encourage 
scholars, researchers, and artists from different academies to work together on shared research 
interests, cultural preservation projects  and innovative initiatives .  Ministry must establish 
common standards, policies, and guidelines across diffe rent Akademis to ensure consistency and 
alignment. This can include areas such as governance, ethical practices, financial management 
and quality assurance. 
 
64. The Akademis can also explore opportunities for collaborative funding and resource 
mobilization. By jointly applying for grants, sponsorships, or donations, academies can enhance 
their chances of securing funding for larger projects or infrastructure development. 
  
Outreach and Inclusivity 
65. The Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that in order to reach out to the a rtists who are 
unaware of the functions and activities of the Akademis and Cultural Institutions , Akademis have taken 
all efforts to reach the remote areas as given below: 
 (i) SNA, under the guidance of the Hon’ble Prime Ministe r instituted a one-time award , the ‘Amrit 
Awards’, for elderly artists who have not been recognized by any national award yet.  
(ii) CCRT has designed various Training programmes including an Orientation Course and many 
Thematic Workshops which focus  on the promotion and preservation of Indian Tangible and Intangible 
Cultural Heritage, Literary Heritage, Folk/Tribal Art & Culture (dance/music/painting) and Craft 
Traditions. CCRT has undertaken the pioneering role to impart the components recommended in NEP -
2020 in its all Training Programmes. CCRT Regional Centres are also established in Tribal/Rural areas 

Page 23 of 88 
 
i.e., Regional Centre Guwahati, Assam, Regional Centre Udaipur, Rajasthan, Regional Centre 
Hyderabad, Telangana and Regional Centre Damoh, Madhya Pradesh,  so that a maximum outreach to 
local artisans and craft person can be done, which in turn trains our programme participants in various 
indigenous art forms.  
(iii) Lalit Kala Akademi, invites artists throughout the country including tribal/regional areas i n camps, 
workshops and exhibitions to showcase their talent and also to provide them  with galleries to promote 
their art. 
 (iv) NSD’s Repertory Company is the regula r performing wing of the School.  It  produces plays and 
performs all over the country , with an average of 12 plays, including 4 new productions, in its annual 
repertoire.  The Company presents an average of 125 – 150 shows per year.  
(v) IGNCA has supported several artists through its Regional Centres and also by organizing 
exhibitions, w orkshops, seminars, fairs etc. T he IGNCA has made sincere efforts to identify and 
promote such art and artists who have remained outside the mainstream of cultural activities. 
66. All the Akademis reach out to different pockets through their regional centres. Also, the Ministry 
of Culture has different Zonal Cultural Centres to reach out to the different States. In addition, some of 
the activities are done in collaboration with the State Culture Ministries. In general, the reach out is 
through financial assistance to artists, workshops, Craft Melas, Art workshops, online programmes, etc. 
Akademis like SNA have provided  grants to artists and organizations , especially from the remote and 
backward areas, and new events and programs have been commenced to get the hi therto unrepresented 
artists to perform across the country. 
67. The Committee feels that the National Akademis need to enhance its outreach, both within 
urban and rural areas, to make the arts more accessible and inclusive.  Without effective outreach 
programmes, Akademis may struggle to reach a broader audience , beyond their immediate 
surroundings.  A lack of outreach can reinforce existing cultural hierarchies and exclude cultural 
practices that are not adequately represented or recognized.  This excl usion can lead to 
marginalization of certain art forms, traditions or communities,  thereby, limiting cultural 
diversity and stifling creativity.  There is also a risk of losing intangible cultural heritage, as there 
may be insufficient engagements with communities, artists and practitioners who are the 
custodians of these traditions.   

Page 24 of 88 
 
68. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to address these challenges, Natio nal 
Akademis should prioritize outreach efforts by actively engaging with communities, promoting 
accessibility, fostering partnerships, and utilizing various communication channels to raise 
awareness about their a ctivities and opportunities. By doing so,  they can broaden their impact, 
increase inclusivity, and promote cultural exchange and understanding. 
69. Further, the Akademis must evolve a cultural landscape th at ensures the creation of 
cultural platforms,  supports cultural diversity and provides sustainable employment / jobs  for 
artists after the Akademis programmes.  
70. The Akademis must work towards  increasing cultural public infrastructure  such as 
affordable workspaces and easy access to cultural centres and cultural hubs across the country.   
They should bring activities closer to people and increase outreach throu gh different means such 
as the EAST (Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely) principle. 
71. The Akademis must also leverage technology for coordination between the Akademis to 
improve outreach and promote each other. 
Interaction between Akademis and educational institutions 
72. The Ministry of Culture informed that it has taken a number of steps to improve the interface 
between Akademis and educational institutions in the country. These steps include:  
i. Organizing workshops and seminars for teachers and administrators on the importance of 
cultural education.  
ii. Providing financial support to Akademis to enable them to collaborate with educational  
institutions.  
73. The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training is signing MoUs with Institutes such as Gujarat 
Vidyapeeth and Kalinga Institute of Social Sciences (KISS) for strengthening the objective of cultural 
education in line with the recommendation of NEP 2020 at the University level.  
74. The General Council of Sahitya Akademi comprises representatives from 20 universities across 
the country and is in touch with various schools in New Delhi for its literary programmes -Spin-a-Tale. 
The journals published by the Akademi have been referenced by University Grants Commission, and its 
children's literature has been selected under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyaan for consideration of bulk 
purchase for setting up libraries.  

Page 25 of 88 
 
75. Sangeet Natak Akademi has commenced "Kala D arohar" in order to establish the link between 
Akademi activities and school children in every State.  
76. Kalakshetra Foundation has also entered with MoUs with educational institutions and 
universities with a view to enrich the pedagogy and training of the art form and its exchange. 
77. The Committee observes that in the past our cultural Akademis d id not seem to interact 
nor d id they have any sustained or meaningful dialogue with schools, colleges and universities – 
even in the metros , leave alone the vast remainder of the country. As a result,  the Akademis, for 
the most part, work ed like museums in the wilderness.  The Committee, however, notes that 
various initiatives have been taken by the cultural institutions to interact with educ ational 
institutions. In the existing scenario, the Committee feels that our schools need to integrate 
cultural education as part of their curriculum  as mentioned in New Education Policy . This has to 
become mandatory for it to be effective.  
78. The Committee emphasize s the significance of an interdisciplinary approach in schools 
and higher education and also introducing students to tangible and intangible heritage as 
suggested by New Education Policy . Teachers need to  be groomed as specialists and an excellent 
team of teachers and faculty will have to be developed.  Also, local artists and crafts persons have 
to be hired as guest faculty to promote local music, art, languages, and handicraft, and to ensure 
that students are aware of the culture and local knowledge where they study. 
79. Education and culture are inseparable and will remain incomplete without one another. 
The Committee, therefore,  feels that the mandate of the A kademis needs to be rearticulate d to 
emphasise links among the A kademis as well as with a range of educational institutions. They 
should interact with Indian universities and educational institutions to propagate, preserve, and 
enrich our heterogeneous culture. Such a link would also promote arts education, essential if we 
are to build a new generation of culture and arts “managers” with a vision. 
Infrastructure and Facilities 
80. The Committee notes that i nfrastructure plays a vital role in the efficient functioning and 
performance of cultural Akademis. Adequate infrastructure is crucial for creating an environment that 
fosters creativity, learning, and the promotion and preservation of cultural heritage. 

Page 26 of 88 
 
81. Akademis informed that there is a shortage of infrastructural facilities like Auditoriums, Open air 
theatres, classrooms, studios, rehearsal halls, exhibition areas, and performance venues. 
82.     The Committee observes that investing in infrastructure for cultural Ak ademis is essential 
for supporting the growth, development, and sustainability of artistic an d cultural practices. 
Committee recommends that informal education may also be imparted through these Institutions.   
Ministry should provide the necessary funds and also promote synergy among the Institutions for 
sharing of infrastructural facilities.  Committee also suggested Akademis to explore  CSR funds to 
mobilise the resources for infrastructure developments including auditoriums, classrooms, studios, 
rehearsal halls and exhibition areas.  
Technological Advancements/Digital accessibility 
83. The Committee notes that a major portion of the resources and offerings by these Akademis can 
be disseminated on a larger scale through digital initiatives. This would enhance the ease and cost of 
accessibility of such resources while generating wider interest among the masses. 
84. The Ministry, in this regard, informed that the social media accounts of Akademis are actively 
creating awareness of its resources to the masses. The Akademis have undertaken various initiatives to 
enhance the accessibility of the resources and offerings of Akademis, as mentioned below:  
(i) During the times of the pandemic when it was difficult to conduct activities physically, Sahitya 
Akademi in order to keep the literary interaction and dialogue vibrant and awake, launched its Webline 
Literature Series and conducted more than 500 literary programme s online as well as live streaming on 
YouTube to keep the writers’ community associated with the Akademi, and still it continues. The timely 
information about the Akademi’s literary activities is updated on social media such as Twitter, Facebook 
and Instagram.  
(ii) CCRT started its digital initiative way back in the year 1986, when CCRT started developing its 
audio-visual material in various digital formats also, as per the recommendations of National Education 
Policy 1986, under the Programme of Action 1992, in the field of various visual, performing and literary 
arts. In close collaboration with organizations like NCERT, it was entrusted to develop models for 
cultural technology like audio-visual projections, sets of posters, display albums etc. It was done for the 
dissemination of an art -integrated approach to education at the grass root level especially in the context 
of school education.  

Page 27 of 88 
 
(iii) CCRT has been recording the lectures/lecture -demonstration/panel discussions of prominent 
scholars, artists and educationists with the help of  the Central Institute of Educational Technology. 
These recordings have also been used for the programmes conducted through Distance Learning mode. 
The CCRT in collaboration with the State Education Department/ RIE’s/Colleges of Education has 
conducted training for in-service/pre-service teachers under Distance Learning Programmes.  
(iv) Since CCRT is acting as a nodal agency of the Ministry of Culture to implement the 
recommendation of NEP 2020, it is also planning to develop online diploma/Certificate courses on 
Indian Knowledge Systems.  
(v) Lalit Kala Akademi is in the process of digitizing it s vast reservoir of documents, p ublication, 
albums, permanent collection etc. the digit ized collection can be viewed online or through visit to the 
Library. The listing of Library resources is available online. Many old Albums, Catalogues have been 
digitised. The Library is an active member of the National Virtual Libraries of India (NVLI) and time to 
time gives e-resources for the NVLI Portal  
(vi) The Lalit Kala Akademi has taken  the initiative for the High -Resolution Photography of approx. – 
8000 artworks and kept the record with proper documentation. 
 (vii) National School of Drama digiti ses the Play Videos and Audios of voice -over/songs recording for 
Student production, TIE Co. productions, Repertory productions, Festival performances by outside 
theatre groups, Workshop videos, Student solo performances, Scene works etc.  
(viii) IGNCA has a state-of-the-art Media Centre which does audio -visual production and archiving and 
a modern conservation laboratory that is executing projects for many prestigious organisations. Minister 
of State for Culture and External Affairs launched the website Temple 360.  
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), through its Research Publications, Multimedia 
presentations and Exhibitions has demonstrated the manner in which Arts can be presented in its totality, 
integrating different aspects of Arts. Th e IGNCA has achieved its objectives by conducting various 
online/offline programmes related to different fields like Vedic Studies, Music, Science, Wom en, 
Architecture and Performing Arts. 
On the eve of  the 36th Foundation Day celebration, the IGNCA launch ed the Vedic Heritage Portal, a 
digital repository of Vedic knowledge and tradition from across the country and Kala Vaibhav (Virtual 
Museum). These were l aunched by Union Home Minister and the Union Culture Minister on 

Page 28 of 88 
 
23.03.2023. Over 550 hours of audio -visual content of more than 18,000 Vedic mantras have been 
uploaded on the website, prepared in conjunction with people who know Vedas, Vedic research 
institutes, Vedapathi families and experts from all over the world, which functions under the Ministry of  
Culture. The portal is an effort to map the Vedic heritage of the country. It  is a one -stop solution for 
researchers and others who would like to search for any information regarding the Vedic Heritage. In 
addition, the IGNCA is also planning to create a Museum dedicated to the Vedic implements or vessels 
used in Yajna.  
The Vedic Heritage portal is aimed to communicate the message enshrined in the Vedas. The Portal 
helps the users to search for any information regarding the Vedic heritage, be it the abstr act oral 
traditions, or the textual. The Vedic scholars, the portal is offering the recitation of Samhitas with text 
and translations in Hindi and English. Till date, Shaakal Samhita of Rigveda; Kanva, Madhyandin and 
Taittariya Samhita of Yaju rveda; and select documentation of Samaveda and Atharvaveda have already 
been made available on the portal. Textual d etails of Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishads have been 
uploaded. About 500+ hours of A/V data is already integrated and uploaded. Showcasing the Vedic 
wisdom through the lens of modern s cientific knowledge , especially in the field of Sciences, 
Mathematics, Medicine, Astronomy, Architecture, Legal systems, Metallurgy and Environmental 
Studies etc., has been initiated under the project. 
 (ix) Sangeet Natak Akademi has successfully organised a number of teaching classes, festivals and 
workshops virtually/online which has received appreciation from all corners. Akademi s have also 
entered into MoUs with the following digital companies/ institutes /organisations to improve its digital 
outreach:  
a. CCRT & Research for Resurgence Foundation, Nagpur  
b. CCRT & Routes 2 Roots, Noida  
c. CCRT & Rooftop (M/S Slo Mo Experiences Private Limited) Fort, Mumbai 
d. CCRT &  Bhishma Foundation for Bhartiya Knowledge Systems (Bhishma School of Indic 
 Studies), Pune.  
e. Sangeet Natak Akademi & BECIL  
85. The Committee appreciates  the efforts being made in the direction of digitalisation.  
However, it feels that more can be done in achieving the goal of Digital India. Akademis must 
adapt to innovations in this digital age and expand their reach through digital platforms like OTT 

Page 29 of 88 
 
apps, promoting  the creation of content, creation of productions, etc., to be facilitated by them 
online. Akademis can explore the provision of online membership programs  that offer exclusive 
benefits, such as access to premium content, discounts on events, or persona lized 
recommendations. Akademis  should also utilize live -streaming technologies to broadcast 
performances, lectures, workshops, and other cultural events in real  time. This allows people to 
experience cultural activities from anywhere in the world, fostering engagement and participation. 
86. Akademis should develop online  learning platforms or learning management systems that 
offer courses, workshops, and educational resources. These platforms can provide a range of 
content, including video lectures, interactive modules, downloadable materials, and assessments. 
87. Akademis can also venture into the creation of virtual spaces that showcase exhibitions and 
galleries, allowing users to explore artworks and cultural artefacts virtually. These platforms can 
provide 360-degree views, detailed descriptions, audio guides, and interactive e lements to enhance 
the user experience. Virtual exhibitions can reach a wider audience. 
88. The Committee also recommends that Akademis should develop comprehensive digital 
archives and libraries that provide searchable databases, high -resolution images, a nd detailed 
metadata. These digitized collections enable researchers, scholars, and the general public to access 
and study cultural heritage materials remotely. 
89. Akademis should also utilize social media platforms to engage with audiences, share 
updates, and promote cultural program mes. Further, fostering collaborations with other cultural 
institutions, universities, and organizations to create joint digital initiatives can also be a great 
help. 
Returning of Awards 
90. Ministry of Culture  informed that d uring the year 2015, a total number of 39 writers returned 
their awards to the Sahitya Akademi. It also stated that none of the award winners returned their award 
while receiving it nor registered any protest when they received it . Many of the 39 writers r eturned their 
awards later. The Akademi conducted special meetings of its Executive Board and unanimously passed a 
Resolution, requesting the writers to reconsider their decision. Further, it was unanimously decided that 
each of the Akademi’s Awards is to be decided carefully by a process involving people ranging from a 
common reader to the most eminent critic in the language.  Sri Nand Bhardwaj, Sahitya Akademi Award 

Page 30 of 88 
 
winner in Rajasthani has taken back his decision of returning the award after the meeting o f the 
Executive Board, held on 17th December 2015.  There have been no instances  of awards returning after 
2015. However , organisations are advised to take proper precautionary check s before announcing 
awards. 
91. Sahitya Akademi, further, informed that the reason for returning the awards by 39 persons, was a 
political reason s- Mr. Kalburgi, an eminent writer from Karnataka, was killed. In protest of Mr. 
Kalburgi’s killing in 2015, from September to October, the ‘award wapsi’ episode happened.  Around 39 
people returned the awards . The amount of the award was Rs.5,000 in 1970s, some people have sent 
their plaques, and some have not.  Some people also sent cheques.   However, Akademi informed that it 
did not have any system for taking back the award, therefore, cheques were not deposited.  The Akademi 
wrote a letter to them stating ‘we do not have a system of taking back the award once it is given; so, 
kindly reconsider.  We will not deposit your amount into the bank.’  The Akademi also informed that 
many of these people have, again, associated with the Akademi  and they are serving, sometimes, in the 
Jury and participating in programmes. 
 
92. The Committee notes the instances of recipients of awards , given by Akademis (such as 
Sahitya Akademi Awards) , returning their awards in protest of certain political issues which are 
outside the ambit of the cultural re alms and the autonomous functioning of the concerned 
Akademi. Such inappropriate incidents involving the return of awards undermine the 
achievements of the ot her awardees and also impact the overall prestige and reputation of the 
awards. 
93. A Member of the Committee opined against the view that artists, authors and other 
intellectuals and performers who have been recommended for awards must sign a commitment 
that they will not return the awards as a form of protest at any point in the future before they are 
able to receive it. He was of the view that India is a democratic country, and our Constitution has 
provided to every citizen the freedom of speech and expr ession and also the freedom to protest in 
any form. Returning of awards is only a form of protest. The Member added that the Committee 
must strongly recommend to the Government to look into the actual issues in protest of which 
such awards have been return ed and work towards resolving them. He was seconded by another 
Member.  

Page 31 of 88 
 
94. The Committee questioned the re -engagement of such awardees who joined the Akademi 
after insulting it. Such inappropriate incidents involving the return of awards undermine the 
achievements of other awardees and also impact the overall prestige and reputation of the awards. 
The Member again submitted that the Akademis and the other Institutions should continue to 
work together with these artists and not shun them.  
95. The Committee observes that the awards given by each Akademi continue to be top 
honours for an artist in India. The Committee emphasizes that Sahitya Akademi or other 
Akademis are apolitical organizations. The re is no place for politics. The Committee, the refore, 
suggests that whenever an award is given, the consent of the recipient must be taken, so that 
he/she does not return it because of political reasons; as it is disgraceful to  the country . The 
Committee recommends  prior concurrence of short -listed candidates for awards before 
finalization.  A  system may be pu t in place where an undertaking is taken from the proposed 
awardee citing acceptance of the award and that the awardees cannot dishonour the award at any 
point of time in future .  Awards may not be given without such an undertaking.  In the event that 
the awards are returned, the awardee shall not be considered for such award in the future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 32 of 88 
 
IV 
Impact and Way Forward 
96. The way forward for cultural academies involves embracing innovation, fostering inclusivity, 
and adapting to the changing needs of society. Here are some key aspects to consider for the future 
development of cultural academies. 
 
Community participation and public awareness 
97. The Ministry informed that through its organizations, it strives to expand its reach, and include 
and represent, art forms of various people and communities. Some steps taken in this direction  are 
detailed below:  
98. The teachers trained by the CCRT further train students in their respective schools and are also 
motivated and oriented to create awareness at the village, community and district level s. Moreover, on 
the basis of their output and evaluation of their half -yearly reports submitted to CCRT, they are  
appointed as District Resource Persons, thereby acting as CCRT’s Cultural Ambassador s in their 
respective district.  
99. The Sahitya Akademi publishes large volumes of material, confers a number of awards and 
conducts numerous programmes, seminars, worksh ops, lectures, symposia, readings and discussions in 
all 24 languages publishing over 7000 books in 24 languages. 50 seminars at regional, national and 
international levels in addition to nearly 400 literary gatherings, workshops and lectures have been 
conducted by the Akademi. The Akademi al so organizes popular events  like ‘Meet the Author ’, 
‘Samvatsarlecture’,’Kavi Anuvadak’,‘Kathasandhi’, ‘loka’ ‘Translation workshops’, among others to  
help create broader outreach. 
100. CCRT organised an International Li terary Festival, UNMESHA from 16 to 18 June 2022, in 
Shimla, in which 425 eminent wr iters, both Indian and foreign , took part. This was the biggest literary 
festival ever held  and boosted the literary milieu of the nation. UNMESHA also witnessed the larges t 
participation of writers and thinkers from all wakes of life including the tribal and international writers, 
transgender poets, young writers etc.  
101. CCRT conducts the ‘Extension Services and Community Feedback Programme’ to include the 
community in t he dialogue. Cultural Clubs in Government & Government aided schools also help in 

Page 33 of 88 
 
knowing the concerns and wants of the community as the activities are conducted directly at the 
Community level. 
102. In Committee’s opinion, artistic and cultural activities can engage a wide audience in a way 
that resonates with their cultural background. They are an effective forum for community 
collaboration and engaging marginalized communities.   
103. The Committee feels that there is a need to strengthen ties with local communities, artists, 
and cultural organizations. Further,  a bottom-to-top approach is required for a better 
understanding of the ground level requirement s. Akademis should involve communities in 
decision-making processes, c o-creation of programs, and the preservation of intangible cultural 
heritage. Engaging with the community helps ensure relevance and authenticity in cultural 
activities, further, leading to the revival of lost traditions, languages and customs. 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP): 
104. The Committee feels that to maximise the output of Akademis and other Cultural Institutions, 
collaborative efforts with the private sector through the Public -Private Partnership (PPP) model should 
be encouraged. 
105. The Ministry informed that Akademis are implementing PPP projects in collaboration with the 
private organizations/ institutions/ State Akademis/State Governments/local Bodies/Artistic Societies 
and Akademis welcome the initiative of private organizations/insti tutions. The National School of 
Drama under the Ministry of Culture has branches viz. Festival Cell which caters to the demands of the 
theatre community of our country. All extension programmes and festivals are organised in 
collaboration with State Akadem is, State Governments, local bodies and a rtistic societies. Besides,  
NSD’s Repertory Co., Regional Centres and other branches also enter into MoU with various State 
Governments under the PPP model for production and showcasing them before the public.  
106. Sahitya Akademi occasionally holds its literary programmes in collaboration with private literary 
organizations/institutions. The Akademi welcomes the initiative of private literary 
organizations/institutions to collaborate with the Akademi in holding literary programmes. The Akademi 
organized a Book Fair – Pustakayan on the occasion of National Book Week from 11 to 18 November 
2022 at Rabindra Bhavan, New Delhi in which more than 30 publishers including private publishers 
from Delhi and NCR region also actively took part.  

Page 34 of 88 
 
107. CCRT has also entered PPP mode for collaborative efforts with the private sector for conducting 
collaborative activities such as setting up a State of the art studio with recording, editing & broadcasting 
via internet facility, to en hance the existing ecosystem of creative learning. CCRT has signed MoU with 
private sector organizations such as Routes2Roots (R2R) etc. and collaborative digitally interactive, e -
learning programmes in virtual mode are being organized by CCRT in collaborat ion with R2R.  CCRT 
is planning to launch online Diploma and Certificate courses also with the private sector -based 
organization through the PPP model in the fiel d of Indian Knowledge System and Appreciation of Art 
etc. 
108. The Committee feels that little has been done in engaging the private sector  and there is 
still a wide r scope for exploration in this field.  Private partners can provide financial support 
through sponsorships, grants, donations, or investments.  Private partners can  also provide 
expertise, resources, and tec hnical assistance to the Ak ademis.  Collaboration with private 
partners in the co-creation and co-production of programs, exhibitions, festivals, or other cultural 
events can bring diverse perspectives, innovative ideas, and broader networks to th e cultural 
Akademis. 
Protection of rural and tribal culture 
109. The Committee notes that over 70% of the population resides in rural and tribal areas, having 
their distinct cultures and traditions. Considering the limited resources available in rural and tribal areas, 
special efforts are needed to protect their rich and diverse culture. 
110. Ministry informed that it has established a number of cultural centres in rural and tribal areas. 
These centres provide training and support to rural and tribal artists, and they also organize festivals and 
workshops. Awareness and advertisement of the art form is done through seminars, conventions, and 
workshops. 
111. CCRT conducts lecture/lecture-demonstration sessions on Traditional Folk or Tribal arts as well 
as craft forms with special reference to  their origin and histor y. The In stitute also supports Tribal 
Artisans and Craft Persons by providing a token honorari um for their valuable services and has awarded 
14637 numbers of scholarships under the Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme (CTSSS) in 63 
Rural and Tribal Art forms since 1982-83 till 2020-21. 

Page 35 of 88 
 
112. Sahitya Akademi conducts the programme “Loka: The Many Voices”, consisting of lectures and 
demonstrations, to celebrate folk dances and singing, with the aim to protect and preserve the folk and 
tribal art and culture in the country. The Akademi, apart from organizing nat ional conventions on tribal, 
also conducts seminars and symposia, in online and offline mode on folk and tribal literature to highlight 
the affluence of tribal literature in India. Such programmes hav e been conducted on regional as well as 
national levels, and significant publications have been brought out. In another series of programmes 
titled ‘Gramalok’, literature by the writers of rural areas is celebrated . Such programmes are also held 
only in rural areas.  
113. The Akademi has established a North East Centre for Oral Literature (NECOL) in Agartala to 
exclusively cater to the languages which brings out related publications and also organizes activities and 
programmes in the languages from time to time. These languages include Mizo, Ao, Garo, Chakma, 
Rabha, Karbi, Hmar, Lepcha, Khasi, Tangkhul, Missing, Tenydie, Kokborok, Jaintia, Tulu, Gojri and 
Ho, etc. The Akademi has also translated books from these languages into Engli sh which would help 
translations into other languages for the dissemination of this unknown literature into other linguistic 
communities.  
114. The Sangeet Natak  Akademi has a specialized section named  ‘Folk and Tribal Arts ’, which is 
meant for dealing with issues of folk and triba l artists. The Akademi has been organizing festivals of 
folk and tribal art forms of the country ‘Desaj’ , for more than 10 years. Over this decade -long, Desaj 
festival has become the signature festival of folk and tribal arts and is also quite popular amongst the 
folk and tribal artist f raternity across the country. R ecently, a 30 days long Theatre oriented workshop 
was conducted in March 2023 for tribal communities in Keonjhar, Odisha. More than 50 students 
participated in the workshop and had a great footfall of youngsters and local tribes daily.  
115. As part of the curriculum of 3 years PG Diploma in the National School of Drama, there is a 
special emphasis on learning traditional folk -art forms of various parts of the country. In order to get 
adequate exposure, the students of NSD visit various parts of the country to learn folk theatre forms such 
as Chhau, Jatra, Kudiyattam, Ankianaat, Nautanki, Nacha, etc. Artists of all these folk art  forms are 
hired for imparting training to NSD students. Students of the National School of Drama are also given 
artistic inputs of various other traditional art for ms of the country. The School initiated 
AdirangaMahotsava/Adiparva, National Tribal festival of theatre, music, dance and craft in 2014. More 
than 28 festivals of such kind had been organised in and around the country involving thousands of tribal 
artists to showcase their art forms. 

Page 36 of 88 
 
116. Since the Rural and Tribal Art Forms are already being taken care of by the Ministry as detailed 
above, it is felt that the need to establish a separate body for Rural, Tribal and Folk Arts does not arise. 
117. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee feels that the 
specialized body for Rural, Tribal and Folk Arts could if set up, be a vehicle for the propagation of 
folk and tribal art forms effective ly. This would also mean nurturing these forms and preserving 
them in their original form as well as encouraging innovation in presentation without destroying 
the authenticity of these art forms. This could perhaps also be a way to raise the status as well as 
the remuneration of these artists to levels comparable to those of the classical artists. In addition, 
it can facilitate a cultural dialogue between all art forms from classical to traditional. 
118. The Committee also believes that it is important to prioritize the voices and perspectives of 
tribal communities, while also providing platforms for them to share their culture with a wider 
audience. Akademis should develop educational outreach programs that promote tribal and rural 
culture in schools, colleges, and local communities .  There is also a need for  collaboration with 
tribal organizations, NGOs, and tribal development agencies to jointly support initiatives for the 
promotion of tribal culture.  Further, Akademis must promote rural stays and tribal stays, 
especially among  the younger generation to acquaint them with the cultural heritage of the 
country. 
Youth engagement 
119. The Ministry informed that Akademis are organizing competitions, workshops and seminars and 
inviting school children an d local area children to  participate. The details of the prog rammes organized 
by the Akademis are as under:  
(i) SNA has designed a series, viz., Kala Dharohar for school children. S NA is visualizing it on a grand 
scale and will reach out to lakhs of schools across the country. To connect with school children, SNA 
will organize programmes and workshops by eminent artists, gurus and scholars in schools throughout 
the country. Sangeet N atak Akademi has commenced this series from Dongabori Higher Secondary 
School, Dist. Morigaon, Assam and will take it to the school children in different parts of the country. 
 (ii) CCRT is working in the field of linking education with culture and tries to help children to learn 
various skills to promote themselves and to make a career out of it by way of providing scholarship and 
fellowship schemes for the preservation and promotion of diverse, varied and rich Indian cultural 

Page 37 of 88 
 
heritage, which is being manifested through various performing, literary and visual art forms.  CCRT 
also promotes Art and Culture through Cultural Club Scheme in which students themselves with their 
teachers run a cultural club in the school and learn about the loc al art and culture and how to organiz e 
programmes in these fields.  
(iii) LKA organizes p ainting competitions, workshops etc. inviting School & Local Area Children for 
participation to promote themselves. The Akademi also organizes summer camps to help the  children to 
develop themselves.  
(iv) Sahitya Akademi awards children literature and confers Bal Sahitya Puraskar annually in the 24 
Indian languages recognized by it. Besides, it publishes children's literature and holds programmes for 
children such as S pin-a-Tale, Summer Workshops for Creative Writing, etc. Recently, it has begun to 
establish a children’s corner, the first of its kind, in its library  
(v) NSD’s Sanskar Rang Toli organizes summer workshops in Delhi an d NCR schools with children of 
8 to 16  years of age every year during the children's school holidays in the month of May -June. This 
workshop is conducted in about 9 schools of Delhi and in each scho ol about 600 participants from  the 
age groups 2 to 3 years, 8 to 12 years and 12 to 16 years par ticipate in all the workshop centres. The 
Objective of the workshop is to socially unite childre n from diverse backgrounds.  T he main effort is to 
make them more alert than their environment, and this work is done through humorous (laughing) 
theatre activities. TIE (The IndUS Entrepreneur) company has a group of actor -teachers who work with 
children and perform f or them. The major focus of TIE company is to perform creative, curriculum 
based and participatory plays in schools specially designed and designed  for children of different age 
groups. The major thrust of the plays is to create an environment to encourage children, raise questions 
with an awareness of themselves within the larger society, make decisions and make choices. 
(vi) IGNCA provides a platfo rm to make students art and culture as their career through its laboratory 
and courses. The IGNCA runs 9 academic courses, diploma courses, short -term certificate courses and 
other similar training -cum-acquaintance programmes for the benefit of the student s who can opt for an 
appropriate career. 
120. The Ministry, further, informed that through its organisations namely , SNA, CCRT and NSD , 
they are providing scholarships to students. The details of the scholarships given by them are  given in 
Annexure –IV. 

Page 38 of 88 
 
121. The Committee notes that the efforts are largely targeted at getting children to learn art 
forms – namely dance and music. The Committee feels that intervention is required to make them 
aware of what these traditions are; at least to a point where the y can identify some very basic 
ideas of the performing and visual arts. While the Ministry of Culture set up the CCRT with 
somewhat a similar idea of reaching out and creating opportunities for young children, especially 
from smaller cities, and all region s including the North -East, the program needs to be seriously 
reviewed and updated. Further, it should be linked with other ongoing efforts of the Ministry. 
Leveraging G20 
122. The Committee notes that the upcoming G20 Summit is a crucial opportunity to showcase Indian 
culture on a global platform. The National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions have an important 
role to play in this regard. 
123. CCRT informed that it has submitted two proposals to the Ministry of Culture for presenting 
cultural productions developed by their scholars - artists at Khajuraho and Bhubaneswar, respectively, to 
highlight Indian culture in the best possible manner at the upcoming G-20 Summit Meetings. The CCRT 
is also worki ng in collaboration with Yuvamanthan, an organization implementing Y -20 module in 
various districts of the country with the help of its District Resource Persons, trained teachers and 
cultural clubs throughout the country. 
124. NSD informed that so far, no such events have been planned.  However, if funds are available 
they can plan the International Theatre Festival by inviting G -20 and guest countries  sometime in 
September, 2023. They have included the G-20 logo in various programmes of NSD. 
125. Sahitya Akademi is planning the publication of G-20 Poetry Anthology comprising contributions 
from the poets of G -20 nations. Sahitya Akademi  is also planning to organize G -20 poets’ meet in New 
Delhi. Sahitya Akademi  regularly requests its 24 language Advisory Board M embers as  well as the 
Members of the General Council in unrecognised languages for suggestions to maximize outreach of the 
Akademi’s activities among the masses. Almost all activities of the Akademi are well attend ed by 
literary personalities and get wide coverage in print and social media.   
126. Kalakshetra Foundation has structured a campus tour, live demonstration and workshops of 
crafts, especially weaving and kalamkari which would showcase the Indian culture T he Bharata 

Page 39 of 88 
 
Kalakshetra Auditorium  itself is a symbol of culture and heritage and excerpts from productions of 
Rukmini Devi are to be presented to give a glimpse of Indian culture. 
127. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Cult ure and various 
cultural institutions in showcasing India’s rich cultural heritage and art forms at various G20 
forums and Conferences. The Committee observes that this is a golden opportunity to propagate 
and exhibit our thousands of years old continuous cultural heritage to the world community. 
128. The Committee recommend s that Akademis should collaborate with tourism authorities 
and G-20 stakeholders to promote cultural tourism in India .  Akademis should also  encourage G-
20 delegates to explore Indian cultural treasures beyond the conference venues, thus promoting 
tourism and economic opportunities. Akademis can i nitiate collaborative projects between 
National Akademis and cultural institutions from G -20 member countries. This can involve joint 
exhibitions, performances, artist residencies, or cultural exchanges.  Digital platforms like social 
media handles, live streaming, and virtual exhibitions can be utilised to extend the reach of 
National Akademis cultural i nitiatives during the G -20 summit and to engage a global audience 
and promote cultural exchange beyond physical boundaries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 40 of 88 
 
V 
Miscellaneous 
129. Members of the Committee also raised various other issues which are as follows: 
 i. Incentives for artists showing their talent on trains, buses, etc.: 
Some people beg  for money  in trains, buses in  exchange of a devotional song, a qawwali or a 
melodious Bollywood number. While most of them are physically challenged, some just take up 
the practice out of  sheer poverty. However, many of these beggars are also musically trained or 
belong to families that have been practising music for generations together. Ministry/Akademis 
must take measures to identify such artists and  provide them a platform to show case their talent 
and also provide monetary support to them. 
 
 ii. Representation and promotion of culture of North East States of India: 
North East India is known for its geographical location, ecology and diverse culture. It  is the a 
homeland of large number of ethnic groups. Each ethnic community has its own  distinct culture 
including food, music, dance, dress, language, etc. However, despite this, the North East has not 
been represented to the degree it deserves to be  represented. Ministry must take measures  in this 
direction and implement more  schemes to preserve and promote various forms of art and culture 
in the NER.  Ministry must extend all kinds of assistance including financial support to the  
individual artists and organizations in this region. 
 
iii. Handling, preservation and digitization of Manuscripts: 
 Manuscripts are the primary source of historic information. Manuscr ipts are diminishing along 
with time. Despite their best efforts, it is difficult to save manuscripts in a physical form beyond a 
time frame. Digital preservation of manuscripts restores them from damage, larc eny and decay. 
The Ministry should evolve a well -designed digitization program that includes not just digital 
capture, but also appropriate care and repair of original materials, and long-term management of 
the digital files it produces. 
 
 

Page 41 of 88 
 
iv. Need for promotion of art and culture in schools: 
Arts in modern education help to stimulate creativity, inspire confidence, and foster personal  
growth. It is a necessary part of any student’ s education and should be encouraged in all  schools. 
Indian arts of all kinds must be offered to students at all levels of  education, starting with early 
childhood care and education. Outstanding  local artists and crafts  persons should be hired as 
guest faculty to promote local  music, art, languages, and handicraft, and to ensure that students 
are aware of the culture and local knowledge of the region where they study. 
v. Lack of career guidance programmes in the arts for school children: 
Most teenagers are receiving little to no career guidance outside the home.  Choosing a career path 
after school can be challenging, especially  for students who have pursued arts. However, with the 
growing demand for creative and artistic talents in various industries, the  career options fo r art 
students have increased significantly. Arts  need no longer remain a passion and hobby. Career 
option guidance programmes must be encouraged in schools to help  students who want to pursue 
a career in the arts and creative field full-time. 
vi. Non-availability of information in Hindi or any other local language: 
Culture is encased in our languages. Art, in the form of literature, plays,  music, film, etc. cannot 
be fully appreciated without language. In order to  preserve and promote our diverse culture, we 
need to preserve and promote a  culture’s languages. Further, information on  the art and culture 
must also be made available in Hindi and the local languages. 
vii. No mention of Gujarat which is famous for various cultural values like Garba, Navratri 
and other traditional dances, nataks like Bhavai: 
Ministry must take measures for equitable representation of all states in the  field of art and 
culture.   
viii. Lack of infrastructure in various Akademis and regional centres in Arunachal 
Pradesh: 
Ministry/ Akademis may look into the matter and ensure that necessary measures are taken in this 
regard 

Page 42 of 88 
 
ix. Need for international recognition of Kalaripayattu, Kathakali and other art forms: 
Ministry may take a look into the matter and take appropriate action in the matter. 
 
x. Details of cultural activities organized in Kerala in Thrissur and Thiruvananthapuram: 
Details of the same may be provided to the Committee for information. 
 xi. Provision for assisting State Akademis in Kerala: 
Ministry/ Akademis may take necessary measures to implement schemes for  providing support 
and financial assistance to the State Akedemis in Kerala. 
xii. Number of cultural Akademis in Andhra Pradesh: 
The total number of Akademis in Andhra Pradesh may be furnished to the Committee. 
 xiii. Plans for future expansion of such Akademis, especially in Rajamundry constituency, 
etc.: 
The Ministry/ Akademis may take measures for the expansion of Akademis  and other cultural 
institutions in Rajamundry and other constituencies f or the promotion of local art and culture in 
these regions. 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 43 of 88 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Akademis in organizing various 
cultural programmes and events to achieve their mandate to preserve and promote the diverse 
cultures and art forms of the country. 
             (Para 6) 
Budgetary Allocation and issues 
The Committee notes that the overall budget allocation for the Ministry of Culture is only 0.075% 
of the total budget, which is grossly inadequate.  In particular, the combined budgetary allocation 
(2023-24) for the National Akademis is just Rs. 401 crore.  The Committee in this regard, 
recommends that the Ministry of Culture should increase the budgetary allocation to the National 
Akademis and other Cultural Institutions in order to increase their efficiency and outreach.  
(Para 10) 
Committee observes that countries like China, the U.K., U.S., Singapore and Australia spend 
roughly 2%-5% of their budget on the promotion of art and culture and a majority of the amount 
spent by these countries on art and culture is sourced from non -government sources which is n ot 
the case in India.  
(Para 11) 
The Committee recommends the Akademis to explore the option of CSR (Corporate Social 
Responsibility) Funds available for “protection of national heritage, art and culture including 
restoration of buildings and sites of hist orical importance and works of art; setting up public 
libraries; promotion and development of traditional arts and handicrafts;” as provided in clause 
(v) of Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Section 135.  The Committee 
recommends that some  portion of the CSR Fund may be mandatorily earmarked for the 
development and promotion of Culture and Cultural Institutions. Government can think of 
making such amendments in the legislation related to CSR. 
(Para 12) 
In Committee’s view a long -term guarantee of sustained funding will go a long way in creating a 
stable environment to implement ambitious plans.  Artistic excellence can flourish only in good 
cultural infrastructure.  Thus, Committee feels that Private partners can also provide financial 
support through sponsorships, grants, donations, or investments under PPP mode. 
(Para 13) 
Further, funds can also be raised as monetary benefits from YouTube channels and other OTT 
platforms. Akademis can organize fundraising events such as galas, auctions, ben efit concerts or 
cultural festivals. These events can attract donors, sponsors, and supporters who are interested in 
experiencing cultural performances and supporting the academy's mission. 
(Para 14) 
Akademis must augment resources to become sustainable an d resilient.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that in order to develop a strong sustainable cultural environment, 
Akademis need to take significant steps to attract investments from the Government and private 
sectors, to develop and maintain their cul tural and social infrastructure. Akademis should start 
thinking outside the box with ‘imagination and a vision’ and draw up a plan to explore other 

Page 44 of 88 
 
suitable types of external financing. Investments should include audience engagement, supporting 
artists, and subsidizing performance to optimize public engagements. The Committee believes that 
along with tourists and visitors, citizens also constitute a major part of the consumers, who are 
willing to spend larger portions of their disposable income to seek ente rtainment. The Akademis 
should tap such potential of the citizens. 
(Para 15) 
Election and Tenure of Heads of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
The Committee notes that only the Chairman of Sahitya Akademi is elected.   The process for 
appointment of the Chairman/President as also their tenure varies between the Akademis. The 
tenure of the Governing Body is also different for the different Akademis, ranging between 3 years 
for Lalit Kala Akademi to 10 years for Kalakshetra Foundation.  T here are no fixed guidelines 
with regard to the number of members of the Governing Council, the number of meetings to be 
held, etc.   Also, there are no people’s representatives in the Governing Council of the Akademis. 
(Para 17) 
The Committee observes that there are different parameters for different Akademis.  In 
Committee’s view, this lack of uniformity is not desirable as it leads to administrative and 
organisational inconsistencies among the various Akademis and Institutions. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends Government to formulate a policy emphasising uniformity among all the 
Akademis in terms of the tenure of the Chairman/President, representation and election of the 
General Council, and the minimum number of meetings to be held each year. If r equired, 
legislation governing the Akademis/ Institutions may be amended to ensure uniformity among the 
Akademis and their functionaries. 
(Para 18) 
Committee, further, suggests that one Member of Parliament should be included on the Governing 
Board of each  of the Institutions on the lines of All India Institute of Medical Sciences and other 
such institutions to assist the working of Akademis and to provide ground reports to the 
Akademis.  
 (Para 19) 
The Committee also recommends that there is a need to incr ease the involvement of States in the 
overall functioning of the National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions and this may be done 
by giving representation to all States in the administrative set -up and through collaboration with 
cultural bodies at th e state level. In this regard, proper consultations must be conducted with all 
States.  
 (Para 20) 
The Committee observes that at present, only a few National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
have established regional centres across the country. States a re not evenly covered in so far as the 
establishment of regional Centres in the country is concerned. The map given above shows that 
there is no representation of culturally rich regions like Mizoram, Nagaland, Himachal Pradesh, 
Haryana, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh. The Committee 
notes that a substantial chunk of the population is left out of the reach of the Cultural Institutions 
and Akademis. In Committee’s view, this has greatly restricted the active local presence o f these 
national cultural bodies. 
(Para 28) 

Page 45 of 88 
 
The Committee notes most of the cultural institutions are headquartered in Delhi. The Committee 
reminds that these cultural bodies can be relocated to various other parts of the country to ensure 
Pan India presence of the Institutions. 
(Para 29) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need for establishing regional centres in 
each State as well as in remote areas like tribal areas to promote tribal culture, and in rural areas 
to promote village cultur e. Further, Regional Centres must be set up in all culturally rich regions 
to promote art and culture at grassroots level. The Committee also suggests that there is a need for 
cultural mapping of districts using the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). Regi onal Centres 
must cater to all the aspects of art and culture of that region. 
(Para 30) 
Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) provide facilities for the promotion of arts and culture in their 
respective regions. The Committee, however, observes that the functioning of ZCCs is not always 
uniform across the States, thereby defeating the very purpose of fostering cultural activities 
equitably throughout the country.  The Committee also recommends that the National Akademis 
and other Cultural Institutions must collaborate with ZCCs to remove this disparity across States.  
The Ministry of Culture needs to play a lead role in such coordination works .  Ministry/ National 
Akademis must evolve a mechanism to ensure effective coordination of efforts between National  
Akademis/Cultural Institutions and ZCCs 
(Para 31) 
The Committee takes note of IGNCA’s reply that the opening of Regional Centres in more 
number of States would be feasible subject to the allocation of more funds for staff as well as 
establishment costs.  The Committee takes note of the fund constraints faced by the Institutions. 
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should seriously consider 
enhancing the budgetary allocation for the Akademis.  The Committee also noted the s uggestion 
from the National School of Drama, requesting Hon’ble MPs to contribute funds from MPLAD 
funds which could be used in the enhancement of art and culture education.  
(Para 32) 
The Akademis, during the course of the discussion, agreed to the view that Members of 
Parliament and MLAs of the region can help the Akademis with outreach and accessibility to the 
interior parts as they are more aware of the cultural spread in their regio ns.  The Committee 
appreciates that the views of the Committee in this regard are well taken by the Akademis. 
Popular participation is essential to propagate and preserve various forms of our culture. The 
elected representatives of the area can contribute immensely to popularize the art and art forms. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all MPs and MLAs of the region should be invited to 
the events organized by the respective organizations. Also, Ministry/ Akademis should actively 
involve Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
(Para 33) 
Committee recommends the Ministry/ Akademis to attend the DISHA meetings.  Representatives 
of the Ministry/Akademis should be encouraged to attend the DISHA meetings for consu ltation 
with Members of Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Governments (Panchayati Raj 
Institutions/Municipal Bodies). These Committees can monitor the implementation of the 
programmes and promote synergy and convergence for greater impact.  They can  also facilitate 
coordinated solutions to remove constraints, if any. 

Page 46 of 88 
 
(Para 34) 
Administrative Staff and Vacancies 
The Committee observes that the Government’s Cultural Institutions are affected by vacancies 
and a lack of trained manpower.  Lack of manpowe r not only affects the working of these 
organizations but also hinders their efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Culture should urgently take measures to fill up the said vacancies at each level since 
manpower is the backb one of these Organisations. The Committee also emphasizes that the 
Ministry must conduct the recruitment process in a fair and transparent manner, adhering to 
equal opportunity for all and non -discrimination principles.  The Committee may be apprised of 
the recruitment process being followed in the Akademis and Cultural Institutions to fill in posts. 
(Para 37) 
The Committee desires the Ministry to complete the recruitment process and fill up all the 
vacancies within a fixed time period.  The Ministry may al so apprise the Committee of the status 
of the matter.  
(Para 38) 
Cultural knowledge and Expertise of Staff 
The Committee notes that a majority of the administrative staff have little knowledge/expertise in 
arts and culture management. The Committee feels that extensive training programmes are 
required for better expertise of staff to enable proficiency and comp etency at scale, and across 
levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a comprehensive assessment of the training 
needs of the staff may be undertaken to identify the areas where they require skill development or 
additional knowledge in art and cult ure and specific domains.  The Ministry can also establish 
mentoring or coaching programmes where staff members are paired with experienced 
professionals in the field.   
(Para 44) 
Governance and related issues 
Committee feels that resolving governance issues in National Akademis requires a systematic and 
proactive approach. First of all, Committee suggests identifying the specific areas where 
governance problems exist, acknowledging the issues, and committing to addressing them. 
Further, there is a need to enhance transparency and accountability and promote a culture  of 
ethical conduct and integrity within the Akademis. 
(Para 49) 
Committee, further, flags that continuous monitoring and evaluation of the effectiveness of 
governance practices is also required at regular intervals . Akademis should seek feedback from 
stakeholders, conduct internal and external evaluations, and use the findings to identify areas for 
improvement. 
(Para 50) 
In cases where governance issues persist or are complex, the Akademis should  consider seeking 
external expertise or consulting services. Independent evaluations or audits can provide valuable 
insights and recommendations for addressing governance challenges. 
(Para 51) 
Further, the Ministry/Akademis may also consider the possibility of adopting new technological 
advancements in administration for improving the day-to-day functioning of the Akademis. 

Page 47 of 88 
 
(Para 52) 
Segregation of Functions   
The Committee feels that the function of the Akademis is to enable artists to create and  express 
their creativity.  The role of the Ministry should be to help the organizations and their artists to 
realize the organizational vision and fulfil their mission. Its responsibility is to provide an 
atmosphere for artists to develop and realize thei r vision with resources that would otherwise be 
unavailable or greatly diminished in the face of lack of opportunities. The Committee notes that 
the 2014 High Powered Committee also expressed that the Ministry has to work as a point of 
coordination for cul tural expression and a catalyst for the dissemination of that expression 
through the encouragement and sponsorship of multifarious artistic activity . To this end, 
Committee feels that there should be proper and clear segregation of functions among the 
Akademis. 
(Para 54) 
The Committee observes that segregation of functions is also an important concept to internal 
control frameworks, financial reporting and regulatory compliance. The overall effectiveness of 
the organization depends on an effective internal administration, adequate division of 
responsibilities, and the requirement of a sufficient number of staff who are adequately trained.  
Separation of functions is an important mechanism to help reduce the risk of fraud, error and 
other financial misconduct .  In addition, it helps to promote accountability, transparency and 
ethical behaviour within the organization.  The Committee, therefore, recommends segregation of 
the purchasing, provisioning, financing and policy-making functions within the Akademis. 
(Para 55) 
Roles and responsibilities need to be clearly defined. The Heads of these institutions must be 
domain experts for such bodies.  They must be persons with knowledge and work experience in 
the cultural domain of their institutions.  More autonomy and proper policy or guidelines to guide 
the working of these institutions will enable them to carry on their designated tasks efficiently and 
effectively. This will further create transparency and build stronger working relationships and 
clear dissemination of information across the organizations. 
(Para 56) 
The working of the cultural institutions and the inherent gaps and discrepancies suggest that there 
is still significant room for improvement.    There is a need to strengthen the technical and 
financial capacities of government departments responsible for cultural po licy in order to enable 
them to harness potential synergies with all agencies.  Cooperation is needed to develop regulatory 
frameworks, policies and strategies.  E ffective decentralization, government engagement and 
collaboration between the Government, Ak ademis and multi -stakeholders can improve policy 
design, implementation and monitoring for the cultural institutions by adhering to shared 
principles and developing complementary strategies.  This will strengthen informed and 
transparent systems of governance. 
(Para 57) 
Synergy and coordination among the Institutions 
The Committee, in this regard, recommends that Inter -Akademi cooperation is the need of the 
hour for a coordinated and effective promotion of art and culture across the country. Akademis 
should establish formal channels of communication between different cu ltural Akademis. The 

Page 48 of 88 
 
Ministry can encourage the Akademis to share best practices, lessons learned, and resources with 
each other. This can also resolve the issue of lack of infrastructure. Moreover, it can lead to 
optimum utilization of resources. The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry can explore 
the streamlining of the functions of the Akademis, defining separate functions and 
compartmentalization of the same. The committee notes that “Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav” was a 
stellar success in promoti ng and propagating our culture in various nook s and corner s of the 
country. The Committee reminds that the lessons learned in organising “Azadi Ka Amrit 
Mahotsav” should be further utilised to generate synergies among all the cultural institutions and 
those lessons may be converted into institutional mechanisms to administer the Cultural 
Institutions and Akademis. 
(Para 62) 
 
Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must facilitate joint research projects, 
exchange programs and interdisciplinary collaborations between Akademis to encourage scholars, 
researchers, and artists from different academies to work together on shared research interests, 
cultural preservation projects and innovative initiatives.  Ministry must  establish common 
standards, policies, and guidelines across different Akademis to ensure consistency and alignment. 
This can include areas such as governance, ethical practices, financial management and quality 
assurance. 
(Para 63) 
 
The Akademis can also explore opportunities for colla borative funding and resource mobilization. 
By jointly applying for grants, sponsorships, or donations, academies can enhance their chances of 
securing funding for larger projects or infrastructure development. 
(Para 64) 
Outreach and Inclusivity 
The Committee feels that the National Akademis  need to enhance its outreach, both within urban 
and rural areas, to make the arts more accessible and inclusive.  Without effective outreach 
programmes, Akademis may struggle to reach a broader audience, beyond their im mediate 
surroundings.  A lack of outreach can reinforce existing cultural hierarchies and exclude cultural 
practices that are not adequately represented or recognized.  This exclusion can lead to 
marginalization of certain art forms, traditions or communit ies, thereby, limiting cultural 
diversity and stifling creativity.  There is also a risk of losing intangible cultural heritage, as there 
may be insufficient engagements with communities, artists and practitioners who are the 
custodians of these traditions.   
(Para 67) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that to address these challenges, National Akademis 
should prioritize outreach efforts by actively engaging with communities, promoting accessibility, 
fostering partnerships, and utilizing various communication channels to raise awareness about 
their activities and opportunities. By doing so, they can broaden their impact, increase inclusivity, 
and promote cultural exchange and understanding. 
(Para 68) 
Further, the Akademis must evolve a cultural la ndscape that ensures the creation of cultural 
platforms, supports cultural diversity and provides sustainable employment/ jobs for artists after 
the Akademis programmes.  

Page 49 of 88 
 
(Para 69) 
The Akademis must work towards increasing cultural public infrastructure su ch as affordable 
workspaces and easy access to cultural centres and cultural hubs across the country.  They should 
bring activities closer to people and increase outreach through different means such as the EAST 
(Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely) principle. 
(Para 70) 
The Akademis must also leverage technology for coordination between the Akademis to improve 
outreach and promote each other. 
(Para 71) 
Interaction between Akademis and educational institutions 
The Committee observes that in the past our cultural Akademis did not seem to interact nor did 
they have any sustained or meaningful dialogue with schools, colleges and universities – even in the 
metros, leave alone the vast remainder of the country. As a r esult, the Akademis, for the most 
part, worked like museums in the wilderness.  The Committee, however, notes that various 
initiatives have been taken by the cultural institutions to interact with educational institutions. In 
the existing scenario, the Com mittee feels that our schools need to integrate cultural education as 
part of their curriculum as mentioned in New Education Policy. This has to become mandatory 
for it to be effective.  
(Para 77) 
The Committee emphasizes the significance of an interdiscip linary approach in schools and 
higher education and also introducing students to tangible and intangible heritage as suggested 
by New Education Policy. Teachers need to  be groomed as specialists and an excellent team of 
teachers and faculty will have to be  developed.  Also, local artists and crafts persons have to be 
hired as guest faculty to promote local music, art, languages, and handicraft, and to ensure that 
students are aware of the culture and local knowledge where they study. 
(Para 78) 
Education and  culture are inseparable and will remain incomplete without one another. The 
Committee, therefore, feels that the mandate of the Akademis needs to be rearticulated to 
emphasise links among the Akademis as well as with a range of educational institutions. T hey 
should interact with Indian universities and educational institutions to propagate, preserve, and 
enrich our heterogeneous culture. Such a link would also promote arts education, essential if we 
are to build a new generation of culture and arts “managers” with a vision. 
(Para 79) 
Infrastructure and Facilities 
The Committee observes that investing in infrastructure for cultural Akademis is essential for 
supporting the growth, development, and sustainability of artistic and cultural practices. 
Committee recommends that informal education may also be imparted through these Institutions.   
Ministry should provide the necessary funds and also promote synergy among the Institutions for 
sharing of infrastructural facilities. Committee also suggested Akademis to  explore CSR funds to 
mobilise the resources for infrastructure developments including auditoriums, classrooms, studios, 
rehearsal halls and exhibition areas.  
(Para 82) 

Page 50 of 88 
 
Technological Advancements/Digital accessibility 
The Committee appreciates the efforts  being made in the direction of digitalisation.  However, it 
feels that more can be done in achieving the goal of Digital India. Akademis must adapt to 
innovations in this digital age and expand their reach through digital platforms like OTT apps, 
promoting the creation of content, creation of productions, etc., to be facilitated by them online. 
Akademis can explore the provision of online membership programs that offer exclusive benefits, 
such as access to premium content, discounts on events, or personali zed recommendations. 
Akademis should also utilize live -streaming technologies to broadcast performances, lectures, 
workshops, and other cultural events in real time. This allows people to experience cultural 
activities from anywhere in the world, fostering engagement and participation. 
(Para 85) 
Akademis should develop online learning platforms or learning management systems that offer 
courses, workshops, and educational resources. These platforms can provide a range of content, 
including video lectures, interactive modules, downloadable materials, and assessments. 
(Para 86) 
Akademis can also venture into the creation of virtual spaces that showcase exhibitions and 
galleries, allowing users to explore artworks and cultural artefacts virtually. These platform s can 
provide 360-degree views, detailed descriptions, audio guides, and interactive elements to enhance 
the user experience. Virtual exhibitions can reach a wider audience. 
(Para 87) 
The Committee also recommends that Akademis should develop comprehensive  digital archives 
and libraries that provide searchable databases, high -resolution images, and detailed metadata. 
These digitized collections enable researchers, scholars, and the general public to access and study 
cultural heritage materials remotely. 
(Para 88) 
Akademis should also utilize social media platforms to engage with audiences, share updates, and 
promote cultural programmes. Further, fostering collaborations with other cultural institutions, 
universities, and organizations to create joint digital initiatives can also be a great help. 
(Para 89) 
Returning of Awards 
The Committee notes the instances of recipients of awards, given by Akademis (such as Sahitya 
Akademi Awards), returning their awards in protest of certain political issues which are outs ide 
the ambit of the cultural realms and the autonomous functioning of the concerned Akademi. Such 
inappropriate incidents involving the return of awards undermine the achievements of the other 
awardees and also impact the overall prestige and reputation of the awards. 
(Para 92) 
A Member of the Committee opined against the view that artists, authors and other intellectuals 
and performers who have been recommended for awards must sign a commitment that they will 
not return the awards as a form of protest at any point in the future before they are able to receive 
it. He was of the view that India is a democratic country, and our Constitution has provided to 
every citizen the freedom of speech and expression and also the freedom to protest in any form. 
Returning of awards is only a form of protest. The Member added that the Committee must 

Page 51 of 88 
 
strongly recommend to the Government to look into the actual issues in protest of which such 
awards have been returned and work towards resolving them. He was seconded by anoth er 
Member.  
(Para 93) 
The Committee questioned the re -engagement of such awardees who joined the Akademi after 
insulting it. Such inappropriate incidents involving the return of awards undermine the 
achievements of other awardees and also impact the overall prestige and reputation of the awards. 
The Member again submitted that the Akademis and the other Institutions should continue to 
work together with these artists and not shun them.  
(Para 94)  
The Committee observes that the awards given by each Akademi continue to be top honours for 
an artist in India. The Committee emphasizes that Sahitya Akademi or other Akademis are 
apolitical organizations. There is no place for politics. The Committee, therefore, suggests that 
whenever an award  is given, the consent of the recipient must be taken, so that he/she does not 
return it because of political reasons; as it is disgraceful to the country. The Committee 
recommends prior concurrence of short-listed candidates for awards before finalization.  A system 
may be put in place where an undertaking is taken from the proposed awardee citing acceptance 
of the award and that the awardees cannot dishonour the award at any point of time in future.  
Awards may not be given without such an undertaking. In  the event that the awards are returned, 
the awardee shall not be considered for such award in the award in the future. 
(Para 95) 
Community participation and public awareness 
In Committee’s opinion, artistic and cultural activities can engage a wide audien ce in a way that 
resonates with their cultural background. They are an effective forum for community 
collaboration and engaging marginalized communities.   
(Para 102) 
The Committee feels that there is a need to strengthen ties with local communities, artis ts, and 
cultural organizations. Further, a bottom -to-top approach is required for a better understanding 
of the ground level requirements. Akademis should involve communities in decision -making 
processes, co-creation of programs, and the preservation of in tangible cultural heritage. Engaging 
with the community helps ensure relevance and authenticity in cultural activities, further, leading 
to the revival of lost traditions, languages and customs. 
(Para 103) 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP): 
The Committee fe els that little has been done in engaging the private sector and there is still a 
wider scope for exploration in this field. Private partners can provide financial support through 
sponsorships, grants, donations, or investments. Private partners can also p rovide expertise, 
resources, and technical assistance to the Akademis.  Collaboration with private partners in the 
co-creation and co -production of programs, exhibitions, festivals, or other cultural events can 
bring diverse perspectives, innovative ideas, and broader networks to the cultural Akademis. 
(Para 108) 
 

Page 52 of 88 
 
 
Protection of rural and tribal culture 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that the 
specialized body for Rural, Tribal and Folk Arts could if set up, be a vehicle for the propagation of 
folk and tribal art forms effectively. This would also mean nurturing these forms and preserving 
them in their original form as well as encouraging innovation in presentation without destroying 
the authenticity of th ese art forms. This could perhaps also be a way to raise the status as well as 
the remuneration of these artists to levels comparable to those of the classical artists. In addition, 
it can facilitate a cultural dialogue between all art forms from classical to traditional. 
(Para 117) 
The Committee also believes that it is important to prioritize the voices and perspectives of tribal 
communities, while also providing platforms for them to share their culture with a wider 
audience. Akademis should develop educational outreach programs that promote tribal and rural 
culture in schools, colleges, and local communities.  There is also a need for  collaboration with 
tribal organizations, NGOs, and tribal development agencies to jointly support initiatives for the  
promotion of tribal culture. Further, Akademis must promote rural stays and tribal stays, 
especially among the younger generation to acquaint them with the cultural heritage of the 
country. 
(Para 118) 
Youth engagement 
The Committee notes that the efforts are largely targeted at getting children to learn art forms – 
namely dance and music. The Committee feels that intervention is required to make them aware 
of what these traditions are; at least to a point where they can identify some very basic ideas of th e 
performing and visual arts. While the Ministry of Culture set up the CCRT with somewhat a 
similar idea of reaching out and creating opportunities for young children, especially from smaller 
cities, and all regions including the North -East, the program ne eds to be seriously reviewed and 
updated. Further, it should be linked with other ongoing efforts of the Ministry. 
(Para 121) 
Leveraging G20 
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Culture and various cultural 
institutions in showcasing India’s rich cultural heritage and art forms at various G20 forums and 
Conferences. The Committee observes that this is a golden opportunity to propagate and exhibit 
our thousands of years old continuous cultural heritage to the world community. 
(Para 127) 
The Committee recommends that Akademis should collaborate with tourism authorities and G -20 
stakeholders to promote cultural tourism in India.  Akademis should also  encourage G -20 
delegates to explore Indian cultural treasures beyond the conferenc e venues, thus promoting 
tourism and economic opportunities. Akademis can initiate collaborative projects between 
National Akademis and cultural institutions from G -20 member countries. This can involve joint 
exhibitions, performances, artist residencies, or cultural exchanges. Digital platforms like social 
media handles, live streaming, and virtual exhibitions can be utilised to extend the reach of 

Page 53 of 88 
 
National Akademis cultural initiatives during the G -20 summit and to engage a global audience 
and promote cultural exchange beyond physical boundaries. 
(Para 128) 
Members of the Committee also raised various other issues which are as follows: 
 i. Incentives for artists showing their talent on trains, buses, etc.: 
Some people beg for money in trains, buses in exch ange of a devotional song, a qawwali or a 
melodious Bollywood number. While most of them are physically challenged, some just take up 
the practice out of sheer poverty. However, many of these beggars are also musically trained or 
belong to families that ha ve been practising music for generations together. Ministry/Akademis 
must take measures to identify such artists and provide them a platform to showcase their talent 
and also provide monetary support to them. 
(Para 129(i)) 
ii. Representation and promotion of culture of North East States of India: 
North East India is known for its geographical location, ecology and diverse culture. It is the 
homeland of large number of ethnic groups. Each ethnic community has its own distinct culture 
including food, music, d ance, dress, language, etc. However, despite this, the North East has not 
been represented to the degree it deserves to be represented. Ministry must take measures in this 
direction and implement more schemes to preserve and promote various forms of art an d culture 
in the NER. Ministry must extend all kinds of assistance including financial support to the 
individual artists and organizations in this region. 
(Para 129(ii)) 
iii. Handling, preservation and digitization of Manuscripts: 
 Manuscripts are the prim ary source of historic information. Manuscripts are diminishing along 
with time. Despite their best efforts, it is difficult to save manuscripts in a physical form beyond a 
time frame. Digital preservation of manuscripts restores them from damage, larceny and decay. 
The Ministry should evolve a well -designed digitization program that includes not just digital 
capture, but also appropriate care and repair of original materials, and long -term management of 
the digital files it produces. 
(Para 129(iii)) 
iv. Need for promotion of art and culture in schools: 
Arts in modern education help to stimulate creativity, inspire confidence, and foster personal 
growth. It is a necessary part of any student’s education and should be encouraged in all schools. 
Indian arts of  all kinds must be offered to students at all levels of education, starting with early 
childhood care and education. Outstanding local artists and crafts persons should be hired as 
guest faculty to promote local music, art, languages, and handicraft, and t o ensure that students 
are aware of the culture and local knowledge of the region where they study. 
(Para 129(iv)) 
v. Lack of career guidance programmes in the arts for school children: 
Most teenagers are receiving little to no career guidance outside the home. Choosing a career path 
after school can be challenging, especially for students who have pursued arts. However, with the 

Page 54 of 88 
 
growing demand for creative and artistic talents in various  industries, the career options for art 
students have increased significantly. Arts need no longer remain a passion and hobby. Career 
option guidance programmes must be encouraged in schools to help students who want to pursue 
a career in the arts and creative field full-time. 
(Para 129(v)) 
vi. Non-availability of information in Hindi or any other local language: 
Culture is encased in our languages. Art, in the form of literature, plays, music, film, etc. cannot 
be fully appreciated without language. In ord er to preserve and promote our diverse culture, we 
need to preserve and promote a culture’s languages. Further, information on the art and culture 
must also be made available in Hindi and the local languages. 
(Para 129(vi)) 
vii. No mention of Gujarat which  is famous for various cultural values like Garba, Navratri 
and other traditional dances, nataks like Bhavai: 
Ministry must take measures for equitable representation of all states in the field of art and 
culture.   
(Para 129(vii)) 
viii. Lack of infrastruc ture in various Akademis and regional centres in Arunachal 
Pradesh: 
Ministry/ Akademis may look into the matter and ensure that necessary measures are taken in this 
regard 
(Para 129(viii)) 
ix. Need for international recognition of Kalaripayattu, Kathakali and other art forms: 
Ministry may take a look into the matter and take appropriate action in the matter. 
(Para 129(ix)) 
x. Details of cultural activities organized in Kerala in Thrissur and Thiruvananthapuram: 
The details of the same may be provided to the Committee for information. 
(Para 129(x)) 
 xi. Provision for assisting State Akademis in Kerala: 
The Ministry/ Akademis may take necessary measures to implement schemes for providing 
support and financial assistance to the State Akedemis in Kerala. 
(Para 129(xi)) 
xii. Number of cultural Akademis in Andhra Pradesh: 
The total number of Akademis in Andhra Pradesh may be furnished to the Committee. 
(Para 129(xii)) 
 

Page 55 of 88 
 
 xiii. Plans for future expansion of such Akademis, especially in Rajamundry constituency, 
etc.: 
The Ministry/ Akademis may take measures for the expansion of Akademis and other cultural 
institutions in Rajamundry and other constituencies for the promotion of local art and culture in 
these regions. 
(Para 129(xiii)) 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 56 of 88 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure I 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
Organisation 
Achievements 
1.  Sahitya Akademi UNMESHA: organized India’s largest International Literature 
Festival in Shimla, that hosted 64 events featuring more than 400 
writers and scholars  
 

Page 57 of 88 
 
Festival of Letters: Event held in New Delhi featuring more than 400 
writers, hosted 40 events, promoted 60 languages  
 
Archives of Indian Literature: Produced around 170 documentaries 
on modern litterateurs, archiving 10,000 hours of audio of eminent 
litterateurs and their rare photographs     
 
Seminars and publications: Annually 50 seminars 
(regional/national/international); over 100  Symposia; birth centenary 
seminars; over 400 literary gatherings 
 
Other events and activities in Financial Year 2022-2023: Organized 
590 programmes and 121 book exhibitions, published 417 books, 
opened first Metro bookshop in Bengaluru 
 
SCO Summit: translation of 10 modern Indian classics into Russian, 
Chinese, English. Hon’ble Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced 
project completion during SCO summit on 10th November 2020  
 
Association with UNESCO: Publication of 30 books in multiple 
languages, including English, French. Publications also feature 
translation of Indian classics to foreign languages.   
 
‘Indian Literature Abroad’ Scheme: to promote Indian literacy works 
in foreign languages abroad       
 
Collaboration with embassies: Coordination  
with embassies of several countries; also hosts writer’s delegations 
abroad  
 
International collaboration: associated with Union Akademique 
Internationale (Belgium) and numerous international Writer’s 
Union/Association - Syria, China, Sweden, Slovenia, Nepal   
 
2.  Kalakshetra 
Foundation 
Bharata Kalakshetra Auditorium: Inauguration of the renovated 
auditorium  
 
Open-to-all dance classes: Free-of-cost classes for children in low 
socio-economic strata  
Seminars and workshops: For propagating craft, culture and 
education 
 
Kalanubhava: First-ever art exhibition by Rukmani Devi College of 
Fine Arts 
 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat Centre for Design: there are three bays assigned 
at Red Fort to showcase weaving, block printing and kalamkari 
painting from the Craft Education and Research Centre (CERC) Unit 

Page 58 of 88 
 
 
Cultural festival: Performance in presence of Hon’ble Prime Minister 
at Mahabalipuram 2019, and in presence of Hon’ble President of 
India and HH King of Netherlands 
 
Kala Samviridhi: Provision for performance opportunities for dance 
and music students 
 
Craft Education and Research Centre (CERC): Setting-up of 
Indigo vat and dying process; and propagating Khadi and traditional 
styles of weaving 
 
Increase in student strength in foundation’s units: Besant 
Arundale Senior Secondary School had a 25% increase, and Besant 
Theosophical Higher Secondary School had a 23% increase over the 
past three years 
 
Indo Korean Ceramic Residency and Exhibition: Organized at 
Visual Arts Department, Kalkakshetra Foundation from 19th January 
– 23rd February 2020 
 
Documentation of weaving techniques: Creating a directory 
through a CSR project of techniques such as Adai designs of 
Rukmani Devi Arundale and Kalladikodan (Kathakali) 
 
Latest productions by the foundation: SarasvathiAntarvahini, 
Vahanas, Shanti Sutra, Revival: Koormavatharam, Shakuntalam, 
PanchaliSabatham, Kumara Sambhavam, KrishnamariKuravanji, 
Meenakshi Kalyanam 
3.  Centre for Cultural 
Resources and 
Training (CCRT) 
2,13,659 Teachers trained by CCRT since inception till date. 
 
10,11,497 Students trained by CCRT under Extension Services and 
Community Feedback Programme. 
 
14,637 Scholarships awarded by CCRT under CTSS  Scheme . 
 
1,908 Scholarships awarded from 2014 to till date under SYA. 
 
2,142Junior/Senior fellowships awarded from 2014 to till date. 
 
CCRT has produced 57 publications which includes books, cultural 
packages, catalogues, brochures and posters till date on variety of 
subjects related to Indian Art and Culture  
 
CCRT has developed 46 documentary films, 5 Audio CDs, 3 digital 
slide albums containing 968 slides with text on Performing, Visual & 
Literary Arts 
 

Page 59 of 88 
 
CCRT has rich collection of Cultural Resources in the form of 23,580 
colour photos; 3664 B/W photos; 47,045 master colour slides and 
1,86,205 colour digital images photos 
 
Above films, publications and material are the products of intense 
research and are shared with schools that depute teachers to CCRT 
for training. 
 
4.  National School of 
Drama (NSD) 
International Theatre Festival of India (Bharat Rang Mahotsav): 100 
theatre groups from India and abroad participate every year in 
February since 1999  
 
National Theatre Festival: Organized for children (Jashn-e-bachpan 
& Bal Sangam) to promote traditional performing arts from 
tribal/rural areas  
 
Organizes Indian Classical Drama Festival since 2016 
 
Organizes Poorvottar Natya Samaroh since 2009  
 
Repertory Company: is the regular performing wing of NSD; has 
produced variety of plays ranging from stylized musicals to 
contemporary Indian Dramas to versions of foreign plays 
Extension Program: Provide possible opportunities to theatre artists 
in different States who cannot accommodate teaching and training 
programs    
 
TIE Company (Sanskar Rang Toli): Established in 1989 to encourage 
children to perform in plays and activities from young age  
Publications: Publishes text books, translates drama text and theatre 
journals for the advantage of theater students and practitioners  
 
5.  Lalit Kala Akademi 
(LKA) 
Triennale India 
• In 1968, LKA launched an international exhibition of contemporary 
art known as “Triennale India” 
• It brings together artists of the entire world on one platform for the 
celebration of art 
• LKA has organized 11 international art exhibitions so far 
 
Cultural Exchange Programme 
• LKA participates regularly in International exhibitions in different 
parts of the world through Cultural Exchange Programmes 
• Countries with which LKA organized International events include 
China, Czech Republic, Sri Lanka, Canada, USA, Poland, 
Bangladesh, Vienna, Germany, France, Korea, Mongolia 
 
National Exhibition of Art 
• It is the most prestigious annual event of LKA, established since 

Page 60 of 88 
 
1955 
• This exhibition is an open forum where established and aspiring 
artists from all parts of India can meet and share their experiences on 
a wider platform 
• LKA recently organised its 60th National Exhibition of Art in 
Mumbai 
 
LKA also organised following events: 
 Virtual Art Camp “Swadheenta se Swatantrata Ki Or”  
 One Day Painting Camp on Telangana Diwas 
 International Yoga Day Painting Workshop  
 National Painting Workshop on Kargil Vijay Diwas 
 76th Independence Day  
 World Photography Day  
 Regional Painting Workshop on Hyderabad Liberation Day 
 An Exhibition on Hyderabad Liberation Day 
 An Exhibition Shourya Gaatha 
 Days Portrait Art Demonstration Workshop  
 Mega Exhibition “Rise in Uttar Pradesh 2022  
 Art Workshop “Jan Janani Janambhumi” for New Parliament 
Building People’s Wall Project  
 National Painting Camp  
 National Multimedia Camp on the Anniversary of Champaran 
Satyagrah 
 Virtual Painting Camp “Voice of Massacre, Jallianwala Bagh” 
 Exhibition “Katha Krantiveeron Ki” organized on 74th Independence 
Day of India 
 National Awardee Camp (Multimedia Camp) 
 National Painting Camp on Unsung Heroes of Uttarakhand in 
Collaboration with Culture Department, Kumaon Mandal Vikas 
Nigam and Ranggeet Art Centre, Uttarakhand 
 2nd Print Biennale India Exhibition at Karnataka ChitrakalaParishath 
Inauguration of 2 Exhibition at CENART, Mexico city 
• Stree Drishti 
• Lok Mein Ram 
National Multimedia Camp 
6.  Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for 
the Arts (IGNCA) 
National Mission of Cultural Mapping: IGNCA has been appointed 
by Ministry of Culture to preserve the intangible cultural heritage of 
India 
New Parliament artwork: IGNCA has been designated to research 
and create artworks that will be installed in the new Parliament 
building on the behalf of Ministry of Culture  
 
Vedic Heritage Portal: IGNCA has launched a digital repository of 
Vedic Knowledge and traditions inspiring from different parts of the 
country  
 

Page 61 of 88 
 
5thAyodhyaParv: IGNCA collaborated with PrayagSansthan to 
organize cultural performance under 5thAyodhyaParv which was 
graced by eminent personalities  
 
National Cultural audio-visual archives (NCAA): IGNCA has 
preserved more than 30,000 hours of digital records till date 
 
Buddha Exhibition: Buddha exhibition was organized and focused on 
the birth and propagation of Buddhism in the Asian continent 
Exhibition and Seminars by Regional Centers: Regional centers 
organized several exhibitions, seminars, and book launches at 
different locations 
 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat Centre for Design: L1 barrack at Red Fort 
premises acts as a platform that showcases the rich heritage of Indian 
citizens to international visitors  
 
Convention Centre of India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO): 
Engaged as the implementing agency for installation of art works in 
the ITPO Center  
 
Mera Gaon Meri Darohar (MGMD): An initiative to document more 
than 6 lakh villages of the country on various cultural parameters 
7.  Sangeet 
NatakAkademi 
(SNA) 
Festival of Performing Arts: featuring the recipients of ‘Sangeet 
NatakAkademi Awards’ 2018  
 
Amrit Yuva Kalotsav: a four-day festival of Music, Dance and Drama 
featuring recipients of the Yuva Puruskar 
 
75 Sangeet Natak Akademi Amrit Awards: to pay tribute to 
performing artists aged 75+ who were not recognized by SNA, as 
desired by Hon’ble Prime Minister 
 
Rishikesh Music Festival 2022: annual music festival which features 
renowned voices of the music industry—artists of National and 
International repute 
 
Jyotirgamaya: Organized to showcase the talent of unsung performers 
on the occasion of World Music Day 
 
15thSattriya Sangeet Samroh: to increase awareness about Sattriya 
Music Tradition, a unique festival was organized 
 
Tableau: Assisted MoC to present its tableau for Republic Day 2023 
on the theme “Shakti RupenaSamsthita”  
 
Akhil Bharatiya Mahila Lokakala Sammelan: Organized on 
International Women’s Day, in collaboration with P.L. Deshpande 

Page 62 of 88 
 
Maharashtra Kala Akademi. Inaugurated by Hon’ble Chief Minister 
of Maharashtra.  
 
Significant Publications: Special issues of ‘Sangeet Natak’ on 
 (1) Kathak and Shastra and  
(2) Kavalam Narayana Panikkar (July 2022). New book titled 
‘Natyamandapams&Kuttampalams’.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
Akade
mis 
LKA SA SNA IGNCA NSD CCRT KF 
Nomenc
lature 
Gen. 
Council 
Gen. Council Gen. 
Council 
Trustees Society Society Governi
ng Body 

Page 63 of 88 
 
of 
Governi
ng Body 
(Acade
mic  
Council) 
Number 
of 
Membe
rs 
 
65 100 72 7to21 14 18 19 
Tenure 5 years 
 
No Member 
can be 
member of 
GC for two 
consecutive 
terms but 
can become 
members for 
two terms. 
5 years 
 
No member 
can be 
member of 
GC for more 
than two 
terms and the 
two terms 
shall not be 
consecutive. 
 
(Not 
applicable 
for ex-officio 
members and 
eminent 
writers) 
5 years 10 years 
 
 
1/3 of 
total 
Trustees 
to retire 
after10ye
arsand 
vacancies 
have to 
be filled 
in a 
prescribe
d way. 
4years 4years 5years 
Compos
ition 
(i)Chairman, 
LKA 
 
(ii)Vice-
Chairman, 
LKA 
(iii) FAMoC 
 
(iv) Five ex-
officio 
nominees of 
GOI DG. 
(NGMA) 
 DG(NM) 
Jt.Secy. 
(Akademies) 
FA,MoC 
Nominee 
from MoC 
 
(v) Eight ex-
officio 
(i) President, 
SA 
 
(ii) FAMoC 
 
(iii)Five ex-
officio 
members 
nominees of 
GOI 
 
Representative
s from MoC, 
I&B, NBT, 
Two 
Nominees 
from MoC. 
 
 
(iv) 36from 
States/U.T.s, 
nominated by 
(i) 
Chairman, 
SNA 
 
(ii) FAMoC 
 
(iii) Five 
ex-officio 
members 
nominated 
by the GOI. 
 
(iv) 
36eminent 
persons in 
the field of 
performing 
arts 
nominated 
by States 
and U.T.s in 
consultation 
(i)Preside
nt, 
IGNCA 
 
On expiry 
of each 10 
years, 
1/3rd 
 of the 
total 
number of 
Trustees 
will retire, 
and 
vacancies 
to be 
filled by 
nominatio
ns by 
GOI. 
 
Another 
(i)Chairma
n, NSD 
 
(ii) 
FAMoC 
 
(iii) Two 
theatre 
experts, 
one 
nominated 
by the EB 
of the SNA 
and one by 
Society of 
the NSD 
from a 
panel of 
names 
drawn up 
by AC of  
NSD. 
(i) Chairman, 
CCT 
 
(ii)Representat
ive of IFD of 
MoC 
 
(iii)Three 
nominations 
from MoC. 
 
(iv) Five 
eminent 
persons from 
the field of 
education, art 
and culture 
nominated by 
MoC 
 
(v)One 
representative 
(i) 
Chairper
son,  KF 
 
(ii) 
Twelve 
members 
nominate
d by the 
Central 
Govt. 
From 
those 
who:- 
have 
rendered 
valuable 
service 
to 
Kalakshe
tra have 
been 

Page 64 of 88 
 
nominees 
Chairperson 
(SNA) 
President (SA), 
DG (ICCR) 
Member 
Secy.(IGNC
A), 
DG(Akashw
ani),DG(Doo
rdarshan) 
Chairman(AI
CTE) 
Chairman  
(UGC) 
 
(vi) Three 
fellows of 
the LKA 
inrotation 
for3years 
each. 
 
(vii) 36 
persons from 
States and 
U.T.s from a 
panel of 
three names 
(at least one 
of the three 
should be a 
woman) 
 
(viii) Ten 
persons in 
service for 
promotion of 
arts 
nominated 
by 
MoC(from at 
least thirty 
names 
recommende
d to the 
Govt. by the 
GC) 
the outgoing 
GC from panel 
of names 
recommended 
by the 
State/UT 
Akademies. 
 
By State 
Govts/UTs 
admns.where 
no State/UT 
Akademies/ 
more than one 
State/UT 
Akademi, 
 
[Eminent 
persons be 
nominated 
from field of 
letters and not 
necessary 
functionaries 
of the State 
Governments 
or the 
U.T.Admns] 
 
(v) 
22+2persons 
nominated to 
represent 
languages of 
constitution 
and 2 
recognized by 
the SA time to 
time. 
 
(Nominations 
made by the 
outgoing GC 
from a panel of 
3 
recommended 
by Literary 
Associations 
with the 
State 
Academies 
or 
equivalent 
institutions. 
 
(v) One 
representati
ve of MoC 
 
(vi) One 
representati
veof M/o 
I&B 
 
(vii) Six 
representati
ves @two 
from SA, 
two from 
LKA and 
one from 
NSD and 
one from 
ICCR. 
 
(viii) 
Twelve 
persons co - 
opted by the 
members 
mentioned 
above in 
consultation 
with 
organizatio
ns in the 
fields of 
music, 
dance and 
drama 
recognized 
by the 
Akademi 
(@two 
persons 
with 
1/3rdofthe 
total 
Trustees 
also to 
retire and 
vacancies 
filled by 
nominatio
n of new 
Trustee 
by retiring 
members. 
 
The 
Trustees 
to retire 
on the 
expiry of 
each 
period of 
10 years 
is 
determine
d by lots, 
default 
and 
subject to 
any 
agreemen
t among 
themselve
s. 
 
Member 
Secretary 
is deemed 
to be a 
Trustee 
but the 
provisions 
above 
relating to 
retirement 
of 
Trustees 
shall not 
apply for 
him. 
 
(iv)One 
nominee 
from MoC. 
 
(v)One 
representat
ive of the 
M/o I&B 
 
(vi)Directo
r, Films 
and T.V.  
Institutes 
 
(vii) Four 
members 
nominated 
by the 
Central 
Governme
nt from:- 
(a) One 
dramatist 
of repute  
to be 
nominated 
in 
consultatio
n with the 
Chairman 
of SA and 
the 
Director of 
the School 
(b) One 
expert in 
T.V. to be 
nominated 
in 
consultatio
n with the 
Ministry of 
I&B 
(c) Two 
eminent 
persons in 
the field of 
of NCERT 
 
(vi)One 
representative 
of the M/o 
I&B 
 
(vii)One 
representative 
of the 
Handicrafts 
Board 
 
(viii)One 
representative 
of Gandhi 
Darshan 
Samiti or 
KhadiUdyog 
Commission 
 
(ix) Four 
representatives 
of the State 
Govts. and one 
representative 
of U.T. 
comprising 
officers 
dealing with 
Culture/Educat
ion, Art and 
Culture to be 
co-opted by 
the society 
 
(x) Director 
CCRT, ex-
officio 
member- 
secretary of the 
Society. 
connecte
d with, 
or have 
knowled
ge of art, 
culture, 
folk arts 
and 
crafts are 
eminent 
artistes; 
are 
patrons 
of art 
and 
culture; 
 
(iii) Two 
persons, 
possessin
g one or 
more of 
the 
qualificat
ions 
above 
and 
nominate
d by the 
State 
Govern
ment. 
 
(iv) Two 
DS level 
officers 
to be 
nominate
d by 
MoC. 
 
(v) One 
officer of 
the State 
Govern
ment, not 
below 
the rank 

Page 65 of 88 
 
from list 
maintained by 
SA). 
 
(vi) 20 person 
to represent 20 
Universities 
having PG 
Department in 
Humanities. 
 
(These names 
shall be 
selected for a 
year by the 
outgoing GC 
Council from 
recommendati
ons received 
from 
University 
having a PG 
Department in 
Humanities 
(No University 
is represented 
for two 
successive 
terms. The 20 
names shall be 
from different 
Universities in 
different 
States/UTs). 
 
 
(vii) Eight 
eminent 
persons in field 
of 
Letters to be 
selected in 
their individual 
capacity by the 
outgoing GC. 
 
(viii) Three 
representatives 
knowledge 
of 
Hindustani 
Music, 
@ two 
persons 
with 
knowledge 
of Carnatic 
Music, 
@ two 
persons 
with 
knowledge 
of dance, 
@.Two 
persons 
with 
knowledge 
of drama). 
 
(ix) Eight 
eminent 
persons in 
the fields of 
music, 
dance and 
drama from 
different 
regions of 
India to be 
co-opted in 
their 
individual 
capacity by 
the 
members 
mentioned 
in above. 
culture to 
be 
nominated 
in 
consultatio
nwith the 
Chairman 
of the 
Society 
and the 
Director of 
the School. 
 
(viii) One 
representat
ive of the  
teaching 
staff of the 
NSD. 
 
(ix)One 
Alumni to  
be co-
opted by 
Society 
members. 
 
(x)Director
, NSD will 
be ex- 
officio 
member- 
Secretary 
of the 
Society. 
of Joint 
Secretary
, to be 
nominate
d by that 
Govern
ment, to 
represent 
the 
Departm
ent of 
Educatio
n of that 
Govern
ment, ex-
officio; 
 
(vi) 
Director, 
ex-
officio. 

Page 66 of 88 
 
@1 each from 
SNA,LKA, 
ICCR 
 
(ix)  One 
representative 
of Indian 
Publishers 
 
(Selected by 
the outgoing 
GC based on 
recommendati
ons received 
from various 
Publishers 
Associations 
of India). 
 
(x) One 
nominated 
representative 
of the Raja 
Ram Mohan 
Roy Library 
Foundation. 

Page 67 of 88 
 
 
Annexure III 
Number of sanctioned and vacant posts, Akademi-wise 
 
Org. 
 
Regional Centres 
 
Sanctioned 
 
Vacant 
 
CCRT 
Udaipur 4 4 
Hyderabad 4 1 
Guwahati Managed from Headquarters’ staff 
Damoh  
 
LKA 
Lucknow 9 7 
Bhubaneshwar 13 1 
Chennai 16 9 
Garhi 20 13 
Kolkata 14 8 
 
NSD 
Varanasi Managed from Headquarter’s staff 
Bengaluru 
 
 
Tripura 
Sikkim 
 
IGNCA 
Varanasi Managed from Headquarter’s staff  
Guwahati 
Bengaluru 
Ranchi 
Puducherry 
Thrissur 
Goa 
Vadodara 
Srinagar 
 

Page 68 of 88 
 
SA Kolkata 19 
Bengaluru 14 
Mumbai 14 
Chennai 7 
 
SNA 
Imphal Managed from Headquarter’s staff 
Guwahati 
Agartala 
Bokaro 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 69 of 88 
 
Annexure-IV 
Details of the scholarship provided by Centre of Kuiyattam, SNA 
 
S. No. NAME OF CITY NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIP 
1.  Thiruvananthapuram 13 
2.  Kollam 1 
3.  Alappuzha 3 
4.  Kottayam 1 
5.  Eranakulam 11 
6.  Idukki 1 
7.  Thrissur 26 
8.  Palakkad 7 
9.  Malappuram 1 
10.  Kozhikode 2 
11.  Wayanad 2 
12.  Kannur 1 
 TOTAL 69 
 
  

Page 70 of 88 
 
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA 
The district wise data of scholarship provided to the 53 students is given as under.  
S.No.  District/City State S.No.  District/City State 
1 Papun Pare, Arunachal Pradesh 28 Chandrapur Maharashtra 
2 North 
Lakimpur Assam 29 Pune Maharashtra 
3 Demaji Assam 30 Mumbai Maharashtra 
4 Tangla Assam 31 Jalgaon Maharashtra 
5 Gopalgaj Bihar 32 Thane Maharashtra 
6 Begusarai Bihar 33 Nagpur Maharashtra 
7 Madhubani Bihar 34 Mandla MP 
8 Nawada Bihar 35 Balangid Odissa 
9 Bilaspur Chhatisgarh 36 Nayaghar Odissa 
10 Raipur Chhatisgarh 37 Ganjam Odissa 
11 North East 
delhi Delhi 38 Hanumangarh Rajasthan 
12 Delhi Delhi 39 Dharma Nagar Tripura 
13 Delhi Delhi 40 Dharma Nagar Tripura 
14 Delhi Delhi 41 Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 
15 Delhi Delhi 42 Jhunsi Uttar Pradesh 
16 Delhi Delhi 43 Khushi Nagar Uttar Pradesh 
17 Solan Himachal Pradesh 44 Varanasi Uttar Pradesh 
18 Jammu J & K 45 Ajamgarh Uttar Pradesh 
19 Ranchi Jharkhand 46 Ghazipur Uttar Pradesh 
20 Dharwad Karnataka 47 Gorakpur Uttar Pradesh 
21 Bengaluru Karnataka 48 Agra Uttar Pradesh 
22 Bengaluru Karnataka 49 Barapangi Uttar Pradesh 

Page 71 of 88 
 
 
 
  
23 Kollam Kerala 50 Ambedkar Nagar Uttar Pradesh 
24 Kozhikode Kerala 51 Pithoragarh Uttarkhand 
25 Kasarkode Kerala 52 Darjeeling West Bengal 
26 Calicut Kerala 53 North 24 Parganas West Bengal 
27 Jabalpur Madhya Pradesh     

Page 72 of 88 
 
Centre of Cultural Resources and Training 
NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIPS AWARDED UNDER CULTURAL 
TALENT SEARCH SCHOLARSHIP (CTSSS) SCHEME IN LAST 5 YEARS 
are as follows: 
  
State District 
YEAR 
2018 
YEAR 
2019 
YEAR 
2020 
YEAR 
2021-22 
YEAR  
2022-
23 
Andaman Nicobar 
North Middle 
Andaman 1 -- -- 
 
The Virtual/Online 
National Level 
Selection 
Committee Meeting 
was organized from 
15th February to 
15th March, 2023 
and the finalization 
of result in under 
progress 
Andaman Nicobar South Andaman 1 1 -- 
Andhra Pradesh Chittoor 1 2 -- 
Andhra Pradesh East Godavari 2 3 1 
Andhra Pradesh Eluru 1 -- -- 
Andhra Pradesh Guntur -- -- 1 
Andhra Pradesh Kadapa 1 -- -- 
Andhra Pradesh Krishna 1 -- 2 
Andhra Pradesh Visakhapatnam 6 6 9 
Andhra Pradesh Vizianagaram 1 -- -- 
Assam Barpeta 2 1 2 
Assam Bongaigaon -- 3 -- 
Assam Cachar 3 5 1 
Assam Charaideo -- 1 -- 
Assam Darrang -- 1 1 
Assam Dhemaji -- -- 1 
Assam Dibrugarh 6 6 6 
Assam Golaghat 5 4 6 
Assam Hailakandi -- 1 -- 
Assam Jorhat 5 11 1 
Assam Kamrup 22 26 41 
Assam Kamrup Metropolitan 12 -- -- 
Assam KarbiAnglong -- 1 -- 
Assam Karimganj -- -- 1 
Assam Lakhimpur 4 -- 3 
Assam Majuli 3 3 10 
Assam Nagaon 1 -- 1 
Assam Nalbari -- -- 1 
Assam Sivasagar 6 8 5 
Assam Sonitpur 1 2 1 
Assam Tinsukia 2 1 1 
Bihar Aurangabad 9 7 2 
Bihar Darbhanga -- 4 4 
Bihar Muzaffarpur -- -- 1 

Page 73 of 88 
 
Bihar Patna 6 7 6 
Bihar Saran 1 -- -- 
Chhattisgarh Bilaspur 5 4 
 Chhattisgarh Durg 3 5 2 
Chhattisgarh Raigarh -- 2 -- 
Chhattisgarh Raipur -- 1 -- 
Delhi Central Delhi -- 2 -- 
Delhi East Delhi 1 4 5 
Delhi New Delhi -- -- -- 
Delhi North Delhi -- 2 1 
Delhi North East Delhi -- 3 2 
Delhi North West Delhi 8 3 -- 
Delhi South Delhi 14 14 5 
Delhi South East Delhi 15 2 3 
Delhi South West Delhi -- 9 13 
Delhi West Delhi 2 2 1 
Goa North Goa -- -- 3 
Gujarat Ahmedabad -- 4 1 
Gujarat Bhavnagar 1 7 3 
Gujarat Surat 1 -- 1 
Gujarat Vadodara 1 -- 1 
Haryana Faridabad 2 1 -- 
Haryana Gurugram 4 -- 3 
Haryana Rohtak 2 -- -- 
Himachal Pradesh Kangra 2 -- -- 
Himachal Pradesh Solan -- 1 
 Jammu Kashmir Jammu 1 1 1 
Jharkhand Dhanbad 1 -- -- 
Jharkhand East Singhbhum -- 1 -- 
Jharkhand Jamtara -- 1 -- 
Jharkhand Ranchi 1 -- -- 
Jharkhand SeraikelaKharsawan 3 -- 2 
Karnataka Bangalore Rural 9 -- 10 
Karnataka Bangalore Urban 7 -- 11 
Karnataka Belgaum 1 4 1 
Karnataka Dakshina Kannada 3 3 3 
Karnataka Dharwad 1 -- 3 
Karnataka Gadag -- -- 1 
Karnataka Mandya 1 -- -- 
Karnataka Mysore -- 2 2 
Karnataka Shimoga -- -- 1 

Page 74 of 88 
 
Karnataka Udupi 2 2 3 
Karnataka Uttara Kannada -- 2 -- 
Kerala Alappuzha 4 5 3 
Kerala Ernakulam 1 2 6 
Kerala Kannur 8 8 5 
Kerala Kasaragod 4 4 -- 
Kerala Kollam 1 -- 1 
Kerala Kozhikode 1 -- 1 
Kerala Malappuram 1 3 2 
Kerala Palakkad 1 -- 2 
Kerala Thiruvananthapuram 7 2 8 
Kerala Thrissur 4 3 4 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 3 7 1 
Madhya Pradesh Chhatarpur -- -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Gwalior -- -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Hoshangabad -- -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Indore 2 1 3 
Madhya Pradesh Jabalpur 2 3 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Katni -- 1 -- 
Maharashtra Ahmednagar 1 -- 1 
Maharashtra Akola -- 1 
 Maharashtra Beed -- -- 1 
Maharashtra Buldhana -- -- 1 
Maharashtra Hingoli -- 1 1 
Maharashtra Jalgaon -- 1 -- 
Maharashtra Kolhapur 3 1 1 
Maharashtra Latur -- -- 2 
Maharashtra Mumbai City 4 3 7 
Maharashtra Nagpur 1 -- 2 
Maharashtra Nashik 1 -- 1 
Maharashtra Palghar -- -- 2 
Maharashtra Parbhani 7 -- 5 
Maharashtra Pune 9 8 5 
Maharashtra Raigad 2 -- -- 
Maharashtra Sangli 2 -- -- 
Maharashtra Solapur -- 1 1 
Maharashtra Thane 1 2 9 
Manipur Bishnupur -- 1 -- 
Manipur Imphal East 1 
  Manipur Imphal West 9 10 13 
Manipur Thoubal 3 2 -- 

Page 75 of 88 
 
Odisha Angul 5 4 5 
Odisha Balangir -- -- 2 
Odisha Balasore -- 2 2 
Odisha Bargarh 1 -- 2 
Odisha Boudh -- 1 -- 
Odisha Cuttack 6 9 1 
Odisha Dhenkanal 2 -- 2 
Odisha Gajapati -- -- -- 
Odisha Ganjam 3 4 3 
Odisha Kendrapara 2 -- 2 
Odisha Khordha 12 -- 24 
Odisha Mayurbhanj 3 6 5 
Odisha Nayagarh -- -- 1 
Odisha Puri -- 2 1 
Odisha Sambalpur -- 2 2 
Odisha Sundergarh 3 -- 1 
Puducherry Puducherry 3 -- 6 
Punjab Mohali -- -- 1 
Punjab Patiala 2 5 1 
Rajasthan Ajmer -- 1 1 
Rajasthan Alwar -- 1 -- 
Rajasthan Barmer 1 1 5 
Rajasthan Jaipur 3 5 3 
Rajasthan Kota 1 -- 1 
Rajasthan Udaipur 1 4 -- 
Tamil Nadu Chennai 12 15 20 
Tamil Nadu Coimbatore 2 -- 1 
Tamil Nadu Cuddalore -- -- 1 
Tamil Nadu Dindigul 1 -- -- 
Tamil Nadu Kanyakumari -- 1 -- 
Tamil Nadu Krishnagiri -- -- 1 
Tamil Nadu Sivaganga -- -- 1 
Tamil Nadu Tirunelveli -- 3 1 
Tamil Nadu Viluppuram 1 -- -- 
Telangana BhadradriKothagudem -- -- 1 
Telangana Hyderabad 8 14 5 
Telangana Khammam -- 1 1 
Telangana Medak -- 1 -- 
Telangana Medchal -- -- 1 
Telangana Ranga Reddy 4 -- 6 
Telangana Wanaparthy -- 1 -- 

Page 76 of 88 
 
Telangana Warangal 2 1 3 
Tripura Dhalai -- 1 -- 
Tripura Gomati -- -- 5 
Tripura North Tripura -- -- 1 
Tripura Sepahijala 1 -- 1 
Tripura South Tripura -- -- 1 
Tripura West Tripura 22 34 30 
Uttar Pradesh Bareilly -- -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Chandauli -- -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh 
Gautam Buddha 
Nagar 4 -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Ghaziabad 1 3 3 
Uttar Pradesh Gorakhpur 1 -- -- 
Uttar Pradesh Jhansi -- -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Kanpur Nagar -- -- 3 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow -- -- 3 
Uttar Pradesh Meerut -- 1 1 
Uttar Pradesh Varanasi 2 8 9 
Uttarakhand Dehradun 1 1 -- 
Uttarakhand Nainital 2 -- 1 
West Bengal Birbhum -- 2 -- 
West Bengal Cooch Behar -- -- 2 
West Bengal Darjeeling 1 1 -- 
West Bengal Hooghly 12 12 17 
West Bengal Howrah 2 5 10 
West Bengal Jalpaiguri 2 -- 1 
West Bengal Kolkata 7 -- 22 
West Bengal Murshidabad -- 1 1 
West Bengal Nadia -- 1 5 
West Bengal North 24 Parganas 12 14 6 
West Bengal Paschim Bardhaman 1 -- -- 
West Bengal Purba Medinipur -- -- 2 
West Bengal South 24 Parganas 2 -- 6 
 
TOTAL 431 424 528 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 77 of 88 
 
District wise data of Scholarships Awarded Under Award of Scholarships to Young Artistes (SYA) 
in different Cultural Fields are as follows:  
State District 
YEAR 
2018-20 
YEAR 
2019-20 
YEAR  
2020-21 
YEAR 
2021-22 
 
YEAR 
2022-23 
Andhra Pradesh Krishna 1 1 
The Compilation of  
result has been 
completed , which will 
be sent to MoC for 
getting the approval of 
competent authority 
Not yet 
advertised Andhra Pradesh Visakhapatnam 1 1 
Andhra Pradesh Vizianagaram 1 1 
Arunachal 
Pradesh Papum Pare 2 1 
Arunachal 
Pradesh Upper Siang 1 -- 
Assam Baksa 1 1 
Assam Barpeta -- 4 
Assam Cachar 1 1 
Assam Charaideo -- 1 
Assam Darrang 2 1 
Assam Dhemaji 1 -- 
Assam Dhubri 1 -- 
Assam Dibrugarh 1 -- 
Assam Golaghat 1 2 
Assam Jorhat -- 4 
Assam Kamrup 2 8 
Assam 
Kamrup 
Metropolitan 6 5 
Assam Kokrajhar 1 -- 
Assam Sivasagar 1 1 
Assam Sonitpur 2 -- 
Bihar Aurangabad -- 3 
Bihar Begusarai 1 3 
Bihar Gaya 1 -- 
Bihar Katihar -- 1 
Bihar Lakhisarai -- 1 
Bihar Madhubani 1 2 
Bihar Muzaffarpur 2 -- 
Bihar Patna 6 6 
Bihar Rohtas 2 -- 
Bihar Sheikhpura 1 -- 
Bihar Sitamarhi -- 1 
Bihar Siwan 1 2 
Chandigarh Chandigarh 1 4 
Chhattisgarh Balod 2 -- 

Page 78 of 88 
 
Chhattisgarh Dhamtari 1 2 
Chhattisgarh Durg 2 3 
Chhattisgarh Khairagarh 1 -- 
Chhattisgarh Raigarh 2 1 
Chhattisgarh Raipur 2 1 
Chhattisgarh Rajnandgaon 3 3 
Chhattisgarh Surajpur 1 -- 
Delhi Central Delhi 2 1 
Delhi North Delhi 3 3 
Delhi North East Delhi -- 1 
Delhi North West Delhi 6 7 
Delhi South Delhi 10 11 
Delhi South West Delhi 2 -- 
Delhi West Delhi -- 1 
Goa North Goa -- 1 
Goa South Goa 1 1 
Gujarat Ahmedabad -- 1 
Gujarat Anand 2 -- 
Gujarat Rajkot -- 1 
Gujarat Surat 1 1 
Gujarat Vadodara 9 3 
Haryana Faridabad 1 1 
Haryana Gurugram -- 1 
Haryana Hisar -- 1 
Haryana Jind 1 -- 
Haryana Karnal 3 -- 
Haryana Kurukshetra -- 1 
Haryana Panipat -- 1 
Haryana Yamunanagar 1 -- 
Himachal 
Pradesh Kullu 1 -- 
Jammu Kashmir Budgam 1 -- 
Jammu Kashmir Jammu 5 1 
Jammu Kashmir Samba 1 -- 
Jharkhand Dhanbad 3 8 
Jharkhand Palamu -- 1 
Jharkhand Ramgarh -- 1 
Jharkhand Sahebganj 1 -- 
Jharkhand SeraikelaKharsawan 1 2 
Karnataka Bangalore Rural 5 6 
Karnataka Bangalore Urban 9 11 

Page 79 of 88 
 
Karnataka Bidar 1 -- 
Karnataka Chikkamagaluru 1 -- 
Karnataka Dakshina Kannada -- 1 
Karnataka Gulbarga 1 -- 
Karnataka Mysore 3 1 
Karnataka Shimoga -- 2 
Karnataka Udupi 1 2 
Karnataka Uttara Kannada -- 2 
Kerala Ernakulam 3 2 
Kerala Kannur 2 4 
Kerala Kollam -- 1 
Kerala Kottayam 1 1 
Kerala Kozhikode 3 -- 
Kerala Malappuram 2 1 
Kerala Palakkad 2 3 
Kerala Thiruvananthapuram 2 -- 
Kerala Thrissur 4 6 
Madhya Pradesh Bhind 1 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 9 7 
Madhya Pradesh Chhatarpur 1 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Gwalior 2 1 
Madhya Pradesh Indore 2 1 
Madhya Pradesh Jabalpur 1 2 
Madhya Pradesh Katni -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Mandsaur 1 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Narsinghpur -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Raisen 1 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Rajgarh 2 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Sagar 9 9 
Madhya Pradesh Satna 2 -- 
Madhya Pradesh Sehore -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Sidhi -- 1 
Madhya Pradesh Ujjain 5 3 
Maharashtra Ahmednagar 1 -- 
Maharashtra Akola -- 1 
Maharashtra Chandrapur -- 1 
Maharashtra Jalgaon 1 -- 
Maharashtra Mumbai City 10 7 
Maharashtra Mumbai Suburban 5 -- 
Maharashtra Nagpur 3 6 
Maharashtra Nanded 2 -- 

Page 80 of 88 
 
Maharashtra Nashik 2 5 
Maharashtra Pune 14 13 
Maharashtra Ratnagiri -- 1 
Maharashtra Satara -- 1 
Maharashtra Solapur -- 1 
Maharashtra Thane 3 2 
Maharashtra Yavatmal 1 2 
Manipur Bishnupur -- 1 
Manipur Imphal East 3 3 
Manipur Imphal West 6 3 
Manipur Thoubal -- 1 
Odisha Angul -- 1 
Odisha Balangir 1 3 
Odisha Bhadrak -- 2 
Odisha Cuttack 1 -- 
Odisha Ganjam 1 4 
Odisha Kalahandi 1 1 
Odisha Kendrapara -- 1 
Odisha Khordha 7 7 
Odisha Koraput 1 -- 
Odisha Mayurbhanj 3 4 
Odisha Puri 1 -- 
Odisha Sambalpur 3 2 
Punjab Amritsar -- 1 
Punjab Fazilka 1 -- 
Punjab Hoshiarpur -- 1 
Punjab Ludhiana -- 1 
Punjab Pathankot 1 -- 
Punjab Patiala 1 -- 
Punjab 
Shaheed Bhagat 
Singh Nagar 1 -- 
Rajasthan Ajmer 1 -- 
Rajasthan Alwar -- 1 
Rajasthan Barmer -- 1 
Rajasthan Bikaner 1 -- 
Rajasthan Jaipur 5 5 
Rajasthan Jhalawar 1 -- 
Rajasthan Udaipur -- 3 
Sikkim East Sikkim -- 1 
Sikkim North Sikkim 1 -- 
Tamil Nadu Chennai 6 13 

Page 81 of 88 
 
Tamil Nadu Coimbatore -- 3 
Tamil Nadu Kanchipuram 1 1 
Tamil Nadu Tiruchirappalli -- 1 
Tamil Nadu Tirunelveli 1 -- 
Tamil Nadu Vellore -- 1 
Telangana Hyderabad 2 1 
Telangana Mahbubnagar -- 1 
Telangana Ranga Reddy 2 1 
Telangana Warangal -- 1 
Tripura North Tripura 1 1 
Tripura West Tripura -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Agra -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Amethi -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Azamgarh 2 2 
Uttar Pradesh Banda 1 1 
Uttar Pradesh Bhadohi 1 1 
Uttar Pradesh Chandauli -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Etawah 1 -- 
Uttar Pradesh Firozabad -- 2 
Uttar Pradesh 
Gautam Buddha 
Nagar 1 1 
Uttar Pradesh Ghaziabad 3 
 Uttar Pradesh Ghazipur 2 1 
Uttar Pradesh Gonda -- -- 
Uttar Pradesh Gorakhpur -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Jaunpur 1 -- 
Uttar Pradesh Jhansi 1 -- 
Uttar Pradesh Kanpur Nagar -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Kheri 1 -- 
Uttar Pradesh Kushinagar 1 1 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 3 
 Uttar Pradesh Mathura -- 1 
Uttar Pradesh Mau 4 4 
Uttar Pradesh Meerut -- 2 
Uttar Pradesh Mirzapur 1 1 
Uttar Pradesh Prayagraj 4 2 
Uttar Pradesh Sonbhadra 1 -- 
Uttar Pradesh Varanasi 10 13 
Uttarakhand Dehradun -- 2 
Uttarakhand Nainital 1 -- 
Uttarakhand Pithoragarh -- 1 

Page 82 of 88 
 
West Bengal Alipurduar 1 -- 
West Bengal Bankura 1 1 
West Bengal Birbhum 5 7 
West Bengal Dakshin Dinajpur 1 -- 
West Bengal Darjeeling -- 1 
West Bengal Hooghly 10 7 
West Bengal Howrah 2 6 
West Bengal Jalpaiguri -- 4 
West Bengal Jhargram 1 -- 
West Bengal Kolkata 19 12 
West Bengal Malda -- 2 
West Bengal Murshidabad 2 -- 
West Bengal Nadia 2 1 
West Bengal North 24 Parganas 7 9 
West Bengal Paschim Bardhaman 2 2 
West Bengal Paschim Medinipur 3 1 
West Bengal PurbaBardhaman 1 1 
West Bengal Purulia 2 3 
West Bengal South 24 Parganas 3 6 
 
Total  384 400 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 83 of 88 
 
District wise data of Fellowships Awarded in Last 5 Years  under Award of Fellowships to 
outstanding persons in the Field of Culture are as follows:  
 
State District YEAR 
2018-19 
YEAR 
2019-20 
YEAR 
2020-21 
YEAR 
2021-22 
YEAR 2022-23 
AndhraPradesh Anantapur 1 1 The Compilation of  
result has been 
completed , which 
will be sent to MoC 
for getting the 
approval of 
competent authority 
Not Yet 
Advertised AndhraPradesh Guntur -- 2 
AndhraPradesh Krishna 1 -- 
AndhraPradesh Srikakulam 1 -- 
AndhraPradesh Visakhapatnam 2 1 
AndhraPradesh Vizianagaram 1 -- 
Assam Barpeta 2 1 
Assam Darrang 1 -- 
Assam Dibrugarh -- 2 
Assam Jorhat 2 2 
Assam Kamrup -- 2 
Assam KamrupMetropolit
an 
12 15 
Assam Lakhimpur -- 1 
Assam Morigaon 1 -- 
Assam Sivasagar 1 -- 
Assam Sonitpur 4 -- 
Assam SouthSalmara-
Mankachar 
4 -- 
Bihar Begusarai -- 2 
Bihar Bhagalpur -- 2 
Bihar Darbhanga -- 2 
Bihar Madhubani 5 2 
Bihar Munger 1 1 
Bihar Muzaffarpur 2 2 
Bihar Patna 4 2 
Bihar Purnia 1 -- 
Chandigarh Chandigarh 1 1 
Chhattisgarh Balod -- 1 
Chhattisgarh Durg 2 1 
Chhattisgarh Raigarh 1 -- 
Chhattisgarh Raipur 1 -- 
Chhattisgarh Rajnandgaon 2 1 
Delhi CentralDelhi 2 -- 
Delhi EastDelhi 10 9 
Delhi NewDelhi 5 5 
Delhi NorthDelhi 2 1 
Delhi NorthEastDelhi 2 3 
Delhi NorthWestDelhi 8 2 

Page 84 of 88 
 
Delhi Shahdara -- 1 
Delhi SouthDelhi 9 2 
Delhi SouthEastDelhi 2 2 
Delhi SouthWestDelhi 4 5 
Delhi WestDelhi 2 5 
Goa NorthGoa 1 -- 
Goa SouthGoa -- 1 
Gujarat Ahmedabad 1 1 
Gujarat Anand -- 2 
Gujarat Gandhinagar -- 1 
Gujarat Panchmahal -- 1 
Gujarat Surat 1 -- 
Gujarat Vadodara 7 3 
Haryana Ambala 1 2 
Haryana Gurugram 4 5 
Haryana Kurukshetra 1 -- 
Haryana Mahendragarh -- 1 
Haryana Panchkula -- 1 
Haryana Panipat 4 -- 
Haryana Rohtak 1 -- 
HimachalPradesh Chamba -- 1 
HimachalPradesh Kangra -- 2 
HimachalPradesh Kullu -- 1 
HimachalPradesh Shimla 1 -- 
JammuKashmir Jammu 3 4 
Jharkhand Bokaro 1 1 
Jharkhand Deoghar 1 -- 
Jharkhand Giridih -- 1 
Jharkhand Ranchi 5 2 
Karnataka BangaloreRural 1 -- 
Karnataka BangaloreUrban 15 11 
Karnataka Belgaum -- 1 
Karnataka Bidar 3 1 
Karnataka Dharwad 2 -- 
Karnataka Gulbarga 1 -- 
Karnataka Kodagu 1 -- 
Karnataka Mysore 2 -- 
Karnataka Tumkur -- 1 
Karnataka Vijayapura 1 -- 
Kerala Alappuzha 1 1 
Kerala Ernakulam 4 5 
Kerala Kannur 2 1 
Kerala Kasaragod -- 2 

Page 85 of 88 
 
Kerala Kollam 1 2 
Kerala Kottayam -- 3 
Kerala Kozhikode -- 2 
Kerala Malappuram 1 1 
Kerala Palakkad 4 2 
Kerala Pathanamthitta -- 1 
Kerala Thiruvananthapura
m 
5 4 
Kerala Thrissur 2 8 
Kerala Wayanad 1 -- 
MadhyaPradesh Betul 2 -- 
MadhyaPradesh Bhopal 16 8 
MadhyaPradesh Gwalior -- 1 
MadhyaPradesh Harda -- 1 
MadhyaPradesh Hoshangabad 1 -- 
MadhyaPradesh Indore -- 1 
MadhyaPradesh Jabalpur 2 1 
MadhyaPradesh Neemuch 1 -- 
MadhyaPradesh Ratlam 1 -- 
MadhyaPradesh Rewa -- 1 
MadhyaPradesh Sidhi -- 1 
MadhyaPradesh Ujjain -- 3 
MadhyaPradesh Vidisha -- 1 
Maharashtra Aurangabad 1 -- 
Maharashtra Chandrapur 3 -- 
Maharashtra Kolhapur 1 -- 
Maharashtra Latur 1 -- 
Maharashtra MumbaiCity 8 6 
Maharashtra MumbaiSuburban 2 2 
Maharashtra Nagpur 8 4 
Maharashtra Nashik 1 2 
Maharashtra Pune 4 7 
Maharashtra Sangli -- 1 
Maharashtra Satara 1 -- 
Maharashtra Thane 3 5 
Manipur Bishnupur 2 1 
Manipur ImphalEast 6 8 
Manipur ImphalWest 10 6 
Manipur Thoubal 1 1 
Meghalaya EastKhasiHills -- 1 
Meghalaya WestKhasiHills 1 -- 
Nagaland Kohima -- 1 
Nagaland Mokokchung 1 -- 
Odisha Balangir 1 6 

Page 86 of 88 
 
Odisha Balasore 1 -- 
Odisha Bargarh 2 4 
Odisha Bhadrak 1 -- 
Odisha Cuttack 5 -- 
Odisha Dhenkanal -- 1 
Odisha Ganjam 2 1 
Odisha Jagatsinghpur -- 1 
Odisha Jajpur 1 -- 
Odisha Kendujhar 1 -- 
Odisha Khordha 17 9 
Odisha Koraput 1 -- 
Odisha Mayurbhanj 7 3 
Odisha Nayagarh -- 1 
Odisha Nuapada 1 -- 
Odisha Sambalpur 1 3 
Odisha Subarnapur -- 1 
Puducherry Puducherry 2 1 
Punjab Amritsar -- 1 
Punjab Barnala -- 1 
Punjab Fazilka 1 -- 
Punjab Ludhiana -- 1 
Punjab Mansa -- 1 
Punjab Patiala 1 -- 
Punjab Rupnagar 1 -- 
Punjab Sangrur 1 -- 
Rajasthan Alwar 1 -- 
Rajasthan Bhilwara -- 1 
Rajasthan Bikaner -- 2 
Rajasthan Jaipur 3 4 
Rajasthan Jhunjhunu -- 1 
Rajasthan Jodhpur 1 -- 
Rajasthan Pali 1 -- 
Rajasthan Rajsamand 1 -- 
Rajasthan Sikar -- 1 
Rajasthan Udaipur 2 1 
TamilNadu Chennai 1 5 
TamilNadu Kanchipuram 1 -- 
TamilNadu Madurai 1 -- 
TamilNadu Tiruchirappalli -- 1 
TamilNadu Tiruvallur 1 -- 
TamilNadu Tiruvannamalai 1 -- 
TamilNadu Vellore -- 1 
TamilNadu Viluppuram -- 1 

Page 87 of 88 
 
Telangana Hyderabad -- 5 
Telangana Karimnagar -- 1 
Telangana Nalgonda -- 1 
Telangana RangaReddy -- 3 
Telangana Warangal -- 1 
Tripura WestTripura 2 1 
UttarPradesh Agra 1 1 
UttarPradesh Azamgarh 1 1 
UttarPradesh Bhadohi -- 2 
UttarPradesh Budaun 1 -- 
UttarPradesh Bulandshahr 1 1 
UttarPradesh Chandauli -- 3 
UttarPradesh Chitrakoot 1 -- 
UttarPradesh Deoria 1 -- 
UttarPradesh GautamBuddhaNa
gar 
1 8 
UttarPradesh Ghaziabad 9 6 
UttarPradesh Ghazipur 1 2 
UttarPradesh Gonda -- -- 
UttarPradesh Gorakhpur 1 5 
UttarPradesh Jalaun 1 1 
UttarPradesh Jaunpur -- 1 
UttarPradesh KanpurNagar -- 1 
UttarPradesh Lucknow 7 9 
UttarPradesh Meerut 1 -- 
UttarPradesh Moradabad 1 -- 
UttarPradesh Pratapgarh -- 1 
UttarPradesh Prayagraj 3 9 
UttarPradesh Saharanpur -- 1 
UttarPradesh SantKabirNagar -- 1 
UttarPradesh Shahjahanpur -- 1 
UttarPradesh Varanasi 9 6 
Uttarakhand Dehradun 2 4 
Uttarakhand Haridwar 1 1 
Uttarakhand Nainital 1 1 
WestBengal Birbhum 2 4 
WestBengal Darjeeling 1 -- 
WestBengal Hooghly 2 5 
WestBengal Howrah 1 2 
WestBengal Jalpaiguri 1 -- 
WestBengal Kolkata 3 9 
WestBengal Nadia 1 -- 
WestBengal North24Parganas 8 6 
WestBengal PaschimMedinipur 1 2 

Page 88 of 88 
 
WestBengal PurbaMedinipur -- 1 
WestBengal Purulia -- 2 
WestBengal South24Parganas 3 3 
 Total 387 395 
 
As CCRT does not maintain the district wise data of the students, hence, the State wise breakup of 
Students trained by CCRT from all over the country  under Extension Services and Community 
Feedback Programme during last five years are as follows: 
 
State 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21* 2021-22 2022-23 
Assam 10051 2575 2602 4048 1706 
Haryana - 128 - - - 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
170 - - - - 
Maharashtra 4182 - - - - 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
- - - 487 358 
Rajasthan 325 - - 2734 3437 
Telangana 10754 7700 - 6975 8346 
Uttarakhand 447 - - - - 
Uttar Pradesh 1700 - - - - 
Delhi 25850 11589 - 1059 479 
Total 53479 21992 2602 15303 14326 
 
* Due to Covid-19 Pandemic on-campus training for the students were not organized   
 
***** 
 
 
 

89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 9th May, 2023 in Room No. 4, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.   Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
Lok Sabha 
 7.    Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
 8.    Shri Rahul Kaswan  
 9.    Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11.  Shri Tapir Gao 
12.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
14.  Shri Prince Raj 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
         Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways 

91 
 
i. Ms. Uma Nanduri - Joint Secretary (Akademi)  
ii. Sh. Aneish P. Rajan- Director (Akademi) 
iii. Shri Rishi Vasisht, Director, Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the 
agenda of the meeting was to deliberate on the subject of “Functioning of National 
Akademies and other Cultural Institutions”. The Chairman also informed the Members 
that as the Secre tary, Ministry of Culture had sought exemption, the Committee would 
instead hear the Joint Secretary of the Ministry along with the administrative heads of all 
the National Cultural Akademies. 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.           The Chairman noted that the Akademies have been given autonomous status to 
ensure their freedom of expression but issues of bureaucratisation of the cultural 
institutions which hampers their creative dynamism arise from time to time.   The 
Chairman asked that the Committee may be briefed on this issue as well as the challenges 
faced due to lack of infrastructure, manpower shortages and bureaucratic hurdles. He 
asked the Ministry and Akademies to elaborate on the measures taken to promote and 
preserve cultural traditions in the digital age.  The Chairman also noted that there were 
allegations of administrative and financial irregularities in the functioning of some of the 
Akademies, especially the Lalit Kala Akademi and desired that the Committee may be 
briefed in this regard. The Chairman asked the JS whether the budgetary support provided 
by the Ministry to each institution/Akademi is adequate to meet their needs and whether 
any financial assistance is provided to artists/scholars by the Akademies/Ministry.   Citing 
an article in a newspaper  wherein Ministry officials were quoted as stating that Cultural 
Akademies should mobilize funds only from non -governmental sources and not depend 
on government funding, the Chairman enquired about the legality of such proposals.    
4. The Joint Secretary informed the Committee that there were seven Cultural 
Akademies, the oldest being Kalakshetra Foundation (founded in 1936), then the Sangeet 
Natak Akademi (established 1952), the Sahitya Akademi and the Lalit Kala Akademi 
(both established in 1954), the National School of Drama (NSD) (established 1959), the 
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) (established in 1979) and the newest 
being the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) (established in 1985).  

92 
 
5.         The mandate of the Kalakshetra Foundation is mostly   Bharatnatyam and Carnatic 
Music while the Sangeet Natak Akademi promotes the intangible heritage of dance, 
music, and drama.   The Sahitya Akademi   promotes literature, including   children's 
literature. The Lalit Kala Akademi   is  working on tribal traditional arts and ceramic art.   
The NSD is working in the field of theatre. The CCRT is working for educating   school 
children on culture. The IGNCA works as a repository of all the art forms in the country 
and does a lot of research and documentation..   
6.         In response to a query by a Member, the representative of the Ministry informed 
that the tenures of Chairmen/ Presidents are different for different Akademis. In the case 
of Lalit Kala Akademi, the tenure is three years. The NSD and the CCRT are having four 
years tenure. IGNCA has the longest tenure of ten years while the remaining three 
Akademis have a tenure of five years.   Each Akademi, since they are autonomous bodies, 
has its own General Council and an Executive Board. 
7.         In response to another query about the election of the Chairman/President of the 
Akademies, the representative of the Ministry explained that the process was again 
different for different Akademies.  The Chairman of Lalit Kala Akademi is a presidential 
nomination chosen from a list of 3 -4 experts in the field of art picked out by a  Search-
cum-Selection Committee, which is appointed by the Ministry.   The General Council has 
65 members drawn mostly from the n ominations received from each State/ Union 
Territory as well as the nomination of 5    members from the Government of India and ex -
officio members like the Joint Secretary (Akademis) and the Finance Member.   All the 
members have voting rights and decisions are taken on majority vote.  
8.         The President of the Sahitya Akademi, usually a person of eminence in the literary 
field, is elected by the General Council. The General Council has 100 representatives 
from different sources. The State Governments a nd Union Territories send three 
nominations each.  The Ministry also receives nominations of three names each from all 
the about 350 Central and State Universities where Humanities are being taught,   out of 
which representatives of twenty universities are selected on a rotation basis.  There is also 
a provision for 24 language representatives and about 10 ex -officio members like Joint 
Secretary etc.   Upon a query by a Member, it was informed that there were only 20 
members in the University category and car e was taken during selection to include all 
States on a rotation basis since some states had only one university.  

93 
 
9.       The Sangeet Natak Akademi has 72 members, with one representative nominated 
by each State Government in addition to experts, governm ent nominees and ex -officio 
members.  
10.       The National School of Drama and Kalakshetra are mainly training institutes. The 
Chairman of the NSD is appointed by the President while the NSD Director is a 
Government appointee.   Both are appointed by the Government from among three 
candidates selected by a search cum selection committee.    
11.  The Chairman remarked that there are different parameters for different Akademies 
and there is a need to bring uniformity among all the Akademies in terms of tenur e of 
Chairmen/President and representation and election of General Council members.    The 
representative of the Ministry acknowledged that as most Akademies have been   in 
existence  since the 1950s, there is a need to change the age -old systems and the Ministry 
has  taken cognizance of the same 
12.     The representative of the Ministry also informed that the IGNCA has   9 centres 
across the country, the Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) and the Sangeet Natak Akademi 
(SNA) have 7 each, and the Sahitya Akademi and the  NSD have 5 each while CCRT has   
4.  Upon query by Members about the reason for no centres being in states like 
Rajasthan, the Ministry informed that Zonal Cultural Centres cater to cultural needs in 
places which do not have Regional Centres. Besides, the Akademies and CCRT conduct 
shows and workshops even in places where are no centres.   
13. A Member enquired about the mechanism of preservation and promotion of the 
intangible culture of India. He gave examples of artists from around the country, the lack 
of recognition of their work and the ways to promote their work. The Ministry elaborated 
on their efforts to promote the unsung heroes of India like the event of Jyotirgamaya of 
Sangeet Natak Akademi in Rajasthan which comprised 350 artists for five days. 
Similarly, an event in Delhi focussed on instrument making. Upon further discussion and 
observations by some Members about the lack of visibility of the programmes and 
workshops conducted by the Ministry, the representative of the Ministry stated that the 
entire information about the last three years of the programmes, workshops and other 
activities done in Rajasthan and other states would be provided   institution-wise.  A 
Member suggested that  a meeting can be held once in three months in the State Capital  

94 
 
about the working of the Akademies to which    Members of Parliament   can also be 
invited.    
14. Upon a Member’s query whether the Akademies have tribal members the JS informed 
the Committee that the Ministry promotes all States’ art forms and any tribal art expert 
nominated by the State Government, is taken as a member.  
15.       The Committee was further informed about the achievements of the various 
Cultural Akademies - 
 the Sahitya Akademi held   India’s largest international literature festival – 
UNMESHA in Shimla under the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) , that hosted 
64 events featuring more than 400 writers and scholars and the Festival of Letters 
in New Delhi which featured more than 400 writers, hosted 40 events and 
promoted 60 languages.      The Akademi also maintains the   archives for Indian 
literature and every year conducts more than 50 regional, national and 
international seminars and 100 symposiums and about 400 literary gatherings in 
every language. 
 the Kalakshetra Foundation inaugurated a 'Bharata Kalakshetra Auditorium,"    
free-of-cost dance classes for children in low socio -economic strata, Seminars and 
workshops to propagate craft, culture and education,  Kalanubhava, a First-ever art 
exhibition by  Rukmani Devi College of Fine Arts and a cultural festival at 
Mahabalipuram in presence of Hon’ble President of India and His Highness King 
of Netherlands etc.  
 Achievements of the NSD included the International Theatre Festival of India 
(Bharat Rang Mahot sav) where 100 theatre groups from India and abroad 
participate every year in February since 1999, National Theatre Festival organised 
for children (Jashn -e-bachpan & Bal Sangam), organises Indian Classical Drama 
Festival since 2016, Poorvottar Natya Samaroh since 2009 
 the achievements of the IGNCA   included the National Mission of Cultural 
Mapping, New Parliament artwork and the Vedic Heritage Portal,   Mera Gaon 
Meri Darohar (MGMD) initiative to document 6 lakh+ villages on various cultural 
parameters, lik e documentation of Devnarayan Phad tradition, the revival of the 

95 
 
art form of Ramman in a Joshimath village and in instrument making, the revival 
of original Tanpuras in Dharwar and many instruments of the North-East.  
 the achievements of the LKA included o rganising art camps and exhibitions and 
workshops and award of fellowships to artists selected from all over the country. 
 the achievements of the   Sangeet Natak Akademi Awards includes, organising the 
15th Sattriya Sangeet Samaroh to increase awareness ab out the Sattriya Music 
tradition, four-day music/dance/drama festival-Amrit Yuva Kalotsav for recipients 
of the Yuva Puruskar, organizing Jyotirgamaya where artists can register 
themselves on the SNA website with proof of their talent.   
  Under the CCRT’s initiatives  2,13,659 teachers have been trained since inception 
till date and 10,11,497 students were trained under ‘Extension Services & 
Community Feedback Programme.’ 14,637 and 1,908 scholarships were awarded 
under Cultural Talent Sea rch Scholarship Scheme (CTSS) and Scholarships to 
Young Artistes (SYA) Schemes respectively. 2,142 Junior/Senior fellowships 
were awarded from 2014 to till date. CCRT has also produced 57 publications and 
46 documentary films.  
16. The Committee was also i nformed that all the Akademies were contributing 
substantially for the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM).   A programme called Kalanjali 
is being held regularly at the Central Vista where there are performances of various art 
forms and music bands. 
17.       The Committee was informed that a budgetary allocation of Rs. 31.413 Crores has 
been made to various Akademies, in which Rs. 59.75 Cr. is given to SNA, Rs. 95.84 Cr. 
to IGNCA, Rs. 53.91 Cr. to NSD, Rs.37.22 Cr. to Sahitya Akademi, Rs.26.84 Cr. to 
LKA, and R s. 22.67 Cr. to CCRT. The Chairman sought information about the detailed 
budgetary allocation to all Akademies for 2023 -24 and the reasons for low allocation and 
whether the Ministry consulted all the Akademies before the allocation of budget.  
18.       Upon enquiry by the Chairman about the allegations of financial irregularities in 
Lalit Kala Akademi prompting the Government's takeover of the Akademi in 2015, the 
representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that whenever a full -fledged 
Chairman is not selected, the Ministry appoints its representative for an interim period 
and there is no taking over of the institution.   A new Chairman has been recently 
appointed in the Lalit Kala Akademi.   Regarding the financial irregularities, the Ministry 

96 
 
undertook to inform the Committee after gathering the specific facts. The Chairman also 
enquired about the issue of the return of Awards by the artists, the number of such 
instances and the reasons for the rejection of awards, etc. and emphasised the role of 
synergy among Akademies, community participation and public awareness in the 
promotion of Indian culture. 
19.       Members raised various queries such as: 
 Filling up of vacancies and increasing funding for cultural akademies/institutions 
in the country; 
 Criteria for admission into NSD 
 Incentives for artists showing their talent on trains, buses, etc.; 
 Steps taken for the showcase of Indian culture in G20 meetings; 
 Representation and promotion of culture of North East States of India; 
 Handling, preservation and digitization of Manuscripts; 
 Need for promotion of art and culture in schools and the manner in which it is 
presently followed; 
 Lack of career guidance programmes in the art for school children; 
 Need for cultural mapping of districts using the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP); 
 Non-availability of information in Hindi or any other local language; 
 No mention of Gujarat which is famous for various cultural values like Garba, 
Navratri and other traditional dances, nataks like Bhavai; 
 Lack of infrastructure in various Akademies and regional centres in Arunachal 
Pradesh; 
 Non-utilisation of experts in Akademies and officials which are nominated or 
selected have no expertise in any field; 
 Need for National Culture Policy; 
 Need for international recognition of Kalaripayattu, Kathakali and other  artforms ; 
 Details of cultural activities organized in Kerala in Thrissur and 
Thiruvananthapuram; 
 Provision for assisting State Akademies in Kerala; 
 Number of cultural Akademies in Andhra Pradesh; and 
 Plans for future expansion of such Akademies, especially in Rajamundry 
constituency, etc. 
20.       The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took 
note of the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman directed that written rep lies 
to the points which had not been answered and to the ten questions forwarded by him 
 may be sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
21.        The Committee also authorized its Chairman to present the Report on the subject 
‘Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and the Challenges of Retrieving 

97 
 
and Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural Heritage’ to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, during the ongoing inter-Session period. 
22.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
23.       The meeting adjourned at 1.38 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                              Swarabji B. 
9th May, 2023                                                                                                          Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

98 
 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
  
11.00 A.M. 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE. 
1 Ms. Uma Nanduri Joint Secretary(Akademi) 
2 Sh. Aneish P. Rajan Director(Akademi) 
3 Sh. Rishi Vashist,  Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
4 Sh. Rajesh Bhatnagar Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
5 Sh. Raju Das Sangeet Natak Akademi 
6 Dr. Sachchidanand Joshi Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts 
7 Sh. Ajit Kumar Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts 
8 Sh. Rahas Kumar Mohanty Lalit Kala Akademi 
9 Sh. Himanshu Dabral Lalit Kala Akademi 
10 Smt. Revathi Ramchandran Kalakshetra Foundation 
11 Smt. S. Padmavathi Kalakshetra Foundation 
12 Dr. R.C. Gaur Sahitya Akademi 
13 Sh. K. Sreenivasa Rao Sahitya Akademi 
  
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

99 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIII 
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 29th May, 2023 in Room No. 53, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
 
 1.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
 2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
 3. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak 
 4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
 5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
 6. Shri A. A. Rahim 
 7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 8. Shri Bharat Ram Margani 
 9. Shri Tapir Gao 
 10. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
 11. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
 12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
 13. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
 14. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
 15. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
 16. Shri Prince Raj 
 17. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
 18. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 19. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 20. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
 21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
 Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  

100 
 
WITNESSES 
Heads of National Akademis 
1. Dr. Sandhya Purecha, Chairman (Sangeet Natak Akademi) 
2. Prof. V. Nagdas, Chairman (Lalit Kala Akademi) 
3. Dr Vinod Narayan Indurkar, Chairman (Centre for Cultural Resource and Training) 
4. Shri Madhav Kaushik , President (Sahitya Akademi) 
5. Shri S. Ramadorai , Chairman (Kalakshetra Foundation) 
6. Prof. Ramesh Chandra Gaur, Director (National School of Drama) 
7. Shri Ajit Kumar, Director (IGNCA)  
 (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the 
Committee has already heard the views of the Ministry of Culture and Administrative Heads 
of respective Cultural Institutions in its previous meeting held on 9 th May 2023. Now,  the 
Committee has  invited the Heads of all National Akademis to deliberate on the subject of 
“Functioning of National Akademies and other Cultural Institutions”.  
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.         The Chairman noted that t he Akademis play a crucial role in preserving and 
promoting the country’s cultural legacy. He sought to know from the Heads of the National 
Akademis the problems faced by the Institutions and the changes required for their better 
functioning. He enquired a bout any legislative and administrative reforms required to 
modernize the Governing bodies and administrative setup including coordination with the 
Government. The Chairman asked the Heads to brief the Committee on the challenges faced 
by the Akademis due to inadequate funding, the possible ways to overcome the difficulties 
and the sourcing of funds from non -government sources as ordered by the Government. He 
also raised the issue of bureaucratic delays which hamper decision -making and 
implementation of programs. He also asked the Akademis to elaborate on the measures taken 
to enhance their outreach efforts, both within urban and rural areas, the initiatives taken, and 
the extent to which educational institutions and local community organizations are being 
engaged in such activities. Referring to accusations of regional imbalances in their activities 
and recognition of artists, Chairman enquired about the measures taken for ensuring equal 
opportunities and representation to artists from different regions and cultural backgrounds for 
a balanced cultural landscape. He enquired about the adaption to technological advancements 
including digital archiving of cultural artefacts, online exhibitions, virtual performances, and 
the utilization of social media for promot ion and outreach. He sought views of the Heads on 

101 
 
controversies surrounding the awards and instances where the selection process and the 
choice of awardees have faced criticism, leading to debates over the transparency and fairness 
of the selection procedu res. Chairman expressed that Akademis are apolitical organization 
and must ensure that awardees do not return the awards for political reasons. He suggested 
that Akademis should take the prior consent of the recipient before giving the award. He also 
sought justification and reasons for the difference in the tenure of the President and the 
Chairman amongst the different Akademis. 
4.       Chairman, Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) informed that he joined the organization two 
months ago and sought permission for Sec retary, Lalit Kala Akademi to respond to the 
queries raised. Secretary, LKA, responded that a detailed written reply to the issues raised 
will be sent to the Secretariat. The chairman, then asked about the allegations levelled against 
the Lalit Kala Akademi due to which its administration was taken over by the Government of 
India in 2015. Secretary informed that the allegations levelled against the Akademi were 
mainly administrative in nature. Due process was followed in the Ministry and action, as 
deemed fit, was taken in each and every case. He informed that the Government took over in 
order to form the General Council, Executive Board, Finance Committee and Programme 
Committee as there was no General Council or Executive Board in 2013. Chairman then 
enquired about the reasons for the delay and why the issues had not been sorted out. 
Secretary replied that Government handed over the administration to Lalit Kala Akademi in 
2018 and the Chairman was appointed. Thereafter, the General Council, the Executive Bo ard 
and the Finance Committee were formed following due process. He stated that the allegations 
were levelled because these Committees were not formed and the functions were being 
handled by the Chairman single -handedly. Now, all these committees are in pl ace and 
functioning well. 
5.        Thereafter, Chairman, CCRT briefed the Committee about the objectives of CCRT, 
which is to impart training in the art forms, i.e., dance, drama, music, painting, sculpture, etc. 
CCRT gives scholarships, fellowships to ar tists and training to school teachers in around 750 
districts. Regarding budgetary provisions, he stated that CCRT is facing a fund crunch. He 
informed that last year, CCRT was allocatedRs. 27.84 crores which have been reduced to Rs. 
25.45 crore this year.  With reference to engagements with educational institutions, he 
informed that CCRT has been working with schools. Now they have started working with 
colleges and other good institutions in India by signing MoUs with them to impart training at 
the college and educational institutions level. He apprised the Committee about the “Local to 
Global” programme initiated to provide a platform for local artists in the field of dance, 

102 
 
drama, music and painting to help them get recognition at the global level. He info rmed that 
the ‘Indian Knowledge System’ lays emphasis on the utilization of modules prepared for 64 
art forms in four areas, i.e., art, culture, education and literature. Under the new Education 
Policy, art education is a compulsory subject and the Indian Knowledge System aims to 
enhance the integration of all art forms in it.  
6.      With reference to regional imbalance, Chairman, CCRT informed that not many efforts 
are being made in this direction as they have no contacts with regional MPs. However,if 
contacts are established, MPs can help them with outreach and accessibility to the interior 
parts as they are more aware of the cultural spread in their regions. Drawing attention to the 
fund constraints faced by the institution, he requested Hon’ble MPs to contribute funds from 
MP funds adding that even 25 lakh rupees will be sufficient for the enhancement of art and 
culture education. 
7.     On the issue of not inviting MPs to programmes organized by CCRT, Chairman, CCRT 
replied that they invite all MPs to their programmes, it depends on the Hon’ble Members if 
they want to attend or not. On further enquiry, Director, CCRT informed that in August last 
year, Regional Centre, Udaipur, had invited MPs not only from Udaipur, but from all the 
districts of Rajasthan. This was denied by the Members, who stated that they have never been 
invited in their tenure.  Chairman, CCRT, assured the Members to look into the matter. In this 
regard, a Member suggested that the Committee should recommend these organizations to 
invite the Committee Members or regional MLAs to all events organized by them. 
8.      Thereafter, Chairman raised the query regarding the Council structure, the number of 
members and the frequency of holding meetings in a year. CCRT informed that the Society  
and Executive Committee has 22 members. Its tenure is for four years and it generally meets 
thrice in a year. Lalit Kala Akademi informed that its Council has 65 members, its term is for 
three years and the General Council Meeting is held once in a Financ ial Year, which is not 
fixed. Citing the variation in structure and tenure of the Akademis, Chairman suggested that 
the Committee with the consent of the Hon’ble Members would recommend to the 
Government for a uniform tenure for all the Akademis and also t he number of meetings to be 
held each year. He also stated that public representatives, both MPs and MLAs need to be 
invited to the various programmes of  all the Akademis and cultural institutions to ensure that 
the objectives for which these Akademis have been instituted are being fulfilled.  
9.        Thereafter, Chairman, Kalakshetra Foundation, apprised the Committee about its 
structure and tenure. He stated that the Chairman of the Institution is appointed for a term of 

103 
 
five years and he was appointed  on 21 stFebruary 2020. The Governing Board has twelve 
Members who were appointed on 5 thApril, 2021 for a term of five years, with two 
representatives from the State Government of Tamil Nadu, who at present are Shri M.M. 
Murugappan from the Muruggappa Group and Dr. R. Nataraj, former DGP of Tamil Nadu. 
There are also persons of eminence in the Council. They are Dr. Sudha Raghunathan, Shri  
Neyveli Santhanagopalan, Shri Bheru Singh Chouhan, Smt. Veena Murthy Vijay, Shri 
Mukund Marathe, Prof. M. Jayaraman, Dr. Shashank Subramanyam, Shri L. Venkatesh, Adv. 
Renjini Suresh, Shri Aneesh Raghavan from the Ministry of Culture, Smt. Uma Nanduri, 
Joint Secretary and Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary. The Governing Board meets four times a 
year, generally convened before festivals. He stated that the Committee's suggestion for 
inviting Members of the Standing Committee was well taken.   He informed that they  also 
have a SSC school, Central Board School, Rukmani Devi College of Fine Arts and a Centre 
for weaving.  
10.    Chairman, Kalakshetra Foundation also informed about the expanding reach of the 
institution through partnerships and taking programmes to var ious States of the country. He 
listed the things the Akademi has done in the last twelve to twenty -four months and through 
international collaborations and technology integration like OTT platforms for global reach. 
He informed about Swaminathan Iyer Libra ry and the twenty -five dance dramas performed 
by the original Rukmani Devi with a local touch. He apprised that the Akademi receives 500 
to 600 applications a year for the diploma program and students are represented from all over 
the country including Nor th-East, Rajasthan, Gujarat. He informed that for the last ten years 
they have been fighting for approval, pending with the Cabinet regarding degree programmes 
being awarded by the institution as an Institution of Eminence which it became in 1993. On 
the query regarding expansion in North India, he stated that they want to do it but the campus 
cannot be replicated. However, they are working on replicating the smaller portions. On a 
query from a Member regarding the ongoing controversy and the internal issue s, Chairman, 
Kalakshetra Foundation stated that they have appointed a Committee of three experts -Justice 
Kannan(Chairperson), Mrs. Letika Saran, former DGP of Tamil Nadu and Dr. Shobha 
Varthaman, a social sector representative, which will give its report i n June and it will be 
shared with the Committee.  
11.     Therafter, President, Sahitya Akademi made his presentation.   He informed the 
Committee that Sahitya Akademi is an autonomous body and they like to call it an institution 
of 'Man of letters'. There are 100 members in the General Council representing eminent 
authors and representatives of universities of all states and all languages. All works are 

104 
 
undertaken by the General Council. He stated that the organization being an autonomous 
body, has not face d many problems which can be termed as administrative or bureaucratic 
hurdles.  For this, he gave credit to the efficient staff who work day and night. He informed 
that previously he was also Vice President of the Akademi for five years. Dwelling on the 
achievements of the Institution he stated that it is a matter of pride, and it is also proven, that 
Indian literature is one, though it is written in many languages. Since 1954, the way the 
Akademi has published the Indian intellect, wisdom and their contrib ution, and preserved our 
literary and cultural heritage, is unparalleled. Sahitya Akademi is the largest publisher in 
India. It not only prints more than 450 books a year but also publishes a book in less than 18 
hours, that too in 24 different languages i ncluding Rajasthani and English, which are not 
included in the 22 languages recognized by Parliament.  
12.   He sensitized the Committee that the Akademi, when it started 70 years ago, was 
capital-centered. Now, it has penetrated into rural areas through t he ‘Gramlok’ programme, 
thus providing a platform for writers in rural areas. The Akademi has also promoted writers 
from LGBTQ, tribal and Dalit communities. They promote oral tradition and they have 
worked with Bora tribal community in Odisha.   In March t his year, Sahitya Akademi 
organized ‘Pustakayan’ which was very successful; and last year, the ‘Unmesh’ programme 
was organized in Shimla wherein 500 writers participated including international writers of 
sixty languages. With reference to outreach and ac cessibility, he informed that the Sahitya 
Akademi has marked its presence from Guwahati to Chaupati and from Kashmir to 
Kanyakumari. Referring to North -East India as the museum of languages, he informed that 
there is an oral tradition set in Agartala. Also , Sahitya Akademi has signed an MoU with All 
India Radio to record languages which do not have any script and to publish them. He invited 
Hon’ble Members to visit their office library to experience the store of Indian intellect.  
13.      On a query by the  Chairman regarding the tenure and structure of the Sahitya 
Akademi, President, Sahitya Akademi replied that there are 100 members including one 
representative each from 36 states and 20 universities and one representative each from 
eminent institutions of  24 languages. In addition, eight eminent authors are also invited. On 
the query on award selection criteria, he informed that they procure books from various 
scholars which have been published in the last five years. The Advisory Board Members also 
contribute two names each, thus, making the list very comprehensive. Each book undergoes 
scrutiny by 65 individuals, which is a meticulous process. When only five or seven books 
remain, a jury is formed for evaluation. The President or Vice President alone canno t make 
the decision.  The Jury members who are selected, based on the suggestions of the Advisory 

105 
 
Board, assess the books. For the appointment of the Jury, three individuals are chosen from 
the 10 -15 names suggested by the members. Priority is given to the ir literary expertise, 
seriousness, prolific writing skills, and comprehensive knowledge of literature.  
14.      Chairman of Sahitya Akademi also sought information regarding the return of awards 
by 39 writers. Secretary, Sahitya Akademi replied that the ‘award wapsi’ episode happened 
between September to October 2015. Some of these people got the awards in 1970 or 1975 
and around 39 people returned them.  Subsequently, the Akademi has repeatedly stated that 
once the Akademi has given the award, it will no t take it back. He informed that many of 
these people have, again, associated with the Akademi and are serving, sometimes on the 
Jury, and participating in programmes. A Member questioned the re -engagement of such 
awardees who joined the Akademi after insu lting it. The chairman of the Committee 
expressed the view that the Sahitya Akademi is not a political party where a member will go 
out, and, then, again, come back after a few years. Sahitya Akademi is an apolitical 
organization. There is no place for pol itics. He suggested that whenever an award is given, 
the consent of the recipient must be taken, so that he does not return it because of political 
reasons; as it is disgraceful to all the Hon’ble Members of Parliament and the Government. 
One Member suggested that undertaking may be taken from the recipient.  
15.    A Member enquired whether this award is given by the Government or the Akademi. 
Secretary, Sahitya Akademi responded that it is given by Sahitya Akademi, however, it is 
funded by the Government of India but bears no signature of Minister of Culture. They do not 
disclose the names before declaration. After declaration, a letter is sent and they receive 
acceptance/consent letter from each and every awardee that they come in person. The 
Committee suggested the Secretary, to initiate a system where an undertaking is taken citing 
acceptance of the award and that the awardees cannot dishonour the award because they are 
dishonouring their own institution.  
16.    Another Member sought the reasons for ret urning the awards by the 39 persons. 
Secretary, Sahitya Akademi stated it was a political reason - Mr. Kalburgi, an eminent writer 
from Karnataka, was killed. In protest of Mr. Kalburgi’s killing, these people have given back 
the awards. He informed that th e amount of the award was Rs.5,000 in the 1970s.   While 
some people sent their plaques, others did not. Some people also sent cheques. However, the 
Akademi does not have a system for taking back the award, therefore, cheques were not 
deposited. The Akademi  wrote a letter to them stating ‘we do not have a system of taking 
back the award once it is given; so, kindly reconsider. We will not deposit your amount into 
the bank.’ A Member of the Committee had a different opinion with reference to returning of 

106 
 
awards. He expressed that India is a democratic country. Our Constitution has provided to 
every citizen the freedom of speech and expression and also freedom to protest in any form. 
Returning of awards is only a form of protest. They can do that. Then, again, they can 
connect with the Sahitya Akademi. He was seconded by another Member. The Member took 
Chairman’s permission to submit his views in writing. 
17.     Thereafter, President, Sahitya Akademi clarified that award is not for the person or the 
author. The Akademi awards the book.  It is the award for the best book of the year. He added 
that the awardees who returned the awards also understand that these awards are given by the 
authors, to the authors and for the authors. There is no role of Government in i t. A Member 
intervened that the statement is a big academic discussion which can lead to a debate on who 
decides the technicalities involved in it. He gave the example that ‘There is a good fighter 
pilot. Do you give the award to the pilot or to the plane?  It is very debatable to decide who is 
great, the inventor or the invention itself’. Few more Members joined and gave such 
examples.  The President clarified that while giving award, they go by the merit of the text, 
not the ideological linkage of the writ er. On further note, a Member enquired, who is to be 
recognized, the weaver or the machine. Chairman, Kalakshetra Foundation, replied that in his 
opinion, the weaver has to be recognized. He gave an example of Haldhar Nag, the poorest 
man in a tribal villa ge of Sambhalpur in Odisha, who was recognized for his poetry in the 
endangered language of Kosli. Despite the language being on the verge of extinction, he 
never ceased writing. Eventually, he was honored with the Padma Shri award. President, 
Sahitya Akad emi responded by stating that one must be sensitive while comparing skilled 
work and creative work as there is lot of difference in knitting of cloth and knitting of a 
poem.  Reacting to this statement, a Member stated that all work are equal and must be 
respected. Another Member rejoined that the Sahitya Akademi President’s statement is again 
debatable and physical creativity should not be compared with mental creativity.  
18.     Thereafter, Director, National School of Drama briefed the Committee about t he 
Institute. He informed that National School of Drama is one of the most reputed and premier 
Institutes not just in India but also in the world. It was set up in 1959, renamed in 1964 and its 
society was formed in 1975. The society consists of 14 members  and has a 4 -year term. The 
Chairman of the Society is appointed by the President of India for a period of 4 years. All the 
members, except 5 ex-officio members, are appointed by the Society in consultation with the 
Institution. There is no single nomination from the Government of India to this society. It has 
an Akademic Council and a Finance Committee. There does not exist any Executive Council 
currently. Also, the Finance Committee did not have any finance members as most of the 

107 
 
members have different ba ckgrounds. As per the nomination, they become members of the 
Finance Committee. Except for the ex - officio Chairman, who is the Financial Advisor to the 
Ministry of Culture, there is no other finance member. 
19.     Director, NSD informed that there is a n eed for reviewing the administrative structure 
of NSD in the context of staff positions as there is no Finance Officer in the current 
sanctioned strength. Ministry of Culture is working on it. He also flagged that NSD does not 
have any recognition as a uni versity or institute of national importance. The diploma 
provided by the Institute is self -recognized and it is not recognized by the UGC. He 
suggested that there needs to be a structure like the structure of a university or an institution 
of national impo rtance. At present, faculty members are getting two scales lower than the 
university scales. Once the university -level structure is set up, it will also help faculty to get 
the same levels. He also emphasized the need to promote regional theatres and folk traditions. 
He informed that five regional centres have been opened in different parts of the country, 
namely, Bangalore, Sikkim, Varanasi, Sri Nagar and Tripura but resources and focus are not 
sufficient to promote these regional centres. He stated that S tate-level participation is 
required for promoting regional and folk traditions. He emphasized on regional infiltration of 
NSD to have a full -fledged NSD and not just a Centre at the regional level. On a query for 
land requirements, he replied that one aud itorium, few classrooms and rehearsal space will 
work. He also emphasized the need for a National Theatre Policy. He informed that NSD has 
never faced the problem of funding.  
20.     With reference to the outreach programme, Director informed that NSD org anizes a 
number of festivals. Bharat Rang Mahotsav is organized every year. More than 100 theatres, 
including international theatres, are showcased all over India. Similarly, Adirang Mahotsav 
for tribal festival, Jashn -e-Bachpan, a children's theatre is al so organized. The ‘Theatre in 
Education’ programme is currently being organized, in Delhi, from 23 rd May to 23 rdJune, to 
train 540 students at 20 centres. In the context of digital technology, a digital archive of 
10,000 hours of recordings of all theatre festivals and plays has been done. Also, activities are 
regularly monitored on social media. He suggested that a separate National Award for theatre 
artists must be given for better recognition of artists. He informed that NSD is the nodal 
centre for the M inistry of Culture to provide grants for guru -shishya parampara, auditorium 
building, etc, however, artists still complain about the lack of auditoriums in various States. 
Thus, there is a need to have an auditorium in every nook and corner of the country to reach 
rural India.  

108 
 
21.   Chairman appreciated the efforts of NSD and enquired about the frequency of meetings.  
Director, NSD replied that they had nine meetings since last May and they meet almost every 
month and then they have 12 meetings of the Akad emic Council. Seeking information about 
students, it was informed that in PG Diploma Course, there are 29 students (26+3 from EWS 
quota). There are four NSD Centres in India having 20 students each in Bangalore, Varanasi, 
Sikkim and Tripura which comes to 80. There is a programme called the ‘Extension 
Development Programme’ under which 2 -3 workshops are organized almost every month. 
NSD also trains thousands of theatre artists through these 40 days' workshop. In Delhi, NSD 
conducts summer workshops for 600 students. He further stated that there is a need for more 
job opportunities for theatre artists. A Member informed the Committee that Director, NSD is 
an acting director for more than one year and has been loaned from IGNCA to NSD. The 
Member raised the is sue of increasing the pace of filling up of vacancies. To this, Director 
NSD responded that in one year’s span, they have appointed seven faculty members and 
filled up about 15 staff positions.  Most of the vacancy posts have been advertised and within 
the next two months, all positions would be filled up. Interviews for the post of Director were 
held sometime in October last year and the Government has to take a call on that. 
22.      Chairman remarked that for the promotion of Art and Culture, Akademis sh ould 
venture into new platforms like OTT and other digital platforms, make some episodes and 
market them accordingly like India’s Got Talent’.   Also, funds should be sourced from CSR 
funding for the further promotion of Art and Culture. A Member emphasized  the need for 
innovative ideas.  He gave the example of an online series named ‘Khakee’ which is based on 
a book, which was converted into a script and the script was auctioned to make the film. He 
also suggested for including political representatives on their board for better assistance along 
the lines of AIIMS and other institutions.  
23.     Thereafter, Director, IGNCA briefed the Committee on the Institute.   He informed that 
IGNCA was constituted as an autonomous body on 24 thMarch, 1987. The Board of T rustees 
consists of 20 Members of which three are representatives from the Ministry of Culture 
including the Secretary and Additional Secretary, and one is a political member.   Apart from 
that, some literary personalities like Dr. Prasoon Joshi and Dr. Bha rat Gupta are also on the 
Board of Trustees. He informed that the concept was to constitute IGNCA which is into all 
forms of art. So, the Institute looks after dance, drama, literature and exhibitions also. He 
further stated that as suggested by the Commit tee, they will try to source funds from CSR 
also. He apprised the Committee that the interior artwork in Parliament has been done by 
IGNCA.  Also, they have digitalized N-number of videos, films and other manuscripts.  They 

109 
 
have also launched a Vedic Herit age portal which is unique. In that, with one click one can 
take the shlokas from any Vedas like Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda, and Upanishad 
and can also get the correct pronunciation. Further, two virtual museums have also been 
linked. 
24.      A member raised the issue of linking libraries with museums for preservation of 
Manuscripts. Director, NSD informed that they have catalogued 45 lakh manuscripts from all 
over India and digitized six lakh digital manuscripts which are available at  IGNCA and these 
will soon be put on the internet also. The Committee was informed that IGNCA has 32 
manuscript resource centres all over India with at least one resource centre in every State, 
including Rajasthan. He assured to provide the list of the sam e. A Member also raised the 
issue of lack of space in IGNCA as there is no place to display the collections and the 
building had been shifted to Janpath Hotel. She also informed that Jamnagar House in that 
Hexagon had been promised to IGNCA, however, it ha s not been fulfilled yet and the 
institution has to suffer.  
25.      A Member mentioned that sub -section (v) of Section 135 of Schedule Seven, reads, 
“protection of national heritage, art and culture including restoration of buildings and sites of 
historical importance and works of art; setting up public libraries; promotion and 
development of traditional arts and handicrafts;” He, accordingly, suggested that CSR 
funding for art and culture may also be explored. 
26.    Thereafter, Chairman, Sangeet Natak A kademi (SNA)briefed the Committee on the 
constitution of the Governing Council of the Institution.   She informed that the Governing 
Council of the Sangeet Natak Akademi has 71 members including 26 State nominees, 20 co -
opted members, six Government members  and five members from the Ministry. The 
Institution also has 15 advisory boards comprising Governing Council members, Elected 
Body members and also experts from outside. She also informed that SNA has started online 
repositories and any artist can upload his/her bio -data. YouTube links have also been 
provided for the selection of programmes. SNA has also started Yuva Kala Utsav and Azadi 
Ka Amrit Mahotsav. There are 75 performances to be done all over India, about 40 
performances have been done and almost 14 States covered in the last six months. Online and 
offline art appreciation and art critiques courses have also been started.   SNA is also signing 
an MoU with Doordarshan for Indian art and cultural performances. At the school level, SNA 
has started the Kala Dharohar programme where experts and awardees from Sangeet Natak 
Akademi and experts of the national level conduct workshops on rare art forms. Regarding 
digital archives, SNA has digitized 13,065 hours of video recording, 8,432 hours of audio 

110 
 
recording, 6,61,766 photographs, and 40,443 slides since 1953. Regarding the conferring of 
awards, Chairman, SNA stated that awards are by the artists, for the artists and to the artists. 
Nominations for the awards are made by the Sangeet Natak Akademi awardees a nd all of 
them can nominate. As of now, SNA has declared the  2020-21 Awards and the 2019 Awards 
are in the backlog.  She added that there was no controversy surrounding the awards. 
27.   Chairman, Sangeet Natak Akademi also requested the Committee to reco mmend 
changes in the Rules and Regulations of the Akademi as these have not been changed since 
1986 and this would help in filling up of vacant positions and restoration of abolished posts. 
 She further informed that various Art Centres like the JNMDA Cent re for upgradation of 
Manipuri-Art form, Guwahati Centre for Sattriya Development, Bokaro Centre for Chhau, 
Koodiyattam Centre at Kerala for preservation and propagation of  Koodiyattam, Kathak 
Kendra in Delhi and Agartala Centre for Documentation have bee n set up. Further, a 
Hyderabad Centre for the promotion and propagation of South Indian music is also in the 
pipeline. A Member enquired about setting up such a Centre in Goa and was informed that 
the organization has received two applications from Maharas htra and Goa. Chairman, SNA 
assured to look into the matter. 
28.      A Member enquired about revamping of Bokaro Centre as Mayurbhanj Chhau, Purulia 
Chhau and Saraikela Chhau are different.   Chairman, SNA stated that the Centre, designed 
and selected by t he Sangeet Natak Akademi is very apt and that Purulia Chhau, Mayurbhanj 
Chhau, Seraikela or Baripada Chhau have their own Guru -Shishya Parampara Centres, and 
will be not be touched.  
29.  Members also raised various queries such as:  
 Backlog of vacancies 
  Need for more funding to adopt modern technology and new infrastructure  
 Need for engagement with educational institutions under the new education Policy 
 Presence of CCRT and Sahitya Akademi in North Eastern region, especially in all 
states in that region 
 Need for imparting state-specific cultural training to teachers  
 Request for organizing Sahitya Utsav in Manipur 
 Break-up of funds utilized under NSD Initiatives for documentation of cultural 
and oral traditions of Himalayan States and other North Eastern States. 
 Preservation of the Tangam dialect of Arunachal Pradesh 
 Measures to be taken to tender recognition to Bhikari Thakur's creativity in 
Bhojpuri and the body responsible for it. 
 How to attract the younger generation to drama in the face of challenges from 
cinema 

111 
 
 Issue of strikes by students in NSD  
 Request for providing contact details and addresses of the Committee Members 
for invitation purposes. 
30.      The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of 
the sugges tions made by the Members. The Chairman directed that written replies to the 
points which had not been answered and to the ten questions forwarded by him may be sent 
to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
*       *      *     *      *1 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                        Swarabji B. 
29th May, 2023                                                                                                   Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
                                                 
1 Relates to other matters 

112 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
  
11.00 A.M. 
 
Ministry of Culture 
 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1 Dr. Sandhya Purecha Chairman, Sangeet Natak Akademi 
2 Prof. V. Nagdas Chairman, Lalit Kala Akademi 
3 Dr. Vinod Narayan Indurkar Chairman, Centre for Cultural Resources and 
Training 
4 Sh. Madhav Kaushik President, Sahitya Akademi 
5 Sh. S. Ramadorai Chairman, Kalakshetra Foundation 
6 Dr. R.C. Gaur Director, National School of Drama 
7 Sh. Ajit Kumar Director, Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts 
8 Sh. Rahas Kumar Mohanty Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi 
9 Sh. Raju Das Secretary, Sangeet Natak Akademi 
10 Sh. Rishi Vashisht Director, Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
11 Sh. K. Sreenivasa Rao Secretary, Sahitya Akademi 
 
 
 
  
 