PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
Report of the Select Committee on The Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)


Website :  http//rajyasabha.nic.in
E-Mail :  rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available.
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
Report of the Select Committee on The Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE.................................. (i)-(iii)
2. I NTRODUCTION .............................................................. (iv)-(x)
3. A CRONYMS ................................................................... (xi)-(xii)
4. R EPORT........................................................................ 1-43
5. G ENERAL R ECOMMENDA TIONS........................................... 43-48
6. N OTE OF DISSENT – APPENDIX I, II, III, IV & V............. 49-94
7. N OTES RECEIVED FROM MEMBERS – APPENDIX VI, VII &
VIII..........................................................................  95-102
8. B ILL AS REPORTED BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE.................. 103-108
9. A NNEXURES 109-118
I. Motion Adopted in the Rajya  Sabha  pertaining  to
the Select Committee........................................... 111-112
II. List  of    Witnesses   who   appeared   before  the
Committee.......................................................... 1 13-118
10. M INUTES ...................................................................... 1 18-163
11. S TUDY N OTES.............................................................. 165-173

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Binoy Viswam
5. Shri Biswajit Daimary
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
7. Shri Jairam Ramesh
8. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan
9. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
10. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
11. Shri K. K. Ragesh
12. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
13. Shri Manish Gupta
14. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
15. Dr. Narendra Jadhav
16. Shri Naresh Gujral
17. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
18. Shri Parimal Nathwani
19. Shri Prasanna Acharya
20. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
(i)

21. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Shri Sanjay Raut
24. Ms. Saroj Pandey
25. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
26. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
27. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
28. Shri Tiruchi Siva
S
ECRETARIAT
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri P. Naryanan, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K. V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer
Ms. Vunglunmoi Hangzo, Assistant Research Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh, Secretary
2. Shri Pranav Khullar, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Harish Kumar, Director
Representatives of the Archaeological Survey of India
1. Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
(ii)

2. Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, Additional Director General
3. Smt. Urmila Sant, Additional Director General
4. Shri Janhwij Sharma, Joint Director General
5. Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
6. Shri V . N. Prabhakar, Superintending Archaeologist
Representatives of the National Monuments Authority
1. Dr. Susmita Pande, Chairperson
2. Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department
of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri Suresh Chandra, Secretary
2. Dr. Alok Srivastava, Secretary
3. Shri S. R. Mishra, Additional Secretary
4. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department)
1. Dr. N. R. Battu, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri Ramesh Chander Kathia, Director
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Report of the Select Committee on the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill,
2018.
2. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
18th July, 2017 to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958. It was passed in the Lok Sabha on the
2nd January, 2018. The Bill, as passed by the Lok Sabha, was referred*
to the Select Committee comprising 28 Members of the Rajya Sabha on
a motion adopted by the House on the 26th July, 2018 for examination
of the Bill and report thereon to the Rajya Sabha before the 8th of
August, 2018. Later on, on a motion adopted by the House on 7th
August, 2018 the time for presentation of Report was extended upto the
last day of the second week of the Winter Session, 2018. On a motion
adopted by the House on 19th December, 2018 the time for presentation
of Report was further extended upto the last day of the first week of
the Next Session (248), 2019. On a motion adopted by the House on
1st February, 2019 the time for presentation of Report was further
extended till the 8th February, 2019.
3. For considering the Bill, the Committee examined and took note of
the following documents/papers placed before it:-
(a) The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 as passed by Lok Sabha
on the 2nd of January, 2018;
(iv)
*Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 57989, dated 27th July, 2018.

(b) Background note on the Bill furnished by the Ministry of
Culture;
(c) Information/papers on the Bill furnished by the Ministry of
Culture; Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Ministry
of Housing and Urban Affairs; Ministry of Water Resources,
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation; Delhi Metro
Rail Corporation; Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation
Limited; and Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of
Legal Affairs and Legislative Department); and
(d) Memoranda submitted by experts and other witnesses.
4. The Committee held 9 sittings in all.
5. The Committee, in its first sitting held on the 1st August, 2018
deliberated upon the course of action and procedure for examination of
the Bill. The Members raised various points and concerns on the provisions
of the Bill and the Committee decided to discuss the issues with the
concerned Ministries. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture made a
presentation on the provisions of the Bill and its implications. The
Committee decided that apart from seeking opinion of the concerned
Ministries, the views of eminent experts and organizations on the Bill
should be taken for the consideration of the Committee.
6. In its sitting held on the 6th August, 2018, the Committee discussed
the Note/answers to the points raised by the Members in the previous
meeting. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of National
Monuments Authority (NMA) and Archaeological Survey of India on the
various provisions of the Bill. NMA informed the Committee that the Bill
(v)

is being introduced for the implementation of infrastructure projects of
Central Government within the 100 metre limit. It was also informed that
no private project has been allowed within the prohibited limit since the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act was
amended in 2010.
7. The Committee decided that the Amendment Bill needed wider
consultation before coming to any decision and accordingly, decided to
hear experts and stakeholders too. Since the time given to the Committee
for presentation of Report was expiring on 8th August, 2018, it was
decided to seek extension of time upto the last day of the second week
of the Winter Session, 2018. Accordingly, a Motion was introduced in the
House on 7th August, 2018 to seek extension of time of the Committee.
The Motion was adopted and the Committee was granted extension of
time upto the last day of the second week of the Winter Session, 2018
for presenting the Report to the House.
8. In its sitting held on the 10th September, 2018 the Committee
heard the views of experts and Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
on the Bill. Dr. Mangu Singh, Managing Director, DMRC made a
powerpoint presentation indicating views of DMRC on the various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee, thereafter, decided to undertake
a one-day study visit to Pune for on-the-spot visit to the infrastructure
projects held up due to the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and to hold discussion with
various authorities including the officials of the State Government of
Maharashtra.
9. The Committee, in its sitting held on the 18th September, 2018
heard the views of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry
of Housing and Urban Affairs on the Bill. Secretary, Ministry of Road
(vi)

Transport and Highways; and Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs made a powerpoint presentation on the views of their respective
Ministries on the various provisions of the Bill. The Committee, thereafter,
decided to undertake a local study visit to Tughlaqabad Fort, New Delhi
for assessing the impact of construction near the monument.
10. The Committee undertook a study visit to Pune on 27th September,
2018 for on-the-spot visit to the infrastructure projects held up due to the
provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958. The Committee visited Aga Khan Palace and
Pataleshwar Caves to see the impact of the proposed metro projects.
The Committee heard the views of ASI, NMA, Maharashtra Metro Rail
Corporation Limited and State Government of Maharashtra on the various
provisions of the Bill.
11. The Committee, in its sitting held on the 16th October, 2018 heard
the views of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation on the impact of the various
provisions of the Bill on its proposed Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro corridor.
Dr. Mangu Singh, Managing Director, DMRC made a powerpoint
presentation on the issues being faced by DMRC in implementation of
its project because of the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Act, 1958 and informed
the Committee of the lack of feasible alternatives for carrying out this
project.
12. The Committee undertook a study visit to Tughlaqabad Fort, New
Delhi on 16th October, 2018 for assessing the impact of construction of
the proposed Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro corridor in the vicinity of the
monument.
(vii)

13. In its sitting held on the 5th December, 2018, the Committee held
an internal discussion on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Bill), 2018 and decided to examine any document
available in the custody of Ministry of Culture which brings out the
scientific basis for deciding the 100 metres and 200 metres area limit as
prohibited and regulated area respectively in the ASI notification dated
16th June, 1992, which was relied on by the Ministry of Culture for
deciding the criteria.
14. The Committee noticed that there is no consensus among various
Ministries of the Government of India on various provisions of the Bill
and that the Committee needs to collect more information to arrive at
specific conclusions on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee,
accordingly, decided to seek extension of time upto the last day of the
first week of the Next Session (248), 2019. Accordingly, a Motion was
introduced in the House on 19th December, 2018 to seek extension of
time of the Committee. The Motion was adopted and the Committee
was granted extension of time upto the last day of the first week of the
Next Session, 2019 for presenting the Report to the House.
15. In its sitting held on the 22nd January, 2019, the Committee held
an in-house discussion on the file notings received from the Archaeological
Survey of India related to the declaration of 100 metres and 200 metres
area adjoining protected monuments as prohibited area and regulated
area respectively. The Committee briefly discussed the file notings and
reached the conclusion that no explanation for specifying the prohibited
and regulated area limits as 100 metres and 200 metres respectively,
could be located in the ASI files.
16. The Committee undertook clause-by-clause consideration of the
Bill in its sitting held on the 30th January, 2019.
(viii)

17. The Committee, in its meeting held on 4th February, 2019 considered
the draft Report on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018. After detailed discussion, the
Committee adopted the Report without any changes.
18. Shri Jairam Ramesh, Shrimati Ambika Soni, Shri Madhusudan
Mistry, Shri Binoy Viswam and Shri K. K. Ragesh, Members of the
Committee, submitted a Note of Dissent, which is appended to the Report
as Appendix - I. Shri Tiruchi Siva, Member of the Committee, submitted
a Note of Dissent, which is appended to the Report as Appendix - II.
Shri Manish Gupta, Member of the Committee, submitted a Note of
Dissent, which is appended to the Report as Appendix - III. Shri Binoy
Viswam, Member of the Committee, submitted a Note of Dissent, which
is appended to the Report as Appendix - IV . Shri K.K. Ragesh, Member
of the Committee, submitted a Note of Dissent, which is appended to the
Report as Appendix-V.
19. The Note submitted by Shri K. K. Ragesh, Member of the
Committee is appended to the Report as Appendix – VI. The Note
submitted by Dr. Subramanian Swamy, Member of the Committee, is
appended to the Report as Appendix – VII. The Note submitted
by Shri Tiruchi Siva, Shri K. K. Ragesh, Shri Binoy Viswam,
Shri N. Gokulakrishnan, Shri Jairam Ramesh, Shrimati Jaya Bachchan,
Shri Madhusudan Mistry and Shri Manish Gupta, Members of the
Committee, is appended to the Report as Appendix–VIII.
20. The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the
representatives of Ministry of Culture; Ministry of Road Transport &
Highways; Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs; Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation; Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited; Ministry of
(ix)

Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and State
Government of Maharashtra for appearing before the Committee and
submitting their views on the various provisions of the Bill and their
valuable guidance to the Committee. The Committee is also thankful to
the representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department
and Legal Affairs) for rendering valuable assistance to the Committee in
its deliberations. The Committee also wishes to express its gratitude to
all the distinguished persons who appeared before the Committee and
gave their valuable views on the Bill and furnished written notes and
information in connection with the examination of the Bill.
      N
EW DELHI; DR. VINAY P . SAHASRABUDDHE
4th February, 2019 Chairman,
Magha 15, 1940  (Saka) Select Committee on the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment)
Bill, 2018, Rajya Sabha
(x)

ACRONYMS
AMASR  : Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains
ASI : Archaeological Survey of India
CA : Competent Authority
CAG : Comptroller and Auditor General of India
CEPT : Centre for Environmental Planning and
Technology
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
DG : Director General
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DPR : Detailed Project Report
EIA : Environmental Impact Assessment
FM : Flood Management
GFR : General Financial Rules
GoM : Government of Maharashtra
HIA : Heritage Impact Assessment
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
INTACH : Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural
Heritage
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organization
MMRCL : Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited
(xi)

MoHUA : Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MPLADS : Members of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme
NCT : National Capital Territory
NH : National Highways
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
NMA : National Monuments Authority
NOC : No Objection Certificate
NRSC : National Remote Sensing Centre
OA : Original Application
PCMC : Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation
PPP : Public Private Partnership
RD : Regional Director
RFD : River Front Development
RoW : Right-of-Way
SPA : School of Planning and Architecture
Sqm. : Square Meter
STP : Sewage Treatment Plant
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
WP :  Writ Petition
(xii)

1
REPORT
I. Background
1. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act, 1958 provides for the preservation of ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains of national importance and matters
related thereto. It has been amended in the year 2010 which, inter alia,
set up a National Monuments Authority for protection and preservation
of monuments and sites through management of prohibited and regulated
area around the Centrally protected monuments.
2. Construction activities, public and private, are being carried out
in India with an increasing pace. Public infrastructure projects are carried
out all over the country and in many cases, the location in which they
are carried out is in the vicinity of the 3,691 ancient monuments which
are protected by Archaeological Survey of India. The Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act was amended in 2010 to
provide for regulation of construction activities near Centrally protected
monuments by defining every area, beginning at the limit of the protected
area or the protected monument and extending to a distance of one
hundred metres in all directions as prohibited area and a further area of
200 metre from the prohibited area as regulated area. This amendment
provided statutory status to the notification issued by the Archaeological
Survey of India (ASI) on 16th June, 1992 wherein an area upto 100
metres from the protected limits, and further beyond it up to 200 metres
near or adjoining protected monuments was declared to be prohibited
and regulated areas respectively for purposes of both mining and
constructions. New constructions were not allowed in prohibited area.
However, constructions and mining were allowed in regulated area with
the permission from the Director General, ASI.

2
3. Between the period 2000 to 2010, permissions were granted
by the Central Government or the Director General, ASI for construction,
re-construction, repairs and renovations within the prohibited area and
regulated area on the basis of the recommendation of the Expert Advisory
Committee. The permission for construction granted by the Central
Government or the Director General, ASI within the prohibited area prior
to 2010 have been validated by the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act,
2010 in terms of sub-section (3) of Section 20A. However, sub-section
(4) of Section 20A was inserted in the principal Act by AMASR
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 prohibiting grant of any such
permission within prohibited area whether it is for public work or project
essential to the public or other constructions by Central Government or
Director General.
4. The provisions of sub-Section (4) of Section 20A of the Act
prohibits grant of any permission for new construction within the prohibited
area with an overriding effect upon the provisions of sub-section (3) of
Section 20A after coming in to force of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment & Validation) Act, 2010.
Thus, as per the Act, no new construction is permitted in the prohibited
area of a protected monument / site. The blanket ban on all new
constructions within prohibited limit is adversely impacting various public
works and developmental projects of the Central Government. Keeping
in view this roadblock being caused by the Act, Ministry of Culture
introduced the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2017 in the Parliament (Lok Sabha) on 18th July,
2017.

3
II. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 – An Introduction
5. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the Bill) was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 18th July, 2017 further to amend the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. It
was passed in the Lok Sabha on the 2nd of January, 2018. The Bill, as
passed by the Lok Sabha and renamed as Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 was referred
to the Select Committee comprising 28 Members of the Rajya Sabha on
a motion adopted by the House on the 26th July, 2018 for examination
of the Bill and report thereon to the Rajya Sabha (Annexure I).
6. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as
follows:-
(i) “The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 was enacted to provide for the preservation
of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites
and remains of national importance, for the regulation of
archaeological excavations and for the protection of sculptures,
carvings and other like objects.
(ii) The said Act was amended in 2010, which, inter alia,  under
Section 20A allows the Central Government or the Director
General to grant permission for such public works or projects
essential to the public or other constructions which in its opinion,
shall not have any substantial adverse impact on the preservation,
safety, security of, or access to, the monument or its immediate
surroundings, to be carried out in a prohibited area in respect

4
of a protected area or protected monument. However, it
prohibits carrying out any public work or project essential to
the public or other constructions in any prohibited area.
(iii) The prohibition of new construction within prohibited area of
a protected area or protected monument, is adversely affecting
the various public works and developmental projects of the
Central Government. In order to resolve the situation arising
out of the prohibition on any construction under Section 20A
of the Act, a need has been felt to amend the Act to allow for
construction works related to infrastructure financed and carried
out by any Department or office of the Central Government
for public purposes which is necessary for the safety or security
of the public at large.
(iv) In view of the above, it is proposed to introduce a Bill, namely,
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2017, inter alia, to — (a) provide for a
new definition of "public works" in Section 2 of the Act; and
(b) amend Section 20A of the Act so as to allow for construction
of public works related to infrastructure financed and carried
out by any Department or office of the Central Government
for public purposes which is necessary for the safety or security
of the public at large and there is no reasonable possibility of
any other viable alternative to such construction beyond the
limits of the prohibited area.
(v) The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.”
III. Deliberations of the Select Committee
7. During the deliberation of the Committee, it was briefed at
length on the background in which the Bill under consideration was

5
drafted and explained the various provisions of the Bill in detail. The
Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture that the Bill will
allow construction in the prohibited areas for public infrastructure projects
by Central Government in the rarest of rare cases and when there is no
other viable alternative available.
8. The Committee thereafter sought to know the reason for not
including the word “rarest of rare cases” in the amendment itself and
requested the Ministry to furnish a list of the rarest of rare cases which
led to the introduction of the Bill. In response to that, the Ministry of
Culture informed that the rarest of rare case will include cases where
no viable alternative is available and there is danger to safety and security
of people at large and that the cases received by NMA which fall under
the category of rarest of the rare cases are (i) Elevated road near
Akbar's Tomb, Sikandra, Agra; (ii) Delhi Metro extension near Tughlakabad
fort; and (iii) Proposal of Metro at Pune. The Committee enquired the
reason due to which National Monuments Authority has not placed even
a single heritage bye-law before the Parliament in over 6 years. It was
informed by NMA that 24 bye-laws were ready which cover about 59
monuments of the country. The Committee also sought to know the
reasons for the Bill not allowing the State Government projects whereas
it allows construction in prohibited area for Central Government public
infrastructure projects for public safety and security of the public at
large. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture through
a written reply that there are instances of violation of AMASR Act by
State Governments in the past, like (i) Demolition of compound wall of
ASI protected area and encroaching thereupon by Andhra Pradesh
Government; (ii) Denotifying Centrally protected site of Sirsa by Haryana
Government; and (iii) Construction within protected area of Sarnath by

6
Uttar Pradesh Government, etc. The Committee enquired whether a
distinction will be made in the approach towards the monuments which
have been recognized by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites and those
which are not. In response thereto, the Committee was informed by the
Ministry of Culture that there is no distinction in procedure.
9. The Committee raised the issue of heritage bye-laws not being
framed by the NMA even till now as mandated by the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act,
2010. Some Members opined that the metro projects in Tughlaqabad and
Pune cannot be classified as rarest of rare cases since there is a precedent
of realigning metro routes to prevent construction in the prohibited area
of a Centrally protected monument. Some Members voiced their
apprehension over the dilution of powers of the National Monuments
Authority since the Bill empowers the Central Government to take a
final decision on the matter of construction in the prohibited limit of a
monument.
10. One of the Members, in his written statement (Appendix VI),
has stated that the AMASR (Amendment) Bill, 2018 stipulates the sole
right to provide permission for construction within the prohibited and
regulated area to Central Government and extends the mere right to
submit report whether any proposed construction is for public purpose or
not, to the NMA and that in effect, the Bill makes NMA a mere toothless
tiger. In response to that, the Ministry of Culture has submitted that this
is not correct as the NMA is empowered by the proposed Section
20-I (ea) to consider the impact, including archaeological impact, visual
impact and heritage impact assessment of “Public Works”, which may
be proposed in the prohibited area and that these impact assessments
will be carried out by specialized Agencies like INTACH, SPA, IITs,

7
REACH Foundation, CEPT University etc. The Ministry of Culture further
informed that in case of likely adverse impact on the monument, the
NMA may not recommend the case to the Government.
11. The Member also raised the point that the pressure for such
an amendment in AMASR Act came up when the ASI declined permission
for a six lane highway (in the Delhi-Kanpur Highway) near Akbar's
Tomb at Sikandra. To this, the Ministry of Culture informed that permission
to construct elevated road near Akbar Tomb at Sikandra was sought by
the NHAI and that after consideration, this case was rejected by the
NMA since the elevated portion of the road was proposed to be
constructed within the prohibited area of the Centrally protected monument
at Sikandra. The Ministry informed that this was one such case and that
there were other cases also which prompted the Government to bring in
the proposed amendment, like the railway line near Rani-Ki-Vav, Kolkata
Metro, Ahmedabad Metro, the bridge over Panch Ganga river at Kolhapur
etc. On the point raised by the Member that the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill is an attempt to
place blind and unrestricted urbanization over history and cultural heritage
of India, the Ministry of Culture informed that this is not correct since
the proposed amendment will only allow extremely rare Central
Government Infrastructure projects within the Prohibited Area and that
too, only where there are no other viable alternatives and where public
life is endangered. The Ministry stated that the Government is committed
to the protection of monuments and cultural heritage of India in accordance
with Article 49 of the Constitution of India. Again on the statement that
the Act if passed and implemented can be easily misused by builders
under the definition of 'public works', the Ministry of Culture replied that
this is not correct since the proposed amendment only allows Central
Government infrastructure projects.

8
12. The Member also pointed out that it is worthwhile to remember
here that a report by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, in
2013, has stated that 92 historical monuments have gone missing as a
result of developmental activities and another 321 historical monuments
have already been encroached upon. In reply to this, the Ministry of
Culture informed the Committee that the CAG has reported 92 Centrally
protected monuments gone missing. However, on inspection by field
offices, it was found that only 24 monuments are missing. The Member
apprehended that the amendment sounds skeptical at the backdrop of
Centre's decision to allow Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects in
various archaeological sites and that the private entities or CSR partners
which are in such PPP projects should not misuse the AMASR
(Amendment) Bill, 2018. In response to that, the Ministry of Culture has
clarified that the project being taken up as PPP model shall cover only
visitor facility like parking, drinking water, booking counter, cloak room,
toilet, etc. The Member also pointed out that the AMASR (Amendment)
Bill, 2018 extends permission to undertake construction activities in various
prohibited areas around protected monuments if the construction is a part
of 'Central Govt. project' which has a public purpose but does not mention
whether any such project by a 'State Government' can avail such
permission for construction. In reply to that, the Ministry of Culture has
clarified that no State Govt. project qualifies since the proposed
amendment clearly defines "Public Works" as Central Govt. Infrastructure
Projects.
13. One of the Members, in his written submission (Annexure III/
(C)), stated that the local public are unlikely to be satisfied with the
procedure followed for interference in the name of safety and security
and that they need to be involved in the decision-making process. In

9
reply to that, the Ministry of Culture informed that the archaeological,
visual and heritage impact of proposed work shall further support the
decision taking process of NMA. The Ministry further stated that the
definition of “public works” has addressed the issue of public safety and
security and thus the work would be in benefit of public at large. The
Member pointed out that visual interference and adverse visual impact
is also likely to be within their primary focus along with the fear of
invisible structural impact. In response, the Ministry of Culture informed
that proposed new clause (ea) shall act as checks and balances while
considering any work within the limit of prohibited area and that any
work should be in benefit of the public residing in close vicinity of
monument and NMA to consider the proposal accordingly. The Member
submitted to the Committee that the concerned State Governments should
be involved for which appropriate provisions should be included in the
Act. The Ministry of Culture, in their reply, informed the Committee that
in the statute, Competent Authority and NMA have been given mandate
to receive and process applications for grant of NOC to construction
related activities in prohibited / regulated area of Centrally Protected
Monument. The Ministry of Culture further informed that the NMA also
requires Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) Report on Projects having
built up area of 5000 Sqm. and above and that the HIA Report includes
Environmental Impact Assessment also. The Ministry of Culture stated
that there is no scope in the statute to involve State Government in the
process.
14. The Member pointed out it is a well established practice that
Environmental Clearance is preceded by Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA), both Rapid and Final and that Public Hearing is an
essential part of the process. He further suggested that the same procedure

10
should be introduced in the amendments and the Rules to meet the
concerns of the public and that Public Hearing should be made mandatory.
He suggested that Comprehensive Impact Assessment should be made
mandatory (EIA). In response to that, the Ministry of Culture informed
that in the case of public work, the EIA is not prominently required and
that new clause (ea) is being inserted essentially to consider archaeological,
visual and heritage impact of proposed work. The Ministry of Culture
further stated that in any case wherever Public Hearing is essential, the
applicant Department shall have to go for it while obtaining Environmental
Clearance under applicable statute. The Member further submitted that
several Ministries of the Central Government could be involved depending
on the project proposal. He added that this is a complication and the
NMA can probably not by itself be competent to appraise projects as
they may not have expertise. The Ministry of Culture informed that the
NMA has been constituted under Section 20F of the AMASR Act, 1958
and that it consists of a Chairperson, five full-time Members, five part-
time Members, a Member Secretary and DG, ASI as ex-officio Member.
The Ministry further stated that the NMA has been mandated by the Act
to process applications for grant of NOC and that under Section 20F of
AMASR Act, the Authority consists of person having experience in the
field of Archaeology, Country and Town Planning, Architecture, Heritage,
Conservation Architecture, Law, etc. and therefore Authority is capable
to appraise large projects. The Member further pointed out that any
move to bring in Amendment without giving due importance to the role
of the State Government which represents the local public, is fraught
with serious consequences. In response to that, the Ministry of Culture
reiterated that in the statute, Competent Authority and NMA have been
mandated to receive and process applications for grant of NOC for
undertaking construction related activities in prohibited / regulated areas

11
and as such, there is no scope in the statute to involve State Government
in the process.
15. In its sitting held on the 10th September, 2018, the Committee
heard the views of experts and Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
on various provisions of the Bill. One of the witnesses who appeared
before the Committee opined that alternate solutions should be found for
projects falling in the prohibited area of a monument and that passing the
Bill would encourage State Governments to pass similar legislations for
monuments under their jurisdiction. Another witness stated that the people
living near the monuments fear the officials of ASI due to the discretionary
powers given to them, causing the community to be distanced from the
monument. Yet another witness opined that the Act has been amended
to keep pace with changing requirements of the people. He gave the
example of Rakhigarhi, where 8,000 people are living and are not allowed
to build or repair their homes. One of the witnesses who appeared
before the Committee submitted that the monuments and their preservation
are meant for the people and therefore, before making any amendment,
it is necessary to consider their needs and difficulties. He was of the
strong opinion that as and when required there should be amendments
to the original Act enacted in 1958. The Government of India has every
right to make amendments from time to time and that the present Bill is
therefore welcomed. He suggested that the Bill may be applicable to
Centrally and State protected monuments and that as far as possible, the
100 metre restriction around the protected monuments be followed but
in case of monuments where people are facing lot of difficulties in
renovation and construction of structures and in the absence of any
alternative, this rule be relaxed. He gave the examples of the site of
Rakhigarhi, Junnar and Shaniwarwada where many people are living

12
within the 100 metre of the monuments and some of the people are living
from the time of existence of the monument. He suggested that in such
cases, their inconvenience and difficulties should be taken into consideration
and the rules of 100 metre restriction be relaxed. It was also suggested
that there should be an Expert Committee to form separate heritage bye-
laws for such monuments. The Heritage Bye-laws Committee should
consist of experts such as an archaeologist, architect, civil engineer,
environmental expert, geologist, etc. He requested the Select Committee
to relax the 100 metre restriction rule to those protected monuments
around which people are living for ages and there is no other viable
alternative and that this should happen only in the rarest of the rare
cases and would be recommended by Expert Committee. A separate
Competent Authority and Committee of Experts are required to formulate
separate heritage bye-laws for each and every protected monument in
the country.
16. The Managing Director, DMRC informed the Committee, during
his deposition, of the various projects of DMRC that have been affected
by the present Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act. International examples of metro projects executed successfully in
close vicinity of important monuments in London, Barcelona, Rome etc.
were cited before the Committee.
17. During the study visit of the Committee to Pune, the Committee
visited the Aga Khan Palace and Pataleshwar Caves to assess the
alignment of the proposed metro projects in the vicinity of these
monuments. The Committee was informed of the various alternative
routes that were being considered away from the monuments and the
extra costs and delays associated with that. In the meeting held on 27th
September, 2018 during the study visit of the Committee to Pune, the

13
Committee heard the views of Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation
Limited (MMRCL), State Government of Maharashtra, Archaeological
Survey of India and National Monuments Authority on various provisions
of the Bill vis-à-vis proposed metro projects of the MMRCL in the
vicinity of Centrally protected monuments such as Aga Khan Palace and
Pataleshwar Caves.
18. The Managing Director, MMRCL informed the Committee
about the salient features of the Pune Metro Rail Project, technicalities
involved, its position with respect to monuments, technology being adopted,
depth of tunnel, benefits out of the project etc. It was informed that the
proposed alignment passes through the regulated area of Pataleshwar
Caves and Shaniwar Wada, whereas it falls within the prohibited area of
Aga Khan Palace. It was stated that No Objection Certificate for
construction of Metro corridor near Pataleshwar Caves and Shaniwar
Wada was being awaited. He informed the Committee that the present
proposal provides facility to ridership and accessibility to Aga Khan
Palace. The Committee was informed that the latest technology is being
adopted which will ensure that the monuments are not affected and that
proximity to the airport and other multi-modal transportation hubs
necessitated this alignment.
19. NMA informed the Committee that they recommend impact
assessment, on case-by-case basis, through agencies other than INTACH
also viz., School of Planning and Architecture, CEPT, University of
Ahmedabad, Reach Foundation, etc. The DG, ASI informed the Committee
that a MoU has been executed between Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) and ASI for preparing maps indicating protected,
prohibited and regulated areas of all Centrally protected monuments.
Such maps have already been made available with respect to more than

14
2500 monuments on National Remote Sensing Centre's (NRSC) Bhuvan
portal of ISRO for public viewing. She also informed that encroachment
has been reported at 321 Centrally protected monuments/sites. The
Committee was further informed about the status of facilities and
conservation methodology adopted at different monuments across the
world viz., Turkey, Angkor Vat, Ta Prohm, etc. The DG, ASI highlighted
that a uniform protocol cannot be maintained for all the monuments. The
examples of Taj Mahal, Charminar, etc. were quoted.
20. In its subsequent sitting held on the 18th September, 2018, the
Committee heard the views of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on the Bill. Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways informed the Committee about the various
projects of the Ministry which are facing problems on account of the
provisions of the principal Act (AMASR Act, 1958), including the proposed
Delhi-Agra road passing within 30 metres of the boundary wall of Akbar's
Tomb at Sikandra, construction of a bridge on Chenab river at village
Ambaran at NH-144A in the vicinity of a Buddhist ancient monument
and on Buckingham Canal in Andhra Pradesh. In case of the Delhi-Agra
road, the Ministry opined that the carbon dioxide emissions would be
higher in the alternative solution and would harm the monument more in
the long run than if the project had been approved with its original
alignment by the use of raised structures, noise barriers and curtain
walls.
21. The Committee was subsequently informed by the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways that the time overrun and cost overrun
incurred / to be incurred by the Ministry due to absence of permission
from ASI and NMA are as follows:

15
Sl. Name of the Highway T ime-overrun/delay Cost overrun/cost
No. Project affected due (in years) escalation
to non-permission
from ASI
12 3 4
1. Construction of major bridge Apprx. 4.5 years delay ` 1.17 crore extra cost due
across Panchganga river near happened due to delay in to the delay in permission
Kolhapur City on Ratnagiri- the permission
Kolhapur Highway at km.
137/250 of NH-166 in the
State of Maharashtra
2. Elevated Highway in a length NHAI had to drop the Approximate additional financial
of 1.440 km at Sikandara proposal of elevated impact is about ` 23 crores
(Dist. Agra) on NH-2 in the structure after delay of
State of Uttar Pradesh about 2 years in project
completion time.
3. Bridge approaches at km. Any change in alignment at Likely additional financial burden
217.931 on NH-216 of this stage would delay the of ` 36.5 crores

16
Kathipudi-Ongole Section project by 1 year.
of National Highway (old
NH-214A) in the State of
Andhra Pradesh
4. Chenab Bridge at km. The Bid process has been RoW for the alternate alignment
27.100 on NH-144A dropped for the time-being and the additional cost of the
(Jammu-Akhnoor road) in due to uncertainty of Bridge is likely to entail an
the State of Jammu & availability of RoW for additional financial implication of
Kashmir alternate alignment as it more than ` 100.00 crore.
The existing two-lane involves passing through the
 Bridge, which is at a constructed area of Army
distance of 22 mtrs from establishment on both sides
the protected site, was of the river. It is difficult to
constructed in April, 2008 give any estimate of the
after obtaining the permission delays in completion of the
of the competent authority. project. This existing 2-lane
Bridge will continue to
remain a major traffic
bottleneck.
12 3 4

17
22. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have informed
the Committee that while the definition of “public works” proposed in the
Bill is in order in so far as the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
is concerned, it may be noted that the term “public works” has also been
defined in GFR, 2017, which is applicable across the Government. In
GFR, 2017, “public works” is defined as under:
“public works” means civil/ electrical works including public
buildings, public services, transport, infrastructure etc. both
original and repair works and any other project including
infrastructure which is for the use of general public;
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways stated that it may be
advisable to adopt the definition of “public works” as defined in the
GFR-2017.
23. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways further informed
the Committee that the distance norms provided in the Act do not have
any scientific basis and prima facie  appear to be arbitrary. It suggested
that it may not be advisable to prescribe any distance norms in the Act
as any such precaution regarding the safety of the site or protection of
the monument may vary in each case (from site to site and monument
to monument) especially in terms of any adverse impact thereto from the
nature of project proposed to be taken up in close proximity to such area
and that such an assessment should be left to the Authority and the
subject experts.
24. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs gave an example of
Qutub Minar, Saket and Tughlakabad metro stations while informing the
Committee of the various projects of the Ministry that were hampered
by the provisions of the principal Act. It was informed that realignment

18
or relocation of the projects led to the metro rail facility being constructed
away from major footfalls. The Committee was informed of international
metro projects and high speed rail lines in close proximity of ancient
monuments citing examples of Eiffel Tower in Paris, National Mall in
Washington DC, Westminster Building in London, Colosseum in Rome
etc. The Ministry suggested that the definition of “public works” proposed
in the Bill should be replaced by the definition of “public works” given
in the General Financial Rules (GFR). The Ministry of Housing and
Urban Affairs informed the Committee that the definition of “public
works” proposed in the Bill is rather restrictive as it covers construction
works necessary only for safety or security of public at large. In GFR,
2017, “public works” is defined as under:
“Public Works” means civil/ electrical works including public
buildings, public services, transport, infrastructure etc. both
original and repair works and any other project including
infrastructure which is for the use of general public;
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated that the definition of
“public works” may therefore be amended to include “public works” as
already defined in GFR, 2017.
25. It was suggested that the monuments should be classified into
different categories on the basis of footfall and that prohibited area and
regulated area limits with regard to the monuments may be prescribed
on the basis of these categories. The Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs has further suggested that Sections 3 and 4 of the existing
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
may be appropriately amended for categorizing monuments based on the

19
number of footfalls per day for the purpose of defining the prohibited
area as under:
Category A: 10,000 and above footfalls per day
Category B: 2,000 and above footfalls per day
Category C: below 2,000 footfalls per day
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs suggested the following
modifications in Sections 20A and 20B of the Amendment Bill regarding
declaration of prohibited area and regulated area respectively:
20A. Declaration of prohibited area and carrying out public
work or other works in prohibited area:-  Every area, beginning
at the limit of the protected area or the protected monument, as the
case may be, and extending to a distance of 100 meter for category
A monuments, 50 meter for category B monuments and 25 meter
for category C monuments and two meters underground in all cases.
20B. Declaration of regulated area in respect of every
protected monument:-  Every area, beginning at the limit of
prohibited area in respect of every ancient monument and
archaeological site and remains, declared as of national importance
under Section 3 and 4 and extending to a distance 200 meter for
category A monuments, 100 meter for category B monuments and
50 meter for category C monuments and two meters underground
in all cases.
26. The Committee sought to know about the practices and rules
that are followed in other countries with regard to protection of their
ancient monuments and heritage sites. The Committee enquired about
the basis on which the limit of prohibited area and regulated area was

20
defined to be 100 metres and 200 metres in the notification that was
issued by the ASI on 16th June, 1992.
27. In its meeting held on the 16th October, 2018, the Committee
heard the views of DMRC, Ministry of Culture, ASI and NMA on
various provisions of the Bill. NMA informed the Committee about the
proposed Tughlakabad-Aerocity metro corridor and stated that DMRC
had submitted a No Objection Certificate (NOC) application for the
Tughlakabad-Aerocity stretch of the proposed metro project and that
since the proposed metro line was passing through the protected and
prohibited areas of 4 monuments, NMA rejected the NOC application
and DMRC later filed the review application.
28. The Managing Director, DMRC informed the Committee that
the proposed definition of public works does not include projects like
DMRC. It was stated that metro projects in the vicinity of ancient
monuments like Kashmere Gate, Delhi Gate, Jantar Mantar etc. where
the distance from the monuments was less than 100 metres, have not
done any damage in any of these monuments. The Committee was
informed of a study done by National Physical Laboratory in 1998 which
had concluded that the metro projects would not have any impact on the
monuments and that a Heritage Impact Assessment Study conducted by
the School of Planning and Architecture also reached the same conclusion.
29. Further, DMRC informed the Committee about the
Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro line and stated that the majority of the
alignment is underground and that a Greek consultant was engaged
during the Detailed Project Report (DPR) stage of the project, for
assessment of impact of construction near monuments. The Report has
concluded that the monuments will not be harmed because of the projects.

21
It was further stated that because of the presence of monuments on both
sides of the alignment, it was not possible to shift the alignment unless
it was shifted by a long distance, which would change the catchment
area and also the project cost. DMRC informed the Committee that they
are using state-of-the-art technology for all the underground constructions
and that no study has been conducted to assess the impact on monuments
in the long term. Further, NMA stated that the definition of “construction”
in the principal Act talks about vertical or horizontal building and that
underground construction is a grey area in the Act.
30. The Committee again enquired about the reasoning behind setting
the prohibited and regulated area limits as 100 metre and 200 metre
respectively. DG, ASI informed the Committee that no information
regarding the same could be located in the records. Ministry of Culture
informed the Committee that the matter will be looked into again and that
any findings would be reported to the Committee.
31. The Committee visited the Tughlaqabad Fort to assess the
alignment of the proposed Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro corridor in the
vicinity of the monument. The DMRC officials briefed the Committee
with the help of detailed map of the project. The officials stressed that
there is no alternative to the project alignment as the Tughlaqabad Fort
covers a large area and the road in between the monuments is narrow
and could not be widened due to the existence of boundary walls of the
protected monuments.
32. The Committee was informed by the Managing Director,
DMRC that the proposed metro project would pass underground and
that it would not impact the visual beauty of the monument. The Committee
was also assured that DMRC is having state-of-the-art technology for

22
underground construction of metro and that the construction activities
will not impact the monuments. The Committee was further informed of
the lack of a feasible alternative route away from the monument since
the Tomb of Ghiyasuddin Tughlak, another monument protected by
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), falls in the vicinity of the project
too and taking the alignment away from both these monuments would
make the metro project unviable.
33. The Committee, in its meeting held on 5th December, 2018,
discussed in detail, Sections 20A and 20B of the principal Act, wherein
the concepts of prohibited area and regulated area are prescribed. The
Committee also took into account the conditions laid down in the
Notification dated 16th June, 1992 regarding the protected area and
regulated area of protected monuments and sites. The Committee decided
to inspect the entire file notings and the related documents pertaining to
the 16th June, 1992 Notification which prescribed the area limits.
34. Some Members pointed out that a few decades ago, large
scale construction activities were permitted near the Jantar Mantar in
New Delhi which resulted in the disuse of astronomical instruments of
Jantar Mantar. It was opined by some Members that prescribing the 100
metres and 200 metres area as protected and regulated area, is arbitrary
and unnecessary and that a relook is needed on this criteria. It was noted
that modern construction activities have been undertaken in Britain, Italy,
France etc. for development of infrastructural activities very close to the
historical structures in those countries without having any impact on
structures. A Member pointed out that he visited 3 sites of the Delhi
Metro where the 100 metres and 200 metres criteria had been relaxed
by the Government for construction of underground Delhi Metro and
that he was satisfied that no harm has been done to the nearby monuments.

23
One Member stated that the proposed underground Aerocity Metro line
passing through the Tughlaqabad area of Delhi needs to be given permission
as he realizes that there is no feasible alternative route available away
from the Tughlaqabad Fort area, due to the existence of many other
important monuments in and around the area. Another Member opined
that even the underground construction is not advisable for monuments
such as Qutab Minar and Taj Mahal and that experts should be consulted
before taking any decision.
35. In its sitting held on the 22nd January, 2019, the Committee
held an in-house discussion on the file notings received from the
Archaeological Survey of India related to the declaration of 100 metres
and 200 metres area adjoining protected monuments as prohibited area
and regulated area respectively. The Committee briefly discussed the file
notings and reached the conclusion that no explanation for specifying the
prohibited and regulated area limits as 100 metres and 200 metres
respectively, could be located in the ASI files. It was neither a legislation
nor a Cabinet decision. It was simply a bureaucratic decision without any
logic or reasoning. No experts were consulted by ASI while taking
decision about the 100 metres and 200 metres limit.
36. Some Members of the Committee were of the view that the
decision to permit construction works in the vicinity of Centrally protected
monuments should be done on a case-by-case basis by a body of experts
which includes historians, people involved with culture, engineers, urban
architects etc. since there is no logic or scientific basis behind the limits
imposed by the present blanket ban. It was suggested that the appointment
of the Committee should be left at the Ministry level each time a decision
is to be taken on a big project and that such a Committee of experts

24
should hold public hearings with the affected local population to bring in
transparency to the decision making process.
37. One of the Members stated that the 100 meters limit is violated
in several cases and suggested that there should be data on, which
monuments need protection and what the importance of a particular
monument is. Another Member pointed out that no experts were called
by ASI while taking decision about the 100 and 200 metres limit. One
Member suggested that the Committee should recommend that the 100
metres limit should go away, but that it should be ensured that doing so
does not leave too much scope for discretion of ASI with regard to the
limit and that blanket provision should not be there for the bureaucracy
to take decisions in these matters. It was further suggested that people
residing near the monuments should be given the responsibility to form
a Committee which ensures the maintenance and upkeep of the
monuments and ensure that no further structures are constructed near
the monument.
38. Another Member of the Committee opined that some restrictions
are a must; otherwise all the monuments will perish.
39. The Committee noted that the Bill does not give blanket
permission for construction near a monument and that it takes a cautious
approach by having a provision for analyzing visual impact, heritage
impact and archaeological impact of a proposed construction work.
40.  The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation informed the Committee that the National Mission
for Clean Ganga, while pursuing/financing certain projects related to
construction and development of ghats on the bank of River Ganga, has
faced difficulties in pursuing these projects. Such works of the construction

25
and development work related to ghats / infrastructure projects related
to STPs / Laying pipelines etc. are being hampered due to the provisions
of the existing provisions in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 as amended by the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act,
2010. They have also stated that recently in a matter (OA No. 594/2016
– Akash Vashistha Vs. State of UP & Others) before National Green
Tribunal, a work related to construction work being carried on by State
Government of UP (Irrigation Department) involving expansion/renovation
and beautification of the existing Ghats located along the bank of river
Yamuna at Vrindavan and laying of interceptor drain/pipeline to intercept
about six drains for carrying sewage, presently flowing directly into the
river Yamuna, for the proposed STP has been held up because the
project work falls in the prohibited area as there is an ancient monument
close by. Similarly, some construction works related to ghats are subject
matter of restriction/stoppage of work (in WP No. 4003/2006 – Harchetan
Brahamchari Vs. State of UP & others before the Allahabad High Court)
as these ghats are falling within the 500 metres restriction imposed by
the High Court of Allahabad.
41. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation suggested that the definition of the “public works”
may suitably cover the constructions of ghats and other developmental
infrastructure projects (RFDs / ghats / STPs / Pumping Stations /
Sewerage Pipelines, etc., related to STP / laying of pipelines, etc., for
sewerage related works so as to protect the river Ganga and other rivers
and water bodies in general and taking up developmental infrastructure
construction works. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development
and Ganga Rejuvenation also submitted that Flood Management (FM)

26
works are for the overall safety and security of public at large, hence
this amendment may facilitate execution of FM works required to be
carried out for Flood Management. It was further submitted that Flood
Management works, though financed by Central Government, are executed
by concerned State Governments and therefore, State Governments may
also be considered for inclusion in the above clause. It suggested that the
proposed amendment should cover the Multipurpose Projects of the
Ministry.
42. In its meeting held on 30th January, 2019 the Committee took
up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The Ministry of Culture
and Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department) also furnished their comments / clarifications
wherever needed on the issues raised by the Members of the Committee.
The Committee, after detailed discussion, adopted all the clauses of the
Bill without any amendments.
43. The Committee, in its last meeting held on 4th February, 2019
took up the draft Report for consideration and adoption. After a detailed
discussion, the Committee adopted the Report without any amendments.
IV . Views of State Governments
44. The Committee considered in detail the suggestions and
observations submitted by the State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana and Union Territories of NCT of Delhi and Puducherry on
various provisions of the Bill.
45. The State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Haryana, Mizoram, Punjab and Sikkim and Union Territory of Puducherry
have expressed their concurrence with the Bill.

27
46. The State Government of Karnataka has stated that wherever
the words “Central Government” is mentioned in the Bill, the words “or
any State Government” should be added while the Government of NCT
of Delhi has stated that wherever the words “Central Government” is
mentioned in the Bill, the words “/ State Government / Civic Bodies”
may be added.
47. The State Government of Kerala has differed with the provisions
of the Bill. It has stated that monuments across the country should be
reasonably and scientifically categorized based on value points such as
historical importance, national importance, architectural importance,
archaeological value, density of human settlements around the monumental
structure etc. and that the amount of restriction and regulation that can
be imposed around a monument should be a natural balanced outcome
of this value points based categorization. It further stated that the proposed
amendment is irrational since the kind of impact a public construction is
going to have on a monument is not in any manner different from that
by a private or individual construction. It opined that if restrictions can
be compromised for Government works, it may also be possible for
domestic purposes like residential purpose of individuals.
48. The State Government of Manipur has stated that any
construction works related to development of infrastructure which is to
be carried out by any department or office of the Central Government
within the prohibited area of any monument should be carried out in
consultation with ASI.
49. The State Government of Telangana has stated that it differs
with the proposed amendment of sub-Section 8 of Section 20D (which
states that for the words “Director General”, the words “competent
authority” shall be substituted.)

28
V . Clause by Clause Examination of the Bill
50. The Committee held clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill,
the details of which are given below:-
Clause 2
Clause 2: Provides for amendment of section 2.
51. In the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2, after clause (j) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ja) “public works” means construction works related to
infrastructure financed and carried out by any department or office
of the Central Government for public purposes which is necessary
for the safety or security of the public at large and emergent necessity
is based on specific instance of danger to the safety or security of
the public at large and there is no reasonable possibility of any other
viable alternative to such construction beyond the limits of the
prohibited area;”;
52. Clause 2 seeks to insert a new clause in section 2 of the
principal Act relating to definition of the expression “public works”
used in the Act.
Views of State Governments
53. The State Government of Bihar has suggested that since “public
works” encompasses engineering, construction, and related activities
carried out by Government for the benefit of citizens, it is a concurrent
function and is a shared responsibility of national, provincial and local
Government. The definition should be changed to the following:
'(ja) “public works” means construction works related to
infrastructure financed and carried out by any department or

29
offices of the Central, State or Local Government for public
purposes which is necessary for the safety or security or benefit
of the public at large and emergent necessity is based on specific
instance of danger to the safety or security of the public at
large and there is no reasonable possibility of any other viable
alternative to such construction beyond the limits of the
prohibited area;'.
54. The State Government of Karnataka has stated that the words
“or any State Government” should be added after the words “Central
Government” in the definition of public works.
55. The State Governments of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu have
stated that the words “or State Government” should be added after the
words “Central Government” in this clause. The State Government of
Maharashtra has further suggested that the words “or corporation /
company” should be added after the words “any department of office”
and before “of the Central Government” in the above clause.
56. The State Government of Odisha has stated that the definition
should incorporate the words “State funded projects / Centrally funded
projects undertaken by State Government”.
57. The Government of the National Capital Territory (NCT) of
Delhi has stated that the words “State Government / Civic Bodies”
should be added after the words “Central Government” in the clause.
Views of other Ministries/Departments
58. Citing international examples of metro stations in the vicinity of
ancient monuments, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has stated
that the definition of “public works” should consider projects like metro,

30
railways etc. as public utility projects which facilitate the movement of
commuters. DMRC stated the example of Qutub Minar metro station
which had to be shifted 1.8 km away from the monument as that was
the closest alignment possible outside the prohibited zone of the monument.
This causes discomfort to the tourists and leads to lower footfall at the
monument. DMRC further stated that road traffic near a monument
harms it due to pollution whereas rail based transportation projects can
help reduce the emission and thus help protect the monument in the long
run.
59. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs suggested that the
definition of “public works” should include civil/electrical works including
public buildings, public services, transport, infrastructure etc. both original
and repair works, and any other project, including infrastructure which
is for the use of the general public. The definition of “Public Works” may
therefore be amended to include “Public Works” as already defined in
GFR, 2017.
60. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways suggested that the
definition of “public works” proposed in the Bill should be replaced with
the definition of “public works” as defined in the GFR, 2017. The GFR
defines “public works” as “civil/ electrical works including public buildings,
public services, transport infrastructure etc., both original and repair works
and any other project, including infrastructure which is for the use of
general public”.
61. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation suggested that the scope of the definition of “public
works” may be extended to include works of public importance such as
ghats / temples / structures/ STPs / Pumping Stations / River Front

31
Developments of public importance near the river or water bodies in the
public interest. It suggested that the definition of the “public works” may
suitably cover the constructions of ghats and other developmental
infrastructure projects (RFDs / ghats / STPs / Pumping Stations /
Sewerage Pipelines, etc., related to STP / laying of pipelines, etc., for
sewerage related works so as to protect the river Ganga and other rivers
and water bodies in general and taking up developmental infrastructure
construction works.
62. Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited has also stated
that the definition of public works should allow projects like metros,
railways etc. since these projects intend to bring the commuters close to
the monuments and densely populated area of city and directly reduce
the deaths taking place on roads on account of accidents and also reduce
pollution.
Views of Witnesses
63. Some witnesses were of the view that the provision of public
works may also be defined to include the projects being done jointly by
the Central and State Governments.
64. Some witnesses opined that the definition of “public works” is
very vaguely worded and can lead to misuse and misinterpretation.
Views of the Ministry of Culture
65. The Ministry of Culture has stated that the proposed amendment
is aimed at resolving conflict between sub-Section (3) and (4) by creating
an exception under Section 20A so that constructions related to public
works are allowed in prohibited area. For clarity, the term “Public work”
is being defined and therefore proposed to be added under Section 2,
definition clause, at relevant position.

32
66. In response to the opinion stating that the definition of “public
works” is vague and open to misinterpretation, the Ministry of Culture
informed the Committee that the proposed definition has been carefully
drafted and that it has been vetted by the Ministry of Law. The definition
is very specific and only Central Government projects fulfilling the criteria
laid down under the definition shall be considered.
67. The Committee notes that though there are varying
opinions suggested by witnesses and definitions suggested by
different Ministries, the definition of “public works” as given in
the Bill is correct to the limited specific purpose mentioned in
the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2017.
68. Accordingly, the Committee adopted Clause 2 without
any amendment.
Clause 3
Clause 3: Provides for amendment of section 20A.
69. In section 20A of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (4) shall apply to the public
works:
Provided that any question as to whether or not a construction
works is public works, shall be referred to the Authority which
shall on being satisfied make its recommendation, for the reasons
to be recorded in writing, to the Central Government whose
decision thereon shall be final:

33
Provided further that if the decision of the Central Government
differs from the recommendation of the Authority, the Central
Government shall record its reasons thereof.
(6) Any Department or office of the Central Government proposing
to carry out any construction works, including reconstruction or
repair or renovation, of any public works in the prohibited area, shall
make an application to the competent authority for carrying out
such construction works.
(7) Upon decision of the Central Government determining a
construction works as public works in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (5), the competent authority shall convey the decision
of the Central Government to the applicant within ten days of the
receipt of such decision.
(8) The provisions of section 20C shall apply mutatis mutandis to
the public works in a prohibited area.”.
70. Clause 3 seeks to amend section 20A of the Act to allow
public works to be executed within the prohibited limit of a protected
monument or area by granting exemption from sub-section (4) of
section 20A of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958 which prohibits grant of permission to any
construction works within prohibited area, whether it is for public
work or a project essential to the public. The clause gives power to
the Authority to make its recommendations, for the reasons to be
recorded in writing, to Central Government, whose decision shall be
final, on the question of whether a construction works is public
works and where the Central Government's decision differ from the
recommendations of the Authority, the Central Government shall

34
record its reasons. The clause allows all departments or offices of
the Central Government to make an application to the competent
authority for carrying out construction works of any public works
in the prohibited area. Upon decision of the Central Government,
the competent authority shall convey the same to the applicant within
10 days from the date of the receipt of such decision.
71. Some Members of the Committee were of the view that giving
Central Government the right to provide such permission for construction
within the prohibited area of a monument regardless of the recommendation
made by NMA, is a dilution of the powers of NMA. The local public at
ancient monuments should be involved in the decision-making process.
A public hearing should be made mandatory like it is done during the
process of Environment Impact Assessment for Environment Clearance.
Views of State Governments
72. The State Government of Karnataka has stated that the words
“or any State Government” should be added wherever the words “Central
Government” appear in the Bill.
73. The State Governments of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu have
stated that the words “or State Government” should be added after the
words “Central Government” in sub-clause (6) of this clause. The State
Government of Maharashtra has further suggested that the words “or
corporation / company” should be added after the words “any department
or office” and before “of the Central Government” in the above clause.
74. The Government of the National Capital Territory (NCT) of
Delhi has stated that the words “State Government / Civic Bodies”
should be added wherever the words “Central Government” appear in
the clause.

35
75. The State Government of Manipur has stated that any
construction works related to development of infrastructure which is to
be carried out by any department or office of the Central Government
within the prohibited area of any monument should be carried out in
consultation with ASI.
Views of other Ministries/Departments
76. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways expressed its
support for exclusion of “public works” from the ambit of sub-Section 4
of Section 20A of the principal Act.
Views of Witnesses
77. Some witnesses were of the view that the exemption granted
by sub-section (5) of Section 20A of the Bill should be applicable to
Centrally as well as State protected monuments. As far as possible, the
100 metre restriction around the protected monuments should be followed
but in case of monuments where people are facing lot of difficulties in
renovation and construction of structures and in the absence of any
alternative, this rule should be relaxed. The exemption should permit
applications for private works as well.
78. Some witnesses opined that this will make Central Government
the authority to arbitrate between NMA and construction companies
with regard to granting permission for construction works within the
prohibited area of a Centrally protected monument. Instead, decisions
should be reached by discussion in a group which includes public-minded
citizens, artists, geographers and historians. Sub-Section (5) reduces the
autonomy of NMA by giving Central Government the power to override
its decisions. The Central Government should not be allowed to overturn

36
the decision of NMA. The NMA should be prescribed a process for
deciding this matter. The NMA should have someone from the Central
Public Works Department as an additional member. There should be
guidelines about the authority within the Central Government who decides
whether a construction works qualifies as “public works” or not and the
criteria to take decision on that.
79. An expert, in his written submission, stated that Section 20A(4)
of the principal Act prohibited any permissions for construction within the
prohibited area. Now, in order to allow public works within the prohibited
area, Section 20A(5) of the Bill proposes that nothing contained in sub-
Section 20A(4) shall apply to the public works. This means that Section
20A(3) allows the Central Government or the Director General, ASI to
permit public works within the prohibited area. However, as per Section
20D of the principal Act, the permission is granted by the competent
authority on the recommendation of the NMA. Thus, this legislation is
confusing and open to misinterpretation and legal loopholes.
80. Some witnesses stated that most public works run into the
issue of stoppage because the presence of the monuments is ignored by
the consultants during the planning stage of the infrastructure project. By
taking cognizance of existing nationally protected monuments at the
planning stage, the conflict between monuments and infrastructure can
be avoided. Archaeological Clearance should be engrained in all public
projects planning, like Environmental Clearance. Alternatives have always
been found when NMA has mandated it, for instance in the case of Rani
ki Vav, Gandhinagar-Ahemadabad Metro etc.
81. Some witnesses were of the view that the suggested
amendment will cause a domino effect with the State Governments and

37
Union Territories introducing similar legislations for the State protected
monuments.
Views of the Ministry of Culture
82. The Ministry of Culture has stated that proposed exception by
the way of new sub-section (5) is being added to resolve conflict between
Sub-section (3) and (4) and to relax embargo imposed against all new
constructions in prohibited area in favour of new constructions with
regard to public works and public project within prohibited and regulated
area. The proviso is being added as a safeguard provision on taking
decision about whether or not a construction work is public work by the
Central Government. The Ministry stated that sub-section (6) is being
added to specify provision for making application to the competent
authority for carrying out construction works of public nature in prohibited
area. The sub-section (7) provides provision for communicating permission
with respect to construction works of public nature in prohibited area
while the sub-section (8) is proposed to be added to save the applicability
of Section 20C of the Act and to maintain the harmony amongst related
sections.
83. On the suggestion of involving the public at large in the
assessment impact, the Ministry informed that impact assessments are
carried out by specialized institutions like INTACH, SPAs, IITs etc.,
involving archaeologists and conservation architects. On the Central
Government having overriding power over NMA, the Ministry stated
that as per the Act, Ministry of Culture is the final Authority to exercise
powers vested thereunder on behalf of the Central Government in respect
of Centrally protected monuments. On Section 20A(5) of the Bill making
Section 20A(3) of the principal Act operational again, the Ministry stated

38
that sub-Section 20A(3) of the principal Act validates the permissions
granted in prohibited area before 2010 with the recommendation of Expert
Advisory Committee and it has been overruled by the sub-Section 20A(4)
of the principal Act.
84. In view of the clarification / explanation submitted by
the Ministry of Culture that various kinds of safeguards are
provided in the clause, the Committee adopted the clause without
any amendment.
Clause 4
Clause 4: Provides for amendment of section 20D.
85. In section 20D of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), for the
words “Director General”, the words “competent authority” shall be
substituted.
86. Clause 4 seeks to amend section 20D of the Act to replace
“Director General” with “competent authority” to exhibit all the
permissions granted or refused under the Act on their website.
Views of State Governments
87. The State Government of Telangana stated that they differed
with the proposed amendment.
88. The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir stated that the
competent authority should include the authority of the State too.
Views of Witnesses
89. Some witnesses were of the view that the word “Director
General” should not be replaced by “competent authority” because any
government functionary should not be considered to be equivalent to a

39
competent authority on the subject, merely by virtue of being designated
as a “competent authority”.
Views of the Ministry of Culture
90. The Ministry of Culture has stated that as per sub-section (8)
of Section 20D, the Central Government or the Director General, shall
have to exhibit all permissions granted by National Monuments Authority
(NMA) or Competent Authority (CA) on their website. Since the
permissions are granted by NMA and Competent Authority, the information
is not in possession of the Central Government/ASI. Under the situation,
it will be appropriate, if the agency holding the information shall host
such information on its website. Therefore, the amendment is proposed.
91. In response to the concerns raised regarding this legislation
encouraging State Governments to bring out similar amendments for
State protected monuments, the Ministry stated that the State Governments
have their own legislative framework and that they may amend their
Acts even without this amendment.
92. In view of the clarification given by the Ministry of
Culture, the Committee adopted the clause without any
amendment.
Clause 5
Clause 5: Provides for amendment of section 20-I.
93. In section 20-I of the principal Act, after clause (e), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) to consider the impact, including archaeological impact, visual

40
impact and heritage impact assessment, of public works which may
be proposed in the prohibited area and make recommendations to
the Central Government in respect thereof:
Provided that no recommendation for any construction works shall
be made unless the Authority is satisfied that there is no reasonable
possibility of any other viable alternative for shifting such construction
works beyond the limits of the prohibited area.”.
94. Clause 5 seeks to amend section 20-I of the Act. Clause
(ea) is proposed to be inserted in section 20-I mandating the
Authority to consider the impact, including archaeological impact,
visual impact and heritage impact assessment, of public works which
may be proposed in the prohibited area and make recommendations
to the Central Government. The proviso mandates that the Authority
can recommend a construction work only if no other viable alternative
is available.
Views of Witnesses
95. Some witnesses were of the view that the viable alternative
beyond the limit of prohibited area should be examined as part of the
heritage impact assessment process. The heritage impact assessment
should also assess the damages, if any, to the ancient landscape, increase
in pollution as well as social economic benefits to the local communities.
96. Some witnesses suggested that this Clause does not include
“environmental impact assessment”, which is a serious omission.
Views of the Ministry of Culture
97. The Ministry of Culture has stated that clause (e) of sub-
section (1) of Section 20-I deals with considering applications by NMA
and making recommendations with respect to projects and public works

41
essential to public in regulated areas. Since, under the proposed
amendment, projects essential to public and public works are being allowed
within prohibited area, a clause is being added to consider the impact of
large scale developmental projects, including public projects and projects
essential to public so that interest of heritage is protected in larger sense.
98. The Committee notes that the clause prescribes adequate
procedure and safeguards to ensure that public works are
permitted only after various kinds of impact assessment studies
and that too, if no other viable alternative is available.
99. The Committee, therefore, adopted the clause without
any amendment.
Clause 1
Clause 1: Short title and commencement
100. (1) This Act may be called the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
101. Clause 1 provides for the short title of the Bill as the
“Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Act, 2018”, and seeks to provide for the commencement
of the provisions of the Bill from such date as may be notified by
the Central Government.
102. The Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title of the
Bill were adopted with some changes which are consequential in
nature namely, '2018' and 'Sixty-eighth' to be substituted by '2019'
and 'Seventieth' respectively.

42
General suggestions/views of Witnesses/Ministries/Members
103. The nationally protected monuments should be marked out in
zonal/masterplans along with the prohibited area around them, so that
these can be noticed at the planning stage of a public project, thus
allowing development agencies to work with the rules in most cases. In
the interest of preservation of heritage, a decision on the Bill should be
kept in abeyance until complete data on categorization of monuments
and heritage bye-laws is finalized and made available to public by the
relevant authority.
104. Some Members were of the view that State Governments will
follow the cue of the Central Government and alter their own Acts to
allow construction within the prohibited zone for State protected
monuments. This legislation would thus have a cascading effect on several
other State Monuments as well.
105. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs suggested that Sections
3 & 4 of the principal Act may be appropriately amended for categorizing
monuments based on the number of footfalls per day. The prohibited and
regulated areas for the monuments may then be defined in Sections 20A
and 20B according to the category in which they belong.
106. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways cited several of its
projects viz., construction of major bridge across Panchganga river near
Kolhapur city, elevated highway in a length of 1.440 km at Sikandra on
NH-2, bridge approaches at km. 217.931 on NH-216 of Kathipudi-Ongole
section of National Highway and Chenab Bridge at km. 27.100 on
NH-1444A (Jammu-Akhnoor road), which were delayed due to the
provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 and will cause estimated cost overrun of Rs. 1.17

43
crores, Rs. 23 crores, Rs. 36.5 crores and Rs. 100.00 crores respectively.
On the hundred metres and two hundred metres limits prescribed as
prohibited and regulated areas respectively in Section 20A of the principal
Act, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways suggested that the
distance norms provided in the Act do not have any scientific basis and
appear to be arbitrary and that it was not advisable to prescribe any
distance norms in the Act as any such precaution regarding the safety
of the site or protection of the monument may vary in each case.
General Recommendations
107. The Committee understands the importance of preserving
our valuable ancient monuments and notes that all the involved
Ministries and Organizations agree with the same. However, the
formulation of certain rules and regulations in order to ensure the
same is indeed necessary. The law framed in pursuance of the
preservation of monuments need to maintain a delicate balance
between the preservation of our ancient monuments and
archaeological sites, and development of infrastructure that is in
harmony with the needs of the people living nearby these
monuments as well as tourists.
108. Site plans/maps for all monuments should be documented,
regardless of the amendments being proposed by the present Bill
and easy availability of the location of all nationally protected
monuments along with markings of their prohibited and regulated
area will go a long way in avoiding conflicts and delays in project
execution. This detailed map should be available and prominently
visible on the websites of ASI and NMA and available in their
local offices.

44
109. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Culture has
found no specific reasoning or scientific basis behind the 100
metre and 200 metre limit of the prohibited and regulated area of
a monument, respectively, that was initially prescribed in the ASI
notification dated 16th June, 1992 which was later validated and
given legal basis by the 2010 Amendment of the principal Act.
This is a serious cause of concern. The Ministry of Culture should
have looked into the scientific reasoning behind the area limits
before passing the legislation. The Committee noted that in some
of the monuments, the 100 metres prohibition may not be required
and in some other case, even the 100 metres prohibition may not
be sufficient to protect the monument. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that systematic study should be conducted by a body
of experts including archaeologists, historians, geologists and other
experts in the subject to figure out a rational area limit that
should be prescribed for prohibition of construction for
preservation and protection of a monument. There should not be
any blanket limit prescribed for construction; rather it should be
decided on case-by-case basis.
110. The Committee notes that most countries around the
world do not impose a blanket ban on all construction activities
in the vicinity of a monument. A general trend that is observed
in the comparable legislations of several countries is to decide
the limit of area to be prohibited depending on the nature of
monuments. This could be enabled in the context of our ancient
monuments once NMA has developed the Heritage Bye-Laws for
all the monuments. The Committee took serious note of the fact
that NMA could not frame the Bye-laws even after passage of

45
8 years. The Committee recommends that NMA should formulate
Bye-laws for all the protected monuments without any delay and
place those before Parliament so as to fulfill its responsibility.
111. The Committee notes that the AMASR Act empowers
the NMA to make recommendation to the Central Government
whether or not a construction work is public work. The Committee
observes that NMA has been given blanket powers to make such
recommendations without consulting the affected people or
experts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that NMA shall
decide whether or not a construction work is public work only
after requisite consultation with experts.
112. The Committee notes that Section 20F of the principal
Act provides for the National Monuments Authority consisting of
a Chairperson, five whole time Members, five part time Members
and DG , ASI as ex-Officio Member. The Committee further notes
that the existing provisions do not allow NMA for co-option of
subject experts or other domain experts who are having definite
knowledge on a particular monument. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 may suitably be amended to allow
co-option of subject experts and domain experts in NMA.
113. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that NMA
is nowhere on track of completing its mandate of creating heritage
bye-laws for all the nationally protected monuments, even after
8 years since the body was constituted under the provisions of
the AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010. The failure
of NMA in completing its duties is a matter of grave concern.

46
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that NMA should
expedite framing of the requisite bye-laws and lay the same in the
next Session of the Parliament.
114. The Committee notes the absence of feasible alternatives
in case of the DMRC's proposed Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro
project which passes through the prohibited area of the
Tughlaqabad Fort, a protected monument. DMRC informed the
Committee of the impact assessment study conducted by
international consultants on the impact of construction near the
monuments. The report they submitted was proof checked by
IIT, Delhi and it has been concluded that all monuments shall
remain safe during/after construction of metro tunnels and stations.
In light of this, the Committee observes that the definition of
public works in the present AMASR Bill does not cover public
utility projects that are not specifically critical for public safety
and security at large. Given the plethora of projects that are
carried out in the proximity of monuments all around the world,
the Committee fails to understand as to why the definition of
public works does not include such public works that are essential
for providing convenience to the public as long as it can be ensured
that such projects would not impact the monument under question.
The Committee recommends that the Government should find
out a via media  to operationalise the Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro
project which is an underground project.
115. The Committee feels that there are several different
types of structures among our ancient monuments and that
applying a one-fits-all strategy for their preservation is not the
best strategy. The Committee notes that the present Act bars all

47
sorts of constructions in the vicinity of all the Centrally protected
monuments and that this acts as an impediment to infrastructural
work even where studies prove that carrying out such work would
not impact the monuments.
116. The Committee notes various suggestions to form a local
level body to give permission for construction. The Committee
recommends that a body consisting of local people, architects,
engineers, experts, local level officers and the District Collector
etc. should be constituted to study the proposals of construction
and repair and submit suggestion to the Competent Authority and
Government on any kind of construction and repair activities
required to be carried out in the prohibited and regulated areas.
117. The Committee feels that as is the case with environment
clearances, there should be a public hearing when a project is
considered for grant of permission for construction in the prohibited
and regulated area of a Centrally protected monument since the
public needs to be involved in the decision making process. This
would bring transparency to the system while instilling a sense of
ownership and responsibility among the public. The Committee
further recommends that Environmental Impact Assessment may
also be factored in while considering an application for construction
work near a protected monument.
118. The observations/ recommendations of the Committee
may be taken into consideration while framing the subsequent
Notification / Rules related to the Bill.
119. The Committee notes that there is a need to revamp the
AMASR Act, 1958 according to the needs and circumstances of

48
the present-day India. The definition of public works needs a
thorough revision taking into account the claims and demands
made by various Ministries and stakeholders. Likewise, the 100
metres and 200 metres area restriction should be looked into
afresh based on scientific facts. There is a need to classify the
monuments taking into account various parameters such as
historical value, footfall of visitors, etc. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry may look into all these facts based
on the observations of the Committee and then come out with a
comprehensive legislation.
120. Be that it may, the Committee recommends the passage
of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018.

49
NOTE OF DISSENT

APPENDIX-I
NOTE OF DISSENT ON THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
(AMENDMENT) BILL 2018
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment Bill), 2018 (hereafter 'the Bill') and passed by the Lok
Sabha on 2nd January, 2018 was referred to the Select Committee
(hereafter 'the Committee') of the Rajya Sabha through a motion adopted
by the House on 26th July 2018. This bill was deliberated upon by the
Committee. After detailed discussions and amendments, the bill has been
adopted by the Committee without any amendments.
This is an amendment that we oppose and this dissent note outlines
the reasons for it.
(I) An Amendment against protection of monuments and
archaeological sites
The Bill for amending the existing act has not been framed for the
purpose of protecting and conserving ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains. Nor has it been moved for tackling the
enormous threats that these monuments and sites continue to face. Instead,
the reasons why sections of the existing Act have been sought to be
amended is for the express purpose of allowing the construction by the
Central Government of public works in their immediate vicinity - within
the 100 meters prohibited zone that surrounds protected national
monuments. It's crucial aforesaid objective (6, iii) states this in so many
words: 'The prohibition of new construction within prohibited area of a
protected area or protected monument, is adversely affecting the various
public works and developmental projects of the Central Government. In
51

52
order to resolve the situation arising out of the prohibition on any
construction under Section 20A of the Act, a need has been felt to
amend the Act to allow for construction works related to infrastructure
financed and carried out by any Department or office of the Central
Government for public purposes which is necessary for the safety or
security of the public at large.'
The bill, in other words, is driven by development at the cost of
maintaining the integrity of the existing security zone around protected
monuments. This is against the letter and spirit of the existing act which
has, for decades, been seen and used as a vanguard legislation for
protecting monuments and archaeological sites.
(II) An Amendment aimed at reversing the role of Parliament
In attempting to amend the existing act, the bill overturns the role
which India's Parliament has played in defending the archaeological and
monumental heritage of the nation. In the past, it has done so through
Committees and through legislation.
The role of Parliamentary Committees, as a couple of examples
described below would reveal, has uniformly been aimed at protecting
sites and monuments in keeping with India's constitutional provisions.
In 1973-74, a comprehensive assessment of the Archaeological
Survey of India was done by the Estimates Committee of the Lok Sabha
under the chairmanship of R.K. Sinha.
1 The excellent report of this
committee presented an honest and wide-ranging assessment of the
state of Indian archaeology and of Indian monuments. The measures it
suggested were for a better preservation of national monuments. It urged,
1 Report of the Estimates Committee (1973-74), Fifth Lok Sabha, Fifty Second Report,
Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, Archaeological Survey of India, April 1974,
New Delhi: Lok Sabha Secretariat.

53
for instance, effective steps to be taken to demarcate the limits of
protected areas at monuments and sites to prevent encroachment through
the preparation of survey plans. It also pointed to the theft and smuggling
of sculptures and art objects out of India and the tardy way in which the
Archaeological Survey of India (hereafter 'ASI') had handled the
construction of sculpture sheds to protect loose sculptures and antiquities.
In November 2005, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture, submitted a report under the chairmanship
of Nilotpal Basu. This report looked at the state of the ASI in great
detail, from the delay in the publication of its excavation reports to the
outsourcing of its work. It also revealed that the ASI had considered
handing over the National Mission of Antiquities to the American Institute
of Indian Studies, abdicating its own responsibilities. It stated in its report
that 'adequate care should be taken when finalizing such kind of a deal
so that the expenditure to be incurred on the National Mission of Antiquities
is spent in the best interests of the nation and valuable information....[is]
not handed over to foreign hands.
2
Through legislation, it is India's Parliament that has intervened when
the ASI has failed in its duty to adequately protect monuments. The
background to the 2010 amendment to the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act makes this evident.
The ASI and the Ministry of Culture were reminded of their
dereliction of responsibilities by Courts of law. A Delhi High Court
judgment of 2009 had pointed out that through an entirely illegal committee,
the ASI was guilty of proactively breaking the law that mandated it to
2 Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee Report on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, Ninety-First Report on Functioning of the ASI, Presented to the Rajya
Sabha on November 25, 2005.

54
safeguard monuments and was granting permissions within the prohibited
area of 100 m radius around the monuments. 3 It was as a consequence
of this judgment that in 2010, the Government of India set up a Committee
which recommended a new Bill to parliament. It is now known as the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment
and Validation Bill), having been unanimously passed by Parliament in
March 2010. It is this legislation which brought the prohibited and regulated
zones around monuments within the ambit of the Act itself, a provision
which already existed because of a 1992 notification. It was however,
a provision which was given legislative sanctity because of the 2010
amendment. This provision has been confirmed in a Supreme Court
judgment in 2012.
4
It does not behove Parliament that its role as an oversight body as
also as one that has strengthened existing laws for protecting monuments,
for the first time in the history of independent India, being overturned.
(III) Why should the 100 m prohibited zone remain as the 'red'
line?
Protected monuments have three demarcated segments, stipulated
by the Act in and around them: a protected area, a prohibited zone and
a regulated zone. The protected area is that of the monument, the
prohibited zone is where no new construction is allowed and the regulated
zone of some 200 m beyond the prohibited zone requires clearance from
the relevant authority before any change takes place within it. The
purpose of this zoning is to protect sites that are vulnerable to intrusive
human activity in their vicinity.
3 LPA 417/2009, Emca Construction Co. versus Archaeological Survey of India &
others. October 30, 2009 judgment of Chief Justice A.P. Shah and Justice S. Murlidhar.
4 SCC Civil Appeal Nos. of 2430 and 24311 / 2006, Archaeological Survey of India
versus Narender Anand and others. January 16, 2012 judgment of Justice G.S. Singhvi
and Justice A.K. Ganguly.

55
Of these, it is the prohibited zone which is sought to be compromised
by the provisions of the Bill.
Members of the Committee have argued that no rationale was
given in the ASI file notings for creating a prohibited zone of 100 m limit
from the protected area/monument. The fact that reasons were not
mentioned on file does not mean that this was not a thought through
decision. In my opinion, there are at least four reasons for the prohibited
zone being placed at 100 m.
(a) There is an aesthetic consideration which requires that the
integrity of a reasonable line of vision is maintained. This can only be
done if monuments are not 'welled in' by adjoining structures and keeping
such structures at a distance of 100 m from the boundary of the protected
monument. This is also what Bhaskar Ghose, the then Secretary, Culture,
highlighted in an email to me on 20th October 2018 (which was forwarded
to the Committee) as he recalled the background to the framing of rules
relating to the 100 m prohibited zone and a 200 m regulated zone:
'I do remember... visiting the madrasa built by Ferozshah Tughlak
in what is now Hauz Khas village and being horrified to see that
the wall of a large building housing a multi-storeyed restaurant had
been built literally on the outer wall of the madrasa compound. Not
close to, but ON the wall. There was, in fact, some restriction on
building close to protected monuments in the existing rules but these
were easy to circumvent and provided for little or no punishment
for violation. I went back to my office and we got the 100 and 200
metre rules framed and notified. It was possible because of the
then minister for HRD, under whom the Deptt. of Culture came,
the late Arjun Singh, who.... was.... genuinely concerned about
matters relation to heritage and culture.'

56
Additionally, there are monuments, we may point out, where the
prohibited zone is many times more than this as in the case of Agra's Taj
Mahal. Therefore, keeping a security blanket of 100 m around a
monument is the very minimum that needs to be done.
(b) There is a protective purpose that is served in keeping a
minimum demarcation line of 100 m. Frequently, archaeological evidence
exists beyond the protected site and even below the ground. This, if
construction and development work is allowed to proceed in its immediate
vicinity, would certainly be destroyed. In fact, in many instances, the
security blanket of 100 m has proved to be inadequate. The case of
Chandraketugarh in West Bengal is an example of this. The spread of
the archaeological site is massive while the protected areas highly
inadequate. Consequently, thousands of precious terracottas have been
dug out and sent out of the country through the illegal antiquities trade.
Like the Taj Mahal, if the prohibited zone around Chandraketugarh had
been much more considerable, large areas from where antiquities have
been dug up would not have been accessible. Therefore, there are good
archaeological reasons for ensuring that the 100 m provision is not tinkered
with and instead, on a case to case basis, is extended beyond the stipulated
provision.
(c) The standards that India has set for VIP zones across the
country should, at the very minimum, be the standard adopted for national
protected monuments. The Central Government and the State
Governments have protected the aesthetic norms and planning that are
an integral part of public and private VIP zones. The Lutyens Bungalow
zone and the Civil Lines area in New Delhi are examples of this. These
are zones which in many cases are relatively recent (less than one
hundred years old). Yet, no buildings will be allowed to come up in the

57
immediate vicinity of, for instance, Parliament House or the Old
Secretariat. On the other hand, those are norms that are sought to be
compromised in the Bill for monuments that have histories that go back
centuries and millennia and which have been recognized as national
monuments.
(d) Contrary to what is stated in the suggested amendment, there
will be a dangerous domino effect. It is no exaggeration to categorically
state that it will open a Pandora's box because it will lead to similar
amendments in the state legislations. Consequently, the bill which concerns
3650 + monuments will actually impact 10,000 + monuments.
The compromised heritage of India, thus, will not only be
compromised further by Central Government projects but it will be
extended by every State Government and the governments of Union
Territories to construct within the prohibited zone in their own lists. This
will be the ripple effect of the Centre allowing a relaxation in the
100 m zone. In fact, today it is 'public works' that are mentioned, tomorrow
it will be PPP that this will be extended to other kinds of projects.
(IV) The State of Monuments and Sites - Comptroller and Auditor
General's Report
A formidable CAG report was tabled in Parliament in 2013.
5 This
report highlighted the state of India's monuments and the encroachments
in their vicinity. Of the 1655 monuments where records were scrutinized
and a joint physical inspection conducted, 545 monuments were found to
be encroached. This, incidentally, was more than double the figure given
by the ASI to the CAG team. This included iconic sites like Dholavira
5 Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Report No. 18 of 2013,
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities,
Union Government (Civil): Ministry of Culture.

58
and Rangpur in Gujarat. At Rangpur, houses had been constructed on the
site and local people were using a portion of the site for taking out soil.
The bulk of the protected monuments, the report noted, had been neglected
for years. In fact, as it pointed out, unauthorized constructions and
encroachments are legion even at World Heritage Sites: 628 at Khajuraho,
194 at Fatehpur Sikri and 107 at Champaner.
Observation: It is the duty of Parliamentary and parliamentary
legislation to tackle the monumental scale of encroachments into the
100 m prohibited zone. Instead, the present government has brought in
a bill that seeks to compromise the prohibited zone.
(V) Views of Experts sought by the Select Committee
Overwhelmingly, the experts called by the Committee expressed
deep reservations about the amendments.
6
Shri Divay Gupta, Principal Director of INTACH, was of the view
that 'the viable alternative beyond the limit of prohibited areas should be
examined' as part of the Heritage Impact Assessment. The Ministry of
Culture, in fact, thought this to be a reasonable suggestion.
Professor Narayani Gupta, former member of the Delhi Urban Art
Commission, did not think that 'any public works should be permitted in
prohibited area'. As she pointed out, the prohibited area is no longer
prohibited 'if construction is proposed by any department or office of
Central Government'.
Dr. Rima Hooja, former member of the National Monuments
Authority (NMA hereafter), urged the select committee to 'disallow
6 For the opinions of experts invited by the Select Committee, 'Comments furnished
by the Ministry of Culture on the points raised in the memoranda received on the
AMASR (Amendment) Bill, 2018.

59
amendments and alterations to the AMASR Act that can undermine the
spirit and commitment expressed in the Constitution of India towards
protecting our nation's monuments, places and objects of artistic or historic
interest'. She also pointed out to the fact, based on her experience at the
NMA, that viable alternatives are found when there is a prohibited zone
which makes no exceptions for any government or body. Specifically,
she pointed to railway projects: 'NMA discussions with the concerned
railway authorities, and open-mindedness on all sides, led to a less drastic,
less intrusive to the monument, and less expensive alternative, of marginal
realignment of some sections of tracks, and partial addition of new
tracks'. The assumption by the Central Government of final authority
was also flagged by her since the Bill gave it the power to overrule the
'collective wisdom of the Government of India's own duly constituted
ASI and NMA.
Mr. Ranjit Gadgil, activist and program director of Parisar, argued
that with proper planning, any construction works can be undertaken to
avoid passing through the prohibited area of a protected monument.
Professor Himanshu Prabha Ray, former Chairperson of the NMA,
earnestly requested that in the interest of preservation of heritage, a
decision on AMASR amendment 2018 should be kept in abeyance until
complete data on categorization and Heritage bye-laws is finalized and
made available to the public by the relevant authority.
Professor Nayanjot Lahiri, former member of the Delhi Urban Art
Commission, stated that 'the aim of the Central and State Governments
should be to bring more monuments within the ambit of protection. It
should not be to endanger India's defenceless architectural and
archaeological heritage by changing the law in order to promote
development at all costs'.

60
Observation: The Committee sought the views of experts who
have been part of national bodies dealing with monuments and with
development projects in their vicinity. However, the detailed observations
given by them have not been incorporated. Instead, the bill in its original
form has been accepted without any amendments.
It is our view, as suggested by the former chairperson of the NMA,
that the Bill be kept in abeyance until the Heritage bye-laws are finalized
and tabled in Parliament.  Considering that the Committee has
recommended that the National Monuments Authority should lay
the requisite bye-laws in the Next Session of Parliament, this bill
should not be passed in the present session. Once the heritage
bye-laws are tabled, as was mandated by the 2010 amendment,
the bill can be taken up with requisite changes that would be
required in the light of these bye-laws.  On the other hand, if heritage
impact and visual impact are assessed — as the bill stipulates — when
a public work funded and executed by the Central government within the
prohibited zone comes up for consideration, it is likely that the assessments
will be tweaked in order to facilitate the proposal/s. The formal
procedure of drafting and tabling the heritage bye-laws is absolutely
necessary before the bill is passed.
Sd/-
Ambika Soni
Madhusudan Mistry
Jairam Ramesh
Binoy Viswan
K.K. Ragesh
February 4, 2019

61
APPENDIX-II
TIRUCHI SIV A M.A., B.L. 32, Canning Lane,
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT New Delhi - 110 001
RAJYA SABHA 33, S.B.O. Colony,
Cantonment,Tiruchirapalli-
620 001 (Tamil Nadu)
04.02.2019
NOTE OF DISSENT
On the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill 2018
To
Shri Vinay Sahasrabuddhe
The Chairman
Select Committee on The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill 2018
Dear Vinay Saharsabuddhe Ji,
My note of dissent on The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 is as follows:
(I) Proposed Amendment is against protection of monuments
and archaeological sites
The Bill for amending the existing act has not been framed for the
purpose of protecting and conserving ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains. Nor has it been moved for tackling
61


62
the enormous threats that these monuments and sites continue to
face. Instead, the reasons why sections of the existing Act have
been sought to be amended is for the express purpose of allowing
the construction by the Central Government of public works in their
immediate vicinity -within the 100 metres prohibited zone that
surrounds protected national monuments. Its crucial aforesaid
objective (6, iii) states this in so many words: 'The prohibition of
new construction within prohibited area of a protected area or
protected monument, is adversely affecting the various public works
and developmental projects of the Central Government. In order to
resolve the situation arising out of the prohibition on any construction
under Section 20A of the Act, a need has been felt to amend the
Act to allow for construction works related to infrastructure financed
and carried out by any Department or office of the Central
Government for public purposes which is necessary for the safety
or security of the public at large.'
The bill, in other words, is driven by development at the cost of
maintaining the integrity of the existing security zone around protected
monuments. This is against the letter and spirit of the existing act
which has, for decades, been seen and used as a vanguard legislation
for protecting monuments and archaeological sites.
(II) An Amendment aimed at reversing the role of Parliament
In attempting to amend the existing act, the bill overturns the role
which India's Parliament has played in defending the archaeological
and monumental heritage of the nation. In the past, it has done so
through Committees and through legislation.
Through legislation, it is India's Parliament that has intervened when
the ASI has failed in its duty to adequately protect monuments. The

63
background to the 2010 amendment to the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act makes this evident.
The ASI and the Ministry of Culture were reminded of their
dereliction of responsibilities by Courts of law. A Delhi High Court
judgment of 2009 had pointed out that through an entirely illegal
committee, the ASI was guilty of proactively breaking the law that
mandated it to safeguard monuments and was granting permissions
within the prohibited area of 100 m radius around the monuments. 1
It was as a consequence of this judgment that in 2010, the
Government of India set up a Committee which recommended a
new Bill to parliament. It is now known as the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation
Bill), having been unanimously passed by Parliament in March 2010.
It is this legislation which brought the prohibited and regulated zones
around monuments within the ambit of the Act itself, a provision
which already existed because of a 1992 notification. It was however,
a provision which was given legislative sanctity because of the 2010
amendment. This provision has been confirmed in a Supreme Court
judgment in 2012.
2
(III) Why should the 100 m prohibited zone remain as the 'red'
line?
(a) Protected monuments have three demarcated segments,
stipulated by the Act in and around them: a protected area, a
prohibited zone and a regulated zone. The protected area is
1 LPA 417/2009, Emca Construction Co. versus Archaeological Survey of India &
others. October 30, 2009 judgment of Chief Justice A.P. Shah and Justice S. Murlidhar.
2 SCC Civil Appeal Nos. of 2430 and 24311 / 2006, Archaeological Survey of India
versus Narender Anand and others. January 16, 2012 judgment of Justice G.S. Singhvi
and Justice A.K, Ganguly.

64
that of the monument, the prohibited zone is where no new
construction is allowed and the regulated zone of some 200 m
beyond the prohibited zone requires clearance from the relevant
authority before any change takes place within it. The purpose
of this zoning is to protect sites that are vulnerable to intrusive
human activity in their vicinity.
Of these, it is the prohibited zone which is sought to be
compromised by the provisions of the Bill. Additionally, there
are monuments, we may point out, where the prohibited zone
is many times more than this as in the case of Agra's Taj
Mahal.
Therefore, keeping a security blanket of 100 m around a
monument is the very minimum that needs to be done.
(b) There is a protective purpose that is served in keeping a
minimum demarcation line of 100 m. Frequently, archaeological
evidence exists beyond the protected site and even below the
ground. This, if construction and development work is allowed
to proceed in its immediate vicinity, would certainly be
destroyed. In fact, in many instances, the security blanket of
100 m has proved to be inadequate. The case of
Chandraketugarh in West Bengal is an example of this. The
spread of the archaeological site is massive while the protected
areas highly inadequate. Consequently, thousands of precious
terracottas have been dug out and sent out of the country
through the illegal antiquities trade. Like the Taj Mahal, if the
prohibited zone around Chandraketugarh had been much more
considerable, large areas from where antiquities have been

65
dug up would not have been accessible. Therefore, there are
good archaeological reasons for ensuring that the 100 m
provision is not tinkered with and instead, on a case to case
basis, is extended beyond the stipulated provision.
(c) Contrary to what is stated in the suggested amendment, there
will be a dangerous domino effect. It is no exaggeration to
categorically state that it will open a Pandora's box because it
will lead to similar amendments in the state legislations.
Consequently, the bill which concerns 3650 + monuments will
actually impact 10,000 + monuments.
The compromised heritage of India, thus, will not only be
compromised further by Central Government projects but it
will be extended by every State Government and the
governments of Union Territories to construct within the
prohibited zone in their own lists. This will be the ripple effect
of the Centre allowing a relaxation in the 100 m zone. In fact,
today it is 'public works' that are mentioned, tomorrow it will
be PPP that this will be extended to other kinds of projects.
(IV) The State of Monuments and Sites - Comptroller and Auditor
General's Report
Observation: It is the duty of Parliamentary and parliamentary
legislation to tackle the monumental scale of encroachments into
the 100 m prohibited zone. Instead, the present government has
brought in a bill that seeks to compromise the prohibited zone.
(V) It is in my view, as suggested by the former chairperson of the
NMA, that the Bill be kept in abeyance until the Heritage bye-laws

66
are finalized and tabled in Parliament. Considering that the Committee
has recommended that the National Monuments Authority should
lay the requisite bye-laws in the Next Session of Parliament, this bill
should not be passed in the present session. Once the heritage bye-
laws are tabled, as was mandated by the 2010 amendment, the bill
can be taken up with requisite changes that would be required in
the light of these bye-laws. On the other hand, if heritage impact
and visual impact are assessed - as the bill stipulates - when a
public work funded and executed by the Central government within
the prohibited zone comes up for consideration, it is likely that the
assessments will be tweaked in order to facilitate the proposal/s.
The formal procedure of drafting and tabling the heritage bye-laws
is absolutely necessary before the bill is passed.
Yours truly
Sd/-
(Tiruchi Siva)

67
APPENDIX - III
Manish Gupta 20, Suren Tagore Road
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT Kolkata - 700019,
(RAJYA SABHA) W est Bengal
Dy. Leader of A.I.T.C Ph. +91 9830018271
(Rajya Sabha) C - 603, Swarna Jayanti
Sadan Dr. B.D. Marg,
New Delhi-110001
Ph.+911123739272 / 73 + 91 9013181431
Email: manishg882@gmail.com
manish.guptal1@sansad.nic.in
Note of Dissent
To,
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe,
Hon'ble Member of Parliament,
Chairman,
Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Room No. 403, 4th Floor,
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building,
New Delhi - 110001 5th February, 2019
Sub: Note of Dissent
Re : Draft Report of the Select Committee on the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018
Sir,
67

68
As per the RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES and as a Member of this
SELECT COMMITTEE, I am forwarding herewith a NOTE OF
DISSENT. This also refers to the deliberations and the several issues
raised by me verbally and in writing in the Select Committee on the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment)
Bill, 2018. (Letter dated 2nd February, 2019 enclosed). None of these
have been incorporated especially or attributed to West Bengal State in
the Draft Report. (letter No.RS.2/2/2018-T&T dated 23rd January, 2019
received from Under Secretary, Rajya Sabha Secretariat reflects the
opinion as referred to — attached as Encl. at serial No.).
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018 relates mainly to relaxation of norms and
procedures for enabling "public works" in the ancient heritage areas in
the country.
The new definition of "public works" sought to be brought in, states
in the new sub-section "ja" that..... "where there is no reasonable
possibility of any other viable alternative......" This in itself nullifies the
very concept of "Environment Impact Assessment", "Public Hearing"
and consultation with the States. Safety and security of the public is of
paramount importance but should not be used to justify "Public Works"
as newly described, thereby endangering the very heritage we seek to
protect. Heritage belongs to all of us. The Central Government should
not want the final say above local public opinion (Public hearing) which
is in the domain of the States and the opinions of subject matter Experts.
We have suggested a Group of Experts and Public Hearing as part of

69
a "Transparent" process to satisfy our concerns provided the State
Government is involved as required on a "case by case" basis. The
tenets of cooperative federalism should not be given short shrift. Members
of the Select committee albeit in consensus have put forward several
suggestions and sought changes/additions but these have been cast aside
and no amendments have been incorporated in any Clause. In typical
style all the proposed Clauses have been adopted without any change or
amendment. The entire matter is also being unnecessarily rushed through
for whose benefit, it is not clear. In my opinion as also in the opinion of
several Members this treatment of a legislative responsibility entrusted
by Parliament should not be disposed of hurriedly in this fashion. Further
deliberations are essential in the public interest. More time should be
sought for by the Select Committee before submission of the Final
Report.
Several Members had suggested that the role of the State
Governments should be given due respect and accordingly had sought
changes in the proposed Clauses. These suggestions have also been
rejected. The views of the Ministiy of Culture which has at times has
been without substance has been given precedence. Our cultural heritage
and identity is moving towards a new description without any objectivity
which will willy nilly obliterate our history and the march of our civilization.
The Draft Report makes references to the consensus on some
desirable actions that were suggested by the Members but stops short
of incorporating any changes in the proposed Clauses in the Bill. Rather
the Select Committee in the Draft Report advises that these be only
incorporated in subsequent Notifications and Rules ! That on the face of
it doesn't make sense. If the primary Amendment Bill, 2018 does not

70
undergo any changes after so many months of deliberations and voicing
of legitimate concerns, no real purpose seems to have been served.
The Select Committee is being used as a rubber stamp so to speak.
The recommendations in the Draft Report basically seeks to give legislative
legitimacy to a blanket and open definition of "Public Works" to enable
the Central Government and it's department/agencies to carry out or
authorize construction work in the prohibited areas in the name of public
security and safety sans the NMA who would only have a performa
role. This is most unfortunate. The State of West Bengal has constantly
urged that all these issues should be highlighted in the text of the Final
Report and action be initiated to change the proposed Clauses to reflect
suggestions and consensus by the Members of the Select Committee in
the public interest. (Verbatim reports of all the proceedings of the
Select Committee meetings may kindly be included in the FINAL
REPORT)
In our developing nation we need to be circumspect about proposed
legislation that seeks to cover operations in an area which is dear to our
hearts. Depending too much on Rules and Notifications to be formulated
at a ‘later date' is fraught with risks. This leaves scope for
misinterpretation and misrepresentation. The main body of the Bill should
clearly include those basic changes on which there is a consensus in the
Select Committee. Merely admitting but only relaying the concerns raised
by Members in the text of the Draft Report is not adequate. Modern law
must be clear and meaningful in its basic postulates. It should not be left
to the Executive to formulate controls at their discretion or fix limits at
their convenience. Dependence on Rules and Notifications allow for this
kind of activity.

71
Without prejudice to my rights and contentions my Clause by Clause
comments is as under;-
Clause-2
a) In section 2, after clause (j) a new clause (ja) is sought to be
inserted.
In this proposed new clause in the definition "Public Works"
after the words "Central Government" the words "or State
Government" should be added.
b) Section 2 In the proposed new Clause "ja" in line 5 after
".....safety or security of the public at large", rest of the
proposed Clause "ja" should be deleted namely form "and there
is no reasonable possibility......limits of the prohibited area"
Clause-3
Seeks to amend sec 20 A of the act.
This proposed Clause 3 should be deleted in its entirety.
Clause - 5
(a) Seeks to amend sec 20-I.
Proposed subclause "(ea)” after the words "Impact Assessment"
the words "Environmental Impact Assessment and Public
Hearing" should be inserted.
(b) In this proposed amendment "(ea)” after the words "Central
Government", the words "the State Government as the case
may be", be inserted.

72
The protection and management of ancient monuments or
archaeological sites and remains should ensure that their importance
from the national point of view, integrity and authenticity at the time of
protection are atleast maintained, if not enhanced in future. There is a
significant role of culture heritage in defining our national identity.
The proposed amendment in the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 indicates a
probable resolve of the Government to push "development" at any cost
- social, environmental or cultural by what appears to be a dilution of the
AMASR Act. Public works are more often than not very large
infrastructure projects. Allowing these in the immediate vicinity of protected
monuments will defeat the very purpose of the AMASR Act and will be
in violation of Article 49 of the Constitution.
I would humbly urge that this NOTE OF DISSENT in its present
form which attaches my letters dated 3rd August, 2018 and 31st January,
2019 and all enclosures may kindly be included in the text of the FINAL
REPORT of this Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Thanking you,
Yours sincerely,
                                                         Sd/-
(Manish Gupta)
Member, Select Committee
Encl:
1. Copy of my letter dated 2nd February, 2019
2. Copy of my letter dated 4th February, 2019
3. Copy of my letter dated 3rd August, 2018

73
APPENDIX-III/(A)
Manish Gupta 20, Suren Tagore Road
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT Kolkata-700019, West Bengal
(RAJYA SABHA) Ph. +91 9830018271
Dy. Leader of A.I.T.C C - 603, Swarna Jayanti
(Rajya Sabha) Sadan Dr. B.D. Marg.
New Delhi-110001
Ph. +911123739272/73 +
91 9013181431
Email: manishg882@gmail.com
manish.gupta11@sansad.nic.in
To,
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe,
Hon'ble Member of Parliament,
Chairman,
Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Room No. 403, 4th Floor,
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building,
New Delhi-110001
2nd February, 2019
Re : Initial Comments on the Draft Report of the Select Committee
on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Sir,
This refers to the deliberations and the several issues raised by me
verbally and in writing in the Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments
73

74
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018. (Letter
dated 2nd February, 2019 enclosed). None of these have been incorporated
in respect of West Bengal State in the Draft Report.
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018 relates mainly to relaxation of norms and
procedures for enabling "public works" in the ancient heritage areas in
the country.
The new definition of "public works" sought to be brought in states....."
where there is no reasonable possibility of any other viable alternative".
This in itself nullifies the very concept of "Environment Impact
Assessment", Public Hearing and non-consultation with the States. Safety
and security of the public is of paramount importance but should not be
used to justify "Public Works" thereby endangering the very heritage we
seek to protect. Heritage belongs to all of us. The Central Government
should not want the final say above local public opinion (Public hearing)
and opinions of subject matter experts. We have suggested a Group of
Experts and Public Hearing as part of a "Transparent" process to satisfy
our concerns provided the State Government is involved as required on
a "case by case" basis. Members of the Select committee have given
several suggestions and advice but these have been cast aside and no
changes have been incorporated. In typical style all the Clauses have
been adopted without any change or amendment. The entire matter is
being unnecessarily rushed through for whose benefit, it is not clear.
Several Members had suggested that the role of the State
Governments should be given due respect and accordingly had sought
changes in the proposed clauses. These suggestions have been ignored.
The view of the Ministry of Culture which was at times without substance

75
has been given precedence. Our cultural heritage and identity is moving
towards renewal without any objectivity thereby obliterating our history
and the march of our civilization.
The Draft Report makes references to some desirable actions that
were suggested by the Members but stops short of incorporating any
changes in the proposed Clauses in the Act. Rather the Select Committee
in the Draft Report advises that these be incorporated in subsequent
Notifications and Rules! That on the face of it doesn't make sense.
In our developing nation we need to be circumspect about proposed
legislation that seeks to cover operations in an area which is dear to our
hearts. Depending too much on Rules to be formulated at a later date
is fraught with risks. Rules leave scope for misinterpretation and
misrepresentation. The main body of the Act should clearly include those
basic changes on which there is a consensus. Merely mentioning this in
the text of the Draft Report is not adequate. Modern law must be clear
and meaningful in the basic postulates. It should not be left to the Executive
to formulate controls at their discretion or fix limits at their convenience.
Dependence on Rules and Notifications allow for this kind of activity.
My comments Clause by Clause is as under; -
Clause-2
(a) In section 2, after clause (j) a new clause (ja) is sought to be
inserted. In this proposed new clause in the definition "Public
Works" after the words "Central Government" the words "or
State Government" should be added.
(b) In the proposed new Clause "ja" in line five after ".....safety
or security of the public at large", rest of the proposed Clause

76
should be deleted namely from "and there is no reasonable
possibility......limits of the prohibited area"
Clause - 3
Seeks to amend sec 20 A of the act.
This proposed Clause 3 should be deleted in its entirety.
Clause - 5
Seeks to amend sect 20-I.
Proposed subclause "(ea") after the words "Impact Assessment"
the words "Environmental Impact Assessment and Public Hearing"
should be inserted.
In this proposed amendment "(ea)' after the words "Central
Government", the words "the State Government as the case may
be", be inserted.
I would humbly urge that this letter and my letter dated 31st January,
2019 and its enclosures may kindly be included in the Final Report
of the Select Committee
Thanking you, Y ours sincerely,
                                          Sd/-
(Manish Gupta)
Member, Select Committee
Encl:
1. Copy of my letter dated 4th February, 2019
2. Copy of my letter dated 3rd August, 2018

77
APPENDIX-III/(B)
Manish Gupta
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT 20, Suren Tagore Road
(RAJYA SABHA) Kolkata-700019,
Dy. Leader of A.I.T.C West Bengal
(Rajya Sabha) Ph. +91 9830018271
C - 603, Swarna Jayanti
Sadan Dr. B.D. Marg.
New Delhi-110001
Ph. +911123739272/73 + 919013181431
Email: manishg882@gmail.com
manish.gupta11@sansad.nic.in
4th February, 2019
To,
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe,
Hon'ble Member of Parliament,
Chairman,
Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Room No. 403, 4th Floor,
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building,
New Delhi-110001
Sub: Gist of Comments received from State Governments/ UTs on
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018
77

78
Ref: Office of the Select Committee Letter No. RS.2/2/2018-T&T
dated 23rd January, 2019 signed Under Secretary, Rajya Sabha
Secretariat.
Dear Sir,
Please refer to above letter No.RS.2/2/2018-T&T dated 23rd January,
2019. A Gist of Comments of the State Governments/UTs has been
enclosed with respect to deliberations of the Select Committee on the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment)
Bill, 2018
It is observed from the enclosure to the letter under reference that
the comments from the Government of West Bengal have not been
included. Apart from what has stated by the undersigned in the meetings
of the Select Committee held on 1st August, 2018 (ref. page 21 and
22 - Verbatim proceedings) and on 6th August, 2018 (ref. page 24 and
25 - Verbatim proceedings).
The undersigned has also sent the detailed views of the State
Government of West Bengal in a letter dated 3rd August, 2018 (copy
enclosed). I would request you to kindly incorporate the same in your
Records and to kindly ensure that these are adequately reflected in the
Draft and Final Report of the Select Committee in so far as it pertains
to the views of the State of West Bengal.
The Draft Report of the Select Committee does not reflect the
views of the Government of West Bengal submitted through the
undersigned. This looks like an unfortunate departure.

79
Para IV- "Views of the State Governments at page 18 of the Draft
Report also does not reflect the views of the Government of West
Bengal.
Thanking you,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Manish Gupta)
Member of Select Committee
Encl:
1. Copy of my letter dated 3rd August, 2018
2. Extract of the Verbatim proceedings dated 1st August, 2018
3. Extract of the Verbatim proceedings dated 6th August, 2018

80
APPENDIX-III/(C)
   Manish Gupta 20, Suren Tagore Road
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT Kolkata - 700019,
(RAJYA SABHA)  W est Bengal
Dy. Leader of A.I.T.C Ph. +91 9830018271
(Rajya Sabha) C - 603, Swarna Jayanti
Sadan, Dr. B.D. Marg.
New Delhi-110001
Ph. +911123739272/73 +  91 9013181431
Email: manishg882@gmail.com
manish.gupta11@sansad.nic.in
3rd August, 2018
To,
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe,
Hon'ble Member of Parliament,
Chairman,
Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Room No. 403, 4th Floor,
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building,
New Delhi-110001
Ref: Meeting of the Select Committee held on 01.08.2018
Sir,
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill. 2018. relates mainly to relaxation of norms and
procedures for enabling construction, reconstruction and renovation of
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites as also for ensuring mainly
80

81
Public Safety and Security in the prohibited and regulated areas, as
described.
In Section 2, a new defination of "Public Works'" is sought to be
brought in within the qualification "Will be as it is for the safety and
security of the public at large and emergent necessity is based on specific
instance of danger in the safety or security of the public at large where
there is no reasonable possibility of any other viable alternative"
In Section 20, Clause (ea) is proposed to be inserted where the
National Monuments Authority (NMA.) will consider archaeological impact,
visual impact and heritage impact for proposed work in the prohibited
area and regulated areas. All the above considerations through power
concentrated in the Government of India or its subsidiaries arc likely to
became contentious in the long run.
The local public at several Ancient Monument sites are unlikely to
be satisfied with the procedure followed for interference in the name of
safety and security. They need to be involved in the decision-making
process. Visual interference and adverse visual impact is also likely to
be within their primary focus alongwith the fear of invisible structural
impact.
Therefore, the concerned State Governments should be involved
and provisions included accordingly in the Act.
In the case of Environment Clearance preceded by Environment
Impact Assessment both Rapid and Final is a well-established practice.
Public Hearing is decreed and is an essential part of this process. The
same procedure should be introduced in the amendments and the Rules
to meet the concerns of the public. Public Hearing should be made
mandatory. Comprehensive Impact Assessment should be made statutory.

82
EIA can look into various problems, conflicts and harm to monuments
which can also predict if a project might cause harm to the public/
people, their land and livelihoods. It can also maximise the beneficial
effects. Their findings can be discovered through a two - way process
betwen all stakeholders, developers, investors, regulators, planners,
politicians and affected communities.
A short-term or rapid EIA for preliminary screening may be desirable.
It seems that several Ministries of the Central Government could be
involved depending on the projects proposed to be undertaken in the
Prohibited or Regulated Area. This is a complication and the NMA can
probably not by itself be competent to apprise projects as they may not
have the expertise. The type of assessments prescribed under the
Environment Protection Act. 1986 appear to be a good option. Summary
disposal by the NMA is not desirable.
"Public Hearing” in the EIA process in involving the public is one
of the basic principles and provides an opportunity to the people to
highlight any safety or security issues. It also allows any directly affected
people to express their concerns and brings transparency into the system
of project clearance. There are several Hon'blc Supreme Court Rulings
on the importance of "Public Hearing”.
Emergent public safety and security is the responsibility of the State
Government and this should be kept in mind and suitable provisions
incorporated in the Act. while seeking to design projects to address
public security and safely.
Chairman may also kindly consider incorporating the views expressed
by the Members in the several meetings of the Committee held from

83
time to time in the Final Report of this Select Committee including all
written communications from Members.
Any move to bring in Amendments without about giving due
importance to the role of the State Government who represent the local
public is fraught with serious consequences. Project appraisal to obviate
any advance impact on structural stability, visual impact, heritage impact
and fool-proof safety and security for public at large should be done
through well-trodden paths. I would urge that this aspect should be given
due importance and suitable changes in the Amendments may be brought
in, accordingly.
Our heritage and the symbols of our heritage are the quintessences
of our culture. Concerns for protecting our environment is also of great
importance and equally important to a great extent are our ancient
structures, monuments and edifices which give us a glimpse of our
history and the journey of our civilisation.
In the Environment Protection Act, 1986 under Section 5, the Central
Government has delegated powers to the State Governments. This Act
was enacted by Parliament in the wake of the Bhopal Tragedy where
thousands lost their lives. Subsequently more Protection Acts for eg.
Wildlife, Forests, Water etc. were enacted. All these also talk about
preservation of hazards to human beings and other living creations, plants
and property.
Later the Environment Impact Assessment/ Regulations came into
being in 1994. It has been made mandatory for specified projects to
conduct an Environment Impact Assessment (ElA) provided for under
the Environment Protection Act, (EPA) 1986. The primary aim is to

84
assess the potential impact of a project on the environment and
consequently on the public. The ElA identifies key impacts/ issues.
This procedure can be followed  mutatis mutandis for all work in
the Prohibited Areas and the Regulated Areas of Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites after a through examination and realignment to
fit in with the Amendment Bill, 2018 which is under consideration.
With best regards.
Yours faitfully,
Sd/-
(Manish Gupta)
Member of Select Committee

85
APPENDIX-III/(D)
Copy of the Verbatim record of the proceedings
dated 1st August, 2018
SHRI MANISH GUPTA: Sir, the entire amendments that are being
proposed, the power to decide one way or the other depends on the
Central Government or the National Monuments Authority. There are
two issues here.
That fact is that this entire amendment is sought to be brought on
the matter of public safety and security. Now, public safety and security
is necessarily a local issue. That is one part. So, the State Government
needs to be involved because, after all, laws are made for the people of
India. So, we have to look, be careful, and be circumspect when we
bring new amendments.
The other issue is the visual and archaeological impact. This is
again a matter which will impact the public. As you know, for environment
clearances, there is a well—established system in which you have a
public hearing. The Environment Authority, whoever it is designated,
have to have a public hearing before they undertake any project. Now,
with the evolution of our society, I think, we need to involve the public
more and more in what we do, and what we legislate. So, I think, that
aspect has to be considered so that there is no misgiving in the minds
of public as to why a particular project is being undertaken. And also,
you have mentioned here that you looked into this fact of visual impact.
This is very important. In most monuments, I have seen where work is
done, there is some visual change. This is undesirable. So, that is why,
these aspects need to be looked into, and public needs to be involved,
85

86
and the best way to involve them is through public hearing, as we have
in the case of environment clearance. Thank you.
SHRI KANAKAIVEDALA RA VINDRA KUMAR: The ancient
monuments and archaeological sites are already in existence. Can you
identify them State—wise? Does it require an absolute power rested
with the Government by making an Amendment? Unless proper
monuments are identified, to have such a requirement is really not
necessary. It must be considered. Giving absolute power to the Government
is immaterial. I can understand if it is a future unforeseen event that is
kept in mind. It is better to identify wherever such things are for public
safety.
DR. SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY: Section 2, which you sought to
amend or expand, defines also the national monuments. Many clauses
that you introduced are essentially discretionary in the sense that it will
be decided by the National Monuments Authority. It means, it is subject
to challenge in the court of law. To minimise....

87
APPENDIX-III/(E)
Copy of the Verbatim record of the proceedings
dated 6th August, 2018
...sure whether in any of the State Governments, the concept of
prohibited and regulated area exists.
CHAIRMAN: Really?
SHRI NA VNEET SONI: I am not very sure, Sir.
SHRI SAMBHAJI CHHATRAPATI: It is very important.
†¬μÖõÖ : £ÖÖê›ÌüÖ ÃÖÖ  examine Ûúß×•Ö‹, μÖÆü ²ÖÆãüŸÖ ´ÖÆüŸ¾Ö¯ÖæÞÖÔ Æîü…
SHRI SAMBHAJI CHHATRAPATI: Sir, we are talking only about
Central ASI, but almost 40 per cent of this kind of monuments fall under
the State ASI.
†¬μÖõÖ : ‡ÃÖß ÃÖÓ¤ü³ÖÔ ´Öë ¾Öê ²ÖÖê»Ö ¸üÆêü Æïü ×Ûú ¾ÖÆüÖÓ ŸÖÖê †Öî¸ü ³Öß †Ö®Ö®¤ü Ûúß ×Ã£Ö×ŸÖ Æîü…
SHRI MANISH GUPTA: Sir, I have given a letter regarding this
entire affair. We are talking in this amendment basically about safety and
security of public; we are talking about visual impact impairment, structural
damage. In this, I fully agree with the other Members.
We must have a separate Expert Committee or a body which will
be able to judge as to whether the public works which are proposed to
be undertaken can be undertaken. And the well-tested method is to have
public hearings. All the stakeholders should be involved. When we talk
about public interest, we must really involve the public. When the
Environment Protection Act, 1986 was enacted, they did not have public
hearing initially. It was later or instituted by certain judgments given by
the Suprerme Court saying that the public should be involved. When the
public is involved, the State Government has to be involved. I have given
87

88
the details in my letter. We know that the NMA basically plays a pivotal
role in this. But this amendment actually seeks to enable more public
works in a controlled manner in the prohibited and regulates areas. This
is very important that there should be an Expert Body which should be
able to decide on it and all the stakeholders should be able to voice their
opinions, their apprehensions and their concerns.
†¬μÖõÖ : šüßÛú Æîü… It is well taken. ŒμÖÖ †Ö¯ÖÛúÖê Ûãú”û ÛúÆü®ÖÖ Æîü?
ÁÖß ®Ö¾Ö®ÖßŸÖ ÃÖÖê®Öüß : ÃÖ¸ü, ´Öî›ü´Ö ®Öê ‹Ûú  issue raise ×ÛúμÖÖ £ÖÖ, ´Öï ˆÃÖ ¯Ö¸ü Ûãú”û ÛúÆü®ÖÖ
“ÖÖÆüŸÖÖ ÆæÓü… I would just like to read one portion from the law. The hon.
Member spoke about different classes of monuments. Some cannot be
violated at all and there are some where a view can be taken.
SHRIMATI AMBIKA SONI: Experts should take a view on that.
SHRI NA VNEET SONI: Madam, Section 20A says that every
area beginning at the limit of the protected area or...

89
APPENDIX - IV
Binoy Viswam 116, North Avenue,
Member of Parliament New Delhi-110001
(Rajya Sabha) Mob: 9605766702
E-mail: binoyviswam55@gmail.com
Dr. Vinay Sahasrabuddhe
Chairman, Select Committee
Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites
5th February, 2019
Note of Dissent
I write these lines after watching the video clippings of vandalism
in Hampi, the prestigious heritage site, approved by UNESCO.
The Authorities, including ASI failed to protect the monument from
the criminal vandalism.
I am of the opinion that if the present amendments are carried
through, ancient monuments all over the country would be thrown opened
before such kind of criminals and miscreants.
Many encroachments may take place in the name of development
also.
Hence, I reiterate the view that the bill be differed till the bye-laws
are approved for the protection of monuments. There is a growing
tendency in the country in approaching the monuments with a communally
surcharged perspective, which of course is a dangerous trend. In its
haste for 'ease of doing business,' the Govt. ignores such facts. Hence
this dissent.
(Binoy Viswam)
Div. No. 174
Sd/-
89

90
APPENDIX-V
K.K. RAGESH Office : (Delhi)
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT 223, Vithalbhai Patel
(RAJYA SABHA) House Rafi Marg,
Member : Standing Committee New Delhi - 110001
on Industry Cell: 09013181600
Member: Consultative Committee.
Ministry of Labour and Employment
Chairman of the State Consultative
Committee of Food Corporation of
India for the State of Kerala
To
The Chairman
Select committee on AMASR (Amendment) Bill, 2018
Subject: The Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill 2018 - apprehensions opined by the members
of the Select committee submission towards inclusion in the
final report regarding.
Hon'ble Chairman,
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment Bill), 2017 (hereafter 'the Bill') and passed by the Lok
Sabha on 18th July 2017 was referred to the Select Committee (hereafter
'the Committee') of the Rajya Sabha through a motion adopted by the
House on 26th July 2018. This bill was deliberated upon by the Committee.
After detailed discussions and amendments, the bill has been adopted by
90

91
the Committee without any amendments. Hence the following well-thought
out apprehensions opined by the members of the Select committee is
submitted for inclusion in the final report:-
(1) The section 20(A) of AMSAR Act 1958 states that 100 meters
around a protected monument will be a prohibited area.
Construction is not permitted in such protected areas. But the
AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018 permits construction in such
protected areas if it is for public purposes. The bill, in other
words, is driven by development at the cost of maintaining the
integrity of the existing security zone around protected
monuments. This is against the letter and spirit of the existing
act which has, for decades, been seen and used as vanguard
legislation for protecting monuments and archaeological sites.
(2) But the AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018 stipulates the sole
right to provide such permission to Central government and
extends the mere right to submit report whether any proposed
construction is for public purpose or not, to the National
Monument Authority (NMA). In effect the Bill makes NMA
a mere toothless tiger. The Section 20A(3) in the Amendment
allows the Central Government or the Director General, ASI
to permit public works within the prohibited area. It eventually
makes the Central Governments to take a final call on permitting
"public works' irrespective of the recommendations by the ASI,
which is substantiated by the report of the experts.
(3) Protected monuments are not just aging civil structures. Every
protected monument has a lot of sensitivity, significance, and

92
history attached to it. We cannot rebuild such monuments today,
if it is damaged. The materials used, the shape, the ambiance
and the surroundings - everything make the monument speak
of history. Altering the above may amount to altering or re-
writing of history. So anything which have chances to affect
monuments should be do away with, and the amendment
weakens the scope of addressing the above considerations.
(4) Anything - say it, permissions for maintenance, or development
of facilities are if at all needed, should be done with the experts
from the fields of history, architecture, archaeology, structural
engineering etc. on board. Just a legal mechanism brought by
this AMASR amendment won't serve the purpose. We cannot
just re-write history or we should not re-write history nor can
we allow it, by using such legislative amendment. The scope
of alteration of history with the help of AMASR (Amendment)
Bill 2018 cannot be ruled out.
(5) There shall be provision in the Act itself to ensure "case to
case” assessment of each monument. Likewise, it may not be
advisable to prescribe any distance norms in the Act as any
such precaution regarding the safety of the site or protection
of the monument may vary in each case (from site to site and
monument to monument) especially in terms of any adverse
impact thereto from the nature of project proposed to be taken
up in close proximity to such area and that such an assessment
should be left to the Authority and the subject experts. The
stipulation of the 100 metres and 200 metres area as protected

93
and regulated area, is arbitrary and unnecessary and that a
relook is needed on this criteria. It was neither legislation nor
a Cabinet decision and hence sufficient provisions in the Act
shall be included to set aside and prohibit such bureaucratic
decisions, which would harm the protection of monuments.
(6) The submission of NMA and the Ministry of Culture that 59
monuments under the category of "rarest of rare cases” are
awaiting permission for "public works” pin points to the scope
of harm that the amendment might cause to the archeological
monuments, which is van-guarded under the existing Act.
(7) The amendment would encourage State Governments to pass
similar legislations for monuments under their jurisdiction and
shall endanger the protection of the archeological monuments
in general, in future and hence adequate provision to address
this shall be included in the amendment.
(8) The Amendment sounds skeptical at the backdrop of Centre's
decision to allow Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects in
various archeological sites. The private entities or CSR partners
which are in such PPP project should not misuse the AMASR
(Amendment) Bill 2018. Hence the definition of "public works”
should be further stipulated in the in case of AMASR
(Amendment) Bill 2018, as it is now evident that in the case
Public Private Partnerships in building public infra-structure,
commercial viability is getting precedence over other
considerations, which may undermine the interest of protecting
archeological and historic monuments.

94
Therefore, it is further urged that AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018
shall be buffered till the aforesaid apprehensions are adequately addressed.
Thanking you very much.
Regards,
(K.K. Ragesh)
Div. No. 165
Sd/-

95
NOTES RECEIVED FROM
MEMBERS

APPENDIX-VI
K.K. RAGESH Office : (Delhi)
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT 220, Vithalbhai Patel House
(RAJYA SABHA) Rafi Marg
Member : Standing Committee New Delhi - 110001
on Industry Cell: 09013181600
Member : Consultative Committee
Ministry of Labour and Employment
Chairman of the State Consultative
Committee of Food Corporation of
India for the State of Kerala
1/08/2018
Sub: The Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment Act) 2017
Hon'ble Chairman,
The Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill 2018 stands as passed by Lok Sabha in January 2018
(The Bill proposes to amend AMASR Act 1958). Regarding this, the
following concerns are submitted for your consideration and perusal:-
1. The section 20(A) of AMSAR Act 1958 states that 100 meters
around a protected monument will be a prohibited area.
Construction is not permitted in such protected areas.
2. But the AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018 permits construction
in such protected areas if it is for public purposes.
3. But the AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018 stipulates the sole
right to provide such permission to Central government and
97


98
extends the mere right to submit report whether any proposed
construction is for public purpose or not, to the National
Monument Authority (NMA). In effect the Bill makes NMA
a mere toothless tiger.
4. It is widely known that the pressure for such an amendment
in AMASR Act came up when the Archeological Survey of
India (ASI) declined permission for a six lane highway (in the
Delhi-Kanpur Highway) near Akbar's Tomb at Sikandra.
5. Hence the AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018 is an attempt to
place blind and unrestricted urbanization over history and cultural
heritage of India.
6. The Act if passed and implemented can be easily misused by
builders under the definition of 'public works'.
7. It is worthwhile to remember here that a report by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India, in 2013, has stated
that 92 historical monuments have gone missing as result of
developmental activities and another 321 historical monuments
has already been encroached upon.
8. The Amendment sounds skeptical at the backdrop of Centre's
decision to allow Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects in
various archeological sites. The private entities or CSR partners
which are in such PPP project should not misuse the AMASR
(Amendment) Bill 2018.
9. More over the AMASR (Amendment) Bill 2018 extends
permission to undertake construction activities in various
prohibited areas around protected monuments if the construction

99
is a part of 'Central government project' which has a public
purpose.
10. However does not mention whether any such project by a
'state government' can avail such permission for construction.
Hence, more clarity is needed in this AMASR (Amendment) Bill
2018, regarding the above concerns.
Thanking you very much.
Regards,
     Sd/-
(K.K. Ragesh)

100
APPENDIX - VII
DR. SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
Ph.D. (Harvard) (Rajya Sabha)
Cabinet Minister for Commerce, Res.: AB-14, Pandara Road,
Law & Justice (1990-91) New Delhi - 110 003
Chairman (with Cabinet rank), Phone & Fax: +91 11 23387278
Commission on Labour Standards E-mail: swamy39@gmail.com
and International Trade (1994-96) swamy@post.harvard.edu
Former Professor of Economics,
Indian Institute of Technology,
Delhi & Faculty, Harvard University
President, Virat Hindustan Sangam
February 5, 2019.
The Chairman,
Select Committee on the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment)
Bill, 2018
Room No. 403, 4th Floor,
Parliament House Extension
Building, New Delhi.
Dear Mr. Chairman,
I write this letter as per your suggestion at the last meeting of the
Committee on February 4, 2019 to send additional suggestions regarding
further amendment to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains (Amendment) Bill for the future. My suggestion is the
following: Of the 3000 ancient monuments recognized by the ASI and
100

101
the National Monument Committee, there are several monuments which
were built by violence carried out by the foreign invaders in the past. As
a result of which these designated national heritage monuments were
built by demolishing earlier monuments. Hence I suggest that this
Committee or the successive Committee should review the list of
monuments and weed out those monuments which were carried out by
violence by the foreign invaders.
With Regards,
Yours sincerely,
   Sd/-
(Subramanian Swamy)

APPENDIX-VIII
TIRUCHI SIV A, M.A., B.L. 32, Canning Lane,
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT New Delhi - 110 001
RAJYA SABHA 33, S.B.O. Colony, Cantonment,
Tiruchirapalli-620 001
(Tamil Nadu)
5/2/2019
To
Shri Vinay Sahasrabuddhe,
The Chairman
Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill 2018.
Dear Shri Vinay Sahasrabuddhe Ji,
We, the undersigned are of the view that The Ancient Monuments
and Archeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill 2018 if passed
will open the flood gates across the country enabling any Government of
the day, to construct structures in the name of the public security thereby
damaging ancient monuments and heritage sites which are prestigious
and unique symbols of our ancient varied cultures.
As per the conventions of the Parliamentary Committee System,
though we have given dissent notes separately, we urge hereby to defer
considering and passing of this Bill in the Upper House till the necessary
bylaws are framed and the apprehensions expressed by the Select
Committee are adequately addressed.
Sd/-
(Tiruchi Siva)
(K.K. Rajesh)
(Binoy Viswam)
(N. Gokula Krishnan)
(Jairam Ramesh)
(Jaya Bachchan)
(Madhusudan Mistry)
(Manish Gupta)
Sd/- Sd/-
102

BILL AS REPORTED BY THE
SELECT COMMITTEE

THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SITES AND REMAINS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS REPORTED BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE)
THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SITES AND REMAINS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
105
Be it enacted by Parliament in the
Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such
date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,1958
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2, after clause (j), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ja) "public works" means construction
works related to infrastructure financed
Short title
and
commencement
Amendment
of section
2.
24 of 1958

106
and carried out by any department or
office of the Central Government for
public purposes which is necessary for
the safety or security of the public at
large and emergent necessity is based on
specific instance of danger to the safety
or security of the public at large and there
is no reasonable possibility of any other
viable alternative to such construction
beyond the limits of the prohibited area;'.
3. In section 20A of the principal Act,
after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (4)
shall apply to the public works:
Provided that any question as to whether
or not a construction works is public works,
shall be referred to the Authority which shall
on being satisfied make its recommendation,
for the reasons to be recorded in writing, to
the Central Government whose decision
thereon shall be final:
Provided further that if the decision of
the Central Government differs from the
recommendation of the Authority, the Central
Government shall record its reasons thereof.
Amendment of
section 20A

107
(6) Any Department or office of the
Central Government proposing to carry
out any construction works, including
reconstruction or repair or renovation,
of any public works in the prohibited
area, shall make an application to the
competent authority for carrying out such
construction works.
(7) Upon decision of the Central
Government determining a construction
works as public works in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (5),
the competent authority shall convey the
decision of the Central Government to
the applicant within ten days of the
receipt of such decision.
(8) The provisions of section 20C shall
apply mutatis mutandis to the public
works in a prohibited area.".
4. In section 20D of the principal Act,
in sub-section (8), for the words "Director
General", the words "competent authority"
shall be substituted.
5. In section 20-I of the principal Act,
after clause (e), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely: —
"(ea) to consider the impact,
including archaeological impact, visual
impact and
Amendment
of section
20D.
Amendment
of section
20-I.

heritage impact assessment, of public
works which may be proposed in the
prohibited area and make
recommendations to the Central
Government in respect thereof:
Provided that no recommendation for any
construction works shall be made unless the
Authority is satisfied that there is no reasonable
possibility of any other viable alternative for
shifting such construction works beyond the
limits of the prohibited area.".
108

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II
No. 57989  Friday, July 27, 2018 Committee Co-ordination Section
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
As members are aware that the Rajya Sabha, at its sitting held on
the 26th July, 2018, adopted the following motion referring the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill,
2018 to a Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha:-
"That the Bill further to amend the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, as passed by Lok Sabha,
be referred to a Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha consisting of the
following Members:-
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Binoy Viswam
5. Shri Biswajit Daimary
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
7. Shri Jairam Ramesh
8. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan
9. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
10. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
11. Shri K. K. Ragesh
111

112
12. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
13. Shri Manish Gupta
14. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
15. Dr. Narendra Jadhav
16. Shri Naresh Gujral
17. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
18. Shri Parimal Nathwani
19. Shri Prasanna Acharya
20. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
21. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Shri Sanjay Raut
24. Ms. Saroj Pandey
25. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
26. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
27. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
28. Shri Tiruchi Siva
The Committee shall fulfill its task and report to the Rajya Sabha
before the 8th of August, 2018 and if needed, extension of time be
granted”.
2. The Chairman, Rajya Sabha has appointed Dr. Vinay P .
Sahasrabuddhe, Member, Rajya Sabha, to be the Chairman of the
Committee.
Desh Deepak Verma
Secretary-General

113
ANNEXURE-II
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Select Committee
on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018
1st August, 2018
Ministry of Culture
1. Sh. Raghvendra Singh Secretary
2. Sh. Pranav Khullar Joint Secretary
3. Sh. Harish Kumar Director
Archaeological Survey of India
4. Smt. Usha Sharma Director General
5. Sh. Rakesh Singh Lal Additional Director General
6. Smt. Urmila Sant Additional Director General
7. Sh. Janhwij Sharma Joint Director General
8. Sh. T.J. Alone Director (Monuments)
9. Sh. V .N. Prabhakar Suptd. Archaeologist
National Monuments Authority
10. Dr. Susmita Pande Chairperson
11. Sh. Navneet Soni Member Secretary
Legislative Department
12. Sh. N.R. Battu Joint Secretary and Legislative
Counsel
13. Sh. Diwakar Singh Additional Legislative Counsel
14. Sh. Ramesh Chander Kathia Director
113

114
Department of Legal Affairs
15. Sh. Suresh Chandra Secretary
16. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana Joint Secretary and Legal
Advisor
6th August, 2018
National Monuments Authority
1. Sh. Navneet Soni Member Secretary
Archaeological Survey of India
2. Sh. T.J. Alone Director (Monuments)
10th September, 2018
1. Prof. Nayanjot Lahiri Professor, Ashoka University,
Sonepat
2. Ms. Narayani Gupta Historian and retired Professor,
Delhi University
3. Sh. Vasant Shinde Director
Ministry of Culture
4. Sh. Pranav Khullar Joint Secretary
5. Sh. Harish Kumar Director
Archaeological Survey of India
6. Smt. Usha Sharma Director General
7. Sh. Rakesh Singh Lal Additional Director General
8. Smt. Urmila Sant Additional Director General

115
9. Sh. Janhwij Sharma Joint Director General
10. Sh. T.J. Alone Director (Monuments)
National Monuments Authority
11. Sh. Navneet Soni Member Secretary
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.
12. Dr. Mangu Singh Managing Director
13. Sh. D.K. Saini Director (Projects)
18th September, 2018
Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Pranav Khullar Joint Secretary
2. Shri Harish Kumar Director
Archaeological Survey of India
3. Smt. Usha Sharma Director General
4. Shri Rakesh Singh Lal ADG (Admn.)
5. Smt. Urmila Sant ADG
6. Smt. Janhwij Sharma Joint D.G.
7. Shri T.J. Alone Director
National Monuments Authority
8. Dr. Susmita Pande Chairperson
9. Shri Navneet Soni Member Secretary
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
10. Shri Yudhvir Singh Secretary
11. Shri A.P . Pathak Chief Engineer

116
National Highways Authority of India
12. Shri R.K. Pandey Member
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
13. Shri Durga Shanker Mishra Secretary
14. Ms. Usha Batra ADG, CPWD
15. Shri K. Sanjay Murthy Joint Secretary
16. Shri M.K. Sinha OSD & Joint Secretary (UT)
16th October, 2018
Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Arun Goel Secretary
2. Shri Pranav Khullar Joint Secretary
3. Shri Harish Kumar Director
Archaeological Survey of India
4. Smt. Usha Sharma Director General
5. Shri Rakesh Singh Lal ADG (Admn.)
6. Shri T.J. Alone Director
7. Shri D.N. Dimri Director
National Monuments Authority
8. Dr. Susmita Pande Chairperson
9. Shri Navneet Soni Member Secretary
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.
10. Shri Mangu Singh Managing Director

117
11. Shri D.K. Saini Director (Projects)
12. Shri Ravi Kapoor Executive Director
30th January, 2019
Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Harish Kumar Director
Archaeological Survey of India
2. Smt. Usha Sharma Director General
3. Shri Rakesh Singh Lal ADG (Admn)
4. Smt. Urmila Sant ADG
5. Janhwij Sharma Joint D.G.
6. Shri T.J. Alone Director
7. Shri D.N. Dimri Director
8. Shri P.G. Kaladharan Director
National Monuments Authority
9. Shri Navneet Soni Member Secretary
10. Dr. Susmita Pande Chairperson
Department of Legal Affairs
11. Dr. Alok Srivastava Secretary (LA)
12. Shri S.R. Mishra Additional Secretary (LA)
13. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana JS & LA

118
Legislative Department
14. Dr. N.R. Battu Joint Secretary & Legislative
Counsel
15. Shri Diwakar Singh Joint Secretary & Legislative
Counsel
4th February, 2019
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Dr. Alok Srivastava Secretary
2. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana JS & LA
Legislative Department
3. Dr. N.R. Battu Joint Secretary & Legislative
Counsel
4. Shri Diwakar Singh Joint Secretary & Legislative
Counsel

119
MINUTES

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SITES AND REMAINS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 9:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 1st August,
2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Binoy Viswam
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
7. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
8. Shri K.K. Ragesh
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Manish Gupta
11. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
12. Dr. Narendra Jadhav
13. Shri Naresh Gujral
14. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
121

122
15. Shri Prasanna Acharya
16. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
17. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
18. Shri Sanjay Raut
19. Ms. Saroj Pandey
20. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
S
ECRETARIA T
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Culture
Shri Raghvendra Singh, Secretary
Shri Pranav Khullar, Joint Secretary
Shri Harish Kumar, Director
Archaeological Survey of India
Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, Additional Director General

123
Smt. Urmila Sant, Additional Director General
Shri Janhwij Sharma, Joint Director General
Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
Shri V .N. Prabhakar, Suptd. Archaeologist
National Monuments Authority
Dr. Susmita Pande, Chairperson
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Shri Diwakar Singh, Additional Legislative Counsel
Shri Ramesh Chander Kathia, Director
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri Suresh Chandra, Secretary
Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the meeting and informed them about the reference of the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Bill, 2018 for
examination and Report by 8th August, 2018. The Chairman briefly
explained the contents of the Bill. The Chairman also informed that the
agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Culture and requested him to inform the Committee about the

124
circumstances which necessitated the amendment and the pros and cons
of the Bill. He further requested the Secretary to inform how the Ministry
would ensure that the term "public works” is not misused to allow any
and all sorts of constructions within the prohibited area of 100 meters.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture made a power point
presentation on the various clauses of the Bill. He informed the Committee
that the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act
came into being in 1958 and a notification was issued on 16th June, 1992
which stated that an area of 100 meters from the protected limit and
beyond it, up to 200 meters near or adjoining protected monuments was
declared to be prohibited and regulated areas, respectively, for purposes
of both mining and construction. He further informed that an amendment
was brought out in 2010 whereby a sub-Section 4 was added in Section
20 of the Act which prohibited all kinds of construction within the protected
area of the 100 meters boundary. The Secretary informed the Committee
that between the years 2000 and 2010, the Director General,
Archaeological Survey of India was empowered to allow construction
within the prohibited area, but that was stopped by the Amendment
brought in 2010.
5. The Secretary stated that the present Bill is being brought in
to allow construction in the prohibited areas for Central Government
public infrastructure projects in the rarest of rare cases and when there
is no other viable alternative available. He further informed that the term
"public works” means construction works related to infrastructure financed
and carried out by any department or offices of the Central Government
for public purposes which is necessary for the safety or security of the
public at large. He informed the Committee that insertion of sub-Section
(5) in Section 20A of the Act states that nothing contained in sub-Section

125
(4) of the Act which prohibits any kind of construction within the prohibited
area shall apply to public works, and that this sub-Section is added to
enable applications for public infrastructure projects within 100 meters.
6. The Secretary then apprised the Committee that insertion of
sub-Section (6) in Section 20A of the principal Act which says that the
Central Government Departments will be allowed to move the competent
authority for construction work in prohibited areas, is an enabling provision
to make an application to the competent authority. Thereafter, the
Secretary elucidated upon the proposed insertion of sub-Section (7) in
Section 20A of the Act where the National Monuments Authority is to
decide about the nature of the public work and competent authority is to
convey the decision of NMA to the applicant within 10 days of receipt
of such decision. The Secretary also informed that new sub-Section (8)
under Section 20A will enable the repair and renovation at any construction
in prohibited area existing before June 1992 or constructed with due
approval of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India before
2010. He also informed that the amendment Bill will replace the word
'Director General' with the word 'competent authority' in sub-Section (8)
of Section 20D. The Secretary further informed the Committee that
insertion of Clause (ea) in sub-Section (I) of Section 20 of the Act which
states that National Monuments Authority is to consider the impact,
including archaeological impact, visual impact and heritage impact
assessment, of public works proposed in prohibited, is being envisaged to
prevent any public project being undertaken which will adversely impact
the monument.
7. The Committee sought to know the reason for not including
the word "rarest of rare cases” in the amendment itself. The Committee
requested the Ministry to furnish a list of the rarest of rare cases which

126
have led to the introduction of this Bill. The Committee then enquired the
reason due to which National Monuments Authority has not placed even
a single heritage bye-law before the Parliament in over 6 years, in reply
to which the Secretary informed the Committee that a bye-law has been
sent for legal vetting to the Ministry of Law and 24 draft bye-laws are
ready which cover about 59 monuments of our country. The Committee
desired to know the reasons for the Bill not allowing the State Government
projects whereas it allows construction in prohibited area for Central
Government public infrastructure projects for public safety and security
of the public at large.
8. The Chairman enquired about the reason for which the
Notification prohibiting construction in the vicinity of the monuments and
sites was brought out in 1992, when the original Act had been introduced
long time back in 1958. In reply to a question whether modern technology
could be employed to provide public security and safety, while carrying
out construction at ancient monuments and sites, the Secretary informed
the Committee that they have been taking recourse to modern technology
and recently, they have used such technology while constructing Metro
Railway in Ahmedabad. The Committee desired to know as to how
many projects have been pending presently and since how long, which
necessitated the present Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Bill (Amendment) Bill, 2018. The Committee enquired
whether this Bill is snatching the powers of National Monuments Authority,
by the Central Government.
9. The Committee further sought to know whether this Bill will
open the door for similar exceptions to be made for monuments other
than the 3686 monuments protected by the ASI. The Committee enquired
whether a distinction will be made in the approach towards the monuments

127
which have been recognized by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites and
those which are not.
10. Members of the Committee raised various other queries some
of which were replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman directed that
written replies to the points not answered, may be sent at the earliest.
11. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again on 6th August,
2018.
12. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The meeting was adjourned at 10:39 A.M.

128
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Monday, the 6th August,
2018 in Committee Room E, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Binoy Viswam
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
7. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
9. Shri Manish Gupta
10. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
11. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
12. Shri Prasanna Acharya
13. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
14. Shri Sanjay Raut
15. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
16. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
128

129
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
National Monuments Authority
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
Archaeological Survey of India
Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the meeting and informed them that the agenda of the meeting was to
have an in-house discussion on the various aspects of the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill,
2018 and to hear the views of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and
National Monuments Authority (NMA) on the Bill.
3. The Committee discussed the replies furnished by the Ministry
of Culture on various points raised by the Members during its meeting
held on 1st August, 2018. Member Secretary, NMA informed the
Committee that the Bill is being introduced for consideration of
infrastructure projects within the 100 meter limit and that no private
project has been allowed within the prohibited limit since the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act was amended in

130
2010. He stated that 362 private projects falling within the prohibited
area have been rejected so far.
4. The Committee raised the issue of heritage bye-law not being
framed by the NMA even till now as mandated by the AMASR
Amendment in 2010. The Committee sought to know the examples of
"rarest of rare cases”. Some Members opined that the metro projects in
Tughlaqabad and Pune cannot be classified as rarest of rare cases since
there is a precedent of realigning metro routes to prevent construction
in the prohibited area of a Centrally protected monument. Some Members
voiced their apprehension over the dilution of powers of the National
Monuments Authority since the Bill empowers the Central Government
to take a final decision on the matter of construction in the prohibited
limit of a monument.
5. The Committee sought to know whether the definition of repair
and renovation is included in the Bill and whether it leaves any scope for
discretion in classifying some work as renovation. The Member Secretary,
NMA informed about the provisions of Section 20(C) regarding repair
and renovation work in the prohibited area.
6. The Members of the Committee raised various queries on the
provisions of the Bill and its implementation, to which the witnesses
replied and in cases of unanswered queries, they assured that written
replies may be furnished to the Committee.
7. The Committee decided that it needed wider consultation and
accordingly, decided to hear more stakeholders before presenting its
Report to the House. Accordingly, it was decided by the Committee to
seek extension of time upto the last day of the second week of the

131
Winter Session, 2018 for presenting the Report to the House. The
Committee authorized the Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman
to seek his permission to move the Motion in the House for extension
of time.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The meeting was adjourned at 10:45 A.M.

132
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Monday, the 10th September,
2018 in Committee Room 2, First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House
Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Shri Binoy Viswam
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
S
ECRETARIA T
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
132

133
WITNESSES
Prof. Nayanjot Lahiri, Professor, Ashoka University, Sonepat
Ms. Narayani Gupta, Historian and Retired Professor, Delhi University
Shri Vasant Shinde, Professor, Deccan College, Pune
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
Dr. Mangu Singh, Managing Director
Shri D.K. Saini, Director (Projects)
Ministry of Culture
Shri Pranav Khullar, Joint Secretary
Shri Harish Kumar, Director
Archaeological Survey of India
Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, ADG (Admn.)
Smt. Urmila Sant, ADG
Smt. Janhwij Sharma, Joint DG
Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
National Monuments Authority
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the meeting and informed them that the agenda of the meeting was to
hear the views of experts and Managing Director, Delhi Metro Rail

134
Corporation (DMRC) on various provisions of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Prof. Nayanjot Lahiri,
Ms. Narayani Gupta and Shri Vasant Shinde to the meeting and requested
them to place their views on the Bill, before the Committee. Prof. Nayanjot
Lahiri, while deposing before the Committee, stated that the 100 meter
prohibited area restriction is important because it reduces human
interference and helps maintain the visual and aesthetic appeal of a
monument. She suggested that an underground metro project may be
conceived near Tughlaqabad Fort and metro projects in other cities
wherever protected monuments are in existence. She stated that no city
has more monuments than Delhi and that if DMRC could execute its
projects while respecting the prohibited and regulated areas, other
organizations could manage it as well. She mentioned that the Government
has found an alternative solution for the road project near Sikandra in
Agra. Likewise, the Government should find an alternate solution to the
bridge construction in Kolhapur also. She further added that Government
has found solution for construction in Delhi which is less than a century
old. The same enthusiasm may be shown to protect the ancient and
centuries old monuments also. She opined that if the Bill is passed, it will
be taken up by State Governments and similar legislations for relaxation
of conditions will be framed for monuments protected by State
Governments which may vastly damage the cultural heritage of India.
4. Ms. Narayani Gupta opined that ASI and NMA have to be
proactive and that they should allow extending and reducing the regulated
area on the basis of ground realities of a monument. She informed the
Committee that the people living near the monuments fear the officials
of ASI due to the discretionary powers given to them and that this

135
causes the community to be distanced from the monument. She stated
that the bye-laws should take each site as an individual case and that any
issue arising out of construction near a monument should be resolved
through discussions.
5. Shri Vasant Shinde opined that the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act has been amended to keep pace
with changing requirements of the people, since protection of the
monuments is done for the people. He gave the example of Rakhigarhi
where 8000 people are living and are not allowed to build or repair their
homes. He suggested that better coordination must be present between
NMA and ASI, and between Centre and State Departments of
Archaeology.
6. Member Secretary, NMA informed the Committee that NMA
has received applications for fresh constructions in the regulated zone
from about 600 monuments and that these monuments are being prioritized
for framing bye-laws. He informed the Committee of an upcoming web
portal of NMA which will process applications for construction activities
near a monument.
7. Thereafter, Dr. Mangu Singh made a powerpoint presentation
on the views of DMRC on the various provisions of the Bill. He informed
the Committee of the various projects of DMRC that have been affected
by the present AMASR Act. He stated that the Qutub Minar metro
station had to be shifted 1.8 km away from the monument, thus causing
tourists a lot of problem in reaching there. He suggested that the definition
of "public works” in the Bill should be changed to include projects of
public interest such as railways, highways, metros, flyovers and other
similar utility projects. He opined that the increased road traffic because

136
of metro stations being far away from a monument, would cause a lot
of damage to the monument in the long run due to vehicular pollution as
compared to rail based transportation projects that are environment friendly
and cause less emissions. He gave international examples of metro projects
executed successfully in close vicinity of important monuments in London,
Barcelona, Rome etc. The Chairman desired that the Report of National
Physical Laboratory on impact of construction near protected monuments
may be furnished by DMRC.
8. The Committee, thereafter, decided to undertake a one-day
study visit to Pune on 27th September, 2018 for on-the-spot visit to the
infrastructure projects held up due to the provisions of the AMASR Act
and hold discussion with various authorities including the officials of the
State Government. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman
to approach the Hon'ble Chairman for obtaining his permission for the
visit and interaction with the representatives of the Government of
Maharashtra.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting was adjourned at 1:16 P.M.

137
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 18th September,
2018 in Committee Room 3, First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House
Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
M
EMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Binoy Viswam
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
7. Shri K.K. Ragesh
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
9. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
10. Dr. Narendra Jadhav
11. Shri Naresh Gujral
12. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
13. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
14. Shri Sanjay Raut
15. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
16. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
137

138
SECRETARIA T
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Shri Yudhvir Singh Malik, Secretary
Shri A.P. Pathak, Chief Engineer
National Highways Authority of India
Shri R.K. Pandey, Member
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
Shri Durga Shanker Mishra, Secretary
Ms. Usha Batra, ADG, CPWD
Shri K. Sanjay Murthy, Joint Secretary
Shri M.K. Sinha, OSD & Joint Secretary (UT)
Archaeological Survey of India
Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, ADG (Admn.)
Smt. Urmila Sant, ADG
Shri Janhwij Sharma, Joint D.G.
Shri T.J. Alone, Director

139
National Monuments Authority
Dr. Susmita Pande, Chairperson
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
Ministry of Culture
Shri Pranav Khullar, Joint Secretary
Shri Harish Kumar, Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the meeting and informed them that the agenda of the meeting was to
hear the views of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways;
Director General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI); Chairperson,
National Monuments Authority; Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs; and senior officials of Ministry of Culture on various provisions
of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways to the meeting and requested him to place
the views of the Ministry on the Bill before the Committee. The Secretary
made a powerpoint presentation before the Committee. He informed the
Committee about the various projects of the Ministry which are facing
problems on account of the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, including the proposed
Delhi-Agra road passing within 30 meters of the boundary wall of Akbar's
Tomb at Sikandra; construction of a bridge on Chenab river at village
Ambaran at NH-144A in the vicinity of a Buddhist ancient monument;
and on Buckingham Canal in Andhra Pradesh. In case of the Delhi-Agra
road, he stated that the carbon dioxide emissions would be higher in the

140
alternative solution and would harm the monument more in the long run
than if the project had been approved with its original alignment. He also
informed the Committee that in case of raised structures, noise barriers
and curtain walls could be used to protect the monuments from vehicular
emissions. He informed the Committee that a construction on the Kolhapur
Bridge had to be stopped after the distance from the monument was
measured at about 95 meters. The construction finally resumed after a
joint measurement took place which ascertained the distance to be 107
meters and thus, outside the prohibited zone. The Secretary, Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways agreed to provide the chronology of the
joint measurement adopted in the case of the Kolhapur Bridge.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs made
a powerpoint presentation before the Committee. He gave examples of
Qutub Minar, Saket and Tughlakabad metro stations while informing the
Committee of the various projects of the Ministry that were hampered
by the provisions of the 1958 Act. He stated that similar problems are
being faced in the metro rail projects of the Ministry in Ahmedabad,
Kanpur, Kolkata and Pune. He further stated that realignment or relocation
of the projects leads to the metro rail facility being constructed away
from major footfalls. He proceeded to inform the Committee of
international metro projects and high speed rail lines in close proximity
of ancient monuments citing examples of Sagrada Familia in Barcelona,
Eiffel Tower in Paris, National Mall in Washington DC, Westminster
Building in London, Sagrario Metropolitano in Mexico, Arc De Triomphe
in Paris and Milan Cathedral in Milan. He suggested that the definition
of "public works” proposed in the Bill should be replaced by the definition
of "public works” given in the General Financial Rules (GFR). He further

141
suggested that the monuments should be classified into different categories
on the basis of footfall and that prohibited area and regulated area limits
with regard to the monuments may be prescribed based on the footfalls.
A Member of the Committee opined that the categorization of monuments
cannot be done on the basis of footfall because it is categorized on the
basis of architectural, archaeological and historical value of the monuments.
5. Director General, ASI informed the Committee that every
UNESCO World Heritage site has a detailed site management plan and
that it is expected by UNESCO that the plan is duly followed in terms
of implementation. The Committee desired to know if UNESCO issues
any rules regarding construction works in the vicinity of World Heritage
Sites.
6. The Committee sought to know about the practices and rules
that are followed in other countries with regard to protection of their
ancient monuments and heritage sites. The Committee enquired about
the basis on which the limit of prohibited area and regulated area was
defined to be 100 meter and 300 meter in the notification issued by the
ASI on 16th June, 1992. A list of all the constructions which were
cleared by the ASI in prohibited areas of monuments between 2001 and
2010 was also sought. The Committee wanted to know if the restriction
on construction within prohibited area of a monument applies to
underground construction activities within the 100 meter limit of the
monument.
7. Members of the Committee raised various other queries which
were replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman directed that written
replies to the points not answered, may be sent within three weeks.

142
8. The Committee, thereafter, decided to undertake a local study
visit to Tughlaqabad Fort, New Delhi on 16th October, 2018 for assessing
the impact of construction near the monument. The Committee, accordingly,
authorized its Chairman to approach Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for
obtaining his permission for the visit.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting was adjourned at 12:32 P.M.

143
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16th October,
2018 in Committee Room 4, First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House
Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
6. Shri K.K. Ragesh
7. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
8. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
9. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
10. Shri Prasanna Acharya
11. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
12. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
13. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
14. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
15. Shri Tiruchi Siva
143

144
SECRETARIA T
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Culture
Shri Arun Goel, Secretary
Shri Pranav Khullar, Joint Secretary
Shri Harish Kumar, Director
Archaeological Survey of India
Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, ADG (Admn.)
Shri T.J. Alone, Director
Shri D.N. Dimri, Director
National Monuments Authority
Dr. Susmita Pande, Chairperson
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary

145
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.
Shri Mangu Singh, Managing Director
Shri D.K. Saini, Director (Projects)
Shri Ravi Kapoor, Executive Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the meeting and informed them that the agenda of the meeting was to
hear the views of Secretary, Ministry of Culture; Director General,
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI); Chairperson, National Monuments
Authority (NMA); and Managing Director, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
(DMRC) on various provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Culture to the meeting and requested him to place the views of the
Ministry on the Bill, before the Committee. Member Secretary, National
Monuments Authority (NMA) informed the Committee about the proposed
Tughlakabad-Aerocity metro corridor and stated that Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation Ltd. (DMRC) had submitted a No Objection Certificate
(NOC) application for the Tughlakabad-Aerocity stretch of the proposed
metro project. Since the alignment of the proposed metro line was passing
through the protected and prohibited area of 4 monuments, NMA rejected
the NOC application and DMRC later filed the review application.
4. Managing Director, DMRC made a powerpoint presentation
before the Committee. He stated that the proposed definition of public
works does not include projects like DMRC. He informed the Committee
of the various projects carried out by DMRC in the vicinity of protected
monuments. He gave examples of metro projects near Kashmere Gate,

146
Delhi Gate, Jantar Mantar and Khooni Darwaza where the distance
from the monuments was less than 100 meters. He informed the
Committee that no sign of damage has been seen in any of the monuments
during or after the construction of these metro projects. He further
informed the Committee of a study done by National Physical Laboratory
in 1998 which had concluded that the metro projects would not have any
impact on the monuments. A Heritage Impact Assessment Study conducted
by the School of Planning and Architecture also concluded that the
proposed method of construction of metro projects would not have any
adverse impact on the nearby monuments. He informed the Committee
that extensive monitoring of the structures along the alignment was done
during and after the construction.
5. Managing Director, DMRC informed the Committee about the
Tughlaqabad-Aerocity metro line and stated that the majority of the
alignment is underground. He informed the Committee that DMRC had
engaged a Greek consultant during the Detailed Project Report (DPR)
stage of the project, for assessment of impact of construction near
monuments and that the report has concluded that the monuments will
not be harmed because of the project. He stated that there are monuments
on both sides of the alignment and thus it was not possible to shift the
alignment, unless the alignment was shifted by a long distance, which
would change the catchment.
6. The Committee again sought to know the reasoning behind
setting the prohibited and regulated area limits as 100 meter and 200
meter respectively. DG, ASI informed the Committee that no information
regarding the same could be located in the records. The Secretary,
Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the matter will be
looked into again and any findings would be reported to the Committee.

147
Member Secretary, NMA informed the Committee that the definition of
"construction” in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 talks about vertical or horizontal buildings and that
underground construction is a grey area in the Act. The Committee
wanted to know if India has the technologies that are available with
other countries where construction works have been carried out in the
immediate vicinity of their protected monuments. MD, DMRC informed
the Committee that DMRC is using state-of-the-art technology for all the
underground constructions. The Committee sought a summary of all the
impact assessment reports on DMRC projects alongwith comments of
ASI and Ministry of Culture on the same. In reply to a question whether
any study has been conducted to assess the long term impact of metro
projects on the monuments, it was informed by DMRC that no study has
been conducted to assess the impact on monuments in the long term.
7. Members of the Committee raised various other queries which
were replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman directed that written
replies to the points not answered, may be sent at the earliest.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The meeting was adjourned at 11:07 A.M.
10. The Committee, thereafter, proceeded to a local visit to
Tughlaqabad Fort, New Delhi.

148
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 5th December,
2018 in Committee Room 2, First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House
Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
5. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
6. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
7. Shri Naresh Gujral
8. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
9. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
10. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
11. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
12. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
SECRETARIA T
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
148

149
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and
informed that the agenda of the meeting is to hold an internal discussion
on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment) Bill, 2018 and to decide the future course of action. The
Chairman informed the Committee that the time permitted for the
Committee for presentation of the Report on the Bill is upto the second
week of the Winter Session (247) of Parliament.
3. The Chairman, while summarizing the work done by the
Committee till date, stated that the Committee has so far, heard the
views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture; Director-General,
Archaeological Survey of India; and Chairperson, National Monuments
Authority on the Bill, in several of its meetings. He further stated that
the Committee heard the views of several experts; Managing Director,
DMRC; Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs; Secretary,
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Secretary, Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation; Secretary,
Department of Legal Affairs; and representative of the Legislative
Department on the Bill. The Committee was, inter alia, informed during
the meetings about how metro projects are allowed in the vicinity of
protected monuments in several foreign countries.
4. The Chairman further encapsulated that the Committee
undertook a study visit to Pune for an on-the-spot visit to Aga Khan
Palace and Pataleshwar Caves and held discussions with the MD,
Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited and representatives of the
Government of Maharashtra. The Committee heard the views of the

150
Secretary, Ministry of Culture; MD, DMRC; DG, ASI; and Member
Secretary, NMA on the status of the Tughlaqabad-Aerocity Metro corridor
vis-a-vis the various provisions of the Bill. The Committee then undertook
a local visit to the Tughlaqabad Fort, New Delhi to assess the impact of
construction of the proposed Tughlaqabad-Aerocity Metro Project on the
nearby archaeological sites and monuments. During the local visit, the
Committee was informed of the lack of a feasible alternative metro route
away from the monument since the Tomb of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq and
many other monuments fall in the vicinity of the project.
5. The Chairman further said that the Committee had sought
comments from all the State Governments and Union Territories on the
Bill. The comments, thus received, have been circulated to the Members
of the Committee. Six States and one Union Territory fully agreed with
the Bill. Five States and one Union Territory demanded that the term
'State Government' may also be added in the Bill along with the term
'Central Government'. State Governments of Manipur and Telangana
proposed certain amendments in the Bill.
6. Some of the Members suggested that clause by clause
consideration of the Bill may be taken up, whereas, some other Members
opined that the Archaeological Survey of India is not cooperating with
the Committee as regards furnishing the details on 100 meters and 200
meters as prohibited and regulated areas respectively. While considering
various aspects of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018, the Committee discussed in detail,
Sections 20A and 20B of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 wherein the concepts of prohibited area
and regulated area are prescribed. The Committee also took into account

151
the conditions laid down in the Notification dated 16th June, 1992 regarding
the protected area and regulated area of protected monuments and sites.
7. After detailed discussion, the Committee decided to inspect
the entire file noting and the related documents pertaining to the 16th
June, 1992 Notification which prescribes the 100 meters and 200 meters
criteria for prohibited area and regulated area respectively. The Committee
also decided to examine any document which is available in the custody
of the Ministry of Culture which brings out the scientific basis for deciding
the 100 meters and 200 meters criteria and which was relied on by the
Ministry of Culture for deciding the criteria. Some of the Members
pointed out that a few decades ago, large scale construction activities
were permitted near the Jantar Mantar in New Delhi which resulted in
the disuse of astronomical instruments of Jantar Mantar.
8. Some Members opined that if the present Amendment Bill is
passed by the Parliament, thousands of monuments under the control of
the Central Government and State Governments may be opened up for
construction activities in and around those monuments. Each monument
has to be studied by experts to assess the feasibility of any construction
activity proposed by the Governmental agencies; and if the experts agree
that no harm will be done to the monument, then there is no rationale in
preventing the construction activities. It was opined by some Members
that prescribing the 100 meters and 200 meters distances as protected
and regulated areas respectively, are arbitrary and unnecessary; and that
modern construction activities have been undertaken in Britain, Italy,
France etc. for development of infrastructural facilities very close to the
historical structures in those countries. None of those activities have
affected the ancient monuments which have been existing for many
centuries.

152
9. Some Members were of the view that a relook is needed on
the distance criteria of 100 Meter and 200 Meter. Another Member
pointed out that he personally visited 3 sites of the Delhi Metro where
the 100 meters and 200 meters criteria have been relaxed by the
Government for construction of underground Delhi Metro and that he
satisfied himself that no harm has been done to the nearby monuments.
He also stated that the proposed underground Aerocity Metro line passing
through the Tughlaqabad area of Delhi needs to be given permission as
he realizes that there is no feasible alternative route available away from
the Tughlaqabad Fort area, due to the existence of many other important
monuments in and around the area.
10. Another Member informed the Committee that he had allocated
a huge amount from MPLADS fund for the renovation of a Higher
Secondary School in Puducherry. However, the project is held up as the
school is situated within a distance of 100 meters from an ancient Shiva
Temple which is a protected monument under the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. Yet another Member
opined that even the underground projects are not advisable for monuments
such as Qutab Minar and Taj Mahal and that the experts should be
consulted before taking any decision. He also pointed out that other
hazards like environment, traffic and trespassing should also be taken
into consideration.
11. The Chairman informed the Committee that recently, the High
Court of Bombay permitted construction near a Parsi 'Temple in Mumbai
and suggested that the Committee should visit the Parsi temple to have
an on-the-spot assessment. Some Members also suggested to visit
Puducherry. The Committee noticed that there is no consensus among

153
various Ministries of the Government of India on various provisions of
the Bill and that the Committee needs to collect more information to
arrive at specific conclusions on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee
also decided to seek the relevant file and documents from ASI, prescribing
the 100 meters and 200 meters as prohibited and regulated areas, around
the archaeological sites and monuments. The Committee, accordingly,
decided to seek extension upto the last day of the first week of the 248th
Session of the Parliament for submitting its Report to Parliament on the
Bill. The Committee authorized its Chairman to move the necessary
Motion in the House for the purpose.
12. The meeting was adjourned at 4.40 PM.

154
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd January,
2019 in Committee Room 2, First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House
Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shri Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Binoy Viswam
5. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
6. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
7. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
10. Shri Prasanna Acharya
11. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
12. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
S
ECRETARIA T
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri P. Narayanan, Director
154

155
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and
informed that the agenda of the meeting is to hold an in-house discussion
on the file notings received from the Archaeological Survey of India
(ASI) related to the declaration of 100 meters and 200 meters area
adjoining protected monuments as prohibited area and regulated area
respectively. He informed the Committee that no explanation for specifying
the prohibited area and regulated area limits as 100 and 200 meters
respectively, could be located in the ASI files. The Chairman further
informed the Committee that the time permitted for the Committee for
presentation of the Report on the Bill is upto the last day of the first
week of the upcoming Session (248th Session) of Parliament.
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that comments had
been sought from State Governments / Union Territories on the various
provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018. He further stated that only 1 out of
17 State Governments opposed the Bill while other State Governments
have accorded their consent to the Bill and that some State Governments
have suggested that alongwith Central Government, State Governments
may also be brought within the ambit of the Bill. He said that people
living near the monuments have to seek permission from ASI even for
carrying out repair works at their homes. It was further suggested that
people residing near the monuments should be given the responsibility to
form a Committee which ensures the maintenance and upkeep of the
monuments and ensure that no further structures are constructed near
the monument.

156
4. Some Members of the Committee were of the view that the
decision to permit construction works in the vicinity of Centrally protected
monuments should be done on a case-by-case basis based on the
recommendation by a body of experts which includes historians, people
involved with culture, engineers, urban architects, District Collector etc.
Since there is no logic or scientific basis behind the limits imposed by the
present blanket ban, it was suggested that the appointment of an Expert
Committee should be left at the Ministerial level each time a decision is
to be taken on a big project and that such a Committee of experts should
hold public hearings to bring in transparency to the decision making
process.
5. One of the Members stated that the 100 meters limit is violated
in several cases and suggested that there should be data on which
monuments need protection and what the importance of a particular
monument is. Another Member pointed out that no experts were called
by ASI while taking decision about the 100 and 200 meters limit. One
Member suggested that the Committee should recommend that the 100
meter limit should go away, but that it should be ensured that doing so
does not leave too much scope for discretion of ASI with regard to the
limit and that blanket provision should not be there for the bureaucracy
to take decisions in these matters.
6. One of the Members was of the view that the current Bill
would open a Pandora's box since the decision regarding allowing the
construction near monuments cannot be taken by those who do not have
any cultural background or passion for preserving our heritage. It was
further stated that the National Monuments Authority should create a
data bank of the State heritage and national heritage so that one can log
in on their website and get to know about a particular monument.

157
7. One Member of the Committee opined that some restrictions
are a must; otherwise all the monuments will perish. Another Member
opined that State Governments should be given the power to take decision
regarding the area limit on the basis of the project and that doing so
would prevent the need for amending the Bill again and again. Some of
the Members opined that there should be no limit and that residential
areas even within 10 meters of a monument should not be disturbed as
it causes hassle to the people residing there.
8. The Chairman noted that the Bill does not give blanket
permission for construction near a monument and that it takes a cautious
approach by having a provision for analyzing visual impact, heritage
impact and archaeological impact of a proposed construction work. He
suggested that the Committee may recommend creation of a catalogue
of monuments and making people aware as to what kind of monuments
are in category A, B or C. He further suggested that the Committee may
take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its next meeting.
Some of the Members opined that there should be a comprehensive Act
on the subject, taking into consideration all futuristic developments, which
does not need to be amended too often.
9. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet on 30th January,
2019 for clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and on 31st January,
2019 for consideration and adoption of the Report of the Committee.
10. The meeting was adjourned at 11.57 A.M.

158
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 30th January,
2019 in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shrimati Ambika Soni
3. Dr. Banda Prakash
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
6. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar
7. Shri Narain Dass Gupta
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
10. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
S
ECRETARIA T
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri P. Narayanan, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
158

159
WITNESSES
Ministry of Culture
Shri Harish Kumar, Director
Archaeological Survey of India
Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, Additional Director General (Administration)
Smt. Urmila Sant, Additional Director General
Shri Janhwij Sharma, Joint Director General
Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
Shri D.N. Dimri, Director
Shri P.G. Kaladharan, Director
National Monuments Authority
Dr. Susmita Pande, Chairperson
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Dr. Alok Srivastava, Secretary
Shri S.R. Mishra, Additional Secretary
Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Shri Diwakar Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and
informed that the agenda of the meeting is to undertake clause-by-clause

160
consideration of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018. The Chairman then welcomed the
officials of the Ministry of Culture; Director General, Archaeological
Survey of India; National Monuments Authority and the officials of
Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill. The Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Law
and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department)
also furnished their comments / clarifications wherever needed on the
issues raised by the Members of the Committee. The Committee discussed
all the clauses of the Bill in detail and adopted all the clauses without any
amendment. The Committee, however, felt that a week's extension of
time beyond 1st February, 2019 was required to consider and adopt the
Report on the Bill and present the same to the House. The Committee,
therefore, decided to seek extension of time till the 8th February, 2019
for the presentation of its Report on the Bill and authorized its Chairman
to move the Motion in the House for the purpose on 1st February, 2019.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was
kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 3:11 P.M.

161
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 5:00 P.M. on Monday, the 4th February,
2019 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shri Binoy Viswam
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan
5. Shri K.K. Ragesh
6. Shri Manish Gupta
7. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
8. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
S
ECRETARIAT
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri P. Narayanan, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
161

162
WITNESSES
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Dr. Alok Srivastava, Secretary
Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Shri Diwakar Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and
informed that the agenda of the meeting is to consider and adopt the
draft Report of the Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018. The Chairman
then welcomed the officials of the Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department to the meeting.
3. The Committee then took up consideration and adoption of its
draft Report on the Bill. Some of the Members were of the opinion that
keeping in view the inordinate delay in framing of the bye-laws for
protection of our ancient monuments, the proposed amendments may be
deferred till the bye-laws are framed. The Chairman observed that
deferment is not a part of the terms of reference of the Select Committee.
The Chairman, however, requested the Members to furnish their views/
suggestions / note of dissent, if they so desired, by 10:00 A.M. on 6th
February, 2019 so that the same could be appended to the Report.
4. After detailed discussion, the Committee adopted the draft
Report without any changes. The Committee authorized the Chairman of
the Select Committee and in his absence, Shri Swapan Dasgupta, to

163
present the Report and lay the Evidence tendered before the Committee
in Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2019.
5. The Chairman placed on record his gratitude to the
representatives of the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Law and
Justice (Legislative Department and Legal Affairs) for furnishing
necessary information/documents and rendering valuable assistance to
the Committee in its deliberations and also to all the distinguished persons
who appeared before the Committee and gave their valuable views on
the Bill and furnished written notes and information in connection with
the examination of the Bill.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was
kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 6:04 P.M.

STUDY NOTES

Study Note of the Select Committee's Discussion at
Pune on 27.09.2018
The Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 undertook a
study visit to Pune for on-the-spot visit to the infrastructure projects held
up due to the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and held discussion with various
stakeholders.
I. 11:00 A.M.
Visit to Aga Khan Palace and Pataleshwar Caves
The Committee visited the Aga Khan Palace and Pataleshwar Caves
to assess the alignment of the proposed metro projects in the vicinity of
these monuments. The Committee was informed of the various alternative
routes that were being considered away from the monuments and the
extra costs and delays associated with them.
II. 1:00 P.M.
Discussion with various stakeholders
The Committee met at 1:00 P.M. on the 27th September, 2018 to
discuss various provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018.
M
EMBERS P RESENT
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe — Chairman
2. Shri Biswajit Daimary
3. Shri Binoy Viswam
4. Shri K.K. Ragesh
5. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
6. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
167

168
SECRETARIA T
Shri Swarabji B., Director
WITNESSES
Archaeological Survey of India
Smt. Usha Sharma, Director General
Shri Rakesh Singh Lal, ADG (Admn.)
Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
National Monuments Authority
Shri Navneet Soni, Member Secretary
Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited
Shri Brijesh Dixit, Managing Director
Shri Ramnath Subramanian, ED (SP)
Shri S.D. Limaye, Technical Advisor
Shri Hukam S Chaudhary, Project Director (GC)
Shri Rajendra Prasad, ED (Planning)
Shri Manoj Dandare, JGM (Planning)
State Government of Maharashtra
Shri Vijay Shinde, Assistant Director (Town Planning)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the meeting and informed them that the agenda of the meeting was to
hear the Chairperson, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI); Member
Secretary, National Monuments Authority (NMA); Managing Director,
Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRCL) and senior

169
representatives of the State Government of Maharashtra on the various
provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018  vis-a-vis proposed metro projects of
the MMRCL in the vicinity of Centrally protected monuments.
3. The Managing Director of the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation
Limited made a powerpoint presentation on the views of MMRCL on the
various provisions of the Bill. He informed the Committee about the
Pune Metro Rail Project highlighting the salient features of the project,
technicalities involved, its position with respect to monuments, technology
being adopted, depth of tunnel, benefits out of the project etc. The
proposed alignment passes through the regulated area of Pataleshwar
Caves and Shaniwar Wada, whereas it falls within the prohibited area of
Aga Khan Palace.
4. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for which MMRCL
wanted to adopt the alignment that passes through the prohibited area of
Aga Khan Palace despite the ASI notification dated 16th June, 1992
declaring 100 meter zone as prohibited area. In its reply, the Managing
Director, MMRCL submitted that the present proposal provides facility
to ridership and accessibility to Aga Khan Palace. Further, he highlighted
that latest technology is being adopted which will ensure that the
monuments are not affected and that proximity to the airport and other
multi-modal transportation hubs necessitated this alignment. The case
related to Pune metro and order of the Bombay High Court was also
referred to which specifies that the respondent should strictly adhere to
the statutory mandate and requirements in obtaining the necessary
permission before proceeding with the project in question.

170
5. The Member Secretary, NMA briefed the Committee that the
proposed Pune Metro rail line runs at 11 meter from protected area of
the Aga Khan Palace and falls within the prohibited area. The proposal
was discussed in the meeting of NMA held on 10.09.2018 and it was
rejected in the light of Section 20A(4) of the AMASR Act, 1958.
6. Some Members of the Committee opined that the NMA could
have withheld their decision considering the study visit of the Select
Committee to Pune. Further, the Committee wanted to know whether
INTACH is the only agency to provide impact assessment. It was informed
that the NMA recommends impact assessment, on case to case basis,
through agencies other than INTACH also viz., School of Planning and
Architecture, CEPT, University of Ahmedabad, Reach Foundation, etc.
7. The Chairman highlighted different examples across the world
such as in England where the subway runs below the English Parliament
and in France, it runs close to old monuments. He further stressed that
the Committee should take a relook into the 100 meter and 200 meter
regulations. He suggested that a call may be taken as to whether any
recommendations with regard to public proposals should be based on
scientific principles. The Chairman sought the views of DG, ASI on
availability of Google maps of ASI monuments showing the protected
area clearly, the agencies available with ASI for conducting impact
assessment study and the mechanism adopted by ASI in dealing with
such cases.
8. The DG, ASI informed the Committee that a MOU has been
executed between Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and ASI
for preparing maps indicating protected, prohibited and regulated areas
of all Centrally protected monuments. Such maps have already been
made available with respect to more than 2500 monuments on National

171
Remote Sensing Centre's (NRSC) Bhuvan portal of ISRO for public
viewing. She also informed that encroachment has been reported at 321
Centrally protected monuments/sites and assured the Committee to provide
more information on this. The Committee was further informed about the
status of facilities and conservation methodology adopted at different
monuments across the world viz., Turkey, Angkor Vat, Ta Prohm, etc.
The DG, ASI highlighted that a uniform protocol cannot be maintained
for all the monuments. The examples of Taj Mahal, Charminar, etc. were
quoted.
9. The Chairman emphasized that Heritage Conservation is a
science and any implementation should be based on established practices.
The people should be sensitized about the need for the conservation of
heritage and the protection mechanism requires to be reviewed.
10. During the visit, the Committee received background notes
from:
(i) Ministry of Culture - Annexure-I
(ii) Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited (Pune)
Annexure-II

172
Study Note of the Select Committee's Local Visit to
Tughlaqabad Fort, New Delhi on 16.10.2018
The Select Committee on the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 undertook a study visit to
Tughlaqabad Fort, New Delhi for assessing the impact of construction of
the proposed metro project near the monument.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Dr. Banda Prakash
2. Shri Jairam Ramesh
3. Shri K.K. Ragesh
4. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
5. Shri Prasanna Acharya
6. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Swarabji B., Director
2. Besides the above, officials of the Ministry of Culture and
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) accompanied the visit.
12:15 P.M.
Visit to Tughlaqabad Fort
172

173
3. The Committee visited the Tughlaqabad Fort to assess the
alignment of the proposed Tughlakabad-Aerocity metro corridor in the
vicinity of the monument. The Committee was briefed by the DMRC
officials with the help of detailed map of the project. The officials stressed
that there is no alternative as the Tughlakabad Fort covers a large area
and the road in between the monuments is narrow and could not be
widened due to the existence of boundary walls of the protected
monuments. Underground metro rail is the only viable project in the area.
The Committee physically inspected the area and realized that the options
are very less. The Committee took note of the alignment of the proposed
metro project. The Committee was informed by the Managing Director,
DMRC that the proposed metro project would pass underground and
would not impact the visual beauty of the monument. The Committee
was also assured that DMRC is having state-of-the-art technology for
underground construction of metro and that the construction activities
will not impact the monuments.
4. The Committee was further informed of the lack of a feasible
alternative route away from the monument since the Tomb of Ghiyasuddin
Tughlak, another monument protected by Archaeological Survey of India
(ASI), falls in the vicinity of the project too and taking the alignment
away from both these monuments would make the metro project unviable.
5. The local visit concluded at 2:30 P.M.