 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
May, 2016/ Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) 
 
Report 
No.233 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT  
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Culture 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  04.05.2016 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 04.05.2016 ) 
 

2 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Culture 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 04.05.2016 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 04.05.2016 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2016/ Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) 
 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PA G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION  OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT                     1-16 
5. OBSERVATIONS/ CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 17-21 
6. MINUTES                     22-29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.          ANNEXURE                                                                                                                               30-31

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2015-2016) 
 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi 
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
7. Kumari Selja 
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
9. @ Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
10. # Vacant  
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
12. Shri Vinod Chavda 
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
14. Km. Arpita Ghosh 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri P. Kumar 
17. *Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
18. Yogi Aditya Nath 
19. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala 
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
22. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
24. Shri Prathap Simha 
25. Shri Dushyant Singh  
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
27. Shri Rakesh Singh 
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
_______________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated on 15 th  March, 2016. 
# Vacancy caused due to expiry of the term of Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  w.e.f.  9th  April, 2016. 
* Nominated in place of Shri Mohammed Faizal PP. w.e.f.  14 th  March, 2016. 
(i) 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary S tanding Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authori zed by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred T hirty Third Report on Demands for 
Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Culture. 
2.  The Committee, at its meeting held on the 7
th April, 2016 considered the subject 
and heard the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Culture. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of Ministry of 
Culture for placing before the Committee, the mater ial and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the           
3rd  May, 2016. 
 
 
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH  
NEW DELHI;                      Chairman,  
May,3, 2016                                             Departm ent-related Parliamentary Standing  
Vaisakha 13, 1938 (Saka)      Committee on  Transport, Tourism and Cu lture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

7 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ACC -  Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 
AMASR 
Act 
-
 Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains 
 
AnSI -  Anthropological Survey of India 
ASI -  Archaeological Survey of India 
BE -  Budget Estimate 
CCRT -  Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CDAC -  Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
Co_Pis. -  Co-Project Implementers 
CSS -  Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DG -  Director-General 
Dir. Epig. -  Director Epigraphy 
DLB -  Delhi Library Board 
DoPT -  Department of Personnel and Training 
DTH -  Direct to Home 
Dy. S. 
Epig. 
-
 Deputy Superintending Epigraphist 
Dy. SA -  Deputy Superintending Archaeologist 
Dy. SAE -  Deputy Superintending Archaeological Engineer 
HPC -  High Powered Committee 
ICR -  International Cultural Relations 
ICT -  Information and Communications Technology 
IGNCA -  Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
IGNOU -  Indira Gandhi National Open University 
IIT -  Indian Institute of Technology 
ISRO -  Indian Space Research Organization 
KMMT -  Komagata Maru Memorial Trust 
KoPT -  Kolkata Port Trust 
MoF -  Ministry of Finance 
MoUs -  Memorandum of Understandings 
NAI -  National Archives of India 
NCF -  National Culture Fund 
NGOs -  Non-Government Organizations 
NIC -  National Informatics Centre 
  (iii) 

8 
 
NKN -  National Knowledge Network 
NML -  National Model Libraries 
NMML -  Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 
NPRD -  National Platform for the Rights of Disabled 
NRSA -  National Remote Sensing Agency 
NSD -  National School of Drama 
NVLI -  National Virtual Library of India 
PCM -  Project Management Committee 
PI -  Project Implementers 
PMO -  Prime Minister Office 
R&D -  Research and Development 
RE  -  Revised Estimate 
RFID -  Radio Frequency Identification 
RRC -  Regional Resource Centre 
RRRLF -  Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Foundation 
SA Engr. -  Superintending Archaeologist Engineer 
SNA -  Sangeet Natak Akademi 
UNESCO -  United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 
Organization 
UPSC -  Union Public Service Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

9 
 
REPORT 
The Ministry of Culture deals with the preservation  and conservation of the 
country’s rich cultural heritage and promotion of a rt and culture. The Ministry 
functions through two attached offices, six subordi nate offices and thirty five 
autonomous organizations which are fully funded by the Government. There are seven 
Zonal Cultural Centres for promoting folk and traditional arts of different regions of the 
country. There are also four National Missions name ly National Mission for 
Manuscripts, National Mission for Monuments and Ant iquities, National Mission on 
Libraries and Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission. 
2. The Ministry is responsible for the protection, development and promotion of 
both tangible and intangible heritage an culture an d also manages several knowledge 
resource centres. In addition, the Ministry is mand ated to preserve Gandhian heritage 
and for commemoration of important historical event s and centenaries. With regard to 
tangible heritage, the Ministry takes care of all t he Centrally protected monuments of 
national importance, which is achieved through Arch eological Survey of India. 
Similarly, the Ministry is also promoting a museum movement in the country and 
majority of the museums are under its administrativ e control. The Ministry also 
promotes regional museums through grant-in-aids. In  the field of intangible heritage, 
the Ministry extends financial support to individua ls, group of individuals and cultural 
organizations engaged in performing visual and lite rary arts. Similarly, the Ministry 
through its organizations, is engaged in recognizin g excellence in the field of art and 
culture by way of awards given by institutions like Sahitya Akademi and Sangeet Natak 
Akademi. The National School of Drama is involved i n promoting a vibrant theatre 
movement of contemporary relevance in the context o f our traditions and cultural 
diversity. 
3. In knowledge heritage, the Ministry is the custo dian of all the major libraries in 
the country. It also extends grant-in-aid for libra ry development and is also responsible 
for all policy matters regarding library developmen t. Through National Achieves of 
India, Ministry is responsible for maintenance of a ll archival records of the country. 
The Ministry is also involved in protection and pro motion of Buddhist and Tibetan 
Culture. This Ministry has a well-planned capacity- building programme for all those 
who want to excel in the field of Indian as well as Asian art and Culture. 
Assessment of the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry 
4. The Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry  of Culture has been 
presented to Parliament under Demand No. 19 amounting to Rs. 2500 crores.  
5. The Plan and Non-Plan, Revenue & Capital and Cha rged & Voted break-up of 
the total budgetary provision of the Ministry for t he year 2016-17 are as given in the 
following table: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Demand No. 
 Total  Plan  Non-
Plan 
Revenue Capital  Charged Voted 
19-Ministry 
of Culture 
2500 1755 745 2430 70 - 2500 
1

10 
 
6. The above mentioned table reflects that out of t he total allocation of Rs. 2500 
crore in Demand No. 19, Rs. 1755 crore is Plan allo cation & Rs. 745 crore is Non-Plan 
allocation; Rs. 2430 crore is allocation under the Revenue head and Rs. 70 crore is 
allocated under the Capital head. 
(Rs. in crores) 
Major 
Head 
Budget Estimates  
2015-16 
Revised Estimates  
2015-16 
Budget Estimates  
2016-17 
 Plan  Non -
Plan 
Total  Plan  Non -
Plan 
Total  Plan  Non -
Plan 
Total  
Revenue  14 07.50*  714.00  2121.50  1344.50  714.00  2058.50  1685.00  745.00  2430.00  
Capital  77.50  - 77.50  72.50  - 72.50  70.00  - 70.00  
Total  1485.00  714.00  2199.00  1417.00  714.00  2131.00  1755.00  745.00  2500.00  
*Includes Rs. 30.00 crore obtained in the 1 st  Supplementary Demands for Grants 2015-16. 
7. As against total budgetary provision of Rs. 2199 .00 crore at BE 2015-16 which 
has been reduced to Rs. 2131.00 crore at RE 2015-16 , the budget for 2016-17 for 
Ministry of Culture has been pegged at Rs. 2500.00 crore, consisting of Rs. 1755.00 
crore for Plan and Rs. 745.00 crore under Non-Plan for undertaking various prioritized 
programmes/activities/projects under Plan & Non-Plan Heads. 
8. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry  has been allocated about 
17.32% more than the budgetary provisions at RE (20 15-16). The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would be able to spend the allocation in a judicious 
manner.  
9. As per the restructured format approved by Minis try of Finance, both Plan and 
Non-Plan outlays for 2016-17 have been further allo cated to various Organizations and 
Schemes, under the following new Umbrella Schemes: 
(Rs. in crores) 
S.No. Umbrella 
Schemes 
(rationalized 
Budget Heads) 
Plan Allocation 
for 2016-17 
Non-Plan 
Allocation for 
2016-17 
Total Allocation 
for 2016-17 
1 Secretariat-Social 
Services 
0.00 29.24 29.24 
2 ASI 350.00 330.63 680.63 
3 Cultural 
Institutions 
316.45 86.09 402.54 
4 Museums 270.48 138.87 409.35 
5 Libraries and 
Archives 
142.07 102.21 244.28 
6 Kala Sanskriti 
Vikas Yojana 
300.00 56.88 356.88 
7 International Co-
Operation 
33.50 1.08 34.58 
8 Centenary and 342.50 0.00 342.50 
2

11 
 
Anniversary 
Celebrations 
 Total 1755.00 745.00 2500.00 
10. The above allocations include 10% provision for  North East Activities, 2% for 
Tribal Sub-Plan as well as provision for Capital Wo rks (for Attached/Subordinate 
Offices/Schemes) under Plan for 2016-17. 
11. The Ministry has stated that new rationalized/U mbrella Schemes have been 
conceptualized for the financial year 2016-17, on t he instruction of the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) and all the organizations / schemes h ave been clubbed in the revised 
rationalized pattern keeping in view their aims and objectives. 
12. The Committee hopes that the restructured alloc ation will allow the 
Ministry freedom to allocate funds among the scheme s and institutions clubbed 
within the group, as and when the need arises. The Committee emphasizes that the 
Ministry should ensure that such allocation will no t affect the existing 
schemes/programmes of the Ministry.  
Ministry’s projected demand vis-à-vis  budgetary allocation 
13. The Ministry of Culture has stated in its writt en reply that the Ministry had   
projected an outlay of Rs. 3014.44 crore for Annual  Plan 2016-17 on the basis of 
various activities/schemes proposed to be taken up by the cultural 
organizations/schemes under the Ministry. The Ministry of Finance has allocated a sum 
of Rs. 1755.00 crore under Plan for the year 2016-1 7 and no reason for this reduction 
vis-à-vis  the projected outlay has been intimated by the Ministry of Finance.  
14. The Ministry has stated that the reduced alloca tion  is likely to impact  almost 
all sectors/ umbrella schemes of the Ministry including Archaeological Survey of India, 
Cultural Institutions, Museums, Libraries & Archives, Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana, etc. 
Ministry of Culture has earmarked Plan funds among various Rationalized/Umbrella 
Schemes/Sectors, keeping in view the requirements and overall Plan allocation. 
15. The Committee notes that the Ministry was alloc ated only 58.22% of its 
projected Plan outlay. The Committee feels that in view of the various 
Schemes/Programmes/activities undertaken by the Min istry of Culture which are 
important in preserving and promoting the rich cult ural heritage of the nation, 
such reduced allocation is not desirable. The Commi ttee is of the opinion that in 
view of the requirements of the Ministry, more allo cation should be made to the 
Ministry at the RE stage in the current financial y ear. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should pursue this mat ter with the Ministry of 
Finance at the highest level. 
12 
th  Five Year Plan 
16. For the 12 th  Five Year Plan, as against the proposed outlay of Rs. 18668.94 
crore, Planning Commission has approved a Plan allo cation of Rs. 7275.00 crore for 
Ministry of Culture for priority areas/new schemes/ perspectives and ongoing 
schemes/activities/projects under different sectors . The actual Plan allocation for 12 th  
Plan is about 38.97% of the proposed outlay for 12 th  Plan. The approved Sector-wise 
break up of approved outlay for the 12 th  Plan is as per details given below:- 
3

12 
 
 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
S.No. Organization/Scheme 12 
th  Plan Approved 
Outlay 
1 Secretariat-Social Services 25.00 
2 Archaeological Survey of India + CSS 1440.84 
3 Promotion and Dissemination of Art and Culture  1806.05 
4 Anthropology 125.00 
5 Archives & Archival Libraries 171.30 
6 Buddhist & Tibetan Studies 214.25 
7 Museums 1162.01 
8 Public Libraries 728.50 
9 Memorials, Centenaries and Others 606.55 
10 International Cultural Relations (ICR) 79.00 
11 Activities for the North-East Region 727.50 
 Total (Revenue) 7086.00 
12 Building Project of Attached/Subordinate 
Offices 
189.00 
 Grand Total  7275.00 
 
17. The position of Plan expenditure vis-à-vis  the annual allocation, during 12 
th  Plan 
period (2012-17), is indicated in the following table: 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year/Annual 
Plan 
BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
%w.r.t. RE 
XII Plan 
Allocation 
7275.00 
 
2012-13 864.00 864.00 803.79 93.03 
2013-14 1537.00 1470.00 1380.13 93.89 
2014-15 1835.00 1500.00 1418.58 94.57 
2015-16 1485.00 1417.00 1241.34* 87.60 
2016-17 1755.00    
*Position as on 07.04.2016 
18. The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to spend more than 90% 
of its Plan allocation during the first three years  of the 12 
th  Plan. It also notes that 
BE allocations had consistently been reduced at RE stage, despite posting very 
good expenditure by the Ministry. It should be avoided in future. 
19. The Non-Plan year-wise financial performance of  the Ministry for the past four 
years is given below:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
4

13 
 
Year/Annual 
Plan 
BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
%w.r.t. RE 
2012-13 583.00 586.15 587.15 100.17 
2013-14 627.00 624.80 611.59 97.89 
2014-15 676.00 659.00 650.59 98.72 
2015-16 714.00 714.00 719.87* 100.82 
*Tentative 
20. The Ministry has informed the Committee that th e Ministry has evolved a 
mechanism to monitor the pace of expenditure of bud getary allocation constantly 
during the financial year. Under this arrangement, the progress of implementation of 
the schemes as well as the expenditure under each s cheme is constantly monitored at 
the highest level i.e.,  Secretary (Culture) and Additional Secretary & Fin ancial Advisor 
(Culture) and Joint Secretaries in weekly/ fortnigh tly/ monthly/ quarterly meetings held 
regularly. Instructions have also been issued to al l implementing agencies in the 
Ministry, at the beginning of the financial year to  phase out the expenditure in such a 
manner so that the quantum of expenditure incurred under these organizations/ schemes 
is propelled and also sustained in an even manner d uring the months of the financial 
year. 
21. The Ministry has further stated that from the f inancial year 2014-15, the 
Ministry of Culture has introduced a system of sign ing of Memorandum of 
Understandings (MoUs) with all organizations under which monitoring of financial and 
physical performance regularly have been made manda tory. The implementation of 
MoUs will invariably facilitate the Ministry to mon itor the progress of expenditure 
along with physical outputs/achievements in respect  of the organizations under its 
administrative control. The arrangement will provid e impetus to improve the financial 
performances, i.e. progress of expenditure of organ izations at any point of time during 
the year. 
22. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure 
optimum utilization of the allocation. 
23. The Committee observes that Rs. 10 lakhs has be en surrendered under the 
head ‘Artists’ Pension Scheme’ during 2014-15. The Committee would like to 
know the reasons for the surrender. The Committee f eels that this is an 
undesirable development as hundreds of artists and artisans are struggling to 
make a living. Surrendering pension funds, for what ever reasons, is unacceptable. 
The Ministry should have spent the entire allocatio n for the benefit of poor 
artisans and artists. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take care that 
no such fund  lapses. 
Archaeological Survey of India 
24. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) was es tablished in 1861. It functions 
as an attached office of the Ministry of Culture. A SI is engaged in protection, 
preservation and conservation of 3686 protected mon uments of national importance 
including 21 World heritage Monuments and 44 site m useums spread all over India 
which are directly under the ASI. 
5

14 
 
25. The Committee was informed that ASI has been al located just Rs. 200   
crores for conservation activities, which is grossl y inadequate to meet the 
requirement for the purpose. The Committee recommen ds that ASI should be 
given adequate funds to undertake conservation acti vities at RE stage. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture s hould take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance. 
Removal of encroachments in monuments 
26. The Ministry, in its reply, has furnished the f ollowing details of encroachments 
removed from the premises of centrally protected monuments in the past five years:- 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of monument Locality District State 
1. Stone observatory, Man 
Mahal Varanasi Vanarasi 
 
Uttar Pradesh 
 
2. Dharahara Masjid  Varanasi Vanarasi 
3. General Wali Kothi Lucknow Lucknow 
4. Mohibullapur Memorial 
Pillar Hajratganj Lucknow 
5. 
Platform and Stair cases 
of Amjad Ali Shah’s 
Mauloleum 
Lucknow Lucknow 
6. Nakkar Khana/Naubat 
Khana of Bara Imbara Lucknow Lucknow 
7. Sikanderbagh Complex Lucknow Lucknow 
8. Cemetery near fort 
Machchi Bhawan Lucknow Lucknow 
9. Cemetery  Bargawun Lucknow 
10. Tomb of Bahu Begum Faizabad Faizabad 
11. Gourjhamar Fort  Gourjhamar Sagar Madhya Prades h 
12. Shiva Temple Belpan Bilaspur Chattisgarh 
 
13. Chaiturgarh Fort Lapha Korba 
14. Tank, Palace and Harem Sarkhej Ahmedabad Gujarat 
 
15. Ancient site at  Newasa  Ahmednagar 
 
Maharashtra 
16. Markandadev Temple Markanda Gadchiroli 
17. Someshwar Mahadev 
Temple Ner Yeotmal 
18. Ghirshneshwaar 
Mahadev Temple Ellora Aurangabad 
19. Lothian Road Cemetery   
 
Delhi 
 
NCT of Delhi  
 
20. Chhota Batashewala 
Gumbad 
21. Bara Batashewala 
Gumbad 
22. Qudusia Bagh Mosque 
23. Vijay Mandal (Partly) 
    
6

15 
 
27. The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to  the Committee, has stated that the 
Ministry of Culture took up the issue of removal of  encroachments in the Centrally 
protected monuments with the State Governments and requested that State 
Level Coordination Committees may be formed for pro per monitoring and removal of 
encroachment.  Subsequent to this, the State Govern ment of Assam, Rajasthan, Orissa, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu  and Puducherry have 
formed the said Committees. 
28. 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by ASI to  protect and preserve 
the monuments and heritage sites of our country. The Committee desires that the 
Ministry may pursue the other State Governments also to setup the State level Co-
ordination Committees.  
29.      But the Committee feels in NCT of Delhi, l ot of important monuments are 
still under encroachment with little chance of getting them removed. Zafar Mahal, 
for example, in Qutub area is on the verge of being  demolished by encroachers 
and we are not able to do much about it. The Commit tee would like to have a 
status report on the monument. 
 
30. As per the Ministry’s reply, the preparation of  first draft for amendment in the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Rema ins Act, 1958 is ready.  The 
issue is also being discussed with various stake holders. 
31. The Committee, although is not against the view  that ASI can effectively 
fulfill its mandate if it has adequate statutory ba cking to remove and prevent 
encroachments, it, however, is of the considered op inion that it would not help to 
any great extent, until we are able to strike at th e nexus between the unscrupulous 
elements and local authorities including the police , leaving ASI helpless in this 
regard. If the proposed amendment is for breaking t he unholy nexus, the 
Committee would welcome this. The Committee hopes t hat the amendments 
proposed in the AMASR Act would equip ASI to execute its demolition orders and 
also that the Act would stipulate the action to be taken against the District 
Authorities in case of laxity or non- co-operation on their part in executing the 
demolition orders.  
32. The Ministry has stated in its reply that a Com mittee of the Ministry of Culture 
has recommended a Special Force along with the help  of tools and electronic gadgets 
for protection of Monuments and art installations a s part of a comprehensive security 
policy.  The time frame cannot be indicated at this stage as it is still under consideration 
of Government. 
33. The Committee welcomes such a 
 step for the  protection of the monuments 
and desires that the idea may be actively considere d by the Government to 
transform it into reality.  The Committee would like to know the opinion of Uni on 
Ministry of Home as well as the States on this. 
34. The Ministry has informed the Committee that th e ASI has entered into an 
MOU with ISRO for preparation of Survey plans with respect to all Centrally 
protected   monuments/sites. The survey plans will indicate area of monument, 
prohibited boundary and regulated area. Hence an in dividual would be able to assess 
location of his site where construction is proposed  and apply online for 
permission accordingly. The National Monuments Auth ority has already launched the 
7

16 
 
web site in this regard.  Further, the MOU with ISR O provides for development of a 
mobile application, based on the ISRO Bhuwan softwa re, through which the applicant 
could determine the geo-coordinates of his property, simply by using his smart phone at 
the site, which he could provide in the online appl ication through the National 
Monuments Authority portal for permission to repair/renovate/construct. 
35. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, so fa r, more than 500 maps have been 
prepared by ASI and are available on NRSA/Bhuvan Po rtal for public. A Government 
order has been issued by Ministry of Culture on 05.02.2016 with regard to guidelines to 
grant of permissions for construction related activ ities within prohibited/regulated area 
of Centrally Protected monuments/sites. 
36. The Committee observes that such an online faci lity would enable the 
public as well as owners of the properties adjacent  to the protected monuments to 
find out the exact prohibited and regulated area easily. This has also simplified the 
process of applying for permission to repair/ renov ate/ construct. The Committee 
desires that wide publicity should be given to this  facility in future. The 
Committee, however, would like to say that encroach ments happen not because 
people are not aware of area restrictions under AMA SR Act, but they have 
intention to do it and they do it with the connivan ce of local agencies/ authorities 
who are aware of these restrictions. The Committee,  however, feels it would be 
better to have such an App. rather than not having it at all. 
Must See Portal 
37. The Committee was informed that recently, the A rchaeological Survey of India 
initiated a process to make a web portal for a list  of “Must See” that features 
outstanding Indian Monuments and Sites. Such monume nts and sites must display 
exceptionality in terms of art and architecture, pl anning and design, being a unique 
testimony to the civilization in the past and being  an outstanding type of building 
showing exemplary engineering skills. The main inte ntion to create this portal is to 
highlight a few exceptional Indian monuments and sites and popularize them among the 
visitors. The information being provided on the por tal for these sites would be useful to 
the visitors in developing their interest for the site and planning of their visits. 
38. The Committee appreciates this initiative. The Committee hopes that 
through the Portal, the public will come to know ab out more Indian monuments 
and sites which have heritage value. 
Conservation portal for ASI works 
39. As per the Annual Report (2015-16) of the Minis try of Culture, portal for 
Conservation works is being launched by the Archaeo logical Survey of India (ASI) 
which aims to capture details of  all conservation and development works being 
undertaken by its various Circles. The portal has b een developed to increase 
transparency and will be accessible to public as a part of e-governance initiative. The 
portal will have details of all works being underta ken by ASI through its various 
Circles, viz., conservation programme, progress of work, attendanc e of workers, etc., 
including time line, which can be monitored at diff erent levels. The portal is expected 
to be launched shortly. 
40. The Committee appreciates the work relating to conservation/ protection of 
our monuments and hopes that this Portal would prov e to be an effective step in 
8

17 
 
promoting and ensuring transparency in the conservation activities undertaken by 
ASI. 
Adarsh Smarak 
41. ASI has identified 25 monuments for inclusion u nder Adarsh Smarak 
monuments. They are as follows:- 
1.  Leh Palace, Leh, J&K; 
2. Humayun’s Tomb, New Delhi; 
3. Qutub Complex, New Delhi; 
4. Red Fort, Delhi; 
5. Hazardwari Palace, Murshidabad, WB; 
6. Shore Temple, Mahabalipuram, TN; 
7. Elephanta Caves, Mumbai; 
8. Taj Mahal, Agra, UP; 
9. Kumbhalgarh Fort, Rajasthan; 
10. Rani-ki-Vav, Patan, Gujarat; 
11. Fatehpur Sikri, Agra, UP; 
12. Group of monuments Hampi, Karnataka; 
13. Jageshwar Temples, Uttarakhand; 
14. Sravasti, UP; 
15. Sarnath, UP; 
16. Vaishali-Kolhua, Bihar; 
17. Khajuraho, MP; 
18. Mandu, MP; 
19.  Martand Temple, Kashmir; 
20. Tangier-Brihadeshwar, TN; 
21. Group of Temples, Pattadakal, Karnataka; 
22. Masur Rock-cut Temple, Himachal Pradesh; 
23. Rang Ghar, Sibsagar, Assam; 
24. Konark Temple, Odisha; and 
25. Daulatabad Fort, Maharashtra 
42. The Committee was informed that these monuments  would be provided 
necessary tourist amenities including washrooms, dr inking water, signage, cafeteria, 
audio visual center, Wi-Fi, security, encroachment free area, interpretation centers, 
water management system. The monuments will also be  made disabled friendly. 
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan will also be implemented in these monuments. 
43. The Committee takes note of the amenities that would be provided at the 
Adarsh Smarak monuments and desires that all the AS I monuments should be 
upgraded to the standards of the Adarsh Smarak in a phased manner. 
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 
44. Under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Sarnath Circle of ASI has adopted the Man 
Mandir Ghat in Varanasi. Besides cleaning activity,  a green belt has also been 
developed here. In achieving these objectives, ASI is also involving corporate sector.  
9

18 
 
45. The Committee hopes that ASI will engage the co rporate sector in more 
such activities. 
Contractual employees of ASI 
46. It was brought to the notice of the Committee t hat ASI employs a large number 
of people as security guards, watchmen and last gra de employees for decades together, 
but without making them regular or permanent employ ee. There are being paid meagre 
wages and without any social security or heath coverage.  
47. The Committee feels that this is total injustic e and violation of all norms 
and practices laid down by various legislations. Th e Committee is disheartened to 
note that this anti-labour practice is being perpet uated by ASI, one of the premier 
Government institutions of the country. This Commit tee, therefore, recommends 
that the ASI and Ministry of Culture should take al l possible steps to ensure that 
its contractual employees are paid decent wages alo ngwith adequate social 
security schemes and health coverage, until they are given permanent status. 
 
E-ticketing 
48. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that there are 116 ticketed 
monuments and 35 museums under the protection of AS I. E-ticketing facility has been 
launched in co-ordination with Canara Bank with the  aim of providing online booking 
facility for visitors. Moreover, the facility is pr oving to be less expensive as compared 
to manual ticketing system which was prevalent earl ier. Additional benefit will be in 
terms of relieving ASI personnel, mostly monument a ttendants, who will now be able 
to concentrate on the security and maintenance of monuments instead of dispensing and 
checking tickets.  
49. The Committee feels that e-ticketing would ensu re a hassle free entry to the 
visitors at the monuments, which would encourage mo re people to visit these 
monuments. The Committee desires that this facility  should be made available in 
all the ASI ticketed monuments. 
National Museum 
50.  National Museum, in collaboration with UNESCO, Nati onal Platform for the 
Rights of Disabled (NPRD) and Saksham launched a ne w permanent gallery for 
Persons with Disabilities. Featuring tactile replic as of 22 outstanding objects from the 
collections of the Museum as well as an audio guide , ramps and descriptive labels in 
Braille, the gallery encourages visitors to ‘touch’  and feel the objects on display. 
Through its tactile structure, the gallery displace s the hegemony of the visual and 
explores different ways to experience art for disabled and other visitors of the Museum. 
RFID tags and 3-D photography 
51. The Secretary informed the Committee that on pi lot basis, all the artefacts at the 
National Museum are tagged with RFID tags and that this enables the RFID reader to 
record all the artefacts and save them in the compu ter. Also, 3-D photography of the 
museum objects has also been done, which is stored in the JATAN software.  
52. The Committee appreciates these initiatives.  
Functioning of Akademis 
53. The Committee notes the fact that the High Powe red Committee (HPC) 
constituted on the advice of Parliamentary Committe e to look into various issues 
related to Akademis’ Working  submitted its Report in a record few months in May 
10

19 
 
2014. The HPC has advised that a Committee be set u p to implement its 
recommendations . 
54. The Ministry, in its reply, has stated that the  Government has already decided to 
implement most of the acceptable recommendations of  High Powered Committee on 
Akademis and other institutions under Ministry of C ulture subject to maintaining the 
autonomous character of the Akademis and other inst itutions as per their Memorandum 
of Association/ Deed/ Rules & Regulations etc. Nece ssary orders/ instructions have 
since been issued by the Ministry to the Akademis a nd other institutions to initiate 
necessary action for implementations of recommendat ions concerning them after 
obtaining approval of their Governing Body/ Executive Council etc, as the case may be. 
Some Institutions namely National School of Drama ( NSD), Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) & Centre for Cultural Resources & Training (CCRT) have 
taken approval of their competent authority for implementation of the recommendations 
accepted by them.  
55. The Committee notes that some Institutions have  taken action for 
implementation of the recommendations of the HPC. T he Committee desires that 
the recommendations may be implemented by all the c oncerned cultural 
organizations without further delay. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken by the Institutions on a quarterly basis on t he implementation of the 
recommendations of the High Powered Committee.  
56. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture while deposi ng before the Committee stated 
that the Akademis need to be more accountable to th e Ministry and that the Ministry’s 
role is not confined to giving grants only.  
57. The Committee endorses the view put forward by the Secretary, Ministry 
of Culture and desires that the Ministry should tak e effective steps to ensure the 
accountability of these Cultural Institutions witho ut impairing their autonomy in 
any manner.  
Cultural Mapping of India 
58. The Secretary informed the Committee that the M inistry of Culture has an 
ambitious project of Rs. 3000 crores for a period o f 5 years and that an amount of Rs. 
100 crores was asked for this purpose in the projec ted demand for 2016-17. However, 
the amount was not sanctioned. 
59. Under this project it is envisaged that a data base of all the artists in the Country 
would be created. For this, about 10,000 volunteers  would cover each village in a year, 
organizing programmes/competitions in the village i n 100 disciplines. These 
competitions will be held at the Panchayat level, B lock level, District level and State 
level.  The winning artists would be given cash pri zes. At National level, Rs. 10,00,000 
would be given as first prize; Rs. 5,00,000  as sec ond prize; Rs. 3,00,000 as third prize; 
and Rs. 50,000 as consolation prize for 5 persons. 20% of the reward would be given to 
the guru who mentored the winner. A total of 800 ar tists will be selected each year for 
the awards. 
60. The Committee appreciates this initiative for t alent hunting and hopes that 
when it materializes, it would enable the Ministry to create a data base of artists of 
varied forms of art and culture in the country. The  Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may make a proposal for seeking involv ement of village Panchayats 
11

20 
 
for these activities and also seek for necessary fu nds at the RE stage of this 
financial year, from the Ministry of Finance for this purpose.  
National Culture Fund 
61. The primary mandate of NCF’s primary mandate is  to establish and nurture 
partnerships in the field of heritage between priva te and public sectors, government, 
non-government agencies, private institutions and f oundations and mobilize resources 
for the restoration, conservation, protection and d evelopment of India’s rich, natural, 
tangible and intangible heritage. 
62. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the p rojects completed in 2015-16 are 
Conservation of Sunderwala Mahal, Sunder Nursery, N ew Delhi; and NCF project of 
“Treasures of Indian Museum Series” for National Museum. 
63.  The Committee feels that the National Culture Fund should be given more 
visibility and publicity so that it would attract t he participation of more 
corporates and other organizations. It would like t o know the extent of 
participation of various Organisations to this Fund during the last 5 years. 
 
 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
64. As per Audit Para No. 3.1 of Report No. 23 of 2 013 (Undue benefits to 
employees) in respect of the Asiatic Society, Kolka ta, the Society has started recovery 
of salary of its employees on account of wrongly granted one additional increment from 
June, 2014 onwards. Out of the total recoverable am ount Rs. 34,72,013.00, a sum of 
Rs.22,55,783/- has been recovered by the Asiatic Society, Kolkata till January, 2016. 
65. The Committee desires that the Ministry should undertake strict 
supervision and monitoring of the Asiatic Society o f India to ensure that such 
irregularities do not happen and a report should be  sent to the Committee after 
settlement of the existing Audit Para No. 3.1 of Report No.23 of 2013. 
Vacancies in various Organizations under the Ministry 
S. 
No 
Name of 
Organisation 
Name of Vacant 
Post 
No. of 
vacant 
post 
Present status of filling up the 
vacancy 
1 ASI Joint DG 
Dy. SA 
Dy. SAE 
SA Engr. 
Dir.Epig. (Sans) 
Dy. S.Epig. 
14 
8 
4 
8 
1 
1 
 
 
 
Selection process in progress 
 
2 NAI Director General 1 Selection process in progr ess 
3 AnSI Director 1 Amended R.Rs duly approved 
by DoPT sent to Ministry of 
Law for vetting. 
4 National 
Museum 
Director General 1 Post advertised and the process 
to fill up the same is underway. 
12

21 
 
5 National 
Gallery of 
Modern Art  
Director 2 Posts re-advertise with same 
modification suggested by 
UPSC. 
6 National 
Library 
Director-General 1 Recruitment Rules under 
process.  Thereafter, action will 
be taken to fill up the vacancy 
7 Central 
Reference 
Library 
Librarian 1 Selection in process with the 
meeting of Search-cum-
Selection Committee to be held 
shortly 
8 SNA Secretary 1 Post advertised recently. 
9 IGNCA Member-
Secretary 
1 Selection process in progress. 
10 Delhi Public 
Library 
Director  Approval for seeking revival of 
posts from DLB. 
11 KhudaBakshO 
riental Public 
Library 
Director 1 Selection in process with the 
proposal under consideration of 
ACC 
12 Rampur 
RazaLibrary 
Director 1 Selection in process 
13 Nehru 
Memorial 
Museum 
&Library 
Director  1 Age limit case was refer to 
PMO by DoPT. Necessary 
direction has been received 
from PMO and the same has 
been conveyed to NMML. 
14 Indian 
Museum 
Director 1 Selection process in progress. 
15 Salarjung 
Museum 
Director 1 Selection process in progress. 
66. The Committee is disturbed to note the vacancie s existing in the various 
organizations, especially at the higher level and a t the level of Heads of the 
Organizations. The Committee time and again pointed  out in its various Reports 
that this would adversely affect the functioning of  these Organizations. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take time bound steps to ensure 
that the vacancies are filled up at the earliest. T he Ministry should co-ordinate 
with UPSC and other concerned authorities to ensure  that the bottlenecks in this 
regard are cleared. 
National/Regional Schools of Drama 
67. On the basis of the recommendations made by the  Broad Based Committee for 
opening up of 5 regional centres across the country , NSD Society proposed to establish 
5 regional centres one each at Kolkata, Mumbai/ Goa , J&K, North-East beside 
upgrading the existing Regional Resource Centre (RR C), Bengaluru to a full-fledged 
regional centre. These regional centres were to be established in consultation with the 
13

22 
 
concerned State Governments, who were required to p rovide accommodation for the 
purpose. Only the Government of Karnataka has allot ted land for the purpose at 
Bengaluru. The Government of Maharashtra has also a greed in principle to provide 
accommodation and a plot of land for opening of NSD centre at Mumbai.   
68. The Committee desires that the Ministry may tak e necessary steps to 
ensure that the regional centres of National School  of Drama are set up at each of 
the places at the earliest by doing the needful in this regard. Getting required land 
in a city like Kolkata may not be possible due to o bvious reasons. Since Kolkata 
has several cultural institutions under the Ministr y of Culture, National School of 
Drama centre of Kolkata may be started from one of those premises until a land is 
found out there. 
Plan assistance for State Akademis  
69. The Ministry, in its written reply, has stated that budgetary constraints do not 
permit the Ministry to undertake any scheme of prov iding assistance to the State 
Akademis at present. 
70. The Committee takes note of the sad situation i n which the State Akademis 
are functioning. They are in dire need of funds. Th erefore, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry may take up the matter of providi ng assistance to the State 
Akademis with the Ministry of Finance as well as th e States, to provide some 
financial support to  the State Akademis.  
DTH Channel 
71. The Ministry has informed the Committee that un der Scheme of TV 
programming and other Media Publicity on Art & Cult ure, in view of the large 
perspective and ample dissemination of Ministry’s roles, activities, various programmes 
and activities, the existing Media Cell will be str engthened wherein all components of 
setting up DTH Channels including a production unit  will be incorporated along with 
financial projections in 2016-17. 
National Virtual Library of India 
72. The Committee has been informed that the Minist ry of Culture has constituted 
an Advisory Committee to advise on various issues r elated to the development of 
NVLI. The committee has held three meetings on 29.0 9.2015, 18.02.2016 and 
24.02.2016. A meeting of Experts, Heads of Organiza tions and other stakeholders was 
also organized on 09.12.2015 to specify the scope o f NVLI. The scope of the project 
has been redefined with significant enhancement in the activities and functional areas 
vis-a-vis  the scope as was mentioned in the initial concept note. The Committee also 
observed that the scope of this project should be k ept flexible for progressive additions 
of activities/modules and it has many R&D areas. In  view of this, the Committee 
decided that this project should be undertaken in A ction Research Mode through 
Government Organizations. 
73. The Advisory Committee in its 2rd & 3 
rd  meeting considered the project 
proposals received from various agencies in the fie ld, for development and 
implementation of the NVLI. The project proposals w ere considered and it has been 
decided to develop and implement the project  by Go vernment Organizations such as 
IIT, Mumbai, CDAC, Pune, NIC, IGNOU and NKN with II T, Mumbai being PI and 
other partnering organizations being Co_Pis. Minist ry of Culture has released Rs. 7.50 
14

23 
 
crores to RRRLF for commencement of the project wit h signing of MoUs with the 
partnering organizations.  
74. The creation of NVLI requires consultation with  different experts in the field 
like domain experts of technology, infrastructure, library personnel, museum, achieve 
as well as different institutions including librari es. More than 34000 public libraries are 
available in India. Now it is being finalized in institutionalized project mode.  
75. The Committee appreciates this initiative. The Committee desires that the 
Ministry should ensure timely setting up of the National Virtual Library of India.  
NML Model Libraries 
76. State-wise details of District Libraries and St ate Central Libraries for 
development as Model Libraries under the National M ission on Libraries are given 
below: - 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State District 
Library 
State Central 
Library 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1 1 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1 1 
3 Assam 2 - 
4 Chhattisgarh 2 - 
5 Goa 1 1 
6 Gujarat - 1 
7 Karnataka 1 1 
8 Kerala - 1 
9 Manipur 1 1 
10 Mizoram 1 1 
11 Odisha (Orissa) 1 1 
12 Rajasthan 1 1 
13 Tamil Nadu 2 - 
14 Telangana 1 1 
15 Tripura 1 1 
16 Uttar Pradesh 1 1 
17 West Bengal - 2 
18 Puducherry (Pondicherry) 1 1 
 Total 18 16 
 
77. The Ministry, in its reply, has stated that dur ing 2016-17, it is proposed to set up 
37 NML model libraries at State Central Libraries, 37 district libraries and other six 
public libraries under Ministry of Culture through up-gradation of existing 
infrastructure, modernization of service with ICT a pplications and to acquire reading 
resources to meet the needs of clientele. 
Construction of Komagata Maru Memorial in Kolkata Port land area 
78. As per the reply furnished by the Ministry, a t ripartite MOU in connection with 
the construction of Komagata Maru Martyrs’ Memorial  at Budge Budge was signed on 
29 
th  January, 2016 at Kolkata amongst Ministry of Cultu re, Kolkata Port Trust and 
15

24 
 
Komagata Maru Memorial Trust (KMMT). The Project Ma nagement Committee 
(PCM), as provided in the MoU, also had its 1 st  meeting on 29 th   January, 2016 and 
approved the lay out plan of the memorial. As per the MoU, it is the duty of the KMMT 
to get the drawings/plan approved from the Budge Bu dge Municipality. The KMMT is 
yet to submit the drawings/plan to Budge Budge Municipality. Once the drawings/plans 
are approved by the Municipality, tenders will be f loated by the Kolkata Port Trust 
(KoPT). After finalization of the lowest tender, the construction will start. 
79. The Committee desires that the Ministry should pursue with the State 
Government and KMMT to get all the pre-requisites f or the construction of the 
Komagata Maru Memorial done at the earliest. The Co mmittee may be apprised 
about the development. 
80. The Members of the Committee highlighted the ne ed for proper maintenance 
and preservation of Kalibangan, Chittorgarh Fort an d Taragarh Fort in Rajasthan; and 
Pedagonda, Karnataka.  
81. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may expedite the 
conservation activities presently undertaken in the  above cited places and also 
approach the concerned State Archaeology Department s for taking necessary 
steps for the preservation, maintenance etc. of the said monuments.  
82. The Committee was informed that a large number of NGOs of Anantpur District 
of Andhra Pradesh which are getting financial assis tance and grants are non-existent 
and bogus.  The Committee desired that the matter may be inves tigated and 
necessary measures may be taken to weed out the bog us organizations and the 
Committee may be apprised about the investigation report.  
83. The Secretary informed the Committee that large  numbers of manuscripts are in 
private hands and they are sold at will due to slug gish enforcement mechanisms. These 
manuscripts need to be protected and conserved. The  National Mission for Manuscript 
has the mandate of identifying, documenting, conser ving and making accessible the 
manuscript heritage of India. The Committee was als o informed that there are more 
than one lakh monuments which are unprotected.  
84. The Committee observes that there should be ade quate steps to preserve 
and protect the scriptures and manuscripts of cultu ral importance. The 
Committee also calls upon the Government to take me asures to protect all the 
hitherto unprotected monuments in a phased manner.  
 
16

25 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
Assessment of the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry 
 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry h as been allocated about 
17.32% more than the budgetary provisions at RE (20 15-16). The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would be able to spend the allocation in a judicious 
manner. 
 (Para No. 8) 
 The Committee hopes that the restructured allocati on will allow the 
Ministry freedom to allocate funds among the scheme s and institutions clubbed 
within the group, as and when the need arises. The Committee emphasizes that the 
Ministry should ensure that such allocation will no t affect the existing 
schemes/programmes of the Ministry.  
(Para No. 12) 
Ministry’s projected demand vis-à-vis  budgetary allocation 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry was allocate d only 58.22% of its 
projected Plan outlay. The Committee feels that in view of the various 
Schemes/Programmes/activities undertaken by the Min istry of Culture which are 
important in preserving and promoting the rich cult ural heritage of the nation, 
such reduced allocation is not desirable. The Commi ttee is of the opinion that in 
view of the requirements of the Ministry, more allo cation should be made to the 
Ministry at the RE stage in the current financial y ear. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should pursue this mat ter with the Ministry of 
Finance at the highest level. 
(Para No. 15) 
12 th  Five Year Plan 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to spend more than 90% 
of its Plan allocation during the first three years  of the 12 th  Plan. It also notes that 
BE allocations had consistently been reduced at RE stage, despite posting very 
good expenditure by the Ministry. It should be avoided in future. 
(Para No. 18) 
 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the  Ministry to ensure 
optimum utilization of the allocation. 
(Para No. 22) 
 The Committee observes that Rs. 10 lakhs has been surrendered under the 
head ‘Artists’ Pension Scheme’ during 2014-15. The Committee would like to 
know the reasons for the surrender. The Committee f eels that this is an 
undesirable development as hundreds of artists and artisans are struggling to 
make a living. Surrendering pension funds, for what ever reasons, is unacceptable. 
The Ministry should have spent the entire allocatio n for the benefit of poor 
artisans and artists. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take care that 
no such fund  lapses. 
(Para No. 23) 
 
17

26 
 
Archaeological Survey of India 
 The Committee was informed that ASI has been alloc ated just Rs. 200   
crores for conservation activities, which is grossl y inadequate to meet the 
requirement for the purpose. The Committee recommen ds that ASI should be 
given adequate funds to undertake conservation acti vities at RE stage. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture s hould take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para No. 25) 
Removal of encroachments in monuments 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by ASI to  protect and preserve 
the monuments and heritage sites of our country. The Committee desires that the 
Ministry may pursue the other State Governments also to setup the State level Co-
ordination Committees.  
(Para No. 28) 
But the Committee feels in NCT of Delhi, lot of imp ortant monuments are 
still under encroachment with little chance of getting them removed. Zafar Mahal, 
for example, in Qutub area is on the verge of being  demolished by encroachers 
and we are not able to do much about it. The Commit tee would like to have a 
status report on the monument. 
(Para No. 29) 
 The Committee, although is not against the view th at ASI can effectively 
fulfill its mandate if it has adequate statutory ba cking to remove and prevent 
encroachments, it, however, is of the considered op inion that it would not help to 
any great extent, until we are able to strike at th e nexus between the unscrupulous 
elements and local authorities including the police , leaving ASI helpless in this 
regard. If the proposed amendment is for breaking t he unholy nexus, the 
Committee would welcome this. The Committee hopes t hat the amendments 
proposed in the AMASR Act would equip ASI to execute its demolition orders and 
also that the Act would stipulate the action to be taken against the District 
Authorities in case of laxity or non- co-operation on their part in executing the 
demolition orders.  
(Para No. 31) 
 The Committee welcomes such a  step for the  protection of the monuments 
and desires that the idea may be actively considere d by the Government to 
transform it into reality.  The Committee would like to know the opinion of Uni on 
Ministry of Home as well as the States on this. 
(Para No. 33) 
 The Committee observes that such an online facilit y would enable the 
public as well as owners of the properties adjacent  to the protected monuments to 
find out the exact prohibited and regulated area easily. This has also simplified the 
process of applying for permission to repair/ renov ate/ construct. The Committee 
desires that wide publicity should be given to this  facility in future. The 
Committee, however, would like to say that encroach ments happen not because 
people are not aware of area restrictions under AMA SR Act, but they have 
intention to do it and they do it with the connivan ce of local agencies/ authorities 
18

27 
 
who are aware of these restrictions. The Committee,  however, feels it would be 
better to have such an App. rather than not having it at all. 
(Para No. 36) 
Must See Portal 
 The Committee appreciates this initiative. The Com mittee hopes that 
through the Portal, the public will come to know ab out more Indian monuments 
and sites which have heritage value. 
(Para No. 38) 
Conservation portal for ASI works 
 The Committee appreciates the work relating to con servation/ protection of 
our monuments and hopes that this Portal would prov e to be an effective step in 
promoting and ensuring transparency in the conservation activities undertaken by 
ASI. 
(Para No. 40) 
Adarsh Smarak 
 The Committee takes note of the amenities that wou ld be provided at the 
Adarsh Smarak monuments and desires that all the AS I monuments should be 
upgraded to the standards of the Adarsh Smarak in a phased manner. 
(Para No. 43) 
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 
 The Committee hopes that ASI will engage the corpo rate sector in more 
such activities. 
(Para No. 45) 
Contractual employees of ASI 
 The Committee feels that this is total injustice a nd violation of all norms 
and practices laid down by various legislations. Th e Committee is disheartened to 
note that this anti-labour practice is being perpet uated by ASI, one of the premier 
Government institutions of the country. This Commit tee, therefore, recommends 
that the ASI and Ministry of Culture should take al l possible steps to ensure that 
its contractual employees are paid decent wages alo ngwith adequate social 
security schemes and health coverage, until they are given permanent status. 
(Para No. 47) 
E-ticketing 
 The Committee feels that e-ticketing would ensure a hassle free entry to the 
visitors at the monuments, which would encourage mo re people to visit these 
monuments. The Committee desires that this facility  should be made available in 
all the ASI ticketed monuments. 
(Para No. 49) 
RFID tags and 3-D photography 
 The Committee appreciates these initiatives.  
(Para No. 52) 
Functioning of Akademis 
 The Committee notes that some Institutions have ta ken action for 
implementation of the recommendations of the HPC. T he Committee desires that 
the recommendations may be implemented by all the c oncerned cultural 
organizations without further delay. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken by the Institutions on a quarterly basis on t he implementation of the 
recommendations of the High Powered Committee.  
(Para No. 55) 
19

28 
 
 The Committee endorses the view put forward by the  Secretary, Ministry 
of Culture and desires that the Ministry should tak e effective steps to ensure the 
accountability of these Cultural Institutions witho ut impairing their autonomy in 
any manner.  
(Para No. 57) 
Cultural Mapping of India 
 The Committee appreciates this initiative for tale nt hunting and hopes that 
when it materializes, it would enable the Ministry to create a data base of artists of 
varied forms of art and culture in the country. The  Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may make a proposal for seeking involv ement of village Panchayats 
for these activities and also seek for necessary fu nds at the RE stage of this 
financial year, from the Ministry of Finance for this purpose.  
(Para No. 60) 
National Culture Fund 
 The Committee feels that the National Culture Fund should be given more 
visibility and publicity so that it would attract t he participation of more 
corporates and other organizations. It would like t o know the extent of 
participation of various Organisations to this Fund during the last 5 years. 
(Para No. 63) 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry should und ertake strict 
supervision and monitoring of the Asiatic Society o f India to ensure that such 
irregularities do not happen and a report should be  sent to the Committee after 
settlement of the existing Audit Para No. 3.1 of Report No.23 of 2013. 
(Para No. 65) 
Vacancies in various Organizations under the Ministry 
 The Committee is disturbed to note the vacancies e xisting in the various 
organizations, especially at the higher level and a t the level of Heads of the 
Organizations. The Committee time and again pointed  out in its various Reports 
that this would adversely affect the functioning of  these Organizations. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take time bound steps to ensure 
that the vacancies are filled up at the earliest. T he Ministry should co-ordinate 
with UPSC and other concerned authorities to ensure  that the bottlenecks in this 
regard are cleared. 
(Para No. 66) 
 
 
National/Regional Schools of Drama 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may take n ecessary steps to 
ensure that the regional centres of National School  of Drama are set up at each of 
the places at the earliest by doing the needful in this regard. Getting required land 
in a city like Kolkata may not be possible due to o bvious reasons. Since Kolkata 
has several cultural institutions under the Ministr y of Culture, National School of 
Drama centre of Kolkata may be started from one of those premises until a land is 
found out there. 
(Para No. 68) 
Plan assistance for State Akademis  
 The Committee takes note of the sad situation in w hich the State Akademis 
are functioning. They are in dire need of funds. Th erefore, the Committee desires 
20

29 
 
that the Ministry may take up the matter of providi ng assistance to the State 
Akademis with the Ministry of Finance as well as th e States, to provide some 
financial support to the State Akademis.  
(Para No. 70) 
National Virtual Library of India 
 The Committee appreciates this initiative. The Com mittee desires that the 
Ministry should ensure timely setting up of the National Virtual Library of India.  
(Para No. 75) 
Construction of Komagata Maru Memorial in Kolkata Port land area 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry should pur sue with the State 
Government and KMMT to get all the pre-requisites f or the construction of the 
Komagata Maru Memorial done at the earliest. The Co mmittee may be apprised 
about the development. 
(Para No. 79) 
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may exp edite the 
conservation activities presently undertaken in the  above cited places and also 
approach the concerned State Archaeology Department s for taking necessary 
steps for the preservation, maintenance etc. of the said monuments.  
(Para No. 81) 
 The Committee desired that the matter may be invest igated and necessary 
measures may be taken to weed out the bogus organiz ations and the Committee 
may be apprised about the investigation report.  
(Para No. 82) 
 The Committee observes that there should be adequa te steps to preserve 
and protect the scriptures and manuscripts of cultu ral importance. The 
Committee also calls upon the Government to take me asures to protect all the 
hitherto unprotected monuments in a phased manner.  
(Para No. 84) 
 
***** 
 
 
21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
22

 
 
 
XIII  
THIRTEENTH MEETING  
PART-I 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 7th April, 2016 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
6. Kumari Selja 
7. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri P. Kumar 
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
12. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala 
13. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
14. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
15. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
18. Shri Rakesh Singh 
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
20. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
21. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
23

 
 
 
WITNESSES  
*      *     * 
2. *      *     * 
3. *      *     *  
4. *      *     * 
5. *      *     * 
6. *      *     * 
7. *      *     * 
8. *      *     * 
9. *      *     * 
10. *      *     * 
11. *      *     * 
12. *      *     * 
PART-II 
  The Committee met again at 3:10 P.M. and continued its meeting to examine the 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Culture.  
Witnesses 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Narendra Kumar Sinha Secretary 
2. Shri K.K. Mittal Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Kumar Sanjay Krishna Additional Secretary & Financial 
Advisor  
4. Shri Pankaj Rag  Joint Secretary 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
24

 
 
5. Smt. Sonia Sethi Joint Secretary 
6. Sh. M.L. Srivastava Joint Secretary 
7. Sh. Padma Lochan Sahu Joint Secretary 
8. Ms. Shefali Shah Joint Secretary 
9. Ms. N. Sumati Chief Controller of Accounts 
10 Ms. Mahalakshmi Ramakrishnan Director 
11 Sh. Chandra Prakash Director 
12. Ms. Bandana Sharma Director 
13. Ms. Deepika Pokharna Director 
14. Shri Arun Gupta Director  
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
15. Dr. Rakesh Tiwari Director-General 
16. Sh. Shharat Sharma Additional Director-General 
17. Sh. Janhwij Sharma  Director (Conservation) 
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA 
18. Shri Sanjay Garg Deputy  Director 
NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART 
19. Prof. Rajeev Lochan Director 
NATIONAL LIBRARY, KOLKATA 
20. Shri Arun Kumar Chakraborty Director-General 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY  
21. Shri Navneet Soni Member Secretary 
SANGEET  NATAK AKADEMI 
22. Smt. Helen Acharya Secretary 
LALIT KALA AKADEMI 
23. Shri Sudhakar Sharma Secretary 
SAHITYA AKADEMI 
24. Dr. K. Sreenivasarao Secretary 
CENTRE FOR CULTURAL  RESOURCES  & TRAINING  
25. Shri G.C. Joshi Director  
25

 
 
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA 
26. Prof. Waman Kendre Director 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR ARTS (IGNCA) 
27. Mrs. Veena Joshi Joint Secretary 
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES 
28. Dr. Sajith E.N. Director (SZCC), Thanjavur 
29. Dr. Piyush Kumar Director (SCZCC), Nagpur 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed 
that the representatives of Ministry of Culture and its subordinate organizations have been called 
to make a presentation to the Committee about the Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of Ministry of 
Culture. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials to the meeting. The Chairman 
asked the Secretary to make a presentation on the B udget allocations made to the Ministry, 
expenditure and achievements made during the last year, the adequacy of budgetary provisions 
made to each head etc. The Committee also wanted to know about the areas where the Ministry 
failed to fully utilize the funds. 
3. The Secretary made a detailed presentation about the Demands for Grants of  the 
Ministry of Culture. The Secretary stated that the budget for 2016 -17 for Ministry of Culture has 
been pegged at Rs. 2500.00 crore, consisting of Rs. 1755.00 crore for P lan and Rs. 745.00 crore 
under Non-Plan for undertaking various prioritized programmes/activities/projects under Plan & 
Non-Plan Heads. 
4. The Secretary, while making a presentation before the Committee, stated that ASI has 
entered into an MOU with ISRO fo r preparation of Survey plans with respect to all Centrally 
protected   monuments/sites. The survey plans will indicate the area of  monument, prohibited 
boundary and regulated area and an  individual would be able to assess location of his site where 
construction is proposed and apply online for permission accordingly.   
5. The Secretary apprised the Committee that the main intention to create the ‘Must See 
Portal’ is to highlight few exceptional Indian monuments and sites and popularize them among 
the visitors. The information being provided on the P ortal for these sites would be useful to the 
visitors in developing their interest for the site and planning of their visits. 
26

 
 
6. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Cultural Mapping of India is an ambitious 
project of Rs. 3000 crores for a period of 5 years and that an amount of Rs. 100 crores was asked 
for this purpose in the projected demand for 2016 -17. Under this project , it is envisaged that a 
data base of all the artists in the Country would be created. For this, about 10,000 volunteers 
would cover each village in a year, organizing programmes/competitions in the village in 100 
disciplines. These competitions will be hel d at the Panchayat level, Block level, District level 
and State level.  Rs. 10,00,000 would be given as first prize; Rs. 5,00,000  as second prize; Rs. 
3,00,000 as third prize; and Rs. 50,000 as consolation prize for 5 persons. 20% of the reward 
would be given to the guru who mentored the winner.  
7. The Secretary informed the Committee that on pilot basis, all the artefacts at the National 
Museum are tagged with RFID tags and that this enables the RFID reader to record all the 
artefacts and save them in th e computer. Also, 3-D photography of the museum objects has also 
been done, which is stored in the JATAN software.  
8. Some of the Members of the Committee raised the issue of meager wages paid to the 
security personnel deployed at the ASI monuments. The Members of the Committee highlighted 
the need for proper maintenance and preservation of Kalibangan, Chittorgarh Fort an d Taragarh 
Fort in Rajasthan; and Pedagonda, Karnataka. 
9. Members of the Committee also raised various queries which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points unanswered, may be sent within a 
week. 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
11. The meeting adjourned at 4:41 P.M. 
  
27

 
 
XVI  
SIXTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3 rd May, 2016 in Room No.67, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
4. Shri Vinod Chavda 
5. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
8. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
9. Shri Prathap Simha 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
13. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members in the meeting. Thereafter, the 
Committee took up  the following draft Reports for consideration  and adoption: 
(i) 233rd Report on Demands for Grants (2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of Culture ;  
(ii) *      *     *; and 
(iii) *      *     *. 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
28

 
 
 
3. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports without any changes. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay these reports in two spells.  The Committee 
decided to present/lay the 233rd and 234th Reports on 4th May, 2016 and 235th Report on 6th May, 
2016.  The Committee, thereafter, authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Kumari Selja, 
M.P. to present the 233 rd and 234 th Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Ram Charitra Nishad, 
M.P. and in his absence, Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P. to lay the  Reports in the Lok Sabha on the 4 th 
May, 2016.  *     *     *. 
5. *      *     *. 
6. *      *     *. 
7. *      *     *. 
8. *      *     *. 
9. *      *     *.  
10. The meeting adjourned at 3: 40 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


30 
 
ANNEXURE 
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
7th April, 2016 
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Narendra Kumar Sinha Secretary 
2. Shri K.K. Mittal Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Kumar Sanjay Krishna Additional Secretary & 
Financial Advisor 
4. Shri Pankaj Rag Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Sonia Sethi Joint Secretary 
6. Sh. M.L. Srivastava Joint Secretary 
7. Sh. Padma Lochan Sahu Joint Secretary 
8. Ms. Shefali Shah Joint Secretary 
9. Ms. N. Sumati Chief Controller of Accounts 
10 Ms. Mahalakshmi Ramakrishnan Director 
11 Sh. Chandra Prakash Director 
12. Ms. Bandana Sharma Director 
13. Ms. Deepika Pokharna Director 
14. Shri Arun Gupta Director 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
15. Dr. Rakesh Tiwari Director-General 
16. Sh. Shharat Sharma Additional Director-General 
17. Sh. Janhwij Sharma Director (Conservation) 
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA 
18. Shri Sanjay Garg Deputy Director 
NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART 
19. Prof. Rajeev Lochan Director 
NATIONAL LIBRARY, KOLKATA 
20. Shri Arun Kumar Chakraborty Director-General 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY 

31 
 
 
21. Shri Navneet Soni Member Secretary 
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI 
22. Smt. Helen Acharya Secretary 
LALIT KALA AKADEMI 
23. Shri Sudhakar Sharma Secretary 
SAHITYA AKADEMI 
24. Dr. K. Sreenivasarao Secretary 
CENTRE FOR CULTURAL RESOURCES & TRAINING 
25. Shri G.C. Joshi Director 
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA 
26. Prof. Waman Kendre Director 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR ARTS (IGNCA) 
27. Mrs. Veena Joshi Joint Secretary 
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES 
28. Dr. Sajith E.N. Director (SZCC), Thanjavur 
29. Dr. Piyush Kumar Director (SCZCC), Nagpur 