Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
June, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013
 
REPORT NO. 
197
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on ...................................., 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on ...................................., 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on ...................................., 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on ...................................., 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
June, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—10
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ...................................................... 1 1—13
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 15— 33
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 5—43
7. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... 44

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
12. Yogi Adityanath
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
18. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
19. Shri S. Pakkirappa
20. Shri Prabodh Panda
21. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
23. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri K. Sudhakaran
30. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report on “The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013*.
2. In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
18
th March 2013, to the Committee on 19 th March, 2013 for examination and report within three
months.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and other senior
officers at its meeting held on the 18 th April, 2013 on various provisions of the Bill. The Committee
also heard the views of the Indian Ship Owners Association (INSA) on 20 th May, 2013. After
detailed deliberations the committee considered the Bill clause by clause on the 17 th June, 2013 and
adopted the same.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Shipping for
placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the Merchant
Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI Chairman,
June 17 , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Jyaistha 27, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 18 th March, 2013.
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 50774 dated 19 th March, 2013

1
REPORT
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013 (Annexure -1) was introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 18 th March, 2013. On the 19 th March 2013, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
referred the Bill to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture for examination and report.
2. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 governs matters relating to merchant shipping in India.
The main objective of the Act is to ensure development and efficient maintenance of the Indian
mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the national interest. The Act has been amended
from time to time in the light of experience gained in its implementation and also to give effect
to the provisions of various International Conventions to which India has acceded.
3. The Bill, in its Statement of Objects and Reasons, mentions that as a member of the
International Maritime Organisation (IMO), India has been a signatory to a number of International
Conventions and Protocols adopted by the IMO. Now, India intends to accede to the International
Convention for the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships, 2001 (hereafter referred to
as AFS Convention 2001). This Convention aims at protecting the marine environment and human
health from adverse consequences of the use of listed harmful anti-fouling systems. The anti-
fouling paints on ships’ surface lead to “leaching” of these paints into the sea water, thereby
causing harm to the aquatic environment and human health.
4. Anti-fouling paints are used to coat the underwater area of ships to prevent sea life (such
as algae and mollusks) attaching themselves to the hull, thereby slowing down the ship. This also
leads to increase in weight and hence more fuel consumption. But, the harmful chemicals used in
anti fouling paints get released in the water and damage the marine life.
5. In the early days of sailing ships, lime and later arsenic were used to coat ships’ hulls, until
the modern chemicals industry developed effective anti-fouling paints using metallic compounds.
These compounds slowly “leach” into the sea water, killing barnacles and other marine life that get
attached to the ship. But studies have shown that these compounds persist in the water, killing sea
life, harming the environment and possibly entering the food chain. One of the most effective anti-
fouling paints, developed in the 1960s, contains the organotin tributyltin (TBT), which has been
proven to cause deformations in oysters and sex changes in whelks. The AFS Convention,
therefore, prohibits the use of such harmful chemicals in anti-fouling paints used on ships, and
seeks to put in place a mechanism to prevent the use of harmful substances in anti-fouling system.
6. Under the terms of the AFS Convention, Parties to the Convention are required to prohibit
or control Anti-fouling systems as listed in an Annexure to the Convention, which will be updated
as and when necessary.
7. The Convention includes a Clause which states that a ship shall be entitled to compensation
if it is unduly detained or delayed while undergoing inspection for possible violations of the
Convention.
8. The Convention states that ships shall not apply or re-apply chemical compounds which act
as biocides in anti-fouling systems. This applies to all ships (including fixed and floating platforms,
Floating Storage Units (FSUs), and Floating Production Storage and Off-take Units (FPSOs).
9. The Convention requires Parties to undertake technical research for promoting development
of safer technologies for controlling fouling on ships and for communication and exchange of
information.

2
Enforcement of the Convention
10. Based on a decision of the IMO Council, a Conference was held at headquarters of the IMO
at London, in October, in which seventy five countries including India had participated, apart from
the observers. The Final Act of the Conference was signed on the 5
th October, 2001.
11. Though the AFS Convention was adopted in 2001, it came into force only in 2008, when
combined tonnage of the ratifying countries reached 50% of the world tonnage. As on 15 th March,
2013, 64 States have ratified the said Convention and accordingly, the combined tonnage has
reached 83.04% of the world shipping tonnage.
12. In order to enable the Government of India or its agencies to give effect to the AFS
Convention 2001 adopted by the IMO as also to enable the maritime administration to meet its
operational requirements, suitable amendments in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 are required to
be made.
13. The proposed amendments to the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 seeks to provide for the
enforcement of the said AFS Convention 2001, thereby making it mandatory for Indian flag vessels
to comply with Anti-Fouling Systems and to obtain a certificate of compliance thereof. Under the
provisions of the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013, all Indian flag vessels having 400
gross tonnage or more, engaged in international voyages, would be issued with an ‘International
Anti-Fouling System Certificate’, after due verification. This will enable them to engage in
international shipping activities without having to approach the Government of other countries,
which have ratified the Convention for such certificates.
14. Besides, the proposed amendment would enable India to ensure that all foreign flag vessels
entering the Country’s territorial waters, or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has,
or may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to control of pollution under any law for
the time being in force, are duly certified in accordance with the requirement of the AFS
Convention 2001.
15. Most importantly, the Bill also provides for the levy of the penalty for non-compliance of
the provisions of the Convention as provided in the Clause 3 of the Bill.
16. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and other senior
officials of the Ministry on the provisions of the Bill on the 18
th April, 2013. The Committee also
heard the views of the representative of the Indian National Ship Owners Association (INSA) on
the 20
th May, 2013. Besides, both the ICC Shipping Association (ICCSA) and the INSA submitted
written memoranda to the Committee on different aspects of the proposed amendments, as
important stakeholders in this field. The Committee also considered the background note and replies
to its questionnaire furnished by the Ministry of Shipping.
Advantages of the ratification and enactment of legislation for India
17. The Ministry explained that if India ratifies the Convention, it will be a party state of it and
by virtue of that can enforce the Convention requirements on the foreign flag ships treading in its
coastal waters. Also, it can take action on the non compliant foreign ships. The Committee was
informed that Director-General of Shipping had held consultations with the representatives of
various stakeholders who have shown general agreement with the proposal of accession of the AFS
Convention 2001 by the Government of India. When enquired about the difference between the
Ratification Certificate and Compliance Certificate, the Ministry of Shipping clarified that
Ratification Certificate is a certificate issued by a Flag State which has ratified the Convention and
confirms the full compliance of the Convention, both in national and international waters. Whereas,
a Compliance Certificate (Statement of Compliance) is issued by a country which is yet to ratify

3
the Convention, but would like to facilitate operation of a ship under its flag in the waters of
another country which has ratified the convention and by that virtue, has the right to intervene with
any ship which is in non-compliance of the Convention. In such cases, the particular ships have
to meet all the Convention requirements, but the non-party State cannot enforce the Convention
requirements on the foreign flag ships trading in its coastal waters.
18. The Ministry apprised that accession of the AFS Convention 2001 is, therefore, considered
essential and desirable in view of the following reasons:
• India being a Member of the IMO Council, it has a large interest in International Sea
borne trade and also is a party to various Conventions/Protocols of IMO.
• India has a long coastline with a high population density in certain pockets where
towns/cities are located.
• Ratifying this Convention will demonstrate India’s commitment to adopting uniform
international standards for protecting the marine environment.
• At any given time, the majority of vessels in Indian waters are foreign-flagged. It is,
therefore, very important to have necessary and effective mechanisms to regulate
foreign vessels operating in our waters in order to protect the marine environment and
ensure that Indian Ports and Waterways are free from deleterious environmental
impact.
19. Contamination of sediments through the continued use of TBT has been found in harbour
sediments in India, with West Coast levels higher than East Coast. Recent work has shown that
the TBT levels in sediments were 16-16,816 ng/g and 4.5-1193 ng/g in Kochi and Mumbai
Harbours, respectively. These include concentrations, which are high enough to induce toxicological
effects in sensitive species like oysters Saccostrea Cucculata in West Indian Harbours.
20. India, due to its long coastline, has a high stake in fisheries development in its coastal
waters. The quality of water required to carrying out fishing activities must be of a high standard.
The fishing industry provides livelihood for fishermen and their families and also supports other
commercial industries such as boat-builders, trap and net makers, packers, distributors and
retailers. Sustainability of marine fisheries is now threatened by coastal degradation caused by
introduction of different pollutants. Maintenance of present level of seafood production and further
enhancement through improved fishing and aquaculture will become increasingly difficult in the
absence of sustainable environmental management of coastal seas.
21. Further, India will be able to ensure that all foreign flag vessels entering India territorial
waters or Exclusive Economic Zone are duly certified in accordance with the requirement of the
AFS Convention 2001. It also enables implementation of relevant records required to be maintained
on board ship.
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
22. The Committee in its meeting held on the 17
th June, 2013 considered Clauses of the Bill and
the Committee’s recommendations/observations have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
23.1  The Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a separate Part XIB after Part XIA in the
Principal Act. The separate part is needed to be inserted since the provisions contained therein
are based on a distinct international convention, i.e. ‘the Convention on the Control of the
Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems for Ships, 2001’ (AFS Convention 2001). Part XIB starts with
Section 356P and ends with Section 356Y . Relevant provisions mentioned under Section 356P to
356Y are discussed hereafter:

4
356P
23.2 Section 356P applies this new part of legislation to every Indian ship and ships operating
under the authority of India. However, the provisions do not apply to warships, naval auxiliary
ships and non-commercial ships on Government service.
23.3 The Committee asked about the reasons for exempting non-commercial ships and their
percentage to the Indian merchant shipping. The Ministry replied that the Bill forms part of the
Merchant Shipping Act 1958, Section 2 of which provides the application of the Act only to the
vessels registered under it or ought to have been registered under it. Non-commercial vessels such
as war ships belonging to the Indian Navy or those belonging to Indian Coast Guard are not
registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and hence do not fall under the purview of the
Bill.
23.4 The Ministry further clarified that exempting non-commercial ships from the purview of the
International maritime conventions was a standard practice worldwide. Some examples cited are
reproduced below:-
• Article 3 (3) of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from ships
(MARPOL) 73/78 specifically clarifies that the Convention is not applicable to any war
ship, naval ship or any other Government ship used for non-commercial services.
• Chapter I, Reg.3 of Safety of Life At Sea (SOLAS) 74’, expressly provides that the
Convention is not applicable to war ships and troop ships.
• Similarly, Article 3 of International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling
Systems on Ships, 2001 also clarifies that the Convention is not applicable to
Government ships used for non-commercial services.
23.5 The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that the proposed amendments
would be applicable to all Merchant Ships registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958,
or ought to have been registered under it. Section 356 P (2) of the amending Bill exempts
warships, naval auxiliary or other ships “only on Government non-commercial service”. In
other words, these provisions would apply to all commercial ships - government or non-
government. But it remains silent about the ‘non-government vessels on non-commercial
service’. On being asked, the Ministry could not furnish data about non-commercial ships
saying that it had data about only merchant ships. In the absence of such a data, the
Committee feels, it is difficult to know the extent of the vessels being left out from the
ambit of the proposed Bill. The use of harmful paints by any ship, in fact would affect
marine environment adversely. These aspects, the Committee recommends, should be
considered carefully by the Ministry. The words “appropriate measures” in the Proviso to
Section 356 P (2), to the extent possible, be specified.
356U
23.6 Section 356U prescribes that the Central Government taking into account international rules,
standards and requirements shall prescribe Rules to control wastes from anti-fouling systems, their
removal, collection, treatment and disposal to protect human health and environment.
23.7 Merely placing an anti-fouling system on a vessel will not suffice. The waste from the
vessel needs to be collected and disposed off, safely. Such waste needs to be collected and
disposed in such a way that no harm is caused to the sea and the creatures living therein. A party
to the Convention is obliged to make the necessary Rules to this effect.
23.8 The Committee recommends that necessary Rules be framed by the Government
preferably, within six months from the date of notification of this Amendment Act.

5
356W
23.9 Section 356 prescribes that a surveyor or any person authorised by the Director General
of Shipping may, at any reasonable time, inspect any ships to which this new legislation applies
for the purpose of ensuring that prohibition, restriction and obligation imposed by or under this part
are complied with. Such surveyor may also verify the certificate or a declaration of anti fouling
system on board. He may also inspect any record required to be maintained on board of the vessel.
The record certified by the surveyor shall be admissible as evidence of facts stated therein.
23.10 The Ministry informed that in order to check the implementation and enforcement of the
obligations imposed by this legislation on the vessels, a mechanism of inspection by the
Government Surveyors and authorised persons is necessary. Compliance with the anti-fouling
system requirements will be checked by such Surveyors. The certificate, documentation and
system can be checked physically by such Surveyors. In case of any legal dispute, the record
certified by a Surveyor can be produced as evidence in courts of law.
23.11 The Committee feels that the words “surveyor” or “any other person authorized by
Director-General” are ambiguous. It implies that there are two categories namely,
“surveyors” and “any other person authorized by the Director-General, Shipping” for the
purpose which is prone to confusion. The Committee therefore recommends that the said
words in Section 356W may be substituted by the words “any person authorized by Director-
General, Shipping as Surveyor” which would better serve the purpose.
356X
23.12 Section 356X prescribes the power of the Director-General of Shipping or any other
authorised officer to detain the ships unless the contravention of this legislation is removed.
Director-General, Shipping may also levy a penalty on such ships as specified in Section 436. The
assistance of Indian Navy or Indian Coast Guard may also be taken by the Director-General of
Shipping.
23.13 The Central Government on receipt of the information from the Government of any other
country that a ship has contravened any provisions of the convention, may conduct investigation
of the alleged violation and take appropriate measures.
23.14 In case any contravention by any Indian or foreign ship is reported, the Director-General of
Shipping has been given the power to enforce deterrent measures, including detention of the ship.
A penalty, as prescribed under this law, can also be imposed. Such a provision is needed to have
an effective monitoring mechanism by the Government. The Director-General, Shipping may take the
help of the Indian Navy or the Indian Coast Guard to deal with the non-compliant vessels in the
Indian waters. The Central Government has also been given the power to investigate incidents or an
allegation of the violation of a Convention or the law by any vessel, on request of any foreign state,
while that particular ship is in Indian waters. This is an obligation under the Convention.
356Y
23.15 Section 356Y prescribes the power of the Central Government to make the rules with
respect to specification of anti-fouling system, form and records of anti-fouling system, fee for
issuance of certificate, etc.
23.16 The procedures for the specifications of the aforesaid anti-fouling system, records to be
maintained, fee etc., will be prescribed in the Rules, from time to time, as per the changes to the
Convention. The technical provisions are to be promulgated through Rules, and this section
provides for the power to make Rules, prescribe fee, etc.

6
23.17 It was noted by the Committee that words used in Clause 356Y (2) (e) are ambiguous and
may even lead to rule framing on the basis of extraneous consideration under “any other matter”
and asked the Ministry as to why these cannot be specified and made clearly mentioned in the Bill
itself.
23.18 The Ministry replied that “Any other matter” is a generic term which has been extensively
used in the Merchant Shipping Act 1958, particularly in the Section dealing with ‘Power to make
rules’, e.g. 356-O (2) (ee), 344-I, 344T etc.
23.19 The Committee is not convinced with the reason extended by the Ministry about the
generic nature of the words “any other matter” and finds the reasoning that use in the
Parent Act justifies its use in the Amended Act, untenable. The Committee apprehends that
expressions such as “any other matter” are often liable to be misused by taking the rule
making power beyond the ambit of authorization. Therefore, the Committee feels that
powers to make rules should be clearly specified in the Bill itself in order to obviate
possibility of any abuse of the provision.
24. The Sections 356T, 356W and 356X of the Bill provide for Anti-fouling certification,
inspection, control, detention, etc. of the ships. The Committee wanted to know from the Ministry
that if these provisions leave any scope for misuse of these powers and whether adequate
safeguards have been proposed in the Bill. To this query, the Ministry replied that inspection,
control and detention of ships are internationally recognized practices in the maritime sector
provided through various international maritime conventions inter-alia , the UNCLOS’82,
SOLAS’74, MARPOL’73/78 etc. The regime, known as Port State Control (PSC) has well
established systems and procedures, including for the grievance-redressal, which are internationally
recognized and uniformly implemented across the world, as per the time-tested laid down guidelines
of the IMO, the specialized maritime agency of the United Nations.
25. The Parent Act of the proposed Bill, i.e., the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 has clear
provisions for appealing against any intervention with any ship which may prima facie  appear to
be unreasonable (Section 336/342) and seek compensation, if a ship is wrongly detained (Section
337). Such deterrent provisions have proven to be effective in all maritime conventions in vogue
internationally and the same is envisaged for this Convention as well.
26. The Committee feels that abundant precaution should be taken against all possible
misuse of the provisions of the Bill, particularly dealing with inspection, control, detention,
etc. of the ships. The Committee strongly recommends that adequate safeguards and
preventive mechanism should be built into the system sought to be put in place for this
purpose.
27.  With regard to provisions of Clause 2, the Committee further noted that perhaps,
adequate grievance redressal mechanism has not been provided in this Bill, for grievances
pertaining to the Ship owners and the Authority, between one Government and the other and
enquired from the Ministry as to how the grievances would be redressed under the Bill. The
Ministry replied that grievance-redressal mechanism against undue detention is already provided
for in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, as has been explained in the preceding paragraphs No.25
and 26.
28. Regarding the issues related with another flag, Port State Control (PSC) regime provides for
appealing against the detention directly to the respective Flag authorities or through the ‘Detention
Review Panel’ established by the Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) under which the PSC
regimes function.

7
29. The Committee notes the explanation of the Ministry that grievance-redressal
mechanism is already provided for in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The Committee also
takes note of some stakeholders who pleaded before the Committee that “the amendments
proposed to enable ratification of anti fouling Convention is short of grievance redressal
mechanism”. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take care of this concern and
recommends that grievance-redressal mechanism particularly, against undue detention, etc.
should be clearly laid down in the Act leaving no scope for ambiguity in this matter.
Clause 3 [Section 436-115H to 115L]
30. This Clause prescribes the penalties by amending the original Section 436 of the Principal
Act. The entry from 115H to 115L has been added to the list under Section 436 of the Act, for
contravention of provisions of part XIB. The provisions of penalty, being a primary legislative
function, is prescribed under the Bill, so that it can be restored to deal with the non-compliant
vessels or the Masters of the vessels, as and when required.
31. The Committee asked to the Ministry whether the penalties proposed to be inserted in
Section 436 of the Principal Act are adequate and deterrent enough to attain the objective. To this
query the Ministry replied that Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, generally provides for only nominal
penal provisions ranging from few hundreds to few thousand of rupees. In comparison, the penalty
amount as prescribed in the proposed Bill is expected to have a more deterrent effect. Moreover,
detention of ships for non-compliance, prescribed under Section 356X, is a demonstrable provision
to discourage violations.
32. The Committee feels that since the penalty provisions have an international bearing
and hold good even for foreign flag ships, in dollar terms the penalty amount appears to
be far from adequate. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the penalty
provisions as mentioned in Clause 3 of the Bill should be adequate enough to have
deterrent effect on the potential violators.
Clause 4 [New Annexure is added]
33. This Clause provides for insertion of the annexure after the schedule in the Principal Act.
The annexure contains the total Regulations as contained in Annexure 1 to the International
Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969 along with appendix 1 and appendix 2. The
Annexure gives the procedure to compute the Gross Ton (GT) and Net Ton (NT) of a ship, which
is in accordance with International Tonnage Convention 1969 which has already been ratified and
necessary Merchant Shipping Rules, under the Merchant Shipping Act are in place.
34. The Committee noted that  as per  Clause 4 of the Bill, after the Schedule to the Principal
Act, Annexure providing for three sets of regulations would be inserted, determining the make/
build of the ship, tonnage, etc. which are highly technical in nature. The Committee enquired from
the Ministry that whether the Ministry has made a proper assessment of each of these regulations
and impact thereof and how it would impact the existing vessels and the new vessels to be
acquired.
35. The Ministry vide their written replies totally agreed with the observation of the Committee
and stated that the proposed Annexure to Clause 4 is highly technical in nature, which was inserted
primarily to define “Gross Tonnage’ at Section 356Q. However, since India has already ratified the
International Tonnage Convention and has framed its own Merchant Shipping (Tonnage
Measurement) Rules, 1987 to determine the tonnage of a ship, the Annexure can be considered for
deletion. This was conveyed to the Ministry vide the DGS letter No. AFS-3(2)/2009 dated
10.12.2012.

8
36. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Shipping has agreed with its
observations regarding the proposed Annexure to Clause 4 which is highly technical in
nature and can be considered for deletion. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that
in view of the above reply, concerned Annexure may be deleted or if need be suitably
amended.
General Recommendations
(a) Uniformity in the guidelines and decisions of Central and State Pollution Control
Boards
37. It was noted by the Committee that our Country would be bound by the provisions of the
Bill to take appropriate measures in its territory to control the waste material so as to protect
human health and environment taking into account international rules, standards and requirements,
etc. and wanted to know from the Ministry about the concerns/requirements of the shipping
industry in this regard. The Ministry replied that Indian shipping companies may not face problems
for the collection and disposal of the waste of anti-fouling systems, as the issue is relevant only
during the dry-dock repairs of the ships. However, shipyards/repair yards would need to develop
necessary arrangements for the collection and disposal of the wastes arising from the anti-fouling
systems, in the interests of protecting the Indian coastal waters in particular, which may be needed
to be monitored by the respective Pollution Control Boards.
38. The Committee recommends that all Pollution Control Boards should have uniform
standards in management and control of wastes arising from the anti-fouling systems so
that all ships, both Indian and foreign are not put to inconvenience due to divergent
provisions at varied places.
(b) Financial Implications for Small and Medium segments of Domestic Merchant
Shipping
39. When asked, the Ministry informed that there are no financial implications for ratifying
the Convention by the Government of India. Further, the Committee enquired whether any
cost-benefit analysis has been made with regard to merchant shipping sector if the use of this
new paint will be made mandatory. The Ministry replied that no specific cost-benefit analysis
was undertaken by the Government of India against the background of mandatory use of new
AFS paints. However, similar studies were undertaken by several agencies, including many of
the countries who have already ratified the Convention, reports of which are said to be
available in public domain. The Committee was further informed that the Directorate General
of Shipping has had extensive discussions with all major stakeholders, including shipping
companies and had detailed consultations with other related Ministries/Departments prior to
processing the proposal for ratification of the Convention. On being categorically asked
whether the new provisions would increase the cost of merchant shipping, particularly for the
small and medium ones and if so, what would be its immediate implications to this sector, the
Ministry answered that in the initial stages of implementation of the Convention in 2001, it was
reported to have been incurring an additional cost of around 20-30% for the new AFS
compliant paints. However, over the past one decade, most of the ship-yards are reported to
have already changed over their painting schemes to the Convention compliant paints.
Accordingly, most of the manufacturers of the marine paints are also said to be concentrating
on the AFS compliant paints, making the cost difference of the same with the antiquated (tin
based) paints, inconsequential.

9
40. Further, the longevity and better performance standards of the new AFS compliant paints,
encourage ship owners to opt for the Convention-compliant paints, since in the long term, the cost-
differential, if any, is effectively neutralised.
41. The Committee strongly recommends that small and medium segments of merchant
shipping may not be put to disadvantage because of ratification and Government must
properly address their concerns arising out of this international commitment. Domestic
shipping should not be burdened with these International Convention costs.
(c) Approval and certification mechanism for paints
42. Regarding the rules for approval and certification mechanism for paints in the Indian
context, Section 356 Y (2) (a) of the proposed Bill provides for power to the Central Government
for making appropriate rules, if and when felt necessary.
43. Prohibited list of Anti-fouling systems in the international scenario is devised to be developed
by the ‘Technical Groups’ established in pursuance of Article 6 & 7 of the Convention. Any State
which is party to the Convention can be part of the ‘Technical Group’. India can also become a
member of the groups, provided the Convention is ratified.
44. The Committee feels that paint approval and certification mechanism sought to be
provided through the proposed amendment is also very weak thereby, making uniform
interpretation and application difficult. The Committee recommends that the Bill should
have scope for making rules in this regard as much as the Government must complete rule
framing in time, for effective implementation of the provisions of the amended law.
(d) Relaxation to domestic Merchant Shipping
45. The Ministry of Shipping held that the Convention per se  applies to all ships as the AFS
pollution risks are more relevant in the coastal waters than in international waters. However,
Annexure 4 of the Convention dealing with Survey and Certification of ships is applicable only to
ships above 400 gross tonnage, making international voyages and hence does not apply to domestic
ships operating exclusively in the coastal waters of India. This has been suitably incorporated under
Section 356S of the proposed Bill.
46. On being asked whether any relaxation can be extended to ships exclusively faring in
domestic waters, the Ministry replied that any further relaxation can be considered by the Central
Government subject to the conditions that it is necessary and is of no detriment to the flora and
fauna of marine life in domestic waters. The exemptions subject to these conditions may be
extended to domestic shipping through Section 356Y which provides for power to the making of
rules by the Central Government.
47. The Committee notes the provision mentioned at Sub-Section (3) of Section 356S
that “Indian ships, which are required to be registered under this Act, shall be issued
an Indian Anti-Fouling System Certificate, as may be prescribed from time to time.”
This implies that the Government will prescribe such criteria for issuing certificates
through Rules from time to time. The Committee feels that domestic merchant ships of
less than 400 gross tonnage and not undertaking international voyages but yet
registered under the Merchant Shipping Act,1958 will suffer adversely unless relevant
Rules are framed in time. In this regard the Committee also takes note of the concern
of some stakeholders that domestic ships moving exclusively in Indian waters should be
given relaxation from the restrictions to be imposed on them consequent upon the
ratification of the Convention. The Ministry has also agreed that further relaxation can

10
be extended to domestic shipping subject  to the conditions that it is necessary and is of
no detriment to the flora and fauna of marine life in domestic waters. Accordingly, the
Committee recommends that the above stated concerns raised by the domestic shipping
sector should be duly addressed by the Ministry and necessary Rules be framed as soon
as possible and preferably made effective along with the notification of this Amendment
Act itself.
48. The Committee recommends that in view of Para Nos. 23.5, 23.8, 23.11, 23.19, 26, 29,
32, 36, 38, 41, 44 and 47 above necessary amendments may be brought in the relevant
Clauses of the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Bill, as amended, be
passed.

11
11
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
Section 356P
The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that the proposed amendments
would be applicable to all Merchant Ships registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958,
or ought to have been registered under it. Section 356 P (2) of the amending Bill exempts
warships, naval auxiliary or other ships “only on Government non-commercial service”. In
other words, these provisions would apply to all commercial ships - Government or non-
Government. But it remains silent about the ‘non-Government vessels on non-commercial
service’. On being asked, the Ministry could not furnish data about non-commercial ships
saying that it had data about only merchant ships. In the absence of such a data, the
Committee feels, it is difficult to know the extent of the vessels being left out from the
ambit of the proposed Bill. The use of harmful paints by any ship, in fact would affect
marine environment adversely. These aspects, the Committee recommends, should be
considered carefully by the Ministry. The words “appropriate measures” in the Proviso to
Section 356 P (2), to the extent possible, be specified. (Para 23.5)
Section 356U
The Committee recommends that necessary Rules be framed by the Government
preferably, within six months from the date of notification of this Amendment Act.
(Para 23.8)
Section 356W
 The Committee feels that the words “surveyor” or “any other person authorized by
Director-General” are ambiguous. It implies that there are two categories namely,
“surveyors” and “any other person authorized by the Director-General, Shipping” for the
purpose which is prone to confusion. The Committee therefore recommends that the said
words in Section 356W may be substituted by the words “any person authorized by Director-
General, Shipping as Surveyor” which would better serve the purpose. (Para 23.11)
Section 356Y
The Committee is not convinced with the reason extended by the Ministry about the
generic nature of the words “any other matter” and finds the reasoning that use in the
Parent Act justifies its use in the Amended Act, untenable. The Committee apprehends that
expressions such as “any other matter” are often liable to be misused by taking the rule
making power beyond the ambit of authorization. Therefore, the Committee feels that
powers to make rules should be clearly specified in the Bill itself in order to obviate
possibility of any abuse of the provision. (Para 23.19)
The Committee feels that abundant precaution should be taken against all possible
misuse of the provisions of the Bill, particularly dealing with inspection, control, detention,
etc. of the ships. The Committee strongly recommends that adequate safeguards and
preventive mechanism should be built into the system sought to be put in place for this
purpose. (Para 26)

12
The Committee notes the explanation of the Ministry that grievance-redressal
mechanism is already provided for in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The Committee also
takes note of some stakeholders who pleaded before the Committee that “the amendments
proposed to enable ratification of anti fouling Convention is short of grievance redressal
mechanism”. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take care of this concern and
recommends that grievance-redressal mechanism particularly, against undue detention, etc.
should be clearly laid down in the Act leaving no scope for ambiguity in this matter.
(Para 29)
Clause 3 [Section 436-115H to 115L]
The Committee feels that since the penalty provisions have an international bearing
and hold good even for foreign flag ships, in dollar terms the penalty amount appears to
be far from adequate. In view of this, the Committee recommends that the penalty
provisions as mentioned in Clause 3 of the Bill should be adequate enough to have
deterrent effect on the potential violators. (Para 32)
Clause 4 [New Annexure is added]
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Shipping has agreed with its
observations regarding the proposed Annexure to Clause 4 which is highly technical in
nature and can be considered for deletion. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that in
view of the above reply, concerned Annexure may be deleted or if need be suitably amended.
(Para 36)
General Recommendations
(a) Uniformity in the guidelines and decisions of Central and State Pollution Control
Boards
The Committee recommends that all Pollution Control Boards should have uniform
standards in management and control of wastes arising from the anti-fouling systems so
that all ships, both Indian and foreign are not put to inconvenience due to divergent
provisions at varied places. (Para 38)
(b) Financial Implications for Small and Medium segments of Domestic Merchant
Shipping
The Committee strongly recommends that small and medium segments of merchant
shipping may not be put to disadvantage because of ratification and Government must
properly address their concerns arising out of this international commitment. Domestic
shipping should not be burdened with these International Convention costs. (Para 41)
(c) Approval and certification mechanism for paints
The Committee feels that paint approval and certification mechanism sought to be
provided through the proposed amendment is also very weak thereby, making uniform
interpretation and application difficult. The Committee recommends that the Bill should
have scope for making rules in this regard as much as the Government must complete rule
framing in time, for effective implementation of the provisions of the amended law.
(Para 44)

13
(d) Relaxation to domestic Merchant Shipping
The Committee notes the provision mentioned at Sub-Section (3) of Section 356S
that “Indian ships, which are required to be registered under this Act, shall be issued an
Indian Anti-Fouling System Certificate, as may be prescribed from time to time.” This
implies that the Government will prescribe such criteria for issuing certificates through
Rules from time to time. The Committee feels that domestic merchant ships of less than
400 gross tonnage and not undertaking international voyages but yet registered under the
Merchant Shipping Act,1958 will suffer adversely until relevant Rules are framed in time.
In this regard the Committee also takes note of the concern of some stakeholders that
domestic ships moving exclusively in Indian waters should be given relaxation from the
restrictions to be imposed on them consequent upon the ratification of the Convention. The
Ministry has also agreed that further relaxation can be extended to domestic shipping
subject to the conditions that it is necessary and is of no detriment to the flora and fauna
of marine life in domestic waters. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the above
stated concerns raised by the domestic shipping sector should be duly addressed by the
Ministry and necessary Rules be framed as soon as possible and preferably be made
effective along with the notification of this Amendment Act itself. (Para 47)
The Committee recommends that in view of Para Nos. 23.5, 23.8, 23.11, 23.19, 26, 29,
32, 36, 38, 41, 44 and 47 above necessary amendments may be brought in the relevant
Clauses of the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Bill, as amended, be
passed. (Para 48)

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
04 Dec., 2012
Bill No. XXI of 2013
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping
(Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), after Part XIA, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘PART XIB
C
ONTROL OF HARMFUL ANTI-FOULING SYSTEMS ON SHIPS
356P. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in this Part, this
Part shall apply to—
(a) every Indian ship, wherever it is;
(b) ships not entitled to fly the flag of India, but
which operate under the authority of India; and
17
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new Part
XIB.
Application.
44 of 1958.

18
(c) ships that enter a port, shipyard, or offshore
terminal or place in India or within the territorial waters
of India or any marine areas adjacent thereto over
which India has, or may hereafter have, exclusive
jurisdiction in regard to control of pollution under the
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or
any other law for the time being in force.
(2) This Part shall not apply to any warship, naval
auxiliary or other ship owned or operated by or under the
authority of India and used, for the time being, only on
Government non-commercial service:
Provided that in case of such ships, the Government
shall ensure by the adoption of appropriate measures not
impairing operations or operational capabilities of such ship
that such ships in a manner consistent are operated with this
Part.
356Q. In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “anti-fouling system” means a coating, paint,
surface treatment, surface, or device that is used on a
ship to control or prevent attachment of unwanted
organisms;
(b) “authority” means—
(i) the Government of India under whose
authority the ship is operating;
(ii) with respect to a ship entitled to fly a
flag of any other country, the Government of that
country; and
(iii ) with respect to floating platforms
engaged in exploration and exploitation of the sea-
bed and subsoil thereof adjacent to Indian coast
over which Government of India exercises
sovereign rights for the purposes of exploration
and exploitation of its natural resources (including
Floating Storage Units and Floating Production
Storage and Offloading Units), the Government of
India;
(c) “Committee” means the Marine Environment
Protection Committee of the Organisation;
(d) “Convention” means the International
Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling
Systems on Ships, 2001;
Definitions.
80 of 1976.

19
(e) “gross tonnage” means the gross tonnage
calculated in accordance with the tonnage measurement
regulations contained in Annex 1 to the International
Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969,
as set out in the Annexure or any successor Convention
as ratified or acceded to or adopted by the Government
of India;
(f) “international voyage” means a voyage by a
ship entitled to fly the flag of one State to or from a
port, shipyard, or offshore terminal under the
jurisdiction of another State;
(g) “length” means the length as defined in the
International Convention on Load Lines, 1966, as
modified by the Protocol of 1988 relating thereto, or
any successor Convention as ratified or acceded to or
adopted by the Government of India;
(h) “Organisation” means the International
Maritime Organisation;
(i) “port” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in the Indian Port Act, 1908, the Major
Port Trusts Act, 1963, or under any other law for the
time being in force and shall include any terminal, either
within the port limits or otherwise;
(j) “ship” means a vessel of any type whatsoever
operating in the marine environment and includes
hydrofoil boats, air-cushion vehicles, submersibles,
floating craft, fixed or floating platforms, floating
storage units and floating production storage and off-
loading units.
356R. ( 1) Every Indian ship and other ships which are
not entitled to fly Indian flag but operating under the authority
of India, shall comply with the requirements set forth in this
Part, including the applicable standards and requirements as
prescribed from time to time as well as effective measures to
ensure that such ships comply with the requirements, as may
be prescribed from time to time.
(2) All other vessels to which this Part applies shall
comply with requirements of the anti-fouling systems as
prescribed from time to time.
356S. ( 1) No Indian ship or other ships entitled to fly
Indian flag or operating under its authority, which is of 400
gross tonnage and above shall engage in International V oyage
unless there is on-board, in respect of that ship, a certificate
issued by the Director-General, to be called as International
Anti-Fouling System Certificate, in such form, for such
duration and subject to such procedures and conditions as
may be prescribed, from time to time.
15 of 1908.
38 of 1963.
Control of
anti-fouling
systems.
Issuance of
International
Anti-Fouling
System
Certificate.

20
(2) No Indian ship or other ships entitled to fly Indian
flag or operating under its authority excluding fixed or floating
platforms, Floating Storage Units and Floating Production
Storage and Offloading Units which is of 24 metres or more
in length, but less than 400 gross tonnage, shall engage in
international voyage unless there is onboard a declaration in
such form and subject to such procedures and conditions as
may be prescribed, from time to time.
(3) Indian ships, which are below 400 gross tonnage
and not engaged in international voyage and which are
required to be registered under this Act, shall be issued an
Indian Anti-Fouling System Certificate, as may be prescribed
from time to time.
356T. ( 1) The Central Government may, at the request
of the Government of a country to which the Convention
applies, cause an International Anti-Fouling System Certificate
to be issued in accordance with the Convention in respect of
any ship of that country to which the Convention applies, if
it is satisfied that such certificate can properly be issued, and
where a certificate is so issued, it shall contain a statement
that it has been so issued on a request, as per the procedure
prescribed in this behalf from time to time.
(2) The Central Government may request the
Government of a country to which the Convention applies, to
issue an International Anti-Fouling System Certificate in
accordance with the Convention in respect of a ship to which
this Part applies and the certificate so issued in pursuance of
such a request shall contain a statement that it has been so
issued and shall have the same effect as if it had been issued
by the Central Government under this Act.
356U. Taking into account the international rules,
standards and requirements, the Central Government shall
prescribe the rules and take appropriate measures in its
territory to require that wastes from the application or
removal of an anti-fouling system, are collected, handled,
treated and disposed of in a safe and environmentally sound
manner, by any person in India, to protect human health and
the environment.
356V . (1) Every ship to which this Part applies shall
maintain, a record of anti-fouling systems in the prescribed
form.
(2) The manner, in which the record of anti-fouling
systems to be maintained shall be prescribed having regard to
the provisions of the Convention and this Part.
356W. ( 1) A surveyor or any person authorised by the
Director-General in this behalf may inspect, at any reasonable
time, any ship to which any of the provisions of this Part
applies, for the purposes of—
Issue of Anti-
Fouling
System
Certificate
for foreign
ships in India
and Indian
ships in
foreign
countries.
Record of
anti-fouling
systems.
Controls of
waste
materials.
Inspection
and control of
all ships
above 400
gross tonnage.

21
(a) ensuring that the prohibitions, restrictions and
obligations imposed by or under this Part are complied
with;
(b) verifying that, where required, there is on-
board a valid International Anti-Fouling System
Certificate or a declaration on anti-fouling system; or
(c) brief sampling of the ship’s anti-fouling
system that does not affect the integrity, structure, or
operation of the anti-fouling system taking into account
the procedures as prescribed from time to time; and
(d) verifying any record required to be maintained
on-board.
(2) For the purposes of clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1),
the time required to process the results of such sampling shall
not be used as a basis for preventing the movement and
departure of the ship.
(3) The surveyor or any person, authorised by the
Director-General in this behalf, may, certify any matter
referred to in sub-section ( 1) in respect of such ship as a
copy of the records of the ship to be a true copy and such
copy shall be admissible as evidence of the facts stated
therein.
356X. ( 1) If, on receipt of a report from a surveyor or
other person authorised to inspect a ship, the Director-General
is satisfied that any provision of this Part has been
contravened by such ship within the coastal waters, the
Director-General or any officer authorised by him in this
behalf, may—
(a) detain the ship until the causes of such
contravention are removed to the satisfaction of the
Director-General or the officer authorised by him; and
(b) levy penalty on such ship as specified in
section 436:
Provided that where the Director-General deems it
necessary, he may request the Indian Navy or the Coast
Guard for preventing the ship from proceeding to sea and the
Indian Navy or the Coast Guard, as the case may be, shall
take action as requested by the Director-General.
(2) On receipt of information from the Government of
any country to which the Convention applies that a ship has
contravened any provision of the Convention, the Central
Government may, if it deems it necessary so to do, request
such Government to furnish further details of the alleged
contravention and, if satisfied that sufficient evidence is
available, conduct investigation of the alleged violations and
take appropriate measures in respect thereof.
Information
regarding
contravention
of the
provisions of
Convention.

22
356Y . (1) The Central Government may, having regard
to the provisions of the Convention, make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality
of the provisions of sub-section( 1), such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the specification of the anti-fouling system;
(b) the forms of record of anti-fouling systems,
the manner in which such records shall be maintained;
(c) the fees which may be levied for inspection
and for issuance of the International Anti-Fouling
System Certificate;
(d) the fees which may be levied for inspection
and for issuance of the Indian Anti-Fouling System
Certificate;
(e) any other matter which, for the
implementation of the Convention has to be or may be
prescribed.’.
3. In section 436 of the principal Act, after serial number
115G and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
Sl. Offences Section of this Act Pen alties
No. to which offecnce
has reference
12 3 4
“115H. If the owner of an 356R Fine which may extend to
Indian ship fails to five lakh rupees.
comply with section
356R
115-I If a master proceeds 356S Fine which may extend to
or attempts to proceed one lakh rupees.
to sea in contravention
of section 356S
115J If the owner of an 356U Fine which may extend to
Indian ship or any fifty thousand rupees.
person fails to comply
with the rules made or
measures taken by the
Central Government
under section 356U
115K If the master of a 356V Fine which may extend to
ship fails to fifty thousand rupees.
maintain records as
required by section
356V
115L If the master of a ship 356W(1) Fine which may extend to
fails to comply with fifty thousand rupees.".
sub-section (1) of
section 356W
Power to
make rules.
Amendment
of section
436.

23
4. After the Schedule to the principal Act, the following
Annexure shall be inserted, namely:—
“ANNEXURE
[See clause ( e) of section 356Q]
REGULATIONS CONTAINED IN ANNEX 1 TO THE
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON TONNAGE
MEASUREMENT OF SHIPS, 1969
REGULATIONS FOR DETERMINING GROSS AND NET
TONNAGES OF SHIPS
Regulation 1
General
(1) The tonnage of a ship shall consist of gross tonnage and
net tonnage.
(2) The gross tonnage and the net tonnage shall be determined
in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
(3) The gross tonnage and the net tonnage of novel types of
craft whose constructional features are such as to render the
application of the provisions of these Regulations unreasonable or
impracticable shall be as determined by the Administration. Where
the tonnage is so determined, the Administration shall communicate
to the Organisation details of the method used for that purpose, for
circulation to the Contracting Governments for their information.
Regulation 2
Definitions of terms used in the Annexes
(1) Upper Deck
The upper deck is the uppermost complete deck exposed to
weather and sea, which has permanent means of weathertight
closing of all openings in the weather part thereof, and below which
all openings in the sides of the ship are fitted with permanent means
of watertight closing. In a ship having a stepped upper deck, the
lowest line of the exposed deck and the continuation of that line
parallel to the upper part of the deck is taken as the upper deck.
(2) Moulded Depth
(a) The moulded depth is the vertical distance measured
from the top of the keel to the underside of the upper deck
at side. In wood and composite ships the distance is
measured from the lower edge of the keel rabbet. Where the
form at the lower part of the midship section is of a hollow
character, or where thick garboards are fitted, the distance is
measured from the point where the line of the flat of the
bottom continued inwards cuts the side of the keel.
Insertion of
Annexure.

24
(b) In ships having rounded gunwales, the moulded
depth shall be measured to the point of inter-section of the
moulded lines of the deck and side shell plating, the lines
extending as though the gunwales were of angular design.
(c) Where the upper deck is stepped and the raised part
of the deck extends over the point at which the moulded
depth is to be determined, the moulded depth shall be
measured to a line of reference extending from the lower part
of the deck along a line parallel with the raised part.
(3) Breadth
The breadth is the maximum breadth of the ship,
measured amidships to the moulded line of the frame in a ship
with a metal shell and to the outer surface of the hull in a
ship with a shell of any other material.
(4) Enclosed spaces
Enclosed spaces are all those spaces which are
bounded by the ship’s hull, by fixed or portable partitions or
bulkheads, by decks or coverings other than permanent or
movable awnings. No break in a deck, nor any opening in the
ship’s hull, in a deck or in a covering of a space, or in the
partitions or bulkheads of a space, nor the absence of a
partition or bulkhead, shall preclude a space from being
included in the enclosed space.
(5) Excluded Spaces
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph ( 4) of this
Regulation, the spaces referred to in sub-paragraphs ( a) to ( e)
inclusive of this paragraph shall be called excluded spaces and
shall not be included in the volume of enclosed spaces, except
that any such space which fulfils at least one of the following
three conditions shall be treated as an enclosed space:
- the space is fitted with shelves or other means for
securing cargo or stores;
- the openings are fitted with any means of closure;
- the construction provides any possibility of such
openings being closed:
(a) ( i) A space within an erection opposite an end
opening extending from deck to deck except for a
curtain plate of a depth not exceeding by more than 25
millimetres (one inch) the depth of the adjoining deck
beams, such opening having a breadth equal to or
greater than 90 per cent of the breadth of the deck at
the line of the opening of the space. This provision
shall be applied so as to exclude from the enclosed
spaces only the space between the actual end opening

25
and a line drawn parallel to the line or face of the
opening at a distance from the opening equal to one-
half of the width of the deck at the line of the opening
(Figure 1 in Appendix I).
(ii) Should the width of the space because of any
arrangement except by convergence of the outside
plating, become less than 90 per cent of the breadth of
the deck, only the space between the line of the
opening and a parallel line drawn through the point
where the athwartships width of the space becomes
equal to, or less than, 90 per cent of the breadth of the
deck shall be excluded from the volume of enclosed
spaces (Figures 2, 3 and 4 in Appendix 1).
(iii) Where an interval which is completely open
except for bulwarks or open rails separates any two
spaces, the exclusion of one or both of which is
permitted under sub-paragraphs ( a)(i) and/or ( a)(ii),
such exclusion shall not apply if the separation between
the two spaces is less than the least half breadth of the
deck in way of the separation (Figures 5 and 6 in
Appendix 1).
(b) A space under an overhead deck covering
open to the sea and weather, having no other
connection on the exposed sides with the body of the
ship than the stanchions necessary for its support. In
such a space, open rails or a bulwark and curtain plate
may be fitted or stanchions fitted at the ship’s side,
provided that the distance between the top of the rails
or the bulwark and the curtain plate is not less than
0.75 metres (2.5 feet) or one-third of the height of the
space, whichever is the greater (Figure 7 in Appendix 1).
(c) A space in a side-to-side erection directly in
way of opposite side openings not less in height than
0.75 metres (2.5 feet) or one-third of the height of the
erection, whichever is the greater. If the opening in
such an erection is provided on one side only, the space
to be excluded from the volume of enclosed spaces
shall be limited on-board from the opening to a
maximum of one-half of the breadth of the deck in way
of the opening (Figure 8 in Appendix 1).
(d) A space in an erection immediately below an
uncovered opening in the deck overhead, provided that
such an opening is exposed to the weather and the
space excluded from enclosed spaces is limited to the
area of the opening (Figure 9 in Appendix 1).
(e) A recess in the boundary bulkhead of an
erection which is exposed to the weather and the

26
opening of which extends from deck to deck without
means of closing, provided that the interior width is not
greater than the width at the entrance and its extension
into the erection is not greater than twice the width of
its entrance (Figure 10 in Appendix 1).
(6) Passenger
A passenger is every person other than:
(a) the master and the members of the crew or
other persons employed or engaged in any capacity on
board a ship on the business of that ship; and
(b) a child under one year of age.
(7) Cargo Spaces
Cargo spaces to be included in the computation of net
tonnage are enclosed spaces appropriated for the transport of
cargo which is to be discharged from the ship, provided that
such spaces have been included in the computation of gross
tonnage. Such cargo spaces shall be certified by permanent
marking with the letters CC (cargo compartment) to be so
positioned that they are readily visible and not to be less than
100 millimetres (4 inches) in height.
(8) Weathertight
Weathertight means that in any sea conditions water
will not penetrate into the ship.
Regulation 3
Gross tonnage
The gross tonnage (GT) of a ship shall be determined
by the following formula:
GT = K
1V
where: V = Total volume of all enclosed spaces of the
ship in cubic metres,
K1 = 0.2+0.02log 10 V (or as tabulated in Appendix 2).
Regulation 4
Net tonnage
(1) The net tonnage (NT) of a ship shall be determined
by the following formula:
NT = K 2Vc      + K3
in which formula:


27
(a) the factor      shall not be taken as greater
than unity;
(b) the term K 2Vc      shall not be taken as less
than 0.25 GT; and
(c) NT shall not be taken as less than 0.30 GT,
and in which:
Vc = total volume of cargo spaces in cubic
metres,
K2 = 0.2 + 0.02 log 10Vc (or as tabulated in
Appendix 2),
K3 = 1.25
D = moulded depth amidships in metres as
defined in Regulation 2( 2),
d = moulded draught amidships in metres as
defined in paragraph ( 2) of this Regulation,
N1 = number of passengers in cabins with not
more than 8 berths,
N2 = number of other passengers,
N1 + N 2 = total number of passengers the ship is
permitted to carry as indicated in the ship’s passenger
certificate; when N 1 + N 2 is less than 13, N 1 and N 2
shall be taken as zero,
GT = gross tonnage of the ship as determined in
accordance with the provisions of Regulation 3.
(2) The moulded draught ( d) referred to in paragraph ( 1) of
this Regulation shall be one of the following draughts:
(a) for ships to which the International Convention on
Load Lines in force applies, the draught corresponding to the
Summer Load Line (other than timber load lines) assigned in
accordance with that Convention;
(b) for passenger ships, the draught corresponding to
the deepest subdivision load line assigned in accordance with
the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea in
force or other international agreement where applicable;
(c) for ships to which the International Convention on
Load Lines does not apply but which have been assigned a
load line in compliance with national requirements, the draught
corresponding to the summer load line so assigned;


28
(d) for ships to which no load line has been assigned
but the draught of which is restricted in compliance with
national requirements, the maximum permitted draught;
(e) for other ships, 75 per cent of the moulded depth
amidships as defined in Regulation 2( 2).
Regulation 5
Change of net tonnage
(1) When the characteristics of a ship, such as V , V
c, d, N 1
or N 2 as defined in Regulations 3 and 4, are altered and where such
an alteration results in an increase in its net tonnage as determined
in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 4, the net tonnage
of the ship corresponding to the new characteristics shall be
determined and shall be applied without delay.
(2) A ship to which load lines referred to in sub-paragraphs
(2)(a) and ( 2)(b) of Regulation 4 are concurrently assigned shall be
given only one net tonnage as determined in accordance with the
provisions of Regulation 4 and that tonnage shall be the tonnage
applicable to the appropriate assigned load line for the trade in
which the ship is engaged.
(3) When the characteristics of a ship such as V , V
c, d, N 1
or N 2 as defined in Regulations 3 and 4 are altered or when the
appropriate assigned load line referred to in paragraph ( 2) of this
Regulation is altered due to the change of the trade in which the
ship is engaged, and where such an alteration results in a decrease
in its net tonnage as determined in accordance with the provisions
of Regulation 4, a new International Tonnage Certificate (1969)
incorporating the net tonnage so determined shall not be issued until
twelve months have elapsed from the date on which the current
Certificate was issued; provided that this requirement shall not
apply:
(a) if the ship is transferred to the flag of another
State, or
(b) if the ship undergoes alterations or modifications
which are deemed by the Administration to be of a major
character, such as the removal of a superstructure which
requires an alteration of the assigned load line, or
(c) to passenger ships which are employed in the
carriage of large numbers of unberthed passengers in special
trades, such, for example, as the pilgrim trade.
Regulation 6
Calculation of volumes
(1) All volumes included in the calculation of gross and net
tonnages shall be measured, irrespective of the fitting of insulation

29
or the like, to the inner side of the shell or structural boundary
plating in ships constructed of metal, and to the outer surface of the
shell or to the inner side of structural boundary surfaces in ships
constructed of any other material.
(2) V olumes of appendages shall be included in the total
volume.
(3) V olumes of spaces open to the sea may be excluded from
the total volume.
Regulation 7
Measurement and calculation
(1) All measurement used in the calculation of volumes shall
be taken to the nearest centimetre or one-twentieth of a foot.
(2) The volumes shall be calculated by generally accepted
methods for the space concerned and with an accuracy acceptable
to the Administration.
(3) The calculation shall be sufficiently detailed to permit easy
checking.
APPENDIX 1
Figures Referred to in Regulation 2(5)
In the following figures:
O = excluded space.
C = enclosed space.
I = space to be considered as an enclosed space.
Hatched in parts to be included as enclosed spaces.
B = breadth of the deck in way of the opening.
APPENDIX 2
COEFFICIENTS K
1 AND K 2 REFERRED TO IN REGULATIONS
3 AND 4( 1)
V or Vc = V olume in cubic metres
V or Vc K 1 or K2 V or Vc K 1 or K2 V or Vc K 1 or K2 V or Vc K 1 or K2
10 0.2200 45,000 0.2931 330,000 0.3104 670,000 0.3165
20 0.2260 50,000 0.2940 340,000 0.3106 680,000 0.3166
30 0.2295 55,000 0.2948 350,000 0.3109 690,000 0.3168
40 0.2320 60,000 0.2956 360,000 0.3111 700,000 0.3169
50 0.2340 65,000 0.2963 370,000 0.3114 710,000 0.3170
60 0.2356 70,000 0.2969 380,000 0.3116 720,000 0.3171

30
V or Vc K 1 or K2 V or Vc K 1 or K2 V or Vc K 1 or K2 V or Vc K 1 or K2
70 0.2369 75,000 0.2975 390,000 0.3118 730,000 0.3173
80 0.2381 80,000 0.2981 400,000 0.3120 740,000 0.3174
90 0.2391 85,000 0.2986 410,000 0.3123 750,000 0.3175
100 0.2400 90,000 0.2991 420,000 0.3125 760,000 0.3176
200 0.2460 95,000 0.2996 430,000 0.3127 770,000 0.3177
400 0.2520 110,000 0.3008 450,000 0.3131 790,000 0.3180
500 0.2540 120,000 0.3016 460,000 0.3133 800,000 0.3181
600 0.2556 130,000 0.3023 470,000 0.3134 810,000 0.3182
700 0.2569 140,000 0.3029 480,000 0.3136 820,000 0.3183
800 0.2581 150,000 0.3035 490,000 0.3138 830,000 0.3184
900 0.2591 160,000 0.3041 500,000 0.3140 840,000 0.3185
1,000 0.2600 170,000 0.3046 510,000 0.3142 850,000 0.3186
2,000 0.2660 180,000 0.3051 520,000 0.3143 860,000 0.3187
3,000 0.2695 190,000 0.3056 530,000 0.3145 870,000 0.3188
4,000 0.2720 200,000 0.3060 540,000 0.3146 880,000 0.3189
5,000 0.2740 210,000 0.3064 550,000 0.3148 890,000 0.3190
6,000 0.2756 220,000 0.3068 560,000 0.3150 900,000 0.3191
7,000 0.2769 230,000 0.3072 570,000 0.3151 910,000 0.3192
8,000 0.2781 240,000 0.3076 580,000 0.3153 920,000 0.3193
9,000 0.2791 250,000 0.3080 590,000 0.3154 930,000 0.3194
10,000 0.2800 260,000 0.3083 600,000 0.3156 940,000 0.3195
15,000 0.2835 270,000 0.3086 610,000 0.3157 950,000 0.3196
20,000 0.2860 280,000 0.3089 620,000 0.3158 960,000 0.3196
25,000 0.2880 290,000 0.3092 630,000 0.3160 970,000 0.3197
30,000 0.2895 300,000 0.3095 640,000 0.3161 980,000 0.3198
35,000 0.2909 310,000 0.3098 650,000 0.3163 990,000 0.3199
40,000 0.2920 320,000 0.3101 660,000 0.3164 1,000,000 0.3200
Coefficients K 1 or K 2 at intermediate values of V or V c shall be
obtained by linear interpolation.”.

31
31
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 governs matters relating to
merchant shipping in India. The main objective of the Act is to ensure
development and efficient maintenance of the Indian mercantile marine
in a manner best suited to serve the national interest. The Act has
been amended from time to time in the light of experience gained in
its implementation and also to give effect to the provisions of various
International Conventions to which India has acceded.
2. As a member of the International Maritime Organisation
(IMO), India has acceded to a number of International Conventions
and Protocols adopted by the IMO. Now, India intends to accede to
the International Convention for the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling
Systems on Ships, 2001 (hereafter referred to as AFS Convention
2001). This Convention aims to protect the marine environment and
human health from adverse effects of use of listed harmful anti-
fouling systems as the anti-fouling paints on ship’s surface lead to
“leaching” of these paints into the sea water which persist in the
water, thereby causing harm to the environment. In order to enable
the Government of India or its agencies to give effect to the AFS
Convention 2001 adopted by IMO as also to enable the maritime
administration to meet its operational requirements, suitable
amendments in the said Act are required to be made.
3. It is proposed to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 to
provide for the enforcement of the AFS Convention 2001 and thereby
making it mandatory for Indian flag vessels to comply with Anti-
Fouling Systems and to obtain a certificate of compliance thereof.
Under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill,
2013, all Indian flag vessels having 400 gross tonnage or more,
engaged in international voyages, would be issued with an
International Anti-Fouling System Certificate, after due verification.
This will enable them to engage in international shipping activities
without having to approach Government of other countries, who have
ratified the Convention for such certificates. Further, India will be
able to ensure that all foreign flag vessels entering territorial waters
of India, or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has,
or may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to control of
pollution under any Law for the time being in force, are duly certified
in accordance with the requirement of the AFS Convention 2001. The
Bill further provides for the levy of the penalty for non-compliance of
the provisions of the Convention.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI; G . K. V ASAN
The 22 nd February, 2013.

32
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill proposes for the insertion of a new
Part XIB containing sections 356P to 356Y . Sub-section ( 1) of the
proposed section 356Y empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-section ( 2) of
the said section provides for the matters in respect of which such
rules may be made, which, inter alia, pertain to the provisions
relating to—
(a) the specification of the anti-fouling system;
(b) the forms of record of anti-fouling systems, the
manner in which such records shall be maintained;
(c) the fees which may be levied for inspection and for
issuance of the International Anti-Fouling System Certificate;
(d) the fees which may be levied for inspection and for
issuance of the Indian Anti-Fouling System Certificate;
(e) any other matter for the implementation of the
Convention.
2. The matters in respect of which the Central Government
may make rules are matters of procedure and administrative detail
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

33
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
(Shri G ..K. Vasan, Minister of Shipping)

MINUTES

36

37
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18 th April, 2013 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
7. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
9. Yogi Adityanath
10. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri P.K. Sinha, Secretary
2. Mrs. T. Kumar, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
3. Shri M.C. Jouhari, Joint Secretary (S & Parl.)
37

38
4. Shri N. Muruganandam, Joint Secretary (Ports)
5. Shri C.B. Singh, Adviser
6. Ms. Divya Prasad, Joint Secretary (Coord.)
7. Shri Sunil Mishra, Joint Secretary (DGS)
8. Shri B. Poyaamozhi, DA (Ports)
9. Shri P. Sudhir Kumar, Pr. CCA
10. Shri M.M. Hasija, Dy. F.A.
11. Ms. Geetu Joshi, Director (GJ)
12. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Director (AK)
13. Shri R. Srinivasa Naik, Director (RSN)
14. Shri Sambit Tripathi, Director (ST)
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI)
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Chairman
2. Ms. Jayashree Mukherjee, Vice Chairman
3. Shri R.P. Khare, Chief Engineer (Civil)
4. Shri A. Banerjee, Chief Ship Surveyor
Attached & Subordinate Offices
1. Shri Goutam Chatterjee, DG (Shipping)
2. Capt. A.M. Surej, DG (Light Houses and Light Ships)
3. Shri Bimal Sinha, Chief Engineer (ALHW)
Ports
1. Shri R.P.S Kahlon, Chairman, KoPT
2. Shri S.S. Mishra, Chairman, PPT
3. Shri Ajeya Kallam, Chairman, VPT
4. Shri Atulya Misra, Chairman, Ch. CPT
5. Shri S. Natarajan, Chairman I/c. V oCPT
6. Dr. P. Tamilvanan, Chairman, NMPT
7. Shri T.S.N. Murthy, Dy. Chairman, NMPT
8. Shri Paul Antony, Chairman, CoPT
9. Shri Rajeev Gupta, Chairman, MBPT
10. Shri S.K. Kaul, Secretary, JNPT
11. Shri A.J. Lokhande, Chief Engineer, JNPT
12. Shri P.D. Vaghela, Chairman, KPT
13. Shri P. Mara Pandian, Chairman, MoPT
14. Shri M.A. Bhaskarachar, CMD, EPL
15. Shri A. Janardhana Rao, MD, IPA
Public Sector Undertakings
1. Shri B.K. Mandal, CMD, SCI
2. Cmde. K. Subramaniam, CMD, CSL

39
3. Shri Manish Jain, CMD, CIWTC and HDPE
4. Capt. D.K. Mohanty, CMD, DCI
5. Capt. M. Baveja, VC I/c., IMU
Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
2. Shri Mahesh Tyagi, Dy. Legal Adviser
***
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered the two Bills referred to the Committee viz (i) the
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and (ii) The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013. The Committee asked about the importance of the Bills and
its various aspects. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping explained about the Bills with the help of
power point presentations. The Committee observed that the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013 is a repetition of the Bill the Committee examined and
reported to the Parliament vide its 130
th Report in the year 2008.
5. Members of the Committee also raised various queries. The Secretary replied to the points
raised by the Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points
not answered, may be sent within a week.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 1.45 
P.M. to meet again at 3.15 P.M. *  * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

40
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 th May, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
3. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
10. Shri S. Pakkirappa
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
14. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Office
Indian National Ship-Owners Association, Mumbai
Capt. Ranjeet Singh
2. * * *
40
*** Relate to other matters.

41
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views/suggestions of the representative of the Indian
National Ship-owners Association, Mumbai on “The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013. On
certain issues he could not furnish replies instantly, therefore, the Chairman directed him to submit
the written replies to the Secretariat within a week.
4. Another witness from ICC Shipping Association, Mumbai could not appear before the
Committee although he had already confirmed his appearance.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. * *  *  *.
*** Relate to other matters.

42
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th June, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
3. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
9. Shri S. Pakkirappa
10. Shri Prabodh Panda
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and took up consideration of the
draft report on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill 2013 draft Report which was circulated
to them. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report with minor modifications.
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that the time given to the Committee for presenting
the Report expiring before the ensuing Session of Parliament, it need to be presented to Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha. Therefore, the Committee decided that this Report along with the Report
on the National Waterway (Lakhipur – Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013 which has
42

43
already been adopted by the Committee may be presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
The Committee accordingly authorized its Chairman to present both the reports to the Hon’ble
Chairman.
4. * * *
5. The meeting adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AFS – Anti-Fouling Systems
DGS – Director General Shipping
GT – Gross Ton
IMO – International Maritime Organisation
INSA – Indian National Ship Owners Association
MARPOL – International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ship
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
NT – Net Ton
PSC – Port State Control
SOLAS – Safety of Life at Sea
TBT – Tributylin
UNCLOS – United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
44

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.