Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
236
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th August, )10 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th August, )10 2016
Infrastructure Lending in Road Sector
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
Infrastructure Lending in Road Sector
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv )
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (v) -(vi)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-28
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  – A T A G LANCE ..................................... 29-36
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 37-50
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 51- 55

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Kumari Selja
7. Shri Rajeev Shukla
@8. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
$9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ram Charitra
12. Shri Vinod Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
14. Km. Arpita Ghosh
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan
16. Shri P. Kumar
*17. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
18. Yogi Aditya Nath
19. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
22. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
24. Shri Prathap Simha
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
(i)
@ Nominated on 15th March, 2016.
$  Nominated on 28th July, 2016.
* Nominated in place of Shri Mohammed Faizal PP. w.e.f. 14th March, 2016.

(ii)
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf
this Two Hundred Thirty Sixth Report on “Infrastructure Lending in Road Sector”.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture decided to take up the Infrastructure Lending in Road Sector for examination and Report,
as it is felt that roads projects are getting delayed due to various reasons and the Committee tries
to find out the reasons for slow growth of this sector.
3. The Committee heard the views of the Central Engineering Services Group ‘A ’ Officers’
Association, National Highways Builders Federation on the issue on 16th April, 2015.  The
Committee, thereafter, heard the views of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and
National Highways Authority of India on 1st October, 2015.  The Committee also heard the views
of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highways Authority of India,  Ministry
of Finance, Reserve Bank of India, Punjab National Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce on the
18th February, 2016.
4. The Committee visited Kolkata, Mumbai and Kodaikanal from 31st May to 7th June, 2015
to study the subject i.e. Infrastructure Lending in Road Sector.  The Committee heard the views
of Reserve Bank of India, Union Bank of India, Central Bank of India, State Bank of India, Bank
of Baroda, Bank of India, I.D.B.I., IIFCIL, IFCI, LIC, PERDA, NHAI, Highways Constructors;
Association, Government of Maharashtra at Mumbai on 3rd June, 2015. The Committee also visited
Mumbai and Kochi from 12th 18th October, 2015 and in Kochi the Committee heard the views of
NHAI, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, State Government of Kerala, State Bank of
Travancore, Syndicate Bank on the subject on 17th October, 2015. The Committee also visited
Goa, Hyderabad and Bengaluru from 31st January to 7th February, 2016 and there the Committee
heard the views of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highways Authority of
India, Andhra Bank, State Bank of Hyderabad, Canara Bank, State Bank of Mysore, Vijaya Bank,
States Road Constructors’ Associations.
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Central Engineering Services
Group ‘A’ Officers’ Association, National Highways Builders Federation, Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways and National Highways Authority of India, Ministry of Finance, Reserve
Bank of India, Punjab National Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce,  Union Bank of India, Central
Bank of India, State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Bank of India, I.D.B.I., IIFCIL, IFCI, LIC,
PERDA, Highways Constructors Association, Government of Maharashtra, State Government of
Kerala, State Bank of Travancore, Syndicate Bank, Andhra Bank, State Bank of Hyderabad, Canara
Bank, State Bank of Mysore, Vijaya Bank, States Road Constructors’ Associations and other
stakeholders for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection
with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
(iii)

6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  8 th  August,
2016.
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
8 August, 2016 Department-related Parliamentary
Sravana 17, 1938 Saka Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
Rajya Sabha
(iv)

ACRONYMS
AIF : Alternate Investment Fund
ANBC : Adjusted Net Bank Credit
BCBS : Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BOT : Build-Operate-Transfer
CBI : Central Bureau of Investigation
CGMs : Certified Grants Management Specialists 
CRR : Cash Reserve Ratio
 
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CVC : Central Vigilance Commission
DPR : Detailed Project Report
EPC Model : Engineering, Procurement and Construction Model
ETC : Electronic Toll Collection
GQ : General Quarters
HPC : High Powered Committee
IDC : Interest during Construction
IDFs : Infrastructure Debt Funds
IEBR : Internal Extra Budgetary Resources
IHMCL : Indian Highway Management Company Limited
IIFCL : India Infrastructure Finance Co. Ltd.
LWE : Left Wing Extremism
MoEF : Ministry of Environment and Forest
MoRTH : Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
MSME : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NBFC : Non-Banking Financial Companies
NBFC-ND-IFC : Non-Banking Financial Companies - Non-Deposit - Infrastructure
Finance Companies
(v)

NH (O) : National Highways (Original)
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
NHIDCL : National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd.
NHDP : National Highway Development Project
NIIF : National Investment and Infrastructure Fund
NP A : Non Performing Assests
PPP : Public Private Partnership
PWD : Public Works Department
RFID : Radio Frequency Identification Device
SAROD : Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes
SLR : Statutory Liquidity Ratio
SME : Significant Military Equipment
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
TPC : Total Project Cost
(vi)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Availability of an efficient and widespread road network is an essential pre-requisite for a
sustainable economic growth of a country. It is a significant fact that India has the second largest
road network in the world  spread over 5.3 million kilometers, which transports about 60 per cent
of all goods in the country and 85 per cent of overall passenger traffic.  National highways
constitute about 1.9 per cent of road network, but carries about 40 per cent of the total road
traffic. The Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways is primarily responsible for development
and maintenance of National Highways. The main construction programmes implemented by the
Ministry include NHDP (National Highway Development Programme), NH(O) (National Highways
(Original)), Special Accelerated Road Development Programme, Special programme for
Development of Road Connectivity and State Roads in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) Affected Areas
etc.  The Ministry had a target of 10,000 kilometers during the financial year 2015-16. Out of this,
they could achieve a target of 6029 kilometers up to March, 2016. Since the pendency of highways
development projects was increasing and some of important projects were left halfway by the
contractors mainly on account of non availability of regional funds and Banks and other
infrastructure lending institution were feeling reluctant to come forward for financing the highways
sector, the Committee decided to take up the issues related to “lending in road sector for
consideration; to analyze the factors which are hampering the construction of roads and highways.
2. Besides, the Committee took up the issue of infrastructure lending in road sector when it
has noticed that a large number of PPP projects were languishing or delayed due to various reasons
and there were hardly any taker for PPP Projects.
3. The Committee interacted with public sector banks, financial institutions, RBI, Governmental
agencies, NHAI, Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways, Ministry of Finance, Highways
Builders’ Association and Federations on the infrastructure lending in road sector. While examining
the infrastructure lending in road sector, the Committee  noticed various problems and bottlenecks
in infrastructure lending such as need for policy measures to give fillip to infrastructure
development; regulatory measures to facilitate the flow of bank credit to infrastructure sector;
financing requirements of infrastructure sector; asset management issues for the banks; delays in
commercial operations vis-à-vis infrastructure lending; problem of sector-wise exposure ceiling vis-à-vis
lending by Banks to infrastructure sector; problem and issues relating to funding of PPP projects;
environmental clearance and other statutory clearances; slow down of economy and infrastructure
lending; role of NHAI, State and Central agencies; corporate bonds and infrastructure lending and
exposure of Financial Institutions/Banks to Infrastructure Sector and NPAs.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
4. NHAI is responsible for development, maintenance and management of National Highways
vested or entrusted to it by the Central Government and for matters connected or incidental thereto.
1

2
NHAI is mandated to implement National Highways Development Project (NHDP) which is India’s
largest ever Highways Project in a phased manner. Overall status of NHDP is as under (length
in km.):
Phases T otal Approved Length Length To be No. of
Length Cost  in completed under awarded Projects
in km. ` crore  in km. Imp. UI
I 7,522* 30,300 7521 1 - 1
GQ, NS-EW corridors,
Port connectivity
and others
II 6,647 34,339 5893 539 215 38
4/6-laning North
South - East West
corridor, Others
III 12,109 80,626 6608 3235 2266 79
(Upgradation,
4/6-laning
IV 14,799 27,800 1510 4743 6950 57
2 - laning with
paved shoulders
V 6,500 41,210 2238 1443 2819 24
6-laning of GQ and
High density corridor
VI 1,000 16,680 NIL 135 835 6
Expressways
VII 700 km. 16,680 22 20 659 1
Ring Roads, Bypasses of ring
and flyovers and roads/
other  structures bypass +
flyovers
* Chennai – Ennore port connectivity two projects (24 km.) has been re-awarded, these two
projects was merged to another projects (6 km.) under Phase – I. Total length increased by 24
km. 14799 km. was assigned to NHAI remaining 5201 km. with MoRT&H.
5. India has about 52.33 lakh km. of road network, which is the second largest in the world.
The length of various categories of roads is as under:
National Highways : 1,01,010 Km.
State Highways : 1,48,256 Km.
Other Roads : 49,83,579 Km.

3
SOURCES OF FUNDING FOR NHDP
6. The NHDP is proposed to be funded from Cess collected from Petrol and Diesel (as per
Central Road Fund Act, 2000), amount collected from toll, External Assistance, Internal and Extra
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and Private Sector Investment.
MAJOR SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY OTHER THAN NHDP
Improvement of road connectivity in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas
7. The Government has approved a scheme for development of about 1,177 km. of NHs and
4,276 km. of State roads in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas as a Special Project with
an estimated cost of about `7,300 crore.  As on 31st March, 2016, the detailed estimates for
5,469 km. length have been sanctioned at an estimated cost of `8,585 crore, out of which,
works on 5,275 km. length costing `7,861 crore have been awarded.  Development in 3,972 km.
length has been completed up to March, 2016 and cumulative expenditure inc urred so far is
`5,667 crore.
Development of Vijayawada Ranchi route
8. Out of 1,622 km. long LWE affected Vijayawada - Ranchi route, development of 600 km.
(net length 594 km.) of State Road in Odisha (549 km. Newly declared NH and 45 km. SH), not
covered in any Central or State Scheme has been approved by the Government at a cost of `1,200
crore on 4
th November, 2010.
9. The development on 302 km. has been completed at the cumulative expenditure of `592
crores up to March, 2016.
Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for North-Eastern region (SARDP-NE)
10. The scheme has been envisaged to be taken up under three parts as under:
Phase ‘A’  of SARDP-NE approved by the Government envisages improvement of about
4,099 km. length or roads (2,933 km. of NH and 1,166 km. of State roads).  Till March, 2016,
3,115 km of length has been sanctioned and 1,639 km. of road has been completed.  The SARDP-
NE Phase ‘A’ is expected to be completed by March, 2017.
Phase ‘B’  of SARDP-NE, covers 3,723 km. (1,285 km. NHs and 2,438 km. of State roads)
of road Phase ‘B’ SARDP-NE shall be taken up after completion of Phase ‘A ’, which is targeted
for completion by March, 2017.
Arunachal Pradesh Package:   The Arunachal Pradesh Package for Road and Highways
involving development of about 2,319 km. length or road (2,205 km of NHs & 114 km. of State/
General Staff/Strategic Roads) has also been approved by the Government.
MAJOR SCHEMES FOR DEVELOPMENT OF NON-NHDP NHS THROUGH NH (O)
National Highway Inter-connectivity Improvement Programme (NHIIP) under proposed
World Bank Loan Assistance
11. About 1,120 km. length of NHs are proposed to be improved to 2-lane NH standards
following corridor development approach under the World Bank Loan Assistance in Phase-I.

4
Ministry’s initiatives to leverage more resources through Private Sector Investment for
development of non-NHDP NHs
12. About 23 projects of about 1,750 km. length were identified as non-NHDP NH Section for
taking up on BOT (Toll)/EPC basis.  Out of which, 13 projects for about 1395 km length have
been awarded under BOT (Toll) basis and 8 projects for about 316 km. length have been awarded
under EPC mode.  Against this, a length of 1,201 km. has already been completed as on March,
2016.  The remaining 2 projects of 39 km. length are in DPR stage and targeted for award in
current financial year.
MAJOR ISSUES/INITIATIVES TAKEN RECENTLY BY THE MINISTRY OF ROAD
TRANSPORT AND HIGHW AYS ‘BHARATMALA’ PROGRAMME
13. The ‘Bharatmala’ is a proposed umbrella scheme at an estimated cost of about `2,67,200
crore with the following components:-
(i) Development of State Roads along Coastal areas/Border areas including connectivity
of non-major ports-about, 7000 km. for `80,250 crore;
(ii) Backward Areas, Religious, Tourist Places Connectivity programme— about 7,000
km. for `85,250 crore;
(iii) ‘Setubhratam’ Pariyojana -  Construction of about 1,500 major bridges and 208
ROBs/RUBs for `30,000 crore;
(iv) District Head Quarter Connectivity Scheme - development of about 9,000 km. newly
declared NHs for 60,000 crore.
14. For the financial year 2016-17 26,490 km. road length has to be awarded out of which 91
km. has been awarded till April, 2016.
Length awarded and completed by NHAI year-wise
Year No. of Projects Awarded Length Completed Length
(in Km.) (in Km.)
2009-10 39 3379.16 2694
2010-11 50 5082.84 1784
2011-12 47 6491 2248
2012-13 11 11 15.75 2844
2013-14 17 1436 1901
2014-15 35 3067 1501
2015-16 32 2337 647
15. List of projects awarded so far under Hybrid Annuity Mode, and the list of projects
proposed under Hybrid Annuity Mode is given below:

5
(i) List of projects awarded under Hybrid Annuity Mode in the year 2015-16
Sl. Project/Section State Length TPC
No. (in Kms.) ( ` in crore)
1. Delhi Meerut Expressway – PKG-I Delhi 8.716 841.50
2. Delhi Meerut Expressway – PKG-III Uttar Pradesh 22.770 1057.6
3. Meerut - Bulandshahar Uttar Pradesh 61.19 683.24
TOTAL 92.676 2582.34
(ii) List of projects likely to be awarded under Hybrid Annuity Mode in the year 2016-17
Sl. Project/Section State Length T otal Project
No. (in Kms.) ( ` in crore)
1. Delhi Meerut Expressway – PKG-II Uttar Pradesh 19.28 1451
2. Nagpur Ring Road – PKG-I Maharashtra 33.5 593.4
3. Nagpur Ring Road – PKG-II Maharashtra 28.03 657.5
4. Lucknow - S ultanpur Uttar Pradesh 127.4 1661.94
TOTAL 208.21 4363.84
List of projects proposed under Hybrid Annuity Mode in the year 2016-17
Sl.No. Name of Project State NHDP Length T otal
Phase (in Km) Project
Cost ( `
in crore)
1. 4 Lane bypass around Kishanganj Bihar III 7.50  DPR Stage
town on NH-31 in the State of
Bihar
2. Talaja Mahua pkg-2  Gujarat  IV 46.52 666
3. Mahua - Kagabadar Pkg-3  Gujarat  IV 39.82 636
4. Kagabadar - Una pkg-4  Gujarat  IV 40.56 588
5. Una - Kodinar Pkg-5  Gujarat  IV 41.13  647
6. Kodinar - Verevan Pkg-6  Gujarat  IV 41.39 752
7. Construction of New Varsova  Gujarat V 2.25  DPR
Bridge on NH-8 Stage
8. Four Lanning of Ausa - Maharashtra  NH(O) 58.77 DPR
Chakur Section of NH-361 Stage

6
9. Four Lanning of Chakur - Loha Maharashtra  NH(O) 62.20 DPR
Section of NH-361 Maharashtra Stage
10. Bhopal-Sanchi MP III 53.78 538
11. Singara – Binjhabahal Odisha  IV 104.17 1,078
12. Binjhabahal – T elebani Odisha  IV 77.61 914
13. Kharar - Ludhiana Section Punjab IV 76.01 1,473
14. Lucknow – Sultanpur UP  IV 123.20 1,276
15. Four Lanning of Roorkee- Uttarakhand  IV 87.64 1,024
Chutmalpur - Gagalheri
Yamunanagar Sec of NH-73
& Chutmalpur Ganeshpur
section of NH-72A.
16. Elevated corridor partially Punjab VII 12.95 868
access controlled highway
from Samrala Chowk to
Ludhiana Municipal Limits -
NH-95
17. Ladowal Bypass on NH-1 Punjab VII 17.04 370
TOTAL 873.76  
EXISTING MODELS FOR ROAD CONSTRUCTION
16. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways that there
are three models viz. EPC model, PPP Mode and Hybrid Annuity model for construction of roads.
17. (i) EPC Model:  The EPC (engineering, procurement and construction) model entails that the
contractor builds the project by designing, installing and procuring necessary labour and land to
construct the infrastructure, either directly or by subcontracting. Unlike PPP, the financing is done
by the Government and not by banks or private equity funds through issuing of sovereign bonds
or taking financial guarantees for the project. Government also takes responsibility for land
procurement, clearances, etc. Recently, the Government has announced that it will focus on
developing upcoming road project on EPC mode for the coming two years rather than PPP (public
private partnership) mode. The shift to EPC mode is due to the fact that PPP modes are
economically not viable at this moment. However, the cons of this model is that it may entail huge
budgetary support which increases the fiscal deficit.
(ii) PPP Model: Under PPP (public private partnership) model Government agencies tie up
with private agencies for development of infrastructure. In case of highway projects in India,
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) acts as the project authority while projects are
executed by various private agencies known as concessionaire. These concessionaires, apart from
putting their own equity, depend heavily on bank finance. Revenue under this model to the

7
concessionaire can be derived either by direct collection of toll by the concessionaire or by
payment of annuities to the concessionaire by the Government.   In the event of project delays,
or shortfall in collection of toll, the risk of default to the lenders arises. The pros of this model
is that direct fiscal burden on Government is avoided as well as the project may get more
professional expertise of private sector. On the negative side, in cases of delayed implementation,
private players aren’t able to service their loans, adding to NPAs in banks, eventually
disincentivising banks from lending for such projects.
(iii) Hybrid Annuity Model: The hybrid annuity model was conceived in the previous
financial year 2015-16 to bring back private participation in highway projects, which had dried up
in the last few years. The model is a mix of EPC and BOT *formats, with the Government and
the private enterprise sharing the total project cost in the ratio of 40:60, respectively. Under this
new model, Government provides 40% of the project cost during the construction period and the
release of funds is linked to the progress of construction.
18. The private player needs to raise the rest 60% in the form of equity and loan. Since the
overall requirement is less, the private bidder needs to put less equity. Similarly, as the loan
requirement is less in comparison to the other modes such as PPP, banks will also be comfortable
to lend. Government pays back the rest in installments during the entire contract period and it is
linked to the performance of the private player and the asset.
19. The recovery of entire investment is assured as Government takes all the risks including
collecting user fee and thereby the rise or fall in the total collections does not impact the private
participant’s return from the project. It brings greater comfort to the private players and banks to
take up such projects.
RISK ALLOCATION
20. The Committee has been provided with following information regarding division of risk on
private party and the Government in case of various models.
Type of Risk Risk Shared in Risk shared in BOT Risk shared in
EPC Mode (Annuity/Toll) Mode Hybrid Annuity Mode
Financing Risk Government Private Shared between
Government & Private
Operation & Government Private Private
Maintenance Risk
Revenue Risk Government Private Government
Comparative pros and Cons of the Existing Models of Road Financing:
Comparative EPC Mode BOT (Toll) BOT (Annuity) Hybrid Annuity
Advantages Mode Mode Mode
Investment Budget outlay Private Private investment Budget outlay
(Government investment for Construction required for 40%

8
Investment) cost and Staggered of Construction
budget outlay for Cost and balance
Annuity staggered for
Annuity
Operation & Not included Included Included Included
Maintenance (maintenance
included for
3 years only)
Tolling Not included included Not included Not included
Role Limited/none Major Major Up to 42% of
lenders/Banks Construction cost
only
Ease of Contract Comparatively Requires Requires constant Higher monitoring
Management Simple and easy constant monitoring required even
to administer monitoring during operations
period
21. From the above table it may be concluded that financing risk has been shared between the
Government and private party in a 40-60 ratio, therefore private party has not to be worried about
completion of projects due to lack of funds.  As far as revenue is concerned the burden is on the
Government to ensure revenue collection.
LANGUISHING PROJECTS
22. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways submitted that taking on from the
point of view of the Finance Ministry’s representative, it is a fact that the number of languishing
projects has gone down substantially over the period of time.  Ministry is working on them one
by one  and instead of taking a broad picture, if the matter is taken project by project, solutions
seem to come.
23. The private sector participation in the road sector has witnessed severe liquidity crunch in
the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. This has resulted not only in limited or no participation
in the new projects awarded on BOT (Toll) basis but it also resulted in delay in completion of
ongoing projects. The delay in satisfying conditions precedent of the Authority  further aggravated
the situation resulting in many projects turning stalled /non viable. 19 projects have been identified
as on date where issues are yet to be sorted out.
Sl. No. Status Number of Length (km) TPC/CPC
Projects ( ` crore)
12 3 4 5
1. Projects identified as 46 4,860 51,338/62,487
languishing by NHAI
     1     2    3     4       5

9
2. Projects where is sues 27 3,233 35,242/41,473
have been resolved
3. Projects where issues are 19 1,627 16,096/21,014
yet to be sorted out
24. The Ministry has informed that there are 46 projects which have been identified by NHAI
as languishing. Total length of these projects is 4860 km. covering a cost of `51,338/- and
`62,487 crores under TPC and CPC respectively.  Out of 46, issues have been resolved in 27 cases
whereas issues on 19 projects are yet to be sorted out.
REASONS RESPONSIBLE FOR LANGUISHING PROJECTS:
25. Ministry has cited following reasons responsible for languishing projects:
(i) Lack of equity with the Concessionaire:  In projects (e.g. Motihari-Raxaul section,
Rohtak – Jind section, Gurgaon – Kotputli – Jaipur section, Haridwar – Dehradun
section), the lack of equity with the concessionaires has delayed the projects much
beyond the scheduled completion date. In some projects, this has also resulted in the
bankers not disbursing even the loan sanctioned at Financial Close.
(ii)   Diversion of Funds: In few cases the physical progress of work is not
commensurate with the financial progress. These are likely cases where the funds
may not have been utilized towards the projects and concessionaires are finding it
difficult to bring back the funds so diverted.
(iii)  Delays due to reasons not attributable to the Concessionaire: The Authority has
also defaulted in fulfillment of its conditions precedent in a number of cases due to
Land Acquisition, Environment/Forest clearance/Utility Shifting/RoB issues. In cases
like Rimoli – Roxy – Rajamunda, due to delay in forest clearance the project has
turned non viable and requires to be terminated and rebid.
(iv)    Refusal of banks to accept first charge of NHAI:  For any languishing highway
project in BOT (Toll/Annuity) mode that has achieved at least 50% physical
completion, NHAI will provide financial assistance to complete the project subject
to first charge on the Toll/Annuity receivables of these projects. However, the banks
have refused to accept the first charge of NHAI and therefore no progress in
implementation of this policy to complete languishing projects is being achieved.
(v)   High Cost of Interest during Construction (IDC): The cost of construction in
case of delay whether due to concessionaire or the Authority, results in increase in
the cost of debt which turns the project unviable. In case of termination due to
delay by concessionaire during the construction period, there is also no termination
payment.
(vi)  Difficulty in obtaining additional debt in stalled projects: In projects where the
concessionaire is already faced with delays, there is no possibility of obtaining
additional debt to complete the project as the account in many cases may have
already turned NPA.
1        2 3 4 5

10
(vii) Overleveraged Balance sheet of the developers anticipating high level of
growth: The economic downturn seen in the last few years has caused revenue
realization at a much lower rate than was anticipated.   Many developers have taken
future obligation which created difficulties in debt servicing.
(viii) Stress on the existing road infrastructure loan portfolios of FIs:  Reduced
revenue realization due to economic slowdown affecting debt servicing  by the
Concessionaire as the contracted debt servicing   obligations   could not be met with
the existing revenue. As the sector got affected, the lenders debt portfolio for roads
came to have a disproportionally high level of debts.  NPAs saddled banks with
additional capital adequacy requirements, provisioning demands and income
recognition restrictions.
(ix) Long period of revenue collection : The current practice of financing large
infrastructure projects based on revenue streams spread over 20 to 30 years, but
with project debt having tenure of 10 to 15 years, is also unsustainable.
(x) Debt sanctioned by Banks higher than total project cost estimated by NHAI:
Because the project debt is based on the developer’s cost estimates that is, on
average, higher by 35 per cent than the NHAI project cost. In such cases, the
lenders are exposed to a higher risk particularly in the event of termination of the
Concession Agreement wherein NHAI guarantees compensation based on its own
appraised project cost and not the developer’s estimate.
(xi) Corporate Debt Restructuring has been affected in many SPV debt:
Concessionaire unable to service debt have to propose to the lenders  to restructure
the debt:  While the first restructuring  exercise is permitted by lenders without any
adverse asset classifications any such second exercise automatically affect the asset
classifications in the books of lenders. Any second restructuring necessarily requires
that the debt be classified as non performing.
(xii) Sector exposure norms of FIs getting exhausted:  With the debt obligations
mounting on account of debt repayment deferment, sector exposure increased,
reaching exposure norms for this sector.
(xiii) Higher cost of financing:  The lenders who provide major part of financing in the
form of debt are concerned with the downside risks which influences the project
progress and debt serving capability  and consequently to mitigate the risk of
financing have enhanced the cost of lending to the sector.
(xiv) Bond Market for infrastructure financing:  The Bond market can provide a
viable option for long term financing. Under the Infrastructure Debt Fund,  Banks
have to accept the first charge of Infrastructure Debt Funds on termination
payment. As projects have been financed at a much higher cost than the NHAI total
project cost, the debt due may not cover the complete senior debt leading to
resistance of banks to first charge of Infrastructure Debt Funds.

11
BANKS’ LIMIT FOR LONG TERM LOAN
26. The Deputy Governor, RBI submitted before the Committee that the assets in which bank
invest and the advances or loans which they give, there is a limit to their length. So, typically,
banks give it for seven years, whereas these are projects which require financing for 20 or 25
years. Banks have inherent limitations for that kind of long-term financing. Elsewhere, it is not
bank-funded. It is all market-funding or Government-funding only, and the banks will have only
fringe way of doing it. But in our country, as the country demanded that kind of support from
the banking system, the banking system rose to the occasion. In 2007-08, for the entire
infrastructure projects, the funding by the banks was to the tune of `2,00,000 crores, but today
it is `10,00,000 crores plus. So, in these years, the banks have risen five times to support it. That
is why it cannot be done beyond the limit. This itself is forming part of 16 per cent of their total
assets. Banks have to give 40 per cent to the priority sector; 21 per cent they have to put in SLR
bonds and Government securities and four per cent as CRR. Putting all these together, it comes
to 81 per cent. The remaining funds are available for the rest of the business through which they
are supposed to make extra funds and other things.
27. Deputy Governor RBI in his submission before the Committee added that they have allowed
the banks to take long-term bonds on which exemption is given from SLR, CRR, etc. This kind
of enablement will have to be for the right size. That is why the size has been fixed at `500
crores. So, `500 crores is the requirement, based on which all these enablements, all these facilities
or exemptions from SLR, CRR, etc., are feasible. If banks start giving for `200 crores or any less
amount, then, they will not get the required generation of funds. They have to generate revenue.
The remaining 19 per cent only is available for them to take big money. Then the interest rate for
that portion will have to be much, much higher. So, there is a need of balancing.
28. When queried if the threshold limit is brought down for 500 crores to 200 or 300 crores,
how it would affect, RBI said that if the threshold limit is brought down then the bank will have
to extend the recovery of those project loans for twenty years.  As a result, every year the interest
rate flow and the cash flow which is coming back to the banks will be less and they will not be
able to do the rest of the funding.
29. In view of this, the Committee urges RBI to look into the matter and if possible
threshold limit should be brought down so that some more projects could also be completed
which needs lesser amount.
NON PERFORMING ASSETS (NPA)
30. The Chairman, NHAI submitted that loan accounts having an interest or scheduled payment
overdue, where the payment overdue is more than 90 days, are today classified as NPAs. So, once
a loan is declared as NPA, it is not possible for him to secure loans from other banks and financial
institutions. Economic slowdown has resulted in significant decline in traffic levels. The toll rates
have come down because toll rates are linked to the wholesale price index. As a result  toll rates,
sometimes, go negative. So, RBI is requested to relax the NPA norms to 180 days; perhaps, at
one time, they had 180 days as the norm.  This will provide developers more time to work out
an arrangement for regularization of their account and also reduce the cost of funds for the
banks.

12
COMMENTS OF RBI ON NPA
31. Regarding NPA, RBI said that  ’90 days’ is a part of international guidelines for identifying
an NPA.  This is accounting concept in the sense that if a party is not paying back either interest
or installment from the due date within next ninety days, then, the bank should not recognize
income because nothing is coming and when it is not coming, it cannot be recognized that interest
has come or the installment has come.  That becomes NPA.  Because of this problem, it is again
and again reiterated that even though it is an NPA, the bank should fund it so long as it is a viable
project.  Since India has signed the Basel Convention and it is mandatory to adhere to the guideline,
90 days’ period cannot be relaxed.
32. Some of the banks have given the information on total loan given to road sector and also
those loans which have turned into NPA.
As on 31.03.2016
Sl. No. Name of Bank Total number T otal NPA (crore)
of Project Exposure (cr.)
1. IDBI 44 7,885 4129.66*
2. Central Bank of India - 5,120.15 -
3. Bank of Maharashtra 18 2,260 463.77#
4. Punjab National Bank - 14,274 484.18
5. Oriental Bank of Commerce 3 778.78 -
6. Bank of India - 13,890 2146
7. Union Bank of India 42 6,128.74 558.06
8. State Bank of Patiala 32 1,622 -
9. Dena Bank 32 2,627.49 108.01
10. State Bank of India 240 19,502 1,986
*`3750 crore-Jaypee Infratech Ltd.
# `318.69 crore- Jaypee Infratech Ltd.
33. The Committee observes that for IDBI the NPA percentage is as high as   52% of
total loan disbursed for road sector.  The Committee wants to know the reasons why this
huge amount has turned to be NPA that too to a single concessionaire i.e. Jaypee Infratech
Ltd.  The Ministry is requested to give full details of the project awarded to this company.
The Committee further observed that State Bank of India has lent ````` 19,502 crores, out of
which 1,986 crores has turned in to NPA. The Committee is worried about higher percentage
of loan becoming NPA. The Committee suggests that the Banks should take due diligence
while disbursing loans to concessionaires.

13
RBI has permitted NHAI to bail out many projects
34. RBI submitted to the Committee that wherever it is possible and wherever it is needed, they
have made relaxation.  Even though banks are not supposed to lend for more than seven years,
RBI has allowed that, whereas other countries are not doing it.  So, wherever a flexibility is
required, RBI exercised that and has given that flexibility to the banks.  RBI has also allowed
takeover of finance.  Typically, the banks are not required to fund equity financing, whereas in the
infrastructure projects, it has been permitted due to its importance.  RBI has also allowed delays
and   wherever there is cost overrun, it was permitted.  But RBI has to permit  everything within
limits.
35. State Bank of India pleaded before the Committee that the projects may be approved
only after ensuring that 90% of land acquisition is completed. All the approvals from the
Statutory Authorities and clearances from the Government agencies should be obtained
before a particular project is sent for bidding.  Another area of discord is the project cost
estimated by NHAI and the concessionaires which results in delay of lending by the financial
institutions. In case of disputes, the concessionaires have to approach the NHAI for the
redressal in the absence of a dispute settlement mechanism.  This is creating undue delay
for starting projects and thereby escalating the project cost and time overrun.  The
representatives of the IDBI bank informed that the promoters of many of the
infrastructure projects are not big companies which results in insufficient equity for the
promoter companies.  This also leads to a situation where the financial institutions are
refusing to finance the projects.  The Chairman of IFCI informed the Committee that the
bids were done without proper study and the high premium for bidding in many cases
results in failure of the project itself.  Another area of concern pointed out by the banks
and the financial institutions is that there is no dedicated agency for infrastructure lending.
They argued that Developing Financial Institutions may be created to arrange long time
debt funds.  Another complaint made by the banks is that when the projects are terminated
due to various reasons the banks are not given an opportunity or any guarantee that the
pending loan is repaid.  They have demanded that the model concession agreement should
be recast in such a way that the protection of the interest of the banks should be an
integral part of the agreement.  Yet another area of concern is that in many cases the
Government agencies, particularly the authorities of the State Governments are intervening
and putting obstacles in the smooth implementation of the projects by way of refusing to
grant permission to quarry and mines.  They have also complained that there was a hurry
in awarding the projects without any due diligence which resulted in stalling of the projects
and the promoters leaving mid way.  In many of the cases, the promoters are forming their
equity on the basis of the loan taken from the financial institutions which results in failure
of the projects.  The banks are typically encouraged to raise money for a period of 5 to 7
years whereas the need of the infrastructure industry is for a longer period of 20 to 25
years. This is acting as a blockage in the entire infrastructure lending.  Development of
long time bonds is also an option which can be experimented for financing the projects.  In
the present regulatory scenario, the insurance funds and the pension funds are not
permitted to fund the infrastructure projects.  An easing of the regulations may help the
industry as a whole.  Another suggestion was that the concessionaires may be given an exit

14
clause if they want to.  NHAI informed the Committee that out of the 150 projects in the
PPP mode during the period 2006-12, only 16 projects were stalled and many of these were
due to land acquisition problems, utility shifting, delay in granting permission by the local
authorities and delay in giving in formal clearances and various approvals.  The
representatives of the RBI informed the Committee that the Government is seized of the
matter and they are contemplating to ease many of the guidelines applicable to the banks
for infrastructure lending.
36. The overall impression created by the banks is that along with public funding there
should be private participation for the growth of the Indian economy. Highway projects need
to be completed in time within the estimated cost.  It was also pointed out that the held-
up projects should be started immediately and banks and financial institutions may be
sufficiently compensated for the NPAs created by them by lending to the infrastructure
sector.
37. The Committee was also informed that the model concession agreement of NHAI is
not acceptable to the banks and it need to be restructured in a way that the banks should
not end up in accumulating NPAs.
38. The Committee recommends that the model concession agreement may be circulated
to all the banks and the financial institutions and the input and feedback received from
them may be incorporated appropriately.  Every effort may be made to ease out the bad
debts.  It is good that the RBI has already taken steps for converting debts into equity and
the contractors are allowed to get out of the projects in case of a default.  Need for higher
Government allocation is also emphasised  and the banks NPAs may be supported by
Government allocation.  Making the recovery of bad debts easier by empowering the bank
adequately should be considered. For example  in case of a default , the banks may be
allowed to take over the entire company.  The Committee was informed that as of now,
there is a total NPAs of `````2,60,000 crores due to defaulting infrastructure projects.  By the
end of 2015-16, it is estimated that it may go up to more than 4 lakh crore.  The banks’
demanded that the money of the loan given to the road sector  to be allowed to be
restructured for a longer duration may be considered along with proposal for making
adequate provisions in the model concession agreement to for the cost escalation of the
projects.  In case of time overrun due to the reasons which are beyond the control of the
promoters the projects may be re-assessed and the project cost may be refixed accordingly
also needs to be seriously considered for adoption.
CBI AND VIGILANCE
39. The representatives from Banks submitted that so far as financing the NPA accounts is
concerned, the public sector banks come under the purview of vigilance of CBI and other agencies.
And, the public sector bank employees, are probably under a constant fear that if they finance an
NPA account, the CVC or the CBI may question bank’s wisdom.  Even private sector banks are
not financing the NPAs. Though the RBI has clearly been mentioning that there is no ban on
financing the NPAs, yet the fear psychosis among the public sector bankers and also the private
sector bankers is the reason that they are not able to do it.

15
40. The Committee finds it bizarre that the banks work under the fear of CBI and CVC.
The Committee recommends that the banks should take a decision on its own whether a
particular NPA is to be financed or not and it should be done on the bank’s own wisdom
and under the permissible capacity of the banks.  The Committee also suggests that the
bank should see viability of the project i.e. whether lending some more money will give
their due returns. The Committee recommends that every decision if taken in a transparent
way and approved by a Committee consisting of more than two officials based on laid down
principles, there should not be any cause for fear of investigation by CVC, CBI and other
enforcement agencies.
RESTRUCTURING OF LOANS
41. The Chairman, NHAI further submitted that flexible restructuring of infrastructure loans
are only allowed for loan accounts having an aggregate balance of more than ` 500 crores by the
institutional lender.  But the current economic downturn, has resulted in smaller projects, many of
which have a loan amount of less than ` 500 crores.  Lowering the current threshold will assist
such projects to start servicing the debt and provide relief to the concerned banks in recovering
their loans and Reserve Bank of India can resolve this issue by amending its master circular.
42. On this RBI clarified that the banks are meant for short-term finance.  Bank funds are not
for long-term finance.  That is the fundamental principle because bank take money from the public.
43. NHAI submitted that  Scheme of the Government for fund infusion has become infructuous.
One of the reasons is that the first charge has to remain with the NHAI. But the other issue
concerned is that one-time financial support such as this is considered as restructuring of debt by
the RBI.  And, if an account has already been restructured once, then it is declared as an NPA.
There is a need to resolve it because it is just the restructuring of an account once, and, for the
second time, if there is a fund infusion by NHAI and for that, if it is to be classified as an NPA,
then this needs to be resolved by the RBI.
44. Reserve Bank of India elaborated that  there are several exemptions which have been
permitted where repeated restructuring will not be recognized as restructuring. RBI has done
wherever it is feasible, repeated restructuring has also not been considered as an NPA and upto
limits it is done.
45. The Committee finds a disconnect between views of NHAI and RBI because RBI has
said that continuous repeated restructuring is not restructuring and it is also not considered
as NPA, then the problems prohibiting NHAI on this issue, have to be sorted out by NHAI
itself.    The Committee suggests that NHAI resolve this issue with the Banks under the
guidance of RBI.
FUNDING OF SECURITIZATION BY BANKS
46. On the issue of funding of securitization by banks, the Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of
India submitted that guidelines allow the banks to fund the securitization.  Some banks are not
doing it because every bank has got its own risk appetite, based on its own financial strength as
to whether they can take this kind of risk or not.  There is no question of RBI prohibiting banks
from doing so and it is a call that individual banks have to take, based on their own risk

16
assessment.  There are banks who can take extra risk and there are banks who may not be able
to take extra risk.
Existing Regulatory measures for Infrastructure Lending by Banks
47. The Committee was informed by RBI that they are seized of the importance of
infrastructural development in the country and thus the RBI has initiated a number of regulatory
measures/concessions for facilitating increased flow of credit to infrastructure projects. The special
dispensations given by RBI in this regard are briefly outlined below:
(a) Liberal Single/Group Borrower Exposure Limits
 In view of the generally large requirements of funds for infrastructure projects, the
existing RBI guidelines provide for enhanced exposure ceilings for the infrastructure
lending. Exposure to single borrower may exceed the general exposure norm of 15
per cent of the bank’s capital funds by an additional 5 per cent ( i.e. up to 20 per
cent) provided the additional credit exposure is on account of infrastructure finance.
Exposure to borrowers belonging to a group may exceed the general exposure norm
of 40 per cent of the bank’s capital funds by an additional 10 per cent ( i.e. up to
50 per cent), provided the additional credit exposure is on account of extension of
credit to infrastructure projects.
 However, the current dispensation is under review subsequent to the publication of
the BCBS Standards on Supervisory Framework for Measuring and Controlling
Large Exposures.
(b) Liberal Norms for ‘security’ recognition
 While assignments/rights/receivables are not allowed to be treated as ‘tangible’
securities, banks have been allowed to treat annuities under build-operate-transfer
(BOT) model in respect of road/highway projects and toll collection rights, where
there are provisions to compensate the project sponsor if a certain level of traffic
is not achieved, as tangible securities subject to the condition that banks’ right to
receive annuities and toll collection rights is legally enforceable and irrevocable.
 In case of PPP projects, the debts due to the lenders has been allowed to be
considered as secured to the extent assured by the project authority in terms of the
Concession Agreement, subject to the following conditions:
(a) User charges/toll/tariff payments are kept in an escrow account where senior
lenders have priority over withdrawals by the concessionaire;
(b) There is sufficient risk mitigation, such as pre-determined increase in user
charges or increase in concession period, in case project revenues are lower
than anticipated;
(c) The lenders have a right of substitution in case of concessionaire default;
(d) The lenders have a right to trigger termination in case of default in debt
service; and;

17
e) Upon termination, the Project Authority has an obligation of (i) compulsory
buy-out and (ii) repayment of debt due in a pre-determined manner.
48. The Committee observes that initiatives taken by RBI recently has broaden the
scope for borrowers to get more funds on account of enhanced infrastructure finance.  It
is further heartening to note that banks have been allowed to treat annuities under BOT
model in respect of road projects and toll collection rights where there are provisions to
compensate the sponsor. Change of norms in PPP projects are also a welcome move where
debts due to the lenders has been allowed to be considered as secured. Lenders have got
first charge over escrow account and also a right of substitution of concessionaire if he
defaults.  The Committee hopes that these changes in existing models will help lenders and
it will pave the way for getting the stalled projects completed soon.
(c) Long Term Bonds
49. To ensure adequate credit flow to infrastructure sector and affordable housing needs of the
country by encouraging banks to optimally utilize the long-term financing avenues, Reserve Bank
in July 2014 allowed banks to issue long-term bonds with a minimum maturity of seven years to
raise resources for lending to these sectors. As an incentive, these bonds have been exempted from
the regulatory pre-emption of CRR and SLR requirement and including the credit made out of the
proceeds of the bonds in computation of ANBC.
50. The Committee feels that Bond is a potent weapon which can hit the required target
of getting fund from the market.  If, the maturity period is kept medium i.e. 5-7 years,
desired result could be achieved. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by RBI to
allow banks to go for credit flow through issuing bonds.  The Committee recommends that
the Government should strive for long term bonds for a period of 20 to 25 years to
commensurate with the concession period which may be able to achieve the set target.
(d) Financing of Cost Overruns in Project Loans
51. Internationally, project finance lenders sanction a ‘standby credit facility’ to fund cost
overruns if needed. Such ‘standby credit facilities’ are sanctioned at the time of initial financial
closure; but disbursed only when there is a cost overrun. Such ‘standby credit facilities’ may rank
paripassu with base project loans and their repayment schedule may also be the same as that of
the base project loans. Reserve Bank has also introduced a concept of ‘standby credit facility’ to
fund cost overruns. Accordingly, where banks have specifically sanctioned a ‘standby credit
facility’ at the time of initial financial closure to fund cost overruns banks they may fund cost
overruns as per the agreed terms and conditions. However, where the initial financial closure does
not envisage such financing of cost overruns, banks have been allowed to fund cost overruns,
which may arise on account of extension of Date of Commencement of Commercial Operations
(within the time limits of two years and one year for infrastructure and non-infrastructure project
loans respectively), without treating the loans as ‘restructured asset’ subject to certain conditions.
52. The Committee finds that the “Standby credit facility” is a very supportive tool for
borrower if this Clause has been taken into consideration during the initial financial closure
to fund the cost overruns.

18
ISSUES RELATED TO INFRASTRUCTURE LENDING IN HIGHWAYS
53. (i) Financing:  Infrastructure projects, especially road and highway projects, require huge
outlay of funds. While banks are the major provider of funds to road sector,  number of institutions
have been set up by the Government to facilitate financing of Infra and road projects. India
Infrastructure Finance Co. Ltd (IIFCL) was set up in 2006 as a wholly owned GoI company and
as an NBFC-ND-IFC for providing long term finance, direct lending, Take-out finance, Credit
enhancement and refinance to other financing institutions. Similarly, National Investment and
Infrastructure Fund (NIIF) was set up recently as an Alternate Investment Fund (AIF) with an
initial corpus of `20,000 crore (49% from Government). In addition, Infrastructure Debt Funds
(IDFs) were set up under the private sector with active encouragement from the Government for
the purpose of taking over completed projects from the banks. Recently, the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) has proposed to set up a new dedicated financial institution for
financing highways and associated infrastructure or infuse further equity in the existing FIs.
54. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is involved in development of road
sector which is the life-line of the economy of the country.  It supervises projects worth
thousands of crores rupees but it does not have its own source or a mechanism of
generating revenue, although it gets budgetary support from the Government.  But, as we
know that much support is not sufficient.  The Committee recommends that RBI and
Ministry of Finance may help the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to set up their
own dedicated financial institutions to generate own funds for development of road sector.
(ii) Delays and disputes:  Highway and road projects get delayed, impacting the asset
quality of bank loans, due to various reasons, such as problems cited in para 20 ibid , litigations
by different parties, court orders stalling the project, problems in clearances from Ministry of
environment and other agencies, forest clearance, defence land handovers etc. RBI is seized of
these issues and has taken a number of regulatory steps to address the concerns arising from
impact of delays on such project loans. Recently, the Government has proposed to constitute a
High Powered Committee (HPC) on Infrastructure under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of
Finance for amicable resolution of highways related issues that cannot be resolved within the
existing framework provided in the Concession Agreement.
55. The Committee is aware of the reasons for delayed projects.  The Committee
recommends that before awarding the project to concessionaire, the Ministry should
complete the processes of getting land, environmental clearance, relocation  of utilities and
rehabilitation issues etc. Such problems not only delays the project but also enhances the
budget of the project.  The Committee notes that the lack of dispute resolution is one of
the major hurdles in clearing the stressed or delayed projects.  It is time consuming and
the cost involved is too much in the absence of a formal mechanism for dispute redressal.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government need to put in place a dispute
redressal mechanism for resolving the issues related to road project.
(iii) Intangible Nature of Securities: In case of road projects, while the assets created
are tangible, securities created in favour of banks by project authorities are mostly intangible in
nature. Such securities are assignments, rights to receive toll/annuities, etc. Taking into account the

19
requests of banks and Government, RBI has allowed loan to road projects against such intangible
securities to be treated as ‘secured’, subject to certain conditions .
56. The Committee appreciates the step taken by the RBI.  It is a morale booster for
the concessionaire.  But adequate cautions should be taken to ensure that the interests of
the financial institutions which have funded the project should be protected by all means.
View of Ministry of Finance on infrastructure lending
57. The Committee enquired from the  Ministry of Finance whether the Government is thinking
of coming out with some financial institutions for infrastructure lending, or only banks will do the
lending in the road sector.
58. On this question the representative of Ministry of Finance stated that earlier they used to
have, the ‘development financial institutions’, the DFIs.  So, at one point of time there were IFCI,
IDFC, IDBI, and so on.  Now, over the time, either these got converted into banks or they just
withered away.  So, today, the number of DFIs is actually very, very limited.  Only the EXIM Bank
in the export sector, and IIFCL, are there. But the fact is that to recreate those institutions which
had the capacity to take on long-term assets of 20-25 years in terms of financing is going to take
a considerably longer time. Because the kind of requirements that are there in terms of money, the
sheer quantum of money which is required because of a booming infrastructure sector, no single
institution will be able to handle it and, therefore, multiplicity is needed.  Bond market remains
shallow and it is difficult to tap the efficiencies which come out of corporates being able to raise
money outside the banking system.  Now, this is something which the Ministry of Finance is
conscious about.  So, the NIIF, which has recently been launched, looks at the equity side of
things, and the bond market is to be looked forward in consultation with the RBI.  The attempts
therefore, are to address the problems sectorally, rather than looking at one broad-brush solution
for the entire infrastructure sector.
59. Ministry of Finance further added that:-
“the solution would be, one is on the NIIF, which was announced in the last year’s
Budget.  The equity part is coming out through one of the sub-funds, which is on the
stress assets kind of situation, to be able to take equity positions.  Second, is on the
steps to be taken on the bond market side.  Securitization of receivables is one part
of it.  Ways are to be found out by which infusion of funds can come into such
projects, which do not affect the quality of the loan itself.  This would mean that
banks actually get back some money.  So, there are various options on which work
is going on.  It would still take some more time by which it could be presented in
such a way that it satisfies all the concerns of the stakeholders.  That is the direction
in which Ministry of Finance is moving”.
60. From the views of Ministry of Finance the Committee notes that although the
Ministry is taking various measurers to bring financial institutions into infrastructure
lending. The Committee however, does not find any concrete solution from the submission
of Ministry of Finance that the financial institution would come up in near future to rescue
the road sector.  Till the banks remain the sole lender, the situation will not improve
substantially.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Finance should in consultation
with RBI, explore Bond Market more vigorously to generate money for the road sector.

20
61. The Committee was informed by NHAI that they have taken various measures to rectify the
problems affecting the road projects. Some of the initiatives are summarized below:-
(a) Project Preparation :-  Much of the issues affecting project execution and delayed
project execution, by hindsight, can be attributed to the fact that NHAI even before
completing its requirement related to conditions precedent had awarded projects.
This inordinate stress on awards without proper project preparation has been
detrimental to the interest of the road sector as a whole. NHAI has decided not to
award projects until all regulatory approvals are obtained for the project and the
required land is available in possession to avoid post-bid delays and litigations.
(b) In the matter of Environment and Forest clearance, after NHAI moved the
Supreme Court, in March 2013 MoEF changed their policy which addressed all of
NHAI’s concerns.
(c) Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes: It was found that the arbitration
process, through which all unresolved disputes were tried to be resolved, was
proving to be far too expensive and also highly time consuming. Hence NHAI in
association with NHBF formed a society for speedy and affordable redressal of
disputes.  This society is called as Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes
(SAROD)registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.  Builders/Contractors are
the Primary members and Consultants have been made as associate members.
Mainly qualified technocrats of highway sector have been empanelled as arbitrators.
It is intended that time bound completion of arbitration proceedings will now be
possible.
62. The Committee appreciates the corrective steps taken by NHAI.  The Committee
feels that NHAI should learn from its past experience.  Many of the projects got held up
due to bad-planning and showing haste in awarding the projects to developers.  The
Committee recommends that before awarding any project to concessionaire the project
should be technically examined, cost be estimated and all the clearness, viz. statutory,
environment and forest, railways etc. may be obtained first.
DISPUTE RESOLUTION
63. The Ministry submitted that the item rate  EPC awards which was used for project awards
for much of the GQ and part of the corridor has left NHAI with unsettled claims amounting to
more than `18,000 crs.  While much of these are inflated claims, the process of dispute resolution
which could have settled these disputes is expensive and time consuming.  The current liquidity
issues in the market affecting the developers could be partly resolved by finding a method by
which these disputes can be quickly resolved. Hence NHAI created a mechanism for speedy
resolution of long pending disputes. A tribunal was formed headed by a retired High Court justice,
assisted by 3 CGMs as Members in the Committee,  which has till 31
st  March 2015 resolved 84
packages for a value of ` 17,524 crs, settling these for an amount of ` 1,404 crs.  The balance
will be taken up for early resolution in due course. Several contractors have opted for the same
and successfully settled their claims with NHAI

21
64. The Committee recommends that unsettled claims may be settled speedily and it
should be ensured that while settling  the claims due diligence may be taken of the project,
against which the claim has to be settled. Adequate measures should be taken to ensure
that unscrupulous elements do not swindle away the Government money.
(d) Loans to Highway projects classified as “secured” by Lenders:- Unsecured loans
are generally considered as relatively riskier and hence banks limit their exposure on
unsecured loans to 15 to 20% of their debt portfolio. Given the high risk perception
such unsecured loans also carry higher interest rates. At NHAI’s initiative, Reserve
Bank of India has directed a policy shift that the Financial Institutions now should
consider loans to Highway projects as secured to the extent covered by termination
payment provisions under the Concession Agreements. Due to this changed
classification, road sector projects would now be able to access debt funds from
a larger pool for secured loans (as against the restricted pool available for unsecured
loans) and also get the benefit of lesser interest rates.
65. The Committee feels that this policy shift is a wise decision by the RBI,  which has
allowed financial institutions to consider loans to Highways projects as secured to the extent
covered by termination payment provisions under the concession agreement.  The
Committee hopes that interest rates also will come down accordingly in such case.
66. Steps taken by the Ministry for revival of Stalled Projects:
(a) Securitization of future cash flows in BOT Projects:
67. With a view to ameliorate the shortage of equity and improve liquidity of the prospective
bidder, NHAI board has approved granting of permission by NHAI to the Concessionaires of PPP
projects which have Toll/Annuity revenue significantly surplus to the repayment obligations to raise
subordinate loan on the strength of future surplus cash flows of their operational BOT Road
projects.
(b) Premium Deferment in stressed projects:
68. To salvage the stressed projects, the Government has allowed restructuring of premiums
committed by Concessionaires during the bid stage in Highway projects for the awarded projects.
Such a renegotiation is permitted only once through the life of the Concession.
(c) Harmonious Substitution in Financially stressed projects:
69. In view of the difficulties being faced by the Concessionaire in PPP projects Government
has decided to permit substitution of existing Concessionaire or the selected bidder/consortium
member of such project SPV in a harmonious manner. An event of financial default will include
situations where the Authority and/or the senior lenders have reason to apprehend in their
considered opinion that the concessionaire is likely to face financial stress and is likely to default
in the compliance of the terms of the Concession Agreement.
(d) One time fund infusion to revive and physically complete languishing BOT projects:
70. For any languishing highway project in BOT (Toll /Annuity) mode that has achieved at least
50% physical completion and it is also established that infusion of moderate funding can quickly

22
bring this project to completion, NHAI will provide financial assistance in the form of a loan at
bank rate + 2% subject to first charge on the Toll/Annuity receivables of these projects.
(e) 100% equity divestment after two years of construction completion for all BOT
projects irrespective of year of award:
71. This would facilitate concessionaires to invest in:
(i) complete National Highways Authority of India projects;
(ii) any other highways projects;
(iii) to retire their debts to Financial institutions in any other infrastructure projects.
(iv) Authorizing NHAI for rationalized compensation to Concessionaires in case of delays
not attributable to Concessionaires for languishing highway projects on BOT mode:
72. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have
taken certain steps to strengthen the construction work in road sector.  The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should keep eye on toll collection and channelize the surplus
money towards stressed projects.
LAND ACQUISITION
73. Ministry has submitted that  land issues have been resolved in terms of the quantum of
payout to land owner while the multiplier effect is having that beneficial spin-off, the lack of
clarity, which may be called in terms of what exactly is the Authority expected to do when he
acquires land, out of potential hits going forward, that is, still, a grey area.  But, certainly, one
of the beneficial aspects of the Land Act has been in terms of the multiplier, that is, a greater
willingness on the part of owners to part with their land.  By 1
st January, 2015, all land acquisitions
that were in the pipeline from 2012 onwards were getting jammed because every land owners were
trying them best to delay the completion of his process of land acquisition so that timeline of
January, 2015 could be met.  Now the acquisition of land has become easier compare to earlier.
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE
74. On the question of environmental clearances, Ministry assured the Committee that the
position of environmental clearance has improved dramatically. It is being regularly monitored at the
highest level and there is no problem with the environmental and forest clearance as such. That
is happening in a systematic and methodical manner. They have developed online system where the
application does travel online. The physical transmission of application which involved delays does
not happen anymore.
STATUTORY CLEARANCE
75. Other statutory clearances including the State Government ones, is handled through State-
support agreement where most of the States have signed them and it is moving ahead.
76. The Ministry has informed the Committee that the picture on land acquisition front
is more clear now and it has become easier to acquire land from its owners.  Environmental
clearances are also given in a shorter period.

23
77. The Committee is concerned to note that the concessionaire is short of equity and
the bankers are also not disbursing the sanctioned loan.  The Committee fails to understand
the intention of bankers.  NHAI too has defaulted in fulfillment of its conditions and has
failed in many cases for acquiring land, environment clearance, utility shifting etc.  The
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for not fulfilling the requirement by the NHAI.
The Committee also finds that insistence of NHAI for the first change on toll/annuity in the
project which is 50% completed is not practical.  The Committee recommends that NHAI
should offer its help to complete the half built project rather then claiming rights of
collecting revenue.  The Committee recommends that the NHAI may pay full attention to
its duty towards extending all facilities /help to concessionaire in completing the projects.
The Committee notes that if there is a delay in construction from any sides, whether it is
NHAI or concessionaire, the cost of interest is going to be high and if it reaches beyond
a point, obtaining additional debt is certainly difficult.  The Committee recommends that
delay from both sides may be avoided so that already infused in incomplete project does not
turn into NPA. The Committee notes that the Government and its agencies are under
pressure of various limitations imposed by the systemic rules and rigidity in financial
regulations. The Committee recommends that the Government should have relook at the
various rules and regulations from the overall perspective to ensuring that road
construction is completed in time. This is not to say that those misusing the financial
system should not be punished and brought to book.
78. The Secretary, Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways who appeared before the
Committee, submitted that during 2010-12, a large number of road projects were awarded and it
was primarily on BoT Toll Model because that was the default mode at that point of time.  The
Government of that day made a very active or pro-active drive towards achieving 20 kilometers
of road per day, which was the ostensible target of the Government at that point of time.  Many
shortcuts were taken and shortcuts were typical in the sense that the pre-construction activities had
not been fully completed.  In many instances, road projects were awarded when only 20 or 25%
of land was available. At that point of time, it looked very euphoric that the Government had
awarded so much of work.  In reality, those projects became the difficult projects.  The problem
was further compounded when concessionaires were permitted to seek appointed date which is the
real commencement date of the project, much earlier than what should have been provided.
79. There were several instances when an appointed date was given with the 30% or 40% of
the land available for the concerned road projects.  This is important to understand as once the
appointed date is given, the lenders then are free to start providing the borrowed money and allow
it to follow into the escrow account. Typically, what has been observed is that in the PPP projects,
those concessionaires come in and create a SPV as is required and the original mother company
is typically the EPC contractor.  So, there was a tendency to draw down money from the escrow
account as soon as it is available and diverted to the mother company. That is really the cause of
today’s pain and a lot of money  being released by the banking sector at that point of time was
inordinately large.  So in a sense, so much of money was allowed to flow into a very large number
of projects and, therefore, added to the original ownership of the concessionaires.  They lost
interest in the projects as they had already sucked out the money that was required by them.

24
80. At the start of the current Government’s tenure in 2014, there were 77 languishing projects,
almost 34 of them had been terminated and today, there are about 18 or 19 projects which are
still remaining to be re-sold.
81. Currently, no new project is launched unless the pre-construction activities are fully
complete, that means in case of PPP projects, 80 per cent land has to be available and for the EPC
projects, 90 per cent of land has to be available.
82. The Committee noted observations of the Secretary and recommends that the
Government should thoroughly inquire into all the 77 projects which were languishing in
2014 to understand the quantum of money siphoned away by the unscrupulous contractors
in connivance with various agencies of the Government and financial institutions. The
quantum of money lost should be quantified and action should be taken to recover the lost
money and a report to this effect may be submitted to the Committee.
83. The Committee notes that there were an economic downtown that took place in the
last 3 or 4 years and as we are slowly coming out of this, there is a possibility to use the
infrastructure in construction sector as one of the major vehicles for revival of the
economy.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the BoT Toll should not be the sole
model for awarding the road projects. The Committee recommends that each project length
has to be analysed and examined on its merits and demerits depending on the revenue
streams that are possible and determine whether it should be taken up on BoT Toll or BoT
annuity or on EPC Model.
84. The Committee notes that the Government has allocated a huge budget for the road
sector but this excessive flow of Government money cannot sustain over a long run.  The
Committee, therefore, calls upon the Government to devise ways and means and establish
appropriate financial institutions and models to encourage the return of the private
investment to the road sector. The Committee notes that the new hybrid annuity scheme
introduced by the Government is attracting many players in the field but the Committee
feels that the players are the same during the various models over a period of time.
Therefore, the Government needs to be over cautious and what has happened to the PPP
Model in the past, should not be repeated in case of Hybrid Annuity Projects also.
85. Yet another complaint the Committee received during its interaction with various
stake holders is that the NHAI typically underestimates the project costs and the
concessionaires who bid out a project on L1 basis approaches banks and financial
institutions with an inflated project cost for taking loans.  The Committee observes that
NHAI should be realistic while calculating the total project cost (TPC) so that the
concessionaire may not get opportunity to project the inflated cost and obtain loans from
the financial institutions in a nefarious way.  The Committee believes that the total project
cost should be realistic irrespective of the model of the project.
86. The Committee wants to know the issues on which 19 projects are yet to be solved.
The Committee recommends that the impending issues may be solved at the earliest and
the projects should be completed in minimum time period.  The Committee is aware of the
fact that each of the project will have its own peculiarities and problems specific to it.
Therefore, the Committee notes that solution to the problems will also be specific and

25
peculiar to the individual projects.  The Committee recommends that these projects may be
infused fund by all means so that the languishing projects which are presently NPAs could
be made viable by incurring just limited expenditure keeping in view the broader national
interest in mind.
Difference between the project cost estimated by NHAI and Banks
87. In this mode, the bidding parameter is the Total Project Cost (TPC).  One of the main
complaints of the concessionaires and banks has been that the NHAI, typically, underestimates the
costs.  Therefore, when  bid of  a project is estimated as `1,000 crores, the concessionaire is
identified on an L1 basis. Then, concessionaire goes to the banks and asks for `1,400 crores.
Although, bank does its own estimation and then the banks and the concessionaire agree at `1,400
crores, and that becomes the basis of lending.
88. The Committee finds its strange as to how the concessionaire who has got a project
for `````1,000 crore gets `````1,400 crores for the same project.  The NHAI has submitted that the
bank does their own calculation.  The Committee wants to know why there is a big gap
between the cost calculated by NHAI and the bank for the same project?  The Committee
further would like to know whether there is any discussion between NHAI and banks
regarding estimation cost for a particular project after awarding the project to a
concessionaire?  Why the concessionaire has been given a free hand to get the banks’ loan
as per their wish?  The Committee recommends that the NHAI  should keep a watch over
the excess loan amount over the estimated cost obtained by the concessionaire from the
bank. The Committee recommends that the TPC arrived at by the NHAI should be the
project cost for all purposes. If at any time the Banks, Financial Institutions or
concessionaires feel that the TPC need to be revised then they should approach NHAI for
the purpose and NHAI can do it in a transparent way, wherever required. The conditions
under which TPC can be revised should be specifically laid down.
Policy initiative taken by NHAI to overcome the problems
TOLL COLLECTION
89. The toll collection figures since 2009-10 are given below:
COLLECTION ( ````` IN LACS)
Year Toll Revenue (in lakhs)
2009-10 197027
2010-11 245903
2011-12 290477
2012-13 372159
2013-14 524552
2014-15 592591
(Upto August 2015) 282315

26
Problems associated with toll collections:
 Transition from EPC to BOT:  Most BOT project operators are companies that
have evolved from EPC contractors into BOT concessionaires just because of their
experience in constructing mega road projects. However, these companies had either
no knowledge or very basic knowledge of tolling when they entered the tolling
business. Awareness is now dawning upon them that tolling is a very technical and
complex activity and many varied factors contribute towards its success.
 Unwillingness to pay toll:  Road users feel this service should be provided free by
the Government as they are already paying taxes.
 Support from local authorities:  The concept of BOT projects is not understood
by the lower levels of administration with whom the concessionaires have to deal
with on a daily basis.
 Pilferage:  According to a rough assessment, toll pilferage on ill managed plazas can
be as high as 25%. Even a momentary failure of toll IT system can result in
considerable toll pilferages.
 Detours:  With wide-spread development of roads, taking a toll detour has become
a standard practice by most road users. In a large number of concession
agreements, there are no safeguards like check plazas. Thus, to avoid loss of toll
collections, choosing the correct location for the plaza becomes critical.
 Political interference:  This generally commences from protests against land
acquisition and finally culminates in obstruction of tolling activities. Explicit clauses
for addressing the issue of disruption of tolling activities needs to be included in the
agreements. The present, ‘Force Majeure’ clause, does not provide adequate
safeguards due to the lengthy time stipulations. Toll plazas are usually the target of
political agitation in the near vicinity culminating in impacting toll operations.
 Unauthorised exemptions:  A large percentage of exemptions consists of road users
who have to be necessarily exempted in order to ensure smooth and unhindered
tolling operations. These road users have the potential to create problems.
ELECTRONIC TOLL COLLECTION
90. Government has decided to implement Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) on a Pan India basis
on all National Highway projects by 2015. ETC shall be implemented through the use of Radio
Frequency Identification Device (RFID) technology. NHAI in association with select financial
institutions and developers/ promoters of concessionaire had formed a company viz. Indian
Highway Management Company Limited (IHMCL) to implement ETC Systems. IHMCL was
incorporated on 26.12.2012 under the Companies Act, 1956 with equity participation from NHAI
(25%), Concessionaire (50%) and Financial Institutions (25%) primarily for implementation of ETC
system on National Highways in India. Enabling provision are being incorporated in the concession
agreements for implementation of ETC in all future BOT/OMT projects.
91. The Committee recommends that the Government should take adequate measures to

27
sort out the issues such as unwillingness of the public to pay toll, pilferage of toll, political
interference in the functioning of toll booths and unauthorized exemptions at toll plazas.
MAINTENANCE AND OTHER AMENITIES AT HIGHWAYS
92. The Committee feels that   construction of road is a difficult job but to maintain it
is rather more difficult. It is a proven fact that condition of road goes from bad to worse
in a very short period. The Committee was informed that for maintenance and repair, the
budget allocated in `````2834 crore for the financial year 2016-17 which meets only 60% of
total requirement. Ministry further submits that maintenance being a non-plan activity
there is also a tendency by the Government to apply adhoc cuts in the face of resource
constrains.
93. The Committee finds that with this budgetary provision, the Ministry is not giving
adequate attention to maintenance and repair of highways.  The Committee recommends
that the maintenance upkeep of the roads should be given higher priority and a higher
allocation be made at RE stage.
Road Safety
94. Road safety is a major issue in view of increasing road accidents throughout the
country.  There are many factors responsible for it.  According to one report inputs given
by National Crime Records Bureau, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, there are 4.5
lakhs road accidents annually causing 1.4 lakhs death and 4.8 lakhs injured.  It’s a sad face
of our development. The Committee feels that there may be many reasons for road
accidents, but road is also a factor.  Road’s faulty design, pot holes, absence of signage and
speed breaker, blind turn always cause accidents.
95. The Committee insists that road design and its maintenance may be given top
priority. If road is maintained properly, the chances of accidents minimizes.
96. The Committee also recommends that utilizing a part of petrol and diesel Cess on
Road Safety may seriously be considered.
Medical facilities at Highways
97. The Committee has discussed the availability of medical facilities to accident victims
on highways with the Ministry.  The Committee recommends that the trauma centres  may
be opened at every 40-50 Km. on a highway  and ambulance should be made available to
accident victims.  It has been experienced that after an accident many lives could be saved
by giving them medical aid during golden hour.  Every road accident victim should be given
required medical treatment at nearest place whether they are insured or not.
98. Besides medical facilities, the Committee recommends that places of public amenities
like restaurants, toilets, petrol pump etc. may be opened at reasonable distance so that
commuters should not face any difficulty.
99. The Committee notes that every company registered under companies Act is bound
to allocate and spend a portion of their profit for Corporate Social Responsibility. The

28
Committee recommends that the road safety should be included as an area for spending the
money from the Corporate Social Responsibility. Providing Ambulance, hospitals, emergency
services, public amenities such as toilet complexes, etc. can be included in the CSR
activities of the companies. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways should take up this issue at the appropriate level to
implement it.

29
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS — AT A GLANCE
BANKS’ LIMIT FOR LONG TERM LOAN
In view of this, the Committee urges RBI to look into the matter and if possible
threshold limit should be brought down so that some more projects could also be completed
which needs lesser amount. (Para 29)
COMMENTS OF RBI ON NPA
The Committee observes that for IDBI the NPA percentage is as high as 52% of total
loan disbursed for road sector.  The Committee wants to know the reasons why this huge
amount has turned to be NPA that too to a single concessionaire i.e. Jaypee Infratech Ltd.
The Ministry is requested to give full details of the project awarded to this company. The
Committee further observed that State Bank of India has lent ````` 19,502 crores, out of which
1,986 crores has turned in to NPA. The Committee is worried about higher percentage of
loan becoming NPA. The Committee suggests that the Banks should take due diligence
while disbursing loans to concessionaires. (Para 33)
RBI HAS PERMITTED NHAI TO BAIL OUT MANY PROJECTS
State Bank of India pleaded before the Committee that the projects may be approved
only after ensuring that 90% of land acquisition is completed. All the approvals from the
Statutory Authorities and clearances from the Government agencies should be obtained
before a particular project is sent for bidding. Another area of discord is the project cost
estimated by NHAI and the concessionaires which results in delay of lending by the financial
institutions. In case of disputes, the concessionaires have to approach the NHAI for the
redressal in the absence of a dispute settlement mechanism.  This is creating undue delay
for starting projects and thereby escalating the project cost and time overrun.  The
representatives of the IDBI bank informed that the promoters of many of the
infrastructure projects are not big companies which results in insufficient equity for the
promoter companies. This also leads to a situation where the financial institutions are
refusing to finance the projects. The Chairman of IFCI informed the Committee that the
bids were done without proper study and the high premium for bidding in many cases
results in failure of the project itself.  Another area of concern pointed out by the banks
and the financial institutions is that there is no dedicated agency for infrastructure lending.
They argued that Developing Financial Institutions may be created to arrange long time
debt funds.  Another complaint made by the banks is that when the projects are terminated
due to various reasons the banks are not given an opportunity or any guarantee that the
pending loan is repaid.  They have demanded that the model concession agreement should
be recast in such a way that the protection of the interest of the banks should be an
integral part of the agreement.  Yet another area of concern is that in many cases the
Government agencies, particularly the authorities of the State Governments are intervening
29

30
and putting obstacles in the smooth implementation of the projects by way of refusing to
grant permission to quarry and mines.  They have also complained that there was a hurry
in awarding the projects without any due diligence which resulted in stalling of the projects
and the promoters leaving mid way.  In many of the cases, the promoters are forming their
equity on the basis of the loan taken from the financial institutions which results in failure
of the projects.  The banks are typically encouraged to raise money for a period of 5 to 7
years whereas the need of the infrastructure industry is for a longer period of 20 to 25
years. This is acting as a blockage in the entire infrastructure lending.  Development of
long time bonds is also an option which can be experimented for financing the projects.  In
the present regulatory scenario, the insurance funds and the pension funds are not
permitted to fund the infrastructure projects.  An easing of the regulations may help the
industry as a whole.  Another suggestion was that the concessionaires may be given an exit
clause if they want to.  NHAI informed the Committee that out of the 150 projects in the
PPP mode during the period 2006-12, only 16 projects were stalled and many of these were
due to land acquisition problems, utility shifting, delay in granting permission by the local
authorities and delay in giving in formal clearances and various approvals.  The
representatives of the RBI informed the Committee that the Government is seized of the
matter and they are contemplating to ease many of the guidelines applicable to the banks
for infrastructure lending. (Para 35)
The overall impression created by the banks is that along with public funding there
should be private participation for the growth of the Indian economy. Highway projects need
to be completed in time within the estimated cost.  It was also pointed out that the held-
up projects should be started immediately and banks and financial institutions may be
sufficiently compensated for the NPAs created by them by lending to the infrastructure
sector. (Para 36)
The Committee was also informed that the model concession agreement of NHAI is
not acceptable to the banks and it need to be restructured in a way that the banks should
not end up in accumulating NPAs. (Para 37)
The Committee recommends that the model concession agreement may be circulated
to all the banks and the financial institutions and the input and feedback received from
them may be incorporated appropriately.  Every effort may be made to ease out the bad
debts.  It is good that the RBI has already taken steps for converting debts into equity and
the contractors are allowed to get out of the projects in case of a default.  Need for higher
Government allocation is also emphasised  and the banks NPAs may be supported by
Government allocation.  Making the recovery of bad debts easier by empowering the bank
adequately should be considered. For example  in case of a default, the banks may be
allowed to take over the entire company.  The Committee was informed that as of now,
there is a total NPAs of `````2,60,000 crores due to defaulting infrastructure projects.  By the
end of 2015-16, it is estimated that it may go up to more than 4 lakh crore.  The banks’
demanded that the money of the loan given to the road sector  to be allowed to be
restructured for a longer duration may be considered along with proposal for making
adequate provisions in the model concession agreement to for the cost escalation of the

31
projects.  In case of time overrun due to the reasons which are beyond the control of the
promoters the projects may be re-assessed and the project cost may be refixed accordingly
also needs to be seriously considered for adoption. (Para 38)
CBI AND VIGILANCE
The Committee finds it bizarre that the banks work under the fear of CBI and CVC.
The Committee recommends that the banks should take a decision on its own whether a
particular NPA is to be financed or not and it should be done on the bank’s own wisdom
and under the permissible capacity of the banks.  The Committee also suggests that the
bank should see viability of the project i.e. whether lending some more money will give
their due returns. The Committee recommends that every decision if taken in a transparent
way and approved by a Committee consisting of more than two officials based on laid down
principles, there should not be any cause for fear of investigation by CVC, CBI and other
enforcement agencies. (Para 40)
RESTRUCTURING OF LOANS
The Committee finds a disconnect between views of NHAI and RBI because RBI has
said that continuous repeated restructuring is not restructuring and it is also not considered
as NPA, then the problems prohibiting NHAI on this issue, have to be sorted out by NHAI
itself.    The Committee suggests that NHAI resolve this issue with the Banks under the
guidance of RBI. (Para 45)
The Committee observes that initiatives taken by RBI recently has broaden the
scope for borrowers to get more funds on account of enhanced infrastructure finance.  It
is further heartening to note that banks have been allowed to treat annuities under BOT
model in respect of road projects and toll collection rights where there are provisions to
compensate the sponsor. Change of norms in PPP projects are also a welcome move where
debts due to the lenders has been allowed to be considered as secured. Lenders have got
first charge over escrow account and also a right of substitution of concessionaire if he
defaults.  The Committee hopes that these changes in existing models will help lenders and
it will pave the way for getting the stalled projects completed soon. (Para 48)
(d) LONG TERM BONDS
The Commi ttee feels that Bond is a potent weapon which can hit the required
target of getting fund from the market. If, the maturity period is kept medium i.e.
5-7 years, desired result could be achieved. The Committee appreciates the steps taken
by RBI to allow banks to go for credit flow through issuing bonds. The Committee
recommends that the Government should strive for long term bonds for a period of 20 to
25 years to commensurate with the concession period which may be able to achieve the
set target. (Para 50)
(e) FINANCING OF COST OVERRUNS IN PROJECT LOANS
The Committee finds that the “Standby credit facility” is a very supportive tool for
borrower if this Clause has been taken into consideration during the initial financial closure
to fund the cost overruns. (Para 52)

32
ISSUES RELATED TO INFRASTRUCTURE LENDING IN HIGHWAYS
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is involved in development of road
sector which is the life-line of the economy of the country.  It supervises projects worth
thousands of crores rupees but it does not have its own source or a mechanism of
generating revenue, although it gets budgetary support from the Government.  But, as
we know that much support is not sufficient.  The Committee recommends that RBI and
Ministry of Finance may help the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to set up
their own dedicated financial institutions to generate own funds for development of road
sector. (Para 54)
The Committee is aware of the reasons for delayed projects. The Committee
recommends that before awarding the project to concessionaire, the Ministry should
complete the processes of getting land, environmental clearance, relocation  of utilities and
rehabilitation issues etc. Such problems not only delays the project but also enhances the
budget of the project.  The Committee notes that the lack of dispute resolution is one of
the major hurdles in clearing the stressed or delayed projects.  It is time consuming and
the cost involved is too much in the absence of a formal mechanism for dispute redressal.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government need to put in place a dispute
redressal mechanism for resolving the issues related to road project. (Para 55)
The Committee apprecia tes the step taken by the RBI. It is a morale booster for
the concessionaire.  But adequate cautions should be taken to ensure that the interests
of the financial institutions which have funded the project should be protected by all
means. (Para 56)
VIEW OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE ON INFRASTRUCTURE LENDING
From the views of Ministry of Finance the Committee notes that although the
Ministry is taking various measurers to bring financial institutions into infrastructure
lending. The Committee however, does not find any concrete solution from the submission
of Ministry of Finance that the financial institution would come up in near future to
rescue the road sector.  Till the banks remain the sole lender, the situation will not
improve substantially.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Finance should in
consultation with RBI, explore Bond Market more vigorously to generate money for the
road sector. (Para 60)
The Committee appreciates the corrective steps taken by NHAI.  The Committee
feels that NHAI should learn from its past experience.  Many of the projects got held up
due to bad-planning and showing haste in awarding the projects to developers.  The
Committee recommends that before awarding any project to concessionaire the project
should be technically examined, cost be estimated and all the clearness, viz. statutory,
environment and forest, railways etc. may be obtained first. (Para 62)
DISPUTE RESOLUTION
The Committee recommends that unsettled claims may be settled speedily and it
should be ensured that while settling  the claims due diligence may be taken of the project,

33
against which the claim has to be settled. Adequate measures should be taken to ensure
that unscrupulous elements do not swindle away the Government money. (Para 64)
The Committee feels that this policy shift is a wise decision by the RBI,  which has
allowed financial institutions to consider loans to Highways projects as secured to the extent
covered by termination payment provisions under the concession agreement. The Committee
hopes that interest rates also will come down accordingly in such case. (Para 65)
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have
taken certain steps to strengthen the construction work in road sector.  The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should keep eye on toll collection and channelize the surplus
money towards stressed projects. (Para 72)
STATUTORY CLEARANCE
The Ministry has informed the Committee that the picture on land acquisition front
is more clear now and it has become easier to acquire land from its owners.  Environmental
clearances are also given in a shorter period. (Para 76)
The Committee is concerned to note that the concessionaire is short of equity and
the bankers are also not disbursing the sanctioned loan.  The Committee fails to understand
the intention of bankers.  NHAI too has defaulted in fulfillment of its conditions and has
failed in many cases for acquiring land, environment clearance, utility shifting etc.  The
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for not fulfilling the requirement by the NHAI.
The Committee also finds that insistence of NHAI for the first change on toll/annuity in the
project which is 50% completed is not practical.  The Committee recommends that NHAI
should offer its help to complete the half built project rather then claiming rights of
collecting revenue.  The Committee recommends that the NHAI may pay full attention to
its duty towards extending all facilities /help to concessionaire in completing the projects.
The Committee notes that if there is a delay in construction from any sides, whether it is
NHAI or concessionaire, the cost of interest is going to be high and if it reaches beyond
a point, obtaining additional debt is certainly difficult.  The Committee recommends that
delay from both sides may be avoided so that already infused in incomplete project does not
turn into NPA. The Committee notes that the Government and its agencies are under
pressure of various limitations imposed by the systemic rules and rigidity in financial
regulations. The Committee recommends that the Government should have relook at the
various rules and regulations from the overall perspective to ensuring that road
construction is completed in time. This is not to say that those misusing the financial
system should not be punished and brought to book. (Para 77)
The Committee noted observations of the Secretary and recommends that the
Government should thoroughly inquire into all the 77 projects which were languishing in
2014 to understand the quantum of money siphoned away by the unscrupulous contractors
in connivance with various agencies of the Government and financial institutions. The
quantum of money lost should be quantified and action should be taken to recover the lost
money and a report to this effect may be submitted to the Committee. (Para 82)

34
The Committee notes that there were an economic downtown that took place in the
last 3 or 4 years and as we are slowly coming out of this, there is a possibility to use the
infrastructure in construction sector as one of the major vehicles for revival of the
economy.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the BoT Toll should not be the sole
model for awarding the road projects. The Committee recommends that each project length
has to be analysed and examined on its merits and demerits depending on the revenue
streams that are possible and determine whether it should be taken up on BoT Toll or BoT
annuity or on EPC Model. (Para 83)
The Committee notes that the Government has allocated a huge budget for the
road sector but this excessive flow of Government money cannot sustain over a long
run.  The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Government to devise ways and means
and establish appropriate financial institutions and models to encourage the return of
the private investment to the road sector. The Committee notes that the new hybrid
annuity scheme introduced by the Government is attracting many players in the field
but the Committee feels that the players are the same during the various models over
a period of time.  Therefore, the Government needs to be over cautious and what has
happened to the PPP Model in the past, should not be repeated in case of Hybrid Annuity
Projects also. (Para 84)
Yet another complaint the Committee received during its interaction with various
stake holders is that the NHAI typically underestimates the project costs and the
concessionaires who bid out a project on L1 basis approaches banks and financial
institutions with an inflated project cost for taking loans.  The Committee observes that
NHAI should be realistic while calculating the total project cost (TPC) so that the
concessionaire may not get opportunity to project the inflated cost and obtain loans from
the financial institutions in a nefarious way.  The Committee believes that the total project
cost should be realistic irrespective of the model of the project. (Para 85)
The Committee wants to know the issues on which 19 projects are yet to be solved.
The Committee recommends that the impending issues may be solved at the earliest and
the projects should be completed in minimum time period.  The Committee is aware of the
fact that each of the project will have its own peculiarities and problems specific to it.
Therefore, the Committee notes that solution to the problems will also be specific and
peculiar to the individual projects.  The Committee recommends that these projects may be
infused fund by all means so that the languishing projects which are presently NPAs could
be made viable by incurring just limited expenditure keeping in view the broader national
interest in mind. (Para 86)
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE PROJECT COST ESTIMATED BY NHAI AND BANKS
The Committee finds its strange as to how the concessionaire who has got a project
for `````1,000 crore gets `````1,400 crores for the same project.  The NHAI has submitted that the
bank does their own calculation.  The Committee wants to know why there is a big gap
between the cost calculated by NHAI and the bank for the same project?  The Committee
further would like to know whether there is any discussion between NHAI and banks

35
regarding estimation cost for a particular project after awarding the project to a
concessionaire?  Why the concessionaire has been given a free hand to get the banks’ loan
as per their wish?  The Committee recommends that the NHAI  should keep a watch over
the excess loan amount over the estimated cost obtained by the concessionaire from the
bank. The Committee recommends that the TPC arrived at by the NHAI should be the
project cost for all purposes. If at any time the Banks, Financial Institutions or
concessionaires feel that the TPC need to be revised then they should approach NHAI for
the purpose and NHAI can do it in a transparent way, wherever required. The conditions
under which TPC can be revised should be specifically laid down. (Para 88)
TOLL COLLECTION
The Committee recommends that the Government should take adequate measures
to sort out the issues such as unwillingness of the public to pay toll, pilferage of toll,
political interference in the functioning of toll booths and unauthorized exemptions at toll
plazas. (Para 91)
MAINTENANCE AND OTHER AMENITIES AT HIGHWAYS
The Committee feels that   construction of road is a difficult job but to maintain it
is rather more difficult.  It is a proven fact that condition of road goes from bad to worse
in a very short period.  The Committee was informed that for maintenance and repair, the
budget allocated in `````2834 crore for the financial year 2016-17 which meets only 60% of
total requirement.  Ministry further submits that maintenance being a non-plan activity
there is also a tendency by the Government to apply adhoc cuts in the face of resource
constrains. (Para 92)
The Committee finds that with this budgetary provision, the Ministry is not giving
adequate attention to maintenance and repair of highways.  The Committee recommends
that the maintenance upkeep of the roads should be given higher priority and a higher
allocation be made at RE stage. (Para 93)
ROAD SAFETY
Road safety is a major issue in view of increasing road accidents throughout the
country.  There are many factors responsible for it.  According to one report inputs given
by National Crime Records Bureau, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, there are 4.5
lakhs road accidents annually causing 1.4 lakhs death and 4.8 lakhs injured.  It’s a sad face
of our development. The Committee feels that there may be many reasons for road
accidents, but road is also a factor.  Road’s faulty design, pot holes, absence of signage and
speed breaker, blind turn always cause accidents. (Para 94)
The Committee insists that road design and its maintenance may be given top
priority. If road is maintained properly, the chances of accidents minimizes. (Para 95)
The Committee also recommends that utilizing a part of petrol and diesel Cess on
Road Safety may seriously be considered. (Para 96)

36
MEDICAL FACILITIES AT HIGHWAYS
The Committee has discussed the availability of medical facilities to accident victims
on highways with the Ministry.  The Committee recommends that the trauma centres  may
be opened at every 40-50 Km. on a highway  and ambulance should be made available to
accident victims.  It has been experienced that after an accident many lives could be saved
by giving them medical aid during golden hour.  Every road accident victim should be given
required medical treatment at nearest place whether they are insured or not. (Para 97)
Besides medical facilities, the Committee recommends that places of public amenities
like restaurants, toilets, petrol pump etc. may be opened at reasonable distance so that
commuters should not face any difficulty. (Para 98)
The Committee notes that every company registered under companies Act is bound
to allocate and spend a portion of their profit for Corporate Social Responsibility. The
Committee recommends that the road safety should be included as an area for spending the
money from the Corporate Social Responsibility. Providing Ambulance, hospitals, emergency
services, public amenities such as toilet complexes, etc. can be included in the CSR
activities of the companies. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways should take up this issue at the appropriate level to
implement it. (Para 99)

37
MINUTES

39
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 16 1h April, 2015 in Committee Room 139, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS   PRESENT
1. Kumari Selja  —  In the Chair
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Rajeev Shukla
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
LOK SABHA
5. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan
7. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
8. Shri Srinivasa Reddy Ponguleti
9. Shri Dushyant Singh
10. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
11. Shri K. C. Venugopal
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine Joint L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P .P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Central Engineering Services Group 'a' Officers' Association
1. Sh. Ajay Pathak, President
2. Shri Manoj Kumar, Additional Director-General
3. Shri K.C. Verkeychan, Additional Director-General
4. Shri D.O. Tawade, Chief  Engineer
5. Shri R.K. Singh, Chief  Engineer
6. Shri B.N. Singh, Chief  Engineer

40
7. Shri V .S. Prasad, Chief  Engineer
8. Shri M.P. Sharma, Member, NHAI
9. Shri R.K. Pandey, Chief  Engineer
10. Shri Kaushik Basu, Chief  Engineer
11. Shri S.K. Nirmal, Chief  Engineer
12. Shri Pawan Kumar, Superintending Engineer
National Highways Builders Federation
1. Shri V .C. Verma, Executive Director
2. Shri M. Murali, Director General
3. Shri Manoj Dave, Head-O&M (Roads)
4. Shri A P S Chadha, Director
2. Since the Chairman of the Committee was not able to attend the meeting. the Members unanimously
requested Kumari Selja, Member of the Committee, to chair the meeting. The Chair welcomed the Members
of the Committee and informed that three draft Reports on the Demands for Grants (2015-16) will be taken
up for consideration and adoption and thereafter, the Committee will hear the representatives of the National
Highways Builders Federation and Central Engineering Services Group ‘A’ Officers, Association on ‘Issues
relating to Public Private Partnership (PPP) in Highway Sector and Road Safety’.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Thereafter. the Chair welcomed the representatives of National Highways Builders Federation and
Central Engineering Services Group ‘A’ Officers’ Association and requested them to present their views on
the issues relating PPP in Highway construction and Road Safety. The Chair, in her welcome address, raised
the issue of our poor track record in road safety; major impediments in completion of road projects - from
concept stage to final implementation; reasons for change in road construction mode from PPP to EPC:
problems being faced in development and maintenance of national highways; and the interlink between
construction of roads and road safety.
6. The representatives of National Highways Builders Federation informed the Committee on the
problems faced by the highways construction industry in executing PPP projects in road sector and the
reasons behind shifting from PPP to EPC contract. They also added that shortage of funds due to constraints
faced by the financial institutions in lending for highway projects, poor Internal Rate of Return (IRR) on
highway projects, reluctance on the part of highway users to pay toll, delay in commissioning of highway
projects and the poor enforcement of Acts/Rules related to road safety in the country are major issues faced
by the highway construction industry in the country.
7. The representatives of Central Engineering Services Group’ A’ Officers’ Association briefed the
Committee on the various existing modes of construction of national highways in the country. They further
informed the Committee on the impact of overloaded vehicles on the lifeline of national highways, absence
of highway patrolling, acute shortage of safety professionals and. absence of interaction between automobile
* * * Relate to other matters.

41
manufacturers and highways engineers and designers. They also emphasized the need for creation of a
dedicated cell in the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways headed by engineers, to address the
shortcomings in the design and construction of national highways.
8. Members of the Committee also raised various queries. The representatives of both the organizations
replied to the points raised by the Members of the Committee. The Chair directed that written replies to the
points not answered, may be sent at the earliest.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

42
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the lst October, 2015 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
6. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri P. Kumar
9. Shri Faisal P.P. Mohammad
10. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
13. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
16. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jcsudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P .P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri Vijay Chhibber, Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Ranjan, Additional Secretary & F A
42

43
3. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (Highways)
4. Shri Alkesh Sharma, Joint Secretary (Parliament)
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)
1. Shri Raghav Chandra, Chairman
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Member ( NHAI)
3. Shri M.P. Sharma, Member (NHAI)
4. Shri A.K. Singh , CGM (NHAI)
5. Smt. Nivedita Srivastava, CGM (NHAI)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the representatives of
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have been called for a presentation on issues relating to
Infrastructure lending in road sector and Functioning of National Highways Authority of India.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and National Highways Authority of India, to the meeting. The Chairman, in his opening remarks,
raised the issues of problems being faced in the road sector, sources of funding for the road projects,
impediments in attracting investments, reformulation of existing legal and regulatory mechanism to attract
private investments, guidelines issued by RBI to Nationalized Banks for financing large infrastructure projects,
factors responsible for enhancing the cost of lending for development, maintenance and management of
National Highways, projects pending due to lack of funds, generation of funds for targeted completion of
10,000 kms. during the current financial year and the initiatives taken by the Ministry to encourage private
investment in road sector.
4. Further, the Chairman raised the issues of functioning and performance of National Highways Authority
of India, problems being faced by them in executing National Highways projects, the existing co-ordination
mechanism with various stakeholders on implementation of highways projects and the requirements of
NHAI to strengthen its functioning and also in executing highways projects.
5. The Secretary, in his presentation, gave an overview of the prevailing scenario of construction of
roads, land related issues which delayed the road projects, matters which affected the concessionaire for
getting necessary financial assistance from the financial institutions, necessity for changing over from BOT
or PPP mode to EPC mode for infusing required funds for highways projects, problems faced by the
concessionaire in getting additional loan to strengthen his capital inflow and the inability of the concessionaire
in recovenng his investment due to complexities involved in collection of toll.
6. He further informed the Committee regarding the mismatch between the cost and actual funding of
the projects by the financial institutions. He supplemented the reasons for the financial institutions’ hesitation
in providing funds for road projects as they carry a larger gestation period. He apprised the Committee about
the Hybrid Annuity Model wherein 40% of the project cost will be provided by Government so that financing
does not become an issue when the project is commenced. He gave detailed inputs on this new model which
will help the road sector to overcome its financing problems. He also informed the Committee on the steps
taken to achieve 10,000 km. target of road construction during the current financial year. He stated that the
exit clause post - 2009 has been harmonized with that of pre-2009 and expressed hope that this would result
in the flow of foreign equity money into this sector.

44
7. The representative of HAI made a power point presentation on the functioning of NHAI. He informed
the Committee that NHAI consists of the Chairman, not more than six full time Members and not more than
six part time Members. He stated that the item rate EPC awards left NHAI with unsettled claim of above
` 18,000 crores and that an Independent Settlement Advisory Committee headed by a retired High Court
Judge was created by NHAI for speedy resolution of long pending disputes. He narrated the policy initiatives
taken to clear up the issues related to lending in road sector.
8. Members raised the issue of poor condition of National Highways in various parts of the country.
problems faced at toll gates, accidents caused to poor alignment of National Highways and the steps taken
to regulate overloading on National Highways.
9. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues relating to the
subjects, to which the concerned officials replied. For the unanswered questions and other information
sought, the Chairman directed the officials of the Ministry and NHAI to submit written replies to the Committee.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.

45
X
TENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th February, 2016 in Committee Room A, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
5. Kumari Selja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri P. Kumar
9. Yogi Aditya Nath
10. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
11. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
13. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari
15. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P .P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri Sanjay Mitra, Secretary
2. Shrimati Leena Nandan, Joint Secretary (Parl.)
3. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (Highways)
45

46
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)
4. Shri Raghav Chandra Chairman
5. Shri Satish Chandra Member (Finance)
6. Shri M.P. Sharma Member (Tech.)
7. Shri R.K Pandey Member (Projects)
8. Shri A.K. Singh Member (Projects)
9. Smt. Nivedita Srivastava CGM (Finance)
Ministry of Finance
10. Shri Pankaj Jain Joint Secretary
11. Shri R.N. Dubey Economic Advisor
Reserve Bank of India
12. Shri R. Gandhi Deputy Governor
Punjab National Bank
13. Shri R.S. Sangapure Executive Director
14. Shri H.K. Parikh General Manager
Oriental Bank of Commerce
15. Shri N.K. Chauhan General Manager
16. Shri Sushil Pandey Deputy General Manager
17. Shri Ashok Gupta Assistant General Manager
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Sanjay Mitra, Secretary. Ministry or Road Transport and
Highways, Shri Raghav Chandra, Chairman, NHAl, Shri Pankaj Jain, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance,
Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor, RBI, and their team or officials, and Shri R.S. Sangapure, Executive
Director, Punjab National Bank, and Shri N.K. Chauhan, General Manager, Oriental Bank of Commerce to
the meeting. The Chairman informed the Committee that they have been called to deliberate upon the following
issues:-
(i) Languishing road projects and the steps taken by the Ministry for its revival:
(ii) Hybrid Annuity projects: and
(iii) Regulatory mechanism by RBI for lending to the infrastructure projects in road sector.
3. First of all Shri Ritabrata Banerjee, Member of the Committee raised the issue of four months delay
in submitting the replies by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to the queries raised by Members
in the meeting held on 1st October, 2015. On this issue Secretary, Road Transport and Highways apologized
to the Committee and ensured that such delay would not happen in future.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee that earlier there
were problems with PPP model in road sector but now the situation has improved. He further added that
private sector is now showing interest in BOT Toll Projects. He stated that hybrid annuity projects have a
bright future and that positive response has started coming. On land acquisition and environment clearance,

47
he informed the Committee that the situation has improved. States are also co-operating vis-a-vis statutory
clearances.
5. The Secretary in his submission further added that the Ministry has now a single window system
for the road sector. The Cabinet has delegated substantial powers to the Ministry for sanction of projects.
6. A power point presentation was given by the Ministry on the subject. The Chairman raised the issue
or lacking of co-ordination between NHAI and Banks and offered the role of the Committee towards solving
the problems raced by the road sector. The Chairman also pointed out towards a big difference in the total
value assessed by the NHAI and the concessionaires for some of the projects.
7. A power point presentation was then made by the NHAI. After presentation Chairman, NHAI submitted
that Banks are reluctant to consider the funds generated by the concessionaire by securitization of future
cash flows of completed projects and that they were not ready to treat that as equity for other road projects.
8. The Chairman then allowed Deputy Governor, RBI to clarify the points raised by the Chairman,
NHAI on banks’ about their reluctance to further lend in ongoing projects. Deputy Governor apprised the
Committee that every bank has got its own risk appetite based on its financial strength. It is upto the bank to
take extra risk or not while lending to any sector. RBI has put no bar on the banks.
9. Chairman, NHAI gave an account of such projects which are of an amount of less than ` 500 crores
needed for restructuring of infrastructure loans which are allowed only for loan accounts more than ` 500
crores. He opined that lowering the threshold will assist small projects to start servicing the debt and provide
relief to the concerned banks in recovering loans.
10. Deputy Governor, RBI further elaborated that bank funds are for short term finance and not for long
term. Banks have increased funding from 2 lakh crores to ` l 0 lakh crores in last 7-8 years. He submitted
that if bank starts giving ` 200 crores or less amount, then they will not get the required generation of funds.
Deputy Governor, RBI agreed to look into the matter whether it is possible for the banks to lend more and
more funds for longer period.
11. Chairman, NHAI advocated for treating road sector as priority sector for the sake of social and rural
development, as a measure of social justice, bringing about equality and women empowerment but Deputy
Governor submitted before the Committee that if major loan is sanctioned to roads only then the other
smaller sector would suffer and further added that without priority sector label, road sector is getting 16 per
cent of total funds.
12. Chairman, NHAI submitted that loan accounts having an interest or scheduled payment overdue for
more than 90 days turns to NPAs and once the promoter turns as NPA. it is not possible for him to secure
loans from other banks and financial institutions. He requested RBI to relax PA norm from 90 to 180 days.
Committee was informed that India is a signatory to Basel Convention and they cannot break this rule; or
else bank’s rating will go down and Letter of Credits (LCs) will not be accepted internationally and there will
be a higher cost for raising the funds overseas.
13. Executive Director, Punjab National Bank submitted that Public Sector Banks come under the purview
of CVC and CBI and they are under the fear that if they finance NPA account, these agencies may doubt
their integrity and that is the reason why the banks are reluctant to lend for NPA. Deputy Governor further
added that if Banks feel safe in financing NPA, they can do it. Restructuring of loan under 5/25 is permissible
and it is not considered NPA. On cost escalation, he added that 10 per cent is allowed as a normal one and

48
beyond that it is problem loan. 10 per cent is at third stage because at first level the automatic price escalation
clause is there and at second level funded interest loan.
14. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance informed the Committee that earlier there were Development
Financial Institutions (DFls) viz., IFCI, IDFC, IOBI etc; but today they have got converted into Banks and
such new Financial Institutions will take longer time to become functional. He emphasized to improve the
bond market in consultation with RBI and also looking for other means to support the road sector.
15. The Secretary informed the Committee that the number of languishing projects has come down to
19 at present. Members raised various issues related to the subject in various parts of the country and gave
some suggestions also. Deputy Governor, RBI suggested that if a project is ready by 80 or 85 per cent and
some problem has arisen due to some reasons, then the completed segment may be opened for use and then
the bank will not consider it as an NPA.
16. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised different queries and these were answered by
the concerned officers. Chairman allowed the Ministry to send the replies of unanswered questions in 10
days.
17. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
18. The meeting was adjourned at 5.35 
P.M.

49
XIX
NINETEENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 8th August, 2016 in Committee Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
10. Shri Vinod Chavda
11. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
12. Shri Rahul Kaswan
13. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P .P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and he also welcomed Shri
Bhupinder Yadav, a new member to the Committee. After that, the Committee considered the following draft
reports for adoption:
(i) Draft report on the ‘Infrastructure Lending in Road Sector’ ;
49

50
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain amendments and decided to present the Reports
in both the Houses of Parliament on 10th August, 2016. The Committee nominated Chairman and in his
absence Shri Ritabrata Banerjee, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. The Committee also nominated
Shri Ram Charitra Nishad, M.P. and in his absence Shri Rahul Kaswan, M. P. to lay the Reports in the Lok
Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
* * * Relates to other matter.

51
ANNEXURE

53
16th April, 2015
List of Witnesses Appearing before the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture
3.00 P.M.
Central Engineering Services Group 'A' Officers' Association
1. Shri Ajay Pathak, President
2. Shri Manoj Kumar, Additional Director-General
3. Shri K.C. Verkeychan, Additional Director-General
4. Shri D.O. Tawade, Chief Engineer
5. Shri R.K. Singh, Chief Engineer
6. Shri B.N. Singh, Chief Engineer
7. Shri V .S. Prasad, Chief Engineer
8. Shri M.P . Sharma, Member, NHAI
9. Shri R.K. Pandey, Chief Engineer
10. Shri Kaushik Basu, Chief Engineer
11. Shri S.K. Nirmal, Chief Engineer
12 Shri Pawan Kumar, Superintending Engineer
National Highways Builders Federation
13. Shri. V .C. Verma, Executive Director
14. Shri. M. Murali, Director General
15. Shri. Manoj Dave, Head-O&M (Roads)
16. Shri. A P S Chadha, Director

Witnesses Deposed before the Department-Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture the Meeting Held on 1st
October, 2015
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri Vijay Chhibber, Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Ranjan, Additional Secretary & FA
3. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (Highways)
4. Shri Alkesh Sharma, Joint Secretary (Parliament)
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)
5. Shri Raghav Chandra, Chairman
6. Shri Satish Chandra, Member (NEAl)
7. Shri M.P . Sharma, Member (NHAI)
8. Shri A.K. Singh, CGM (NHAI)
9. Smt. Nivedita Srivastava, CGM (NHAI)
54

Witnesses Deposed before the Department-Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Trasport,
Tourism and Culture in the Meeting held on
18th February 2016
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri Sanjay Mitra, Secretary
2. Shrimati Leena Nandan, Joint Secretary (Parl.)
3. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (Highways)
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)
4. Shri Raghav Chandra, Chairman
5. Shri Satish Chandra, Member (Finance)
6. Shri M.P. Sharma, Member (Tech.)
7. Shri R.K Pandey, Member (Projects)
8. Shri A.K. Singh, Member (Projects)
9. Smt. Nivedita Srivastava, CGM (Finance)
Ministry of Finance
10. Shri Pankaj Jain, Joint Secretary
11. Shri R.N. Dubey, Economic Advisor
Reserve Bank of India
12. Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor
Punjab National Bank
13. Shri R.S. Sangapure, Executive Director
14. Shri H.K. Parikh, General Manager
Oriental Bank of Commerce
15. Shri N.K. Chauhan, General Manager
16. Shri Sushil Pandey, Deputy General Manager
17. Shri Ashok Gupta, Assistant General Manager
55