PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
The Carriage By Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH OCTOBER, 2007)
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK  SABHA ON 17TH OCTOBER, 2007)
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 20TH NOVEMBER, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 20TH NOVEMBER, 2007)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
OCTOBER, 2007/ASVINA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                  PAGES

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (iii)
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................................. 1-10
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 ...............................................
11
5. ANNEXURES ................................................................................................................... 13-64
6. MINUTES ....................................................................................................................... 65-72
 
 
 
 
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
      1.    Shri Sitaram Yechury     –––      Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
      2.    Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
      3.    Shri Naresh Gujral
      4.    Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
      5.    Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
      6.    Shri Janardhana Poojary
      7.    Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
      8.    Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
      9.    Shri Shahid Siddiqui

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
    10.    Shri Shatrughan Sinha
            LOK SABHA
    11.    Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
    12.    Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
    13.    Shri Joachim Baxla
    14.    Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
    15.    Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
    16.    Shri Adhir Chowdhury
    17.    Dr. K. Dhanaraju
    18.    Smt. Priya Dutt
    19.    Shri Dip Gogoi
    20.    Shri P. Karunakaran
    21.    Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
    22.    Dr. P. P. Koya
    23.    Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
    24.    Shri Samik Lahiri
    25.    Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
    26.    Shri Hemlal Murmu
    27.    Shri Madan Lal Sharma
    28.    Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
    29.    Shri Dushyant Singh
    30.    Shri Suraj Singh
    31.    Shri Pralhad Joshi
            SECRETARIAT
      1.    Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
      2.    Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
      3.    Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director,
      4.    Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director
 
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been
 authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this 
 One Hundred and Twenty fourth Report of the Committee on the Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007*.
2.     The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 4th May, 2007. In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related
 Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on 25th May, 2007 for
 examination and report within three months. On the request being made by the Chairman of the Committee, Hon’ble Chairman had
 granted extension of time till the first day of last week of the Monsoon Session of the Parliament for the presentation of the report of the
 Committee on the aforesaid Bill.
3.     The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation at its meeting held on the 2nd
 July, 2007.
4.     In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee invited the views of individuals, organisations and institutions on the
 subject through advertisement in all major national dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the country. The Committee also heard the
 views of the representatives of National Aviation Company of India Limited, Jet Airways, Travel Agents Association of India, Travel
 Agents Federation of India and Air Cargo Agents Association of India at its meeting held on the 31st August, 2007. Under the mandate,
 the Committee has examined the Bill and finalised the Report.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
5.     The Committee also considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same on the 25th September, 2007.         ­
6.     The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Law
 and Justice for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also acknowledges
 the contribution of representatives of National Aviation Company of India Limited, Jet Airways, Travel Agents Association of India,
 Travel Agents Federation of India and Air Cargo Agents Association of India who submitted their valuable suggestions on the provisions
 of the Bill.
 
 
 SITARAM YECHURY
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                             Chairman,
25th September, 2007                                          Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Asvina 3, 1929 (Saka)                                                                    on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
 
 
 
 
REPORT
        The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 4th May, 2007. The Bill was referred to this
 Committee for examination and report. Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalised the Report after hearing
 the views of various stakeholders and the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Bill seeks to enable the Government to
 accede to the Montreal Convention for the unification of certain rules for international carriage by air so that India is at par with other
 major countries of the world. India has ratified two instruments, namely the Warsaw Convention, 1929 and the Warsaw Convention as
 amended by the Hague Protocol, 1955, and the same has been given effect to by the Carriage by Air Act, 1972.
2.     The statement of objects and reasons of the Bill states that as the limits of liability were considered to be inadequate, the
 International Civil Aviation Organisation took the initiative and carried out a socio-economic study with a view to revising the levels of
 compensation and modernising the existing  liability provisions. The deliberations in several meetings of the Legal Committee of the
 International Civil Aviation Organisation culminated in the adoption of the Convention for the unification of certain rules for
 International Carriage by Air (popularly known as Montreal Convention, 1999) at a Diplomatic Conference held on 28th May, 1999.
3.     The statement of objects and reasons further states that the amount of compensation for death or injury has been enhanced to
 1,00,000 Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) instead of Gold Francs which after conversion came to US $ 20,000, choice of jurisdiction has
 been expanded to include the place of domicile of the passenger, provision for advance payment in case of death or bodily injury,
 provision for review of limits of liability based on inflation so that the need to amend the Convention is obviated, recognition of the use
 of electronic documents such as e-ticket, etc. to bring uniformity in the application of liability regime ending the multiplicity of
 international instruments.
4.     The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their background note furnished on the 27th June, 2007 to the Committee has brought out the
 reasons for the introduction of the Bill.
5.     There is an international legal regime governing the liability of air carriers for injury or death of their passengers, for destruction,
 loss or damage to baggage and cargo and for losses caused by delay in international carriage of passengers, baggage and cargo. The
 regime is set out in a number of international instruments collectively known as the Warsaw Convention and the Warsaw Convention as
 amended by the Hague Protocol. The Carriage by Air Act, 1972 was enacted to give effect to these instruments.
6.     The various instruments adopted by ICAO failed to receive the kind of universal acceptance as the parent Warsaw Convention and
 the Hague Protocol had received. Consequently, their coming into force was inordinately delayed due to which several States chose to go
 ahead with their unilateral decision to increase the liability limits. This resulted in a situation where several different combinations of
 liability regimes came into existence defying the much desired uniformity and unification of international law in the field.
7.     The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) started a serious initiative in 1994 by carrying out a socio-economic study of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 the levels of compensation. A group was set up for studying the question of modernisation and consolidation of the Warsaw System,
 which produced the text of a new Convention. Finally, the Montreal Convention, 1999 for the Unification of Certain Rules for
 International Carriage by Air was adopted on 28th May, 1999 at a diplomatic conference held in Montreal . It entered into force on 4th
 November, 2003, and aims to achieve the dual purpose of modernising as well as consolidating the various instruments comprising the
 Warsaw System.
8.     In the Montreal Convention, 1999, the denomination for payment of compensation is the Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) as against
 ‘Francs’ mentioned in the Warsaw Convention, 1929 and the Hague Protocol, 1955. Whereas the value of Francs is expressed in terms
 of gold, the Special Drawing Rights is a national currency based on a basket of currencies of several developed countries. It may be
 mentioned here that conversion of Francs into national currency was a very tedious and cumbersome process due to the variation in the
 market value and the official value of gold. On the other hand, the conversion of SDRs into national currencies is relatively easier task in
 as-much as it would be calculated in accordance with the method of valuation applied by the International Monetary Fund.
9.     With respect to the accidental death or injury of passengers; the Montreal Conventional establishes a two-tier liability regime. For
 proven damage, which does not exceed 1,00,000 Special Drawing Rights (SDR) per passenger, the carrier is subject to strict liability
 regardless of fault. However, in the case of contributory negligence of the passenger, the carrier can be partly or wholly exonerated. For
 proven damage exceeding 1,00,000 SDR, the liability of the air carrier is based on a system of presumed fault, with no pre-specified
 limits of liability. However, the carrier shall not be liable for such damage if it proves that the damage was not caused by its negligence
 or other wrongful act or omission. The following Statement illustrates that the difference in liability limits under the existing Carriage by
 Air Act, 1972 and under the Montreal Convention which is proposed to be adopted by way of the Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill,
 2007:­
Sl.No. Subject Rate under Warsaw System i.e.
 Warsaw 29
Rate under Montreal
  + Hague Protocol 55 1999
1     2               3 4
1. Death or bodily Proven damage subject to Proven damage subject to
 injury a maximum of 250,000 a maximum of 100,000
  gold francs (equivalent to SDRs (140,000 USD).
  20000 USD). The limit The limit will not apply if
  will not apply if negligence of the carrier is
  negligence of the carrier proved.
  is proved.  
2. Checked baggage Proven damage subject to Proven damage subject to
  maximum of 250 gold a maximum of 1000
  francs (20 USD) per SDRs(1400 USD) per
  kilogramme. passenger.
3. Hand Baggage Proven damage subject to Included within the limit
  a maximum of 5000 gold set for checked baggage.
  francs (400 USD).  
4. Cargo Proven damage subject to Proven damage subject to
  a maximum of 250 gold a maximum of 17 SDRs
  francs (20 USD) per (24USD) per kilogramme.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
  kilogramme.  
10.   The Warsaw System provides for four choices of jurisdiction for filing of a claim by a passenger or his legal heirs, namely, (1) the
 place where the ticket was issued or the contract of carriage was made, (2) the principal place of business of the carrier, (3) the place of
 destination of the passenger, and (4) the place of the domicile of the carrier. The Montreal Convention, 1999 adds a fifth jurisdiction, i.e.,
 the place of domicile of the passenger, provided the airline has a presence there. This would enable an Indian national to file his claim in
 India even if the journey was undertaken outside India and the ticket was purchased outside India, provided the carrier has a presence in
 India.
11.   Another salient feature of the Montreal Convention is that it facilitates the use of simplified and modernized document of carriage
 (passenger ticket and waybill), thus enabling the utilization of electronic data processing in the air transport industry.
12.   The Montreal Convention, 1999 seeks to establish much needed uniformity and predictability of the rules relating to the
 international carriage of passengers, baggage and cargo. It protects the interests of passengers by introducing a modern two-tier liability
 system and by facilitating the swift recovery of proven damages without the need for lengthy litigation. On the other hand, it would
 enable airline operators to achieve substantive operational savings through the use of electronically produced and simplified documents
 of carriage, and efficient risk management.
13.   The Montreal Convention, 1999 has already been ratified by 78 countries, out of which 25 have direct air links with India, including
 routes having high traffic density such as USA, UK, UAE, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Japan, Austria, France, Germany,
 Netherlands and Italy. In such a situation,  non-accession of the Convention by India may give rise to a situation involving serious
 discrimination between the passengers of the same flight with regard to compensation. For example, those passengers whose journey
 originated in the USA or the UK will be entitled too much higher compensation compared to those whose journey originated in India.
 This will, by and large, go against the interest of Indian passengers. Moreover, if India does not accede to the Montreal Convention, our
 nationals would lose the benefit of the fifth jurisdiction.
14.   In view of the foregoing, it has been proposed to accede to the Montreal Convention, 1999, and deposit the Instruments of Accession
 with ICAO. Before doing so, necessary legislative action is required to be taken in order to give effect to the provisions of the
 Convention in India. Accordingly, it has been proposed that the existing Carriage by Air Act, 1972 may be amended by including a new
 Schedule therein viz., Third Schedule. Just as the provisions of the original Warsaw Convention, 1929 are contained in the First Schedule
 and those of the Warsaw Convention as amended by the Hague Protocol in the Second Schedule, the provisions of the new Convention
 (Montreal Convention, 1999) shall be contained in the Third Schedule.
15.   The rules contained in the First Schedule shall be applicable if the international carriage is between the Contracting Parties to the
 Warsaw Convention, those contained in the Second Schedule shall apply in respect of carriage between the Contracting Parties to the
 Warsaw Convention as amended by the Hague Protocol and the provisions of the Third Schedule shall be applicable for carriage
 between the States parties to the Montreal Convention, 1999.
16.   In its meeting held on the 2nd July, 2007 the Committee heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Bill. The
 Committee also heard the views of various stakeholders such as, National Aviation Company of India Limited (the newly formed
 company after the merger of Air India and Indian Airlines), Jet Airways, Travel Agents Association of India, Travel Agents Federation
 of India, and The Air Cargo Agents Association of India on 31st August, 2007.
17.   The Ministry in their submission before the Committee stated that in order to deliberate on the implications of the Montreal
 Convention, 1999, several meetings were held with various airlines operating international air services viz. Air India, Indian Airlines, Jet
 Airways and Air Sahara. They were advised to carry out an in-depth analysis of various provisions of the Convention with particular
 reference to the financial burden they may have to bear in the event of its ratification. The general view of the airlines was that they were
 passing through a critical phase and the enhanced amount of insurance premium would entail another blow to their dwindling finances.
 Moreover, they were particularly concerned about the additional of fifth jurisdiction i.e. the place of domicile of the passenger. It means
 that the affected person may proceed against the airline in a Court situated at the place of domicile of the passenger provided the carrier
 operates air services for the carriage of passengers to/from that country either on its own aircraft or on another carrier’s aircraft pursuant
 to a commercial agreement. The airlines were concerned about the litigation cost and logistics involved in defending such cases in the
 Courts where they do not operate but have only small representational offices and performs air carriage only through commercial
 agreement with other airlines. It was, therefore, decided to adopt the policy of wait and watch for some time. However, the airlines’

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 concerns about higher cost of insurance premium and litigation were misplaced as after the coming into force of the Convention they
 would in any case be liable in respect of their operation to/from countries who have ratified the Convention.
18.   The Ministry also stated that it takes time for the Governments to go in for ratification/accession of the international instruments
 having far-reaching implications. Most of the major European countries ratified the Montreal Convention in 2004. China did so in 2005,
 Brazil and many Middle East countries in 2006 and Pakistan and Oman in 2007. Interestingly, Australia and some major Asian countries
 like Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand have yet to ratify the Montreal Convention.
19.   On being asked about the consultation with stakeholders before bringing this Amendment, the Secretary stated as under:
“...the Ministry had consulted the Airlines which operate internationally, for example, Air India, Jet Airways and Indian Airlines. I
 understand that the Jet Airways was not supportive of the proposal. Air India and Indian Airlines stated that they would like to wait
 and watch how this unfolds further and how the other countries respond to it”.
20.   However, the Chairman and Managing Director of National Aviation Company of India Limited categorically stated that the
 Ministry did not consult them before bringing this Bill while tendering his evidence before the Committee. The representatives of the
 Travel agents and Cargo agents also expressed the same view. This amendment Bill, if enacted, will definitely have a huge impact on the
 airlines, travel agents and cargo operators as all these stakeholders are mainly related to this Bill.
21.   The Committee in its meeting on 25th September, 2007 considered the Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007 clause-by-clause.
CLAUSE 2
22.   Clause 2 reads - ­
“In the Carriage by Air Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), in the long title, for the words “and to make
 provision for”, the words figures and letters “and also to the Montreal Convention signed on the 28th day of May, 1999 and to
 make provision for” shall be substituted.”
23.   This clause intends to amend the title of the Carriage by Air Act, 1972 by inserting the words “Montreal Convention signed on the
 28th day of May, 1999 and to make provision for”.
CLAUSE 3
24.   Clause 3 reads - “In section 2 of the Principal Act, after clause (ii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:­
‘(iii) “Montreal Convention” means the Convention for the unification of certain rules for international carriage by air signed at
 Montreal on the 28th day of May, 1999 ;
(iv) “Annexure” means the Annexure annexed to this Act’.’’
25.   This clause gives definition to the words Montreal Convention and Annexure which will be mentioned in the Act repeatedly.
CLAUSE 4
26.   Clause 4 reads - “In section 3 of the principal Act,­
        (a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:­
“(2) For the purpose of this Act, the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and the date of enforcement of the said
 Convention shall be such as are included in Part I of the Annexure.”;
        (b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:­
“(5) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do,
 by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, omit from, Part I of the Annexure, any High Contracting
 Party and on such addition, or as the case may be, omission, such High Contracting Party shall be or shall cease to be, a High
 Contracting Party”.”
27.   This Clause intends to amend sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Principal Act and defines the application of Convention in India.
 The Government by notification in the Official Gazette can add or omit any High Contracting Party from Part I of the Annexure through

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 this amendment.
CLAUSE 5
28.   Clause 5 reads - “In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:­
“(2) For the purpose of this Act, the High Contracting Parties to the amended Convention and the date of enforcement of the said
 amended Convention shall be such as are included in Part II of the Annexure.
(2A) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by
 notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, omit from, Part II of the Annexure, any High Contracting Party
 and on such addition, or, as the case may be, omission, such High Contracting Party shall be or shall cease to be, a High
 Contracting Party.”.
29.   This Clause intends to amend sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Principal Act and defines the application of Convention in India.
 The Government by notification in the Official Gazette can add or omit any High Contracting Party from Part II of the Annexure through
 this amendment.
30.   Clauses 4 and 5 deal with powers to Government to add or omit any High Contracting Party to the Part I and Part II of the Annexure
 which contain the, list of countries who are signatory to the Warsaw Convention, 1929 and the Hague Protocol, 1955 respectively.
CLAUSE 6
31.   Clause 6 reads - “After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:­
“4A. (1) The rules contained in the Third Schedule, being the provisions of the Montreal Convention relating to the rights and
 liabilities of carriers, passengers, consignors, consignees and other persons, shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have the
 force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air to which those rules apply, irrespective of the nationality of the aircraft
 performing the carriage.
(2) For the purpose of this Act, the State Parties to the Montreal Convention and the date of enforcement of the said Montreal
 Convention shall be such as are included in Part III of the Annexure.
(3) Any reference in the Third Schedule to the territory of any State Party to the Montreal Convention shall be construed as a
 reference to all the territories in respect of which he is party.
(4) Any reference in the Third Schedule to agents of the carrier shall be construed as including a reference to servants of the carrier.
(5) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by
 notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, omit from, Part III of the Annexure, any State Party and on such
 addition, or, as the case may be, omission, such State Party shall be or shall cease to be, a State Party.”.
32.   This Clause intends to insert a new Section after the Section 4 of the Principal Act and defines the application of Montreal
 Convention in India. The Government by notification in the Official Gazette can add or omit any High Contracting Party from Part III of
 the Annexure through this amendment. Part III of the Annexure contains the list of countries who are signatory to the Montreal
 Convention.
CLAUSE 7
33.   Clause 7 reads - “In section 5 of the principal Act,­
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the First Schedule and in the Second Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule, the Second
 Schedule and the Third Schedule” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words “the First Schedule or of the Second Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule or the Second
 Schedule or the Third Schedule” shall be substituted.”
34.   This Clause intends to amend Section 5 of the Principal Act pertaining to determination of the liability of a carrier in respect of the
 death of passenger. The First Schedule and Second Schedule contain the deliberations of the Warsaw convention, 1929 and the Hague
 Protocol, 1955 respectively. Through this amendment, the Government would determine the liability of a carrier in respect of the death
 of a passenger as per the Provisions in the Montreal Convention, 1999. The liability of the carrier in case of death or injury to the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 passenger due to accident has been discussed in detail in the subsequent paragraphs of the report.
CLAUSE 8
35.   Clause 8 reads - “After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:­
“6A. Any sum in Special Drawing Rights mentioned in rules 21 and 22 of the Third Schedule shall, for the purpose of any action
 against a carrier, be converted into rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date on which the amount of damages to be paid
 by the carrier is ascertained by the Court in accordance with the provisions of rule 23 of the said Third Schedule.”.
36.   This Clause intends to insert a new Section 6A pertaining to Conversion of Special Drawing Rights. The denomination of payment
 of compensation as per the Warsaw Convention, 1929 and the Hague Protocol, 1955 is ‘Francs’ whereas the Montreal Convention has
 introduced a new term for denomination for payment of compensation as Special Drawing Rights.
37.   Through this amendment the Special Drawing Rights will be converted into rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date on
 which the amount of damages to be paid by the carrier is ascertained by the Court.
38.   Since the main objective of the proposed amendments in the Parent Act is to accede to the Montreal  Convention for the
 unification of certain rules for international carriage by air, the Committee adopted Clauses 2-8 without suggesting any
 amendment therein.
CLAUSE 9
39.   Clause 9 reads - “In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:­
“(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the rules contained in the Third Schedule and any
 provision of section 4A or section 5 or section 6A to such carriage by air, not being international carriage by air as defined in the
 Third Schedule, as may be specified in the notification, subject, however, to such exceptions, adaptations and modifications if any,
 as may be so specified.”.
40.   This Clause intends to amend Sub-Section (3) of the Section 8 of Principal Act which deals with the issue of notification for
 application of Act to Carriage by air which is not international. The Government will apply the provisions of Montreal Convention for
 the domestic operation also.
41.   To a specific query on the adoption of Montreal Convention for domestic carriage the Ministry replied that the Government will
 issue a notification after the proposed Bill is passed and the limits of liability in case of domestic carriers are likely to be revised upward.
 In this regard, the Secretary while tendering his evidence before the Committee stated as under:
“... while this regime is an international regime, the Act provides for its applicability even for domestic passenger. There is a
 provision in the Carriage by Air Act, 1972, Section 8 under which a notification has been issued making the same provisions
 applicable to even those passengers who are not international passengers. A similar provision, a parallel provision is included in
 Section 9 of the draft Bill.”
42.   The Amendment Bill has been introduced by the Government to accede the Montreal Convention for international carriage and will
 be subsequently applied to domestic carriage also. But the Bill has been introduced without having any consultation with stakeholders
 who include the domestic operators. The application of this Convention to domestic carriage will increase the liability of domestic
 carriers and the final result will be increase in the domestic fares. The Government have not stated anything about the implication of the
 application of Montreal Convention on the fares in domestic sector whether the enhanced liability will be borne by the operators or
 passed on to customers. The stakeholder also expressed similar sentiments while presenting their views before the Committee.
43.   Clause 9 was adopted without suggesting any change therein. However, regarding the implementation of the Montreal
 Convention for domestic carriages at par with the other countries, the Committee desires that the Government should take the
 domestic air traveller into confidence before implementing the Rules for domestic carriage and give adequate time to them so
 that they can be well prepared and have idea of likely liability and make arrangements with insurers. The Committee also
 desires that the Government should ensure the domestic operators to adopt a transparent policy in fixing fare in the domestic
 sector so that the operators do not try to take benefit of the increase in liabilities to pass on the burden to the travellers
 disproportionately.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
44.   Clause 10, intends to insert Third Schedule and Annexure to provide the Rules in Chapters I-VI (as per annexure - I) which shall
 apply to all international carriage of persons baggage or cargo performed by aircraft for reward.
45.   The Committee asked the Ministry about the benefits which will be accrued to passengers once India adopts the Montreal
 Convention for which the Ministry has stated that for application of the Montreal Convention, the nationality of the passengers or that of
 the aircraft is not at all relevant for performing air travel. The Montreal Convention shall apply if the carriage is between two States
 Parties to the Convention. It shall also apply if the carriage is between two points in a single State which is a Party to the Convention
 provided that there is an agreed stopping place in another State. The other State may or may not be a Party to the Convention. It may be
 pertinent to mention here that most of the passengers originating and terminating their journey in India are Indian nationals. Since India
 has not acceded to the Montreal Convention, these passengers would be deprived of the benefits or enhanced liability limits under the
 Convention. With the accession of the Montreal Convention by India, the benefits of the Convention will become available to passengers
 originating and terminating their journey in India.
46. The Ministry also stated that the Warsaw System provides for four choices of jurisdiction for filing of a claim by a passenger or his
 legal heirs, namely, (1) the place where the ticket was issued or the contract of carriage was made, (2) the principal place of business of
 the carrier, (3) the place of destination of the passenger, and (4) the place of the domicile of the carrier. The Montreal Convention, 1999
 adds a fifth jurisdiction, i.e., the place of domicile of the passenger, provided the airline has a presence there. This would enable an
 Indian national to file his claim in India even if the journey was undertaken outside India and the ticket was purchased outside India,
 provided the carrier has a presence in India.
47.   Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation during his evidence before the Committee also stated as under:
“the Indian passengers or their next of kith and kin could also file the claims or pursue legal remedies in the place of the domicile of
 the passenger so that when something happens in Kenya and the person who has boarded the flight in India, then, he or his next of
 kith and kin can pursue the matter in the Indian court. Earlier the jurisdictions were the place of business of the carrier, the domicile
 of carrier, place of issue of the ticket and the place of destination of the passenger. Now, there is one more jurisdiction available. To
 that extent there could be greater benefit or flexibility for Indian passengers.”
48.   The Third Schedule also contains the two-tier liability regime in which for proven damages, which does not exceed 100,000 SDR
 per passenger, the carrier is subject to strict liability regardless of fault. However, in the case of contributory negligence of the passenger,
 the carrier can be partly or wholly exonerated. For proven damages exceeding 100,000 SDR, the liability of the air carrier is based on a
 system of presumed fault, with no pre-specified limits of liability. However, the carrier shall not be liable for such damage if it proves
 that the damage was not caused by its negligence or other wrongful act or omissions.
49.   The Committee feels that the two-tier liability system should be a flexible one as it will not be an easier task to assess the
 damages considering the magnitude of the accident. The Committee desires that a mechanism should be evolved by the
 Government to ensure that the passenger gets an adequate compensation once the Montreal Convention is adopted.
50.   The Committee adopted all the six chapters under the head Rules under the Third Schedule without suggesting any change
 therein. The Committee also adopted the Title and the enacting formula of the Bill without any change.
OVERALL  RECOMMENDATION
51.   The Committee feels that this amendment to the Principal Act is necessitated because of the international conventions and
 also to become part of the Montreal Convention. The Committee hopes that the enhanced liability of the air carriers after the
 accession to the Montreal  Convention, will not further burden the travellers. The Committee hopes that the Government will
 ensure the carriers to follow electronic data processing like e-ticketing and electronic waybill for luggage fully. The Committee
 desires that the provisions of Montreal Convention is implemented in such a manner that any grey area in fixation of
 compensation for loss of life to passenger, determination of liability of the air carrier in case of lost/damaged luggage, uniformity
 in payment of compensation to legal heirs in case of death of a passenger are well addressed.
52.   Civil Aviation Sector is developing very fast and more and more passengers are travelling by air. Some of them may not be
 having awareness and competence to understand the provisions of Montreal Convention and this legislation. The Committee
 therefore, also desires that once the Montreal Convention forms part of the legislation and notified for implementation, it may be

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 given adequate publicity in such way that the same can be well understood by the common air passengers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS - AT A GLANCE
        Since the main objective of the proposed amendments in the Parent Act is to accede to the Montreal  Convention for the
 unification of certain rules for international carriage by air, the Committee adopted Clauses 2-8 without suggesting any
 amendment therein.                                                                                                    (Para 38)
        Clause 9 was adopted without suggesting any change therein. However, regarding the implementation of the Montreal
 Convention for domestic carriages at par with the other countries, the Committee desires that the Government should take the
 domestic air traveller into confidence before implementing the Rules for domestic carriage and give adequate time to them so
 that they can be well prepared and have idea of likely liability and make arrangements with insurers. The Committee also
 desires that the Government should ensure the domestic operators to adopt a transparent policy in fixing fare in the domestic
 sector so that the operators do not try to take benefit of the increase in liabilities to pass on the burden to the travellers
 disproportionately.
                                                                                                                                          (Para 43)
        The Committee feels that the two-tier liability system should be a flexible one as it will not be an easier task to assess the
 damages considering the magnitude of the accident. The Committee desires that a mechanism should be evolved by the
 Government to ensure that the passenger gets an adequate compensation once the Montreal Convention is
 adopted.                                                                                                                         (Para 49)
        The Committee adopted all the six chapters under the head Rules under the Third Schedule without suggesting any change
 therein. The Committee also adopted the Title and the enacting formula of the Bill without any change.        (Para 50)
        The Committee feels that this amendment to the Principal Act is necessitated because of the international conventions and
 also to become part of the Montreal Convention. The Committee hopes that the enhanced liability of the air carriers after the
 accession to the Montreal  Convention, will not further burden the travellers. The Committee hopes that the Government will
 ensure the carriers to follow electronic data processing like e-ticketing and electronic waybill for luggage fully. The Committee
 desires that the provisions of Montreal Convention is implemented in such a manner that any grey area in fixation of
 compensation for loss of life to passenger, determination of liability of the air carrier in case of lost/damaged luggage, uniformity
 in payment of compensation to legal heirs in case of death of a passenger are well
 addressed.                                                                                                                   (Para 53)
        Civil Aviation Sector is developing very fast and more and more passengers are travelling by air. Some of them may not be
 having awareness and competence to understand the provisions of Montreal  Convention and this legislation. The Committee,
 therefore, also desires that once the Montreal Convention forms part of the legislation and notified for implementation, it may be
 given adequate publicity in such way that the same can be well understood by the common air
 passengers.                                                                                                                        (para 54)
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE - I
(Vide para 1 of the Report)
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
04 May, 2007

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 50 of 2007
 
THE CARRIAGE BY AIR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Carriage by Air Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:­–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Carriage by Air (Amendment)
 Act, 2007.
       (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
 Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
 appoint.
2. In the Carriage by Air Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to
 as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words “and to
 make provision for”, the words figures and letters “and also
 to the Montreal Convention signed on the 28th day of May,
 1999 and to make provision for” shall be substituted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (ii), the
 following clauses shall be inserted, namely:­ –
       ‘(iii) “Montreal Convention” means the Convention for the
 unification of certain’ rules for international carriage by air
 signed at Montreal on the 28th day of May, 1999;
       (iv) “Annexure” means the Annexure annexed to this Act.’.
       4. In section 3 of the principal Act,­
       (a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section”shall be
 substituted, namely:–­
       “(2) For the purpose of this Act, the High Contracting
 Parties to the Convention and the date of enforcement of the
Short title and commencement.
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
 long title.
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 3.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 said Convention shall be such as are included in Part I of the
 Annexure.”;
       (b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be
 substituted, namely:­–
       “(5) The Central Government may, having regard to the
 objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so
 to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the
 case may be, omit from, Part I of the Annexure, any High
 Contracting Party and on such addition, or as the case may be,
 omission, such High Contracting Party shall be or shall cease to
 be, a High Contracting Party.” .
       5. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the
 following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
       “(2) For the purpose of this Act, the High Contracting
 Parties to the amended Convention and the date of enforcement
 of the said amended Convention shall be such as are included
 in Part II of the Annexure.
       (2A) The Central Government may, having regard to the
 objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so
 to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the
 case may be, omit from Part II of the Annexure, any High
 Contracting Party and on such addition, or, as the case may be,
 omission, such High Contracting Party shall be or shall cease to
 be, a High Contracting Party.”.
       6. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section
 shall be inserted, namely:­–
       “4A. (1) The rules contained in the Third Schedule, being
 the provisions of the Montreal Convention relating to the rights
 and liabilities of carriers, passengers, consignors, consignees
 and other persons, shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,
 have the force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air
 to which those rules apply, irrespective of the nationality of the
 aircraft performing the carriage.
       (2) For the purpose of this Act, the State Parties to the
 Montreal Convention and the date of enforcement of the said
 Montreal Convention shal1 be such as are included in part III
 of the Annexure.
       (3) Any reference in the Third Schedule to the territory of
 any State Party to the Montreal Convention shall be construed
 as a reference to all the territories in respect of which he is
 party.
       (4) Any reference in the Third Schedule to agents of the
 Carrier shall be construed as including a reference to servants
 of the carrier.
       (5) The Central Government may, having regard to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 4A.
 
Application of Montreal
 Con­vention to India.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 objects of this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so
 to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the
 case may be, omit from, Part III of the Annexure, any State
 Party and­ on such addition, or, as the case may be, omission,
 such State Party shall be or shal1 cease to be, a State Party.” .
       7. In section 5 of the principal Act,­–
       (a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the First Schedule and
 in the Second Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule, the
 Second Schedule and the Third Schedule” shall be substituted;
       (b) in sub-section (5), for the words “the First Schedule or
 of the Second Schedule”, the words ‘‘the First Schedule or the
 Second Schedule or the Third Schedule” shall be substituted.
       8. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section
 shall be inserted, namely:-
       “6A. Any sum in Special Drawing Rights mentioned in
 rules 21 and 22 of the Third Schedule shall, for the purpose of
 any action against a carrier, be converted into rupees at the rate
 of exchange prevailing on the date on which the amount of
 damages to be paid by the carrier is ascertained by the Court in
 accordance with the provisions of rule 23 of the said Third
 Schedule.”.
       9. In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the
 following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–
       “(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the
 Official Gazette, apply the rules contained in the Third
 Schedule and any provision of section 4 A or section 5 or
 section 6A to such carriage by air, not being international
 carriage by air as defined in the Third Schedule, as may be
 specified in the notification, subject, however, to such
 exceptions, adaptations and modifications, if any, as may be so
 specified.”.
       10.  After the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the
 following Schedule and Annexure shall be inserted, namely:–
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 4A)
RULES
CHAPTER I
SCOPE OF APPLICATION
       1. (1) These rules shall apply to all international carriage of
 persons, baggage or cargo performed by aircraft for reward.
 They shall apply also to such carriage when performed
 gratuitously by an air transport undertaking.
                        (2) In these rules, unless the context otherwise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 5.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new
section 6A.
 
 
Conversion of Special
 Draw­ing Rights.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 8.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 requires,­–
       (a) “baggage” means both checked baggage and unchecked
 baggage;
       (b) “days” means calendar days and not working days;
       (c) “depository” means the International Civil Aviation
 Organisation;
       (d) “State Party” means a signatory or acceding State to the
 Montreal Convention whose instrument of ratification or
 accession has been deposited with the depository.
       (3) For the purposes of these rules, the expression,
 “international carriage” means any carriage in which, according
 to the agreement between the parties, the place of departure and
 the place of destination, whether or not there be a break in the
 carriage or a transhipment, are situated either within the
 territories of two State Parties, or within the territory of a single
 State Party if there is an agreed stopping place within the
 territory of another State, even if that State is not a State Party.
 A carriage between two points within the territory of a single
 State Party without an agreed stopping place within the
 territory of another State shall not be deemed to be international
 carriage for the purposes of these rules.
       (4) A carriage to be performed by several successive air
 carriers shall be deemed for the purposes of these rules, to be
 one undivided carriage if it has been regarded by the parties as
 a single operation, whether it has been agreed upon under the
 form of a single contract or of a series of contracts, and shall
 not lose its international character merely because one contract
 or a series of contracts is to be performed entirely within the
 territory of the same State.
       (5) These rules shall apply also to carriage as set out in
 Chapter V, subject to the terms contained therein.
       2.              (1) These rules shall apply to carriage performed
 by the State or by legally constituted public bodies provided it
 falls within the conditions laid down in rule 1.
       (2) In the carriage of postal items, the carrier shall be liable
 only to the relevant postal administration in accordance with
 the rules applicable to the relationship between the carriers and
 the postal administration.
       (3) Except as provided in sub-rule (2), these rules shall not
 apply to the carriage of postal items.
CHAPTER II
DOCUMENTATION AND DUTIES OF THE PARTIES
 RELATING TO THE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of Third Schedule
and Annexure.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS, BAGGAGE AND CARGO
       3.              (1) In respect of carriage of passengers, an
 individual or collective document of carriage shall be delivered
 containing–       
       (a) an indication of the places of departure and destination;
       (b) if the places of departure and destination are within the
 territory of a single State Party, one or more agreed stopping
 places being within the territory of another State, an indication
 of at least one of such stopping places.
       (2) Any other means which preserves the information
 indicated in sub-rule (1) may be substituted for the delivery of
 the document referred to in that sub-rule. If any such other
 means is used, the carrier shall offer to deliver to the passenger
 a written statement of the information so preserved.     
       (3) The carrier shall deliver to the passenger a baggage
 identification tag for each piece of checked baggage.    
       (4) The passenger shall be given written notice to the effect
 that where these rules are applicable it governs and may limit
 the liability of carriers in respect of death or injury and for
 destruction or loss of, or damage to, baggage, and for delay.
       (5) Non-compliance with the provisions of sub-rules (1), (2)
 and (3) shall not affect the existence or the validity of the
 contract of carriage, which shall, nonetheless, be subject to
 these rules including those relating to limitation of liability.
       4. (1) In respect of the carriage of cargo, an air waybill shall
 be delivered.
       (2) Any other means which preserves a record of the
 carriage to be performed may be substituted for the delivery of
 an air waybill. If such other means are used, the carrier shall, if
 so requested by the consignor, deliver to the consignor a cargo
 receipt permitting identification of the consignment and access
 to the information contained in the record preserved by such
 other means.
       5. The air waybill or the cargo receipt shall include­
       (a) an indication of the places of departure and destination;
       (b) if the places of departure and destination are within the
 territory of a single State Party, one or more agreed stopping
 places being within the territory of another State, an indication
 of at least one of such stopping places; and
       (c) an indication of the weight of the consignment.
       6. The consignor may be required, If necessary to meet the
 formalities of customs, police and similar public authorities, to
 deliver a document indicating the nature of the cargo. This

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 provision shall not create for the carrier any duty, obligation or
 liability resulting therefrom.
       7. (1) The air waybill shall be made out by the consignor in
 three original parts. The first part shall be marked “for: the
 carrier” and it shall be signed by the consignor. The second part
 shall be marked “for the consignee” and it shall be signed by
 the consignor and by the carrier. The third part shall be signed
 by the carrier who shall hand it to the consignor after the cargo
 has been accepted.
       (2) The signature of the carrier and of the consignor may be
 printed or stamped.
       (3) If, at the request of the consignor, the carrier makes out
 the air waybill, the carrier shall be deemed, subject to proof to
 the contrary, to have done so on behalf of the consignor.
       8. When there is more than one package­ –
       (a) the carrier has the right to require the consignor to make
 out separate air waybills;
       (b) the consignor has the right to require the carrier to
 deliver separate cargo receipts when the other means referred to
 in sub-rule (2) of rule 4 are used.
       9. Non-compliance with the provisions of rules 4, 5, 6, 7
 and 8 shall not affect the existence or the validity of the
 contract of carriage, which shall, nonetheless, be subject to
 these rules including those relating to limitation of liability.
       10. (1) The consignor is responsible for the correctness of
 the particulars and statements relating to the cargo inserted by it
 or on its behalf in the air waybill or furnished by it or on its
 behalf to the carrier for insertion in the cargo receipt or for
 insertion in the record preserved by the other means referred to
 in sub-rule (2) of rule 4. The foregoing shall also apply where
 the person acting on behalf of the consignor is also the agent of
 the carrier.
       (2) The consignor shall indemnify the carrier against all
 damage suffered by it, or by any other person to whom the
 carrier is liable, by reason of the irregularity, incorrectness or
 incompleteness of the particulars and statements furnished by
 the consignor or on its behalf.
       (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (1) and (2), the
 carrier shall indemnify the consignor against all damages
 suffered by it, or by any other person to whom the consignor is
 liable, by reason of the irregularity, incorrectness or
 incompleteness of the particulars and statements inserted by the
 carrier or on its behalf in the cargo receipt or in the record
 preserved by the other means referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule
 4.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
       11. (1) The air waybill or the cargo receipt shall be prima
 facie evidence of the conclusion of the contract, of the
 acceptance of the cargo and of the conditions of carriage
 mentioned therein.
       (2) Any statements in the air waybill or the cargo receipt
 relating to the weight, dimensions and packing of the cargo, as
 well as those relating to the number of pack ages, are prima
 facie evidence of the facts stated therein; those relating to the
 quantity, volume and condition of the cargo do not constitute
 evidence against the carrier except so far as they both have
 been, and are stated in the air waybill or the cargo receipt to
 have been, checked by it in the presence of the consignor, or
 relate to the apparent condition of the cargo.
       12. (1) Subject to its liability to carry out all its obligations
 under the contract of carriage, the consignor has the right to
 dispose of the cargo by withdrawing it at the airport of
 departure or destination, or by stopping it in the course of the
 journey on any landing, or by calling for it to be delivered at
 the place of destination or in the course of the journey to a
 person other than the consignee originally designated, or by
 requiring it to be returned to the airport of departure. The
 consignor shall not exercise this right of disposition in such a
 way as to prejudice the carrier or other consignors and shall
 reimburse any expenses occasioned by the exercise of this
 right.
       (2) If it is impossible to carry out the instructions of the
 consignor, the carrier shall so inform the consignor forthwith.
       (3) If the carrier carries out the instructions of the consignor
 for the disposition of the cargo without requiring the production
 of the part of the air waybill or the cargo receipt delivered to
 the latter, the carrier shall be liable, without prejudice to its
 right of recovery from the consignor, for any damage which
 may be caused thereby to any person who is lawfully in
 possession of that part of the air waybill or the cargo receipt.
       (4) The right conferred on the consignor ceases at the
 moment when that of the consignee begins in accordance with
 rule 13. Nevertheless, if the consignee declines to accept the
 cargo, or cannot be communicated with, the consignor shall
 resume its right of disposition.
       13. (1) Except when the consignor has exercised its right
 under rule 12, the consignee shall be entitled, on arrival of the
 cargo at the place of destination, to require the carrier to deliver
 the cargo to it, on payment of the charges due and on
 complying with the conditions of carriage.
       (2) Unless it is otherwise agreed, it shall be the duty of the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 carrier to give notice to the consignee as soon as the cargo
 arrives.             
       (3) If the carrier admits the loss of the cargo, or if the cargo
 has not arrived at the expiration of seven days after the date on
 which it ought to have arrived, the consignee shall be entitled to
 enforce against the carrier the rights which flow from the
 contract of carriage.
       14. The consignor and the consignee may respectively
 enforce all the rights given to them by rules 12 and 13, each in
 its own name, whether it is acting in its own interest or in
 interest of another, provided that it carries out the obligations
 imposed by the contract of carriage.
       15. (1) The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 shall not affect
 either the relations of the consignor and the consignee with
 each other or the mutual relations of third parties whose rights
 are derived either from the consignor or from the
 consignee.        
       (2) The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 shall be varied
 only by express provision in the air waybill or the cargo receipt.
       16. (1) The consignor shall furnish such information and
 such documents as are necessary to meet the formalities of
 customs, police and any other public authorities before the
 cargo can be delivered to the consignee. The consignor shall be
 liable to the carrier for any damage occasioned by the absence,
 insufficiency or irregularity of any such information or
 documents, unless the damage is due to the fault of the carrier,
 its servants or agents.
       (2) The carrier shall be under no obligation to enquire into
 the correctness or sufficiency of such information or
 documents.
CHAPTER III
LIABILITY OF THE CARRIER AND EXTENT OF
 COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES
       17. (1) The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in
 case of death or bodily injury of a passenger upon condition
 only that the accident which caused the death or injury took
 place on board the aircraft or in the course of any of the
 operations of embarking or disembarking.        
       (2) The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in case
 of destruction or loss of, or of damage to checked baggage
 upon condition only that the event which caused the
 destruction, loss or damage took place on board the aircraft or
 during any period within which the checked baggage was in the
 charge of the carrier. However, the carrier shall not be liable if

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 and to the extent that the damage resulted from the inherent
 defect, quality or vice of the baggage. In the case of unchecked
 baggage, including personal items, the carrier is liable if the
 damage has resulted from its fault or that of its servants or
 agents.
       (3) If the carrier admits the loss of the checked baggage, or
 if the checked baggage has not arrived at the expiration of
 twenty-one days after the date on which it ought to have
 arrived, the passenger shall be entitled to enforce against the
 carrier the rights which flow from the contract of carriage.
       18. (1) The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in
 the event of the destruction or loss of, or damage to, cargo upon
 condition only that the event which caused the damage so
 sustained took place during the carriage by air.
       (2) However, the carrier shall not be liable if and to the
 extent it proves that the destruction, or loss of, or damage to,
 the cargo resulted from one or more of the following:­–
       (a) inherent defect, quality or vice of that cargo;
       (b) defective packing of the cargo performed by a person
 other than the carrier or its servants or agents;
       (c) an act of war or an armed conflict; and
       (d) an act of public authority carried out in connection with
 the entry, exit or transit of the cargo.
       (3) The carriage by air within the meaning of sub-rule (1)
 comprises the period during which the cargo is in charge of the
 carrier.
       (4) The period of the carriage by air shall not extend to any
 carriage by land, by sea or by inland waterway performed
 outside an airport. If, however, such carriage takes place in the
 performance of a contract for carriage by air, for the purpose of
 loading, delivery or transhipment, any damage is presumed,
 subject to proof to the contrary, to have been the result of an
 event which took place during the carriage by air. If a carrier,
 without the consent of the consignor, substitutes carriage by
 another mode of transport for the whole or part of a carriage
 intended by the agreement between the parties to be carriage by
 air, such carriage by another mode of transport is deemed to be
 within the period of carriage by air.
       19. The carrier shall be liable for damage occasioned by
 delay in the carriage by air of passengers, baggage or cargo.
 Nevertheless, the carrier shall not be liable for damage
 occasioned by delay if it proves that it and its servants and
 agents took all measures that could reasonably be required to
 avoid the damage or that it was impossible for it or them take
 such measures.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
       20. If the carrier proves that the damages was caused or
 contributed to by the negligence or other wrongful act or
 omission of the person claiming compensation, or the person
 from whom he or she derives his or her rights, the carrier shall
 be wholly or partly exonerated from its liability to the claimant
 to the extent that such negligence or wrongful act or omission
 caused or contributed to the damage. When by reason of death
 or injury of a passenger compensation is claimed by a person
 other than the passenger, the carrier shall likewise be wholly or
 partly exonerated from its liability to the extent that it proves
 that the damage was caused or contributed to by the negligence
 or other wrongful act or omission of that passenger. This rule
 applies to all the liability provisions of these rules, including
 sub-rule (1) of rule 21.
       21. (1) For damages arising under sub-rule (1) of rule 17
 not exceeding one lakh Special Drawing Rights for each
 passenger, the carrier shall not be able to exclude or limit its
 liability.
       (2) The carrier shall not be liable for damages arising under
 sub-rule (1) of rule 17 to the extent that they exceed for each
 passenger one lakh Special Drawing Rights if the carrier proves
 that ­–
       (a) such damage was not due to the negligence or other
 wrongful act or omission of the carrier or its servants or agents;
 or
       (b) such damage was solely due to the negligence or other
 wrongful act or­ omission of a third party.
       22. (1) In the case of damage caused by delay as specified
 in rule 19 in the carriage of persons, the liability of the carrier
 for each passenger is limited to four thousand one hundred and
 fifty Special Drawing Rights.
       (2) In the carriage of baggage, the liability of the carrier in
 the case of destruction, loss, damage or delay shall be limited to
 one thousand Special Drawing Rights for each passenger unless
 the passenger has made, at the time when the checked baggage
 was handed over to the carrier, a special declaration of interest
 in delivery at destination and has paid a supplementary sum, if
 so required. In that case, the carrier shall be liable to pay a sum
 not exceeding the declared sum, unless it proves that the sum is
 greater than the passenger’s ­actual interest in delivery at
 destination.
       (3) In the carriage of cargo, the liability of the carrier in the
 case of destruction, loss, damage or delay is limited to a sum of
 seventeen Special Drawing Rights per kilogramme, unless the
 consignor has made, at the time when the package was handed
 over to the carrier, a special declaration of interest in delivery at
 destination and has paid a supplementary sum, if so required. In

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 that case, the carrier shall be liable to pay a sum not exceeding
 the declared sum, unless it proves that the sum is greater than
 the consignor’s actual interest in delivery at destination.
       (4) In the case of delay, destruction, loss or damage of part
 of the cargo, or of any object contained therein, the weight to
 be taken into consideration in determining the amount to which
 the carrier’s liability is limited shall be only the total weight of
 the package or packages concerned. Nevertheless, when the
 delay, destruction, loss or damage of a part of the cargo, or of
 an object contained therein, affects the value of other packages
 covered by the same air waybill, or the same receipt or, if they
 were not issued, by the same record preserved by other means
 referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 4, the total weight of such
 package or packages shall also be taken into consideration in
 determining the limit of liability.
       (5) The provisions of sub-rules (1) and (2) shall not apply if
 it is proved that the damage resulted from an act or omission of
 the carrier, its servants or agents, done with intent to cause
 damage or recklessly and with knowledge that damage would
 probably result:
       Provided that, in the case of such act or omission of a
 servant or agent; it is also ­proved that such servant or agent
 was acting within the scope of its employment.
       (6) The limits prescribed in rule 21 and in this rule shall not
 prevent the court from awarding, in accordance with its own
 law, in addition, the whole or part of the court costs and of the
 other expenses of the litigation incurred by the plaintiff,
 including interest. The foregoing provision shall not apply if
 the amount of the damages awarded, excluding court costs and
 other expenses of the litigation, does not exceed the sum which
 the carrier has offered in writing to the plaintiff within a period
 of six months from the date of the occurrence causing the
 damage, or before the commencement of the action, if that is
 later.
       23. The sums mentioned in terms of Special Drawing Right
 in these rules shall be deemed to refer to the Special Drawing
 Right as defined by the International Monetary Fund and its
 conversion into national currencies shall, in case of judicial
 proceedings, be made in accordance with the method of
 valuation applied by the International Monetary Fund, in effect
 at the date of the judgment, for its operations and transactions.
       24. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of role 25 and
 subject to sub-rule (2), the limits of liability prescribed in rules
 21, 22 and 23 shall be reviewed by the depository at five-year
 intervals, the first such review to take place at the end of the
 fifth year following the date of coming into force of these rules.
 The measure of the rate of inflation to be used in determining

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 the inflation factor shall be the weighted average of the annual
 rates of increase or decrease in .the Consumer Price Indices of
 the States whose currencies comprise the Special Drawing
 Right mentioned in rule 23.
       (2) If the review referred to in sub-rule (1) concludes that
 the inflation factor has exceeded ten per cent, the depositary
 shall notify State Parties of a revision of the limits of liability.
 Any such revision shall become effective six months after its
 notification to the State Parties. If within three months after its
 notification to the State Parties, a majority of the State Parties
 register their disapproval, the revision shall not become
 effective and the depositary shall refer the matter to a meeting
 of the State Parties. The depositary shall immediately notify all
 States Parties about the coming into force of any revision.
       (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the
 procedure referred to in sub-rule (2) shall be applied at any
 time provided that one-third of the State Parties express a desire
 to that effect and upon condition that the inflation factor
 referred to in sub-rule (1) has exceeded thirty per cent. Since
 the previous revision or since the date of entry into force of the
 Montreal Convention if there has been no previous revision.
 Subsequent reviews using the procedure specified in sub-rule
 (1) shall take place at five-year intervals starting at the end of
 the fifth year following the date of the reviews under the
 provisions of this sub­-rule.
       25. A carrier may stipulate that the contract of carriage shall
 be subject to higher limits of liability than those provided for in
 these rules or to no limits of liability whatsoever.
       26. Any provision tending to relieve the carrier of liability
 or to fix a lower limit than that which is laid down in these
 rules shall be null and void, but the nullity of any such
 provision does not involve the nullity of the whole contract,
 which shall remain subject to the provisions of these rules.
       27. Nothing contained in these rules shall prevent the
 carrier from refusing to enter into any contract of carriage, from
 waiving any defence available in these rules, or from laying
 down conditions, which are not contrary to the provisions of
 these rules.
       28. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
 for the time being in force, where the aircraft accident results in
 death or injury of passengers, the carrier shall make advance
 payments without delay to a natural person or persons who are
 entitled to claim  compensation in order to meet the immediate
 economic needs of such persons. Such advance payments shall
 not constitute a recognition  of liability and may be offset
 against any amounts subsequently paid as damages by the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 carrier.             
       29. In the carriage of passengers, baggage and cargo, any
 action for damages, however founded, whether under these
 rules or in contract or in tort or otherwise, can only be brought
 subject to the conditions and such limits of liability as are set
 out in these rules without prejudice to the question as to who
 are the persons who have the right to bring suit and what are
 their respective rights. In any such action, punitive, exemplary
 or any other non­ compensatory damages shall not be
 recoverable.
       30. (1) If an action is brought against a servant or agent of
 the carrier arising out of damage to which these rules relate,
 such servant or agent, if they prove that they acted within the
 scope of their employment, shall be entitled to avail themselves
 of the conditions and limits of liability which the carrier itself is
 entitled to invoke under these rules.
       (2) The aggregate of the amounts recoverable from the
 carrier, its servants and agents, in that case, shall not exceed the
 said limits.
       (3) Except in respect of the carriage of cargo, the provisions
 of sub-rules (1) and (2) shall not apply if it is proved that the
 damage resulted from an act or omission of the servant or agent
 done with intent to cause damage or recklessly and with the
 knowledge that damage would probably result.
       31. (1) Receipt by the person entitled to delivery of checked
 baggage or cargo without complaint is prima facie evidence
 that the same has been delivered in good condition and in
 accordance with the document of carriage or with the record
 preserved by the other means referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule
 3 and sub-rule (2) of rule 4.
       (2) In the case of damage, the person entitled to delivery
 shall make a complaint to the carrier forthwith after the
 discovery of the damage, and, at the latest, within seven days
 from the date of receipt in the case of checked baggage and
 fourteen days from the date of receipt in the case of cargo. In
 the case of delay, the complaint shall be made at the latest
 within to twenty-one days from the date on which the baggage
 or cargo have been placed at his disposal.
       (3) Every complaint shall be made in writing and given or
 dispatched within the period specified in sub-rule (2).
       (4) If no complaint is made within the period specified in
 sub-rule (2), no action shall lie against the carrier, except in the
 case of fraud committed by the carrier.
       32. In the case of the death of the person liable, an action

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 for damages lies in accordance with these rules against those
 legally representing his or her estate.
       33. (1) An action for damages shall be brought, at the
 option of the claimant of damages, in the territory of one of the
 State Parties, either before the court of the domicile of the
 carrier or of its principal place of business, or where it has a
 place of business through which the contract has been made or
 before the court at the place of destination.
       (2) In respect of damage resulting from the death or injury
 of a passenger, an action may be brought before one of the
 courts mentioned in sub-rule (1), or in the territory of a State
 Party in which at the time of the accident the passenger has his
 or her principal and permanent residence and to or from which
 the carrier operates services for the carriage of passengers by
 air, either on its own aircraft, or on another carrier’s aircraft
 pursuant to a commercial agreement, and in which that carrier
 conducts its business of carriage of passengers by air from
 premises leased or owned by the carrier itself or by another
 carrier with which it has a commercial agreement.
       (3) For the purposes of sub-rule (2)­ –
       (a) “commercial agreement” means an agreement, other
 than an agency agreement, made between carriers and relating
 to the provision of their joint services for carriage of passengers
 by air;
       (b) “principal and permanent residence” means the one
 fixed and permanent abode of the passenger at the time of the
 accident. The nationality of the passenger ­shall not be the
 determining factor in this regard.
       (4) Questions of procedure shall be governed by the law of
 the court seized of the case.
       34. (1) Subject to the provisions of this rule, the parties to
 the contract of carriage for cargo may stipulate that any dispute
 relating to the liability of the carrier under these rules shall be
 settled by arbitration. Such agreement shall be in writing.
       (2) The arbitration proceedings shall, at the option of the
 claimant, take place within one of the jurisdictions referred to
 in rule 33.
       (3) The arbitrator or arbitration tribunal shall apply the
 provisions of these rules.­
       (4) The provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) shall be deemed
 to be part of every arbitration ­clause or agreement, and any
 term of such clause or agreement which is inconsistent
 therewith shall be null and void.
       35. (1) The right to damages shall be extinguished if an
 action is not brought within a period of two years, reckoned

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 from the date of arrival at the destination, or from the date on
 which the aircraft ought to have arrived, or from the date on
 which the carriage stopped.
       (2) The method of calculating the period shall be
 determined by the law of the court seized of the case.
       36. (1) In the case of carriage to be performed by various
 successive carriers and falling within the definition set out in
 sub-rule (4) of rule 1, each carrier which accepts passengers,
 baggage or cargo shall be subject to the provisions of these
 rules and shall be deemed to be one of the parties to the
 contract of carriage in so far as the contract deals with that part
 of the carriage which is performed under its supervision.
       (2) In the case of carriage of this nature, the passenger or
 any person entitled to compensation shall be entitled to take
 action only against the carrier which performed the carriage
 during which the accident or the delay occurred, except where,
 by express agreement, the first carrier has assumed liability for
 the whole journey.
       (3) In respect of baggage or cargo, the passenger or
 consignor shall have a right of action against the first carrier,
 and the passenger or consignee who is entitled to delivery shall
 have a right of action against the last carrier, and further, each
 may take action against the carrier which performed the
 carriage during which the delay, destruction, loss or damage
 took place. These carriers shall be jointly and severally liable to
 the passenger or to the consignor or consignee.
       37.  Nothing in these rules shall prejudicially affect the
 right of a person liable for damages to take recourse against any
 other person.
CHAPTER IV
COMBINED CARRIAGE
       38. (1) In the case of combined carriage performed partly
 by air and partly by any other mode of carriage, the provisions
 of these rules shall, subject to the provisions of sub­-rule (4) of
 rule 18, apply only to the carriage by air, provided that the
 carriage by air falls within the meaning of rule 1.
       (2) Nothing in these rules shall prevent the parties in the
 case of combined carriage from inserting in the document of air
 carriage conditions relating to other modes of carriage,
 provided that the provisions of these rules are observed with
 regard to carriage by air.
CHAPTER V
CARRIAGE BY AIR PERFORMED BY A PERSON OTHER
 THAN 
 THE CONTRACTING CARRIER
       39. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply when a
 person (hereinafter referred to as the contracting carrier) as a

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 principal makes a contract of carriage under these rules with a
 passenger or consignor or with a person acting on behalf of the
 passenger or consignor, and another person (hereinafter
 referred to as the actual carrier) performs, by virtue of authority
 from the contracting carrier, the whole or part of the carriage,
 but is not with respect to such part, a successive carrier within
 the meaning of these rules. Such authority shall be presumed in
 the absence of proof to the contrary,
       40. If an actual carrier performs the whole or part of
 carriage which, according to the contract referred to in rule 39,
 is governed by these rules, both the contracting carrier and the
 actual carrier shall, except as otherwise provided in this
 Chapter, be subject to the provisions of these rules, the former
 for the whole of the carriage contemplated in the contract, the
 latter solely for the carriage which it performs.
       41. (1) The acts and omissions of the actual carrier and of
 its servants and agents acting within the scope of their
 employment shall, in relation to the carriage performed by the
 actual carrier, be deemed to be also those of the contracting
 carrier.
       (2) The acts and omissions of the contracting carrier and of
 its servants and agents acting within the scope of their
 employment shall, in relation to the carriage performed by the
 actual carrier, be deemed to be also those of the actual carrier.
 Nevertheless, no such act or omission shall subject the actual
 carrier to liability exceeding the amounts referred to in rules 
 21, 22, 23 and 24. Any special agreement under which the
 contracting carrier assumes obligations not imposed by the
 provisions of these rules or any waiver of rights or defences
 conferred by the provisions of these rules or any special
 declaration of interest in delivery at destination contemplated in
 rule 22 shall not affect the actual carrier unless agreed to by it.
       42. Any complaint to be made or instruction to be given
 under the provisions of these rules to the carrier shall have the
 same effect whether addressed to the contracting carrier or to
 the actual carrier. Nevertheless, instructions referred to in rule
 12 shall only be effective if addressed to the contracting carrier.
       43. In relation to the carriage performed by the actual
 carrier, any servant or agent of that carrier or of the contracting
 carrier shall, if they prove that they acted within the scope of
 their employment, be entitled to avail themselves of the
 conditions and limits of liability which are applicable under the
 provisions of these rules to the carrier whose servant or agent
 they are, unless it is proved that they acted in a manner that
 prevents the limits of liability from being invoked in
 accordance with the provisions of these rules.
       44. In relation to the carriage performed by the actual
 carrier, the aggregate of the amounts recoverable from that

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 carrier and the contracting carrier, and from their servants and
 agents acting within the scope of their employment, shall not
 exceed the highest amount which shall be awarded against
 either the contracting carrier or the actual carrier under the
 provisions of these rules, but none of the persons mentioned
 shall be liable for a sum in excess of the limit applicable to that
 person.
       45. In relation to the carriage performed by the actual
 carrier, an action for damages may be brought, at the option of
 the complainant, against that carrier or the contracting carrier,
 or against both together or separately. If the action is brought
 against only one of these carriers’, that carrier shall have the
 right to require the other carrier to be joined in the proceedings,
 the procedure and effects being governed by the law of the
 court seized of the case.
       46. Any action for damages contemplated in rule 45 must
 be brought, at the option of the complainant, in the territory of
 one of the State Parties, either before a court in which an action
 may be brought against the contracting carrier, as provided
 under rule 33, or before the court having jurisdiction at the
 place where the actual carrier has its domicile or its principal
 place of business.  
       47. Any contractual provision tending to relieve the
 contracting carrier or the actual carrier of liability under this
 Chapter or to fix a lower limit than that which is applicable
 according to this Chapter shall be null and void, but the nullity
 of any such provision does not involve the nullity of the whole
 contract, which shall remain subject to the provisions of this
 Chapter.           
       48. Except as provided in rule 45, nothing in this Chapter
 shall affect the rights and obligations of the carriers between
 themselves, including any right of recourse or indemnification.
CHAPTER VI
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
       49. Any clause contained in the contract of carriage and all
 special agreements entered into before the damage occurred by
 which the parties purport to infringe the rules laid down by
 these rules, whether by deciding the law to be applied, or by
 altering the rules as to jurisdiction, shall be null and void.
       50. State Parties shall require their carriers to maintain
 adequate insurance covering their liability under the provisions
 of these rules. A carrier may be required to furnish evidence
 that it maintains adequate insurance covering is liability under
 the provisions of these rules.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
       51. The provisions of rules, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 relating to the
 documentation of carriage shall not apply in the case of
 carriage performed in extraordinary circumstances outside the
 normal scope of a carrier’s business.
       52. The expression “days” when used in this Schedule
 means calander days and not working days.
ANNEXURE
[See sub-section (2) of section 3, sub-section (2) of section 4
 and sub-section (2) of section 4A]
PART-I
Sl. High Contracting Date of enforcement of
No. Parties to
 Convention
Convention
(l)        (2)            (3)
1. Afghanistan 21st May, 1969
2. Algeria 31st August, 1964
3. Angola 8th June, 1998
4. Argentina 19th June, 1952
5. Armenia 23rd February, 1999
6. Australia 30th October, 1935
7. Australia 27th December, 1961
8. Azerbaijan 23rd April, 2000
9. Bahamas 10th July, 1973
10 Bahrain 10th June, 1998
11. Bangladesh 26th March, 1971
12. Barbados 30th November, 1966
13. Belarus 25th December, 1959
14. Belgium 11th October, 1936
15. Benin 1st August, 1960
16. Bolivia 29th March, 1999
17. Bosnia and
 Herzegovina
6th March, 1992
18. Botswana 30th September, 1966
19. Brazil 13th February, 1933
20. Brunei 1st January, 1984

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 Darussalam
21. Bulgaria 23rd September, 1949
22. Burkina Faso 9th March, 1962
23. Cambodia 12th March, 1997
24. Cameroon 1st January, 1960
25. Canada 8th September, 1947
26. Cape Verde 8th May, 2002
27. Chile 31st May, 1979
28. China 18th October, 1958
29. Colombia 13th November, 1966
30. Comoros 9th September, 1991
31. Congo 15th August, 1960
32. Costa Rica 8th August, 1984
33. Cote d’ Ivoire 7th August, 1960
34. Croatia 8th October, 1991
35. Cuba 19th October, 1964
36. Cyprus 16th August, 1960
37. Czech Republic 1st January, 1993
38. Democratic
 People’s
30th May, 1961
 Republic of Korea  
39. Democratic
 Republic of the
 Congo
30th June, 1960
40. Denmark 1st October, 1937
 
41. Dominican Republic 25th May, 1972  
42. Ecuador 1st March, 1970  
43. Egypt 5th December, 1955  
44. EI Salvador   
45. Equatorial Guinea 19th March, 1989  
46. Estonia 14th June, 1998  
47. Ethiopia 12th November,
 1950
 
48. Fiji 10th October, 1970  
49. Finland 1st October, 1937  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
50. France 13th February, 1933  
51. Gabon 16th May, 1969  
52. Germany 29th December,
 1933  
53. Ghana 9th November,
 1997
 
54. Greece 11 th April, 1938  
55. Grenada   
56. Guatemala 4th May, 1997  
57. Guinea 10th December,
 1961
 
58. Honduras 25th September,
 1994
 
59. Hungary 27th August, 1936  
60. Iceland 19th November,
 1948
 
61. India 15th August, 1947  
62. Indonesia 17th August, 1945  
63. Iran (Islamic Republic
 of)
6th October, 1975
 
64. Iraq 26th September,
 1972
 
65. Ireland 19th December,
 1935
 
66. Israel 6th January, 1950  
67. Italy 15th May, 1933  
68. Japan 18th August, 1953  
69. Jordan 25th May, 1946  
70. Kazakhstan   
71. Kenya 12th December,
 1963
 
72. Kuwait 9th November,
 1975
 
73. Kyrgyzstan 9th May, 2000  
74. Lao People’s
 Democratic
19th July, 1949
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 Republic   
75. Latvia 13th February, 1933  
76. Lebanon 22nd November,
 1943  
77. Lesotho 4th October, 1966  
78. Liberia 31st July, 1942  
79. Libyan Arab
 Jamahiriya
14th August, 1969
 
80. Liechtenstein 7th August, 1934  
81. Lithuania   
82. Luxembourg 5th January, 1950  
83. Madagascar 26th June, 1960  
84. Malawi 25th January, 1978  
85. Malaysia 16th September,
 1963
 
86. Maldives 11th January, 1996  
87. Mali 26th April, 1961  
88. Malta 21st September,
 1964
 
89. Mauritania 4th November,
 1962
 
90. Mauritius 15th January, 1990  
91. Mexico 15th May, 1933  
92. Monaco   
93. Mongolia 29th July, 1962  
94. Morocco 5th April, 1958  
95. Myanmar 4th January, 1948  
96. Nauru 31st January, 1968  
97. Nepal 13th May, 1966  
98. Netherlands 29th September,
 1933
 
99. New Zealand 5th July, 1937  
100. Niger 3rd August, 1960  
101. Nigeria 1st October, 1960  
102. Norway 1st October, 1937  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
103. Oman 4th November,
 1976  
104. Pakistan 14th August, 1947  
105. Panama 10th February, 1997  
106. Papua New Guinea 16th September,
 1975  
107. Paraguay 26th November,
 1969
 
108. Peru 3rd October, 1998  
109. Philippines 7th February, 1991  
110. Poland 13th February, 1933  
111. Portugal 18th June, 1947  
112. Qatar 22nd March, 1987  
113. Republic of Korea   
114. Republic of Moldova 19th June, 1997  
115. Romania 13th February, 1933  
116. Russian Federation 18th November,
 1934
 
117. Rwanda 1st July, 1962  
118. Saint Vincent and the 27th October, 1979
 
 Grenadines   
119. Samona 1st January, 1962  
120. Saudi Arabia 27th April, 1969  
121. Senegal 17th September,
 1964
 
122. Serbia and
 Montenegro
27th April, 1992
 
123. Seychelles 22nd September,
 1980
 
124. Sierra Leone 27th April, 1961  
125. Singapore 3rd December, 1971  
126. Slovakia 1st January, 1993  
127. Slovenia 25th June, 1991  
128. Solomon Islands 7th July, 1978  
129. South Africa 22nd March, 1955

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
130. Spain 13th February, 1933  
131. Sri Lanka 4th February, 1948  
132. Sudan 12th May, 1975  
133. Suriname 28th September,
 2003  
134. Swaziland   
135. Sweden 1st October, 1937  
136. Switzerland 7th August, 1934  
137. Syrian Arab Republic 2nd March, 1959  
138. The former Yugoslav 17th September,
 1991
 
 Republic of
 Macedonia
30th September,
 1980
 
139. Togo   
140. Tonga 4th June, 1970  
141. Trinidad and Tobago 31st August, 1962  
142. Tunisia 13th February, 1964  
143. Turkey 23rd June, 1978  
144. Turkmenistan 20th March, 1995  
145. Uganda 22nd October, 1963  
146. Ukraine 12th November,
 1959  
147. United Arab Emirates 3rd July, 1986  
148. United Kingdom 15th May, 1933  
149. United Kingdom for
 the
3rd March, 1935
 
 following territories:   
 - Bermuda   
 - British Antarctic
 Territory
  
 - Cayman, Turks and   
    Calcos Islands   
 - Akrotiri and
 Dhekelia
  
 - Falkland Islands and   

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
   Dependencies   
 - Hong Kong   
 - Monsserrat St.
 Helena
 
 
   And Ascension   
150. United Republic of 6th July, 1965  
 Tanzania   
151. United States 29th October, 1934  
152. Uruguay 2nd October, 1979  
153. Uzbekistan 28th May, 1997  
154. Vanuatu 24th January, 1982  
155. Venezuela 13th September,
 1955
 
156. Viet Nam 9th January, 1983  
157. Yemen 4th August, 1982  
158. Zambia 24th October, 1964  
159. Zimbabwe 18th April, 1980  
    
 
 
PART-II
Sl. High Contracting Date of enforcement
 of
No. Parties to Convention Convention
(l)        (2)            (3)
1.  Afghanistan 21st May
2. Algeria 31st August
3. Angola 8th June
4. Argentina 10th September
5. Australia 1st August
6. Austria 24th June
7. Azerbaijan 23rd April
8. Bahamas 10th July
9. Bahrain 10th June
10. Bangladesh 26th March
11. Belarus 1st August

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
12. Belgium 25th November
13. Benin 1st Angust
14. Bosnia and
 Herzegovina
6th March
15. Brazil 14th September
16. Bulgaria 13th March
17. Cambodia 12th March
18. Cameroon 1st August
19. Canada 17th July
20. Cape Verde 8th May
21. Chile 31st May
22. China 18th November
23. Colombia 13th November
24. Congo 1st August
25. Costa Rica 8th August, 1984
26. Cote d’ Ivoire 1st August, 1963
27. Croatia 8th October, 1991
28. Cuba 28th November,
 1965
29. Cyprus 21st October, 1970
30. Czech Republic 1st January, 1993
31. Democratic People’s 2nd February, 1981
 Republic of Korea  
32. Denmark 1st August, 1963
33. Dominican Republic 25th May, 1972
34. Ecuador 1st March, 1970
35. Egypt 1st August, 1963
36. EI Salvador 1st August, 1963
37. Estonia 14th June, 1998
38. Fiji 10th October, 1970
39. Finland 23rd August, 1977
40. France 1st August, 1963
41. Gabon 16th May, 1969
42. Germany 1st August, 1963

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
43. Ghana 9th November, 1997
44. Greece 21st September, 1965
45. Grenada 13th November,
 1985
46. Guatemala 26th October, 1971
47. Guinea 7th January, 1991
48. Hungary 1st August, 1963
49. Iceland 1st August, 1963
50. India 15th May, 1973
51. Iran (Islamic
 Republic of)
6th October, 1975
52. Iraq 1st August, 1963
53. Ireland 1st August, 1963
54. Israel 3rd November, 1964
55. Italy 2nd August, 1963
56. Japan 8th November, 1967
57. Jordan 13th February, 1974
58. Kazakhstan 28th November,
 2002
59. Kenya 4th October, 1999
60. Kuwait 9th November, 1975
61. Kyrgyzstan 9th May, 2000
62. Lao People’s
 Democratic
 Republic
1st August, 1963
63. Latvia 31st December, 1998
64. Lebanon 8th August, 1978
65. Lesotho 15th January, 1976
66. Libyan Arab
 Jamahiriya
14th August, 1969
67. Liechtenstein 3rd April, 1966
68. Lithuania 19th February, 1997
69. Luxembourg 1st August, 1963
70. Madagascar 1st August, 1963
71. Malawi 7th September, 1971
72. Malaysia 19th December, 1974

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
73. Maldives 11th January, 1996
74. Mali 29th March, 1964
75. Mauritius 15th January, 1990
76. Mexico 1st August, 1963
77. Monaco 8th July, 1979
78. Morocco 15th February, 1976
79. Nauru 31st January, 1968
80. Nepal 13th May, 1966
81. Netherlands 1st August, 1963
82. New Zealand 14th June, 1967
83. Niger 1st August, 1963
84. Nigeria 29th September,
 1969
85. Norway 1st August, 1963
86. Oman 2nd November, 1987
87. Pakistan 1st August, 1963
88. Panama 10th February, 1997
89. Papua New Guinea 16th September,
 1975
90. Paraguay 26th November,
 1969
91. Peru 3rd October, 1988
92. Philippines 28th February, 1967
93. Poland 1st August, 1963
94. Portugal 15th December, 1963
95. Qatar 22nd March, 1987
96. Republic of Korea 11th October, 1967
97. Republic of Moldova 19th June, 1997
98. Romania 1st August, 1963
99. Russian Federation 1st August, 1963
100. Rwanda 27th March, 1991
101. Saint Vincent and 3rd March, 2002
 The Grenadines  
102. Samona 14th January, 1973

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
103. Saudi Arabia 27th April, 1969
104. Senegal 17th September,
 1964
105. Serbia and
 Montenegro
27th April, 1992
106. Seychelles 22nd September,
 1980
107. Singapore 4th February, 1968
108. Slovakia 1st January, 1993
109. Slovenia 25th June, 1991
110. Solomon Islands 7th July, 1978
111. South Africa 17th December, 1967
112. Spain 6th March, 1966
113. Sri Lanka 25th May, 1997
114. Sudan 12th May, 1975
115. Suriname 17th January, 2005
116. Swaziland 18th October, 1978
117. Sweden 1st August, 1963
118. Switzerland 1st August, 1963
119. Syrian Arab
 Republic
1st August, 1963
120. The former Yugoslav
 Republic of
 Macedonia
17th September,
 1991
121. Togo 30th September,
 1980
122. Tonga 22nd May, 1977
123. Trinidad and Tobago 8th August, 1983
124. Tunisia 13th February, 1964
125. Turkey 23rd June, 1978
126. Ukraine 1st August, 1963
127. United Arab
 Emirates
16th January, 1994
128. United Kingdom 1st June, 1967
129. United Kingdom for
 the following
 territories:
1st June, 1967
 - Bermuda  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 - British Antarctic  
   Territory  
 - Cayman, Turks and  
   Calcos Islands  
130. United States 14th December
131. Uzbekistan 28th May
132. Vanuatu 24th January
133. Venezuela 1st August
134. Viet Nam 9th January
135. Yemen 4th August
136. Zambia 23rd June
137. Zimbabwe 25th January
 
PART-III
Sl. No. State Parties Date of enforcement
(1)     (2)            (3)
1. Albania 19th December, 2004
2. Austria 28th June, 2004
3. Bahrain 4th November, 2003
4. Barbados 4th November, 2003
5. Belgium 28th June, 2004
6. Belize 4th November, 2003
7. Benin 29th May, 2004
8. Botswana 4th November, 2003
9. Bulgaria 9th January., 2004
10. Cameroon 4th November, 2003
11. Canada 4th November, 2003
12. Cape Verde 22nd October, 2004
13. China 31st July, 2005
14. Colombia 4th November, 2003
15. Cuba 13th December, 2005
16. Cyprus 4th November, 2003
17. Czech Republic 4th November, 2003
18. Denmark 28th June, 2004

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
19. Egypt 25th April, 2005
20. Estonia 4th November, 2003
21. Finland 28th June, 2004
22. France 28th June, 2004
23. Gambia 9th May, 2004
24. Germany 28th June, 2004
25. Greece 4th November, 2003
26. Hungary 7th January, 2005
27. Iceland 16th August, 2004
28. Ireland 28th June, 2004
29. Italy 28th June, 2004
30. Japan 4th November, 2003
31. Jordan 4th November, 2003
32. Kenya 4th November, 2003
33. Kuwait 4th November, 2003
34. Latvia 15th February, 2005
35. Lebanon 14th May, 2005
36. Lithuania 29th January, 2005
37. Luxembourg 28th June, 2004
38. Maldives 30th December, 2005
39. Malta 4th July, 2004
40. Mexico 4th November, 2003
41. Monaco 17th October, 2004
42. Mongolia 4th December, 2004
43. Namibia 4th November, 2003
44. Netherlands 28th June, 2004
45. New Zealand 4th November, 2003
46. Nigeria 4th November, 2003
47. Norway 28th June, 2004
48. Panama 4th November, 2003
49. Paraguay 4th November, 2003
50. Peru 4th November, 2003
51. Portugal 4th November, 2003
52. Qatar 14th January, 2005

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
53. Romania 4th November, 2003
54. Saint Vincent and the 28th May, 2004
 Grenadines  
55. Saudi Arabia 14th December, 2003
56. Slovakia 4th November, 2003
57. Slovenia 4th November, 2003
58. Spain 28th June, 2004
59. Sweden 28th June, 2004
60. Switzerland 5th September, 2005
61. Syrian Arab Republic 4th November, 2003
62. The former Yugoslav 4th November, 2003
 Republic of
 Macedonia
 
63. Tonga 19th January, 2004
64. United Arab Emirates 4th November, 2003
65. United Kingdom 28th June, 2004
66. United Republic of 4th November, 2003
 Tanzania  
67. United States 4th November, 2003
68. Vanuatu 8th January, 2006
69. European
 Community
28th June, 2004."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
        The legal regime governing the liability of air carriers for injury or death of passengers, for destruction or damage or loss or damage
 to baggage and cargo and losses caused by delay in international carriage is set out in a number of international instruments. However,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 India has ratified only two instruments, namely the Warsaw Convention, 1929 and the Warsaw Convention as amended by the Hague
 Protocol, 1955, and the same has been given effect to by the Carriage by Air Act, 1972.
2.     As the limits of liability were considered to be inadequate, the International Civil Aviation Organisation took the initiative and
 carried out a socio-economic study with a view to revising the levels of compensation and modernising the existing liability provisions.
 The deliberations in several meetings of the Legal Committee of the International Civil Aviation Organisation culminated in the
 adoption of the Convention for the unification of certain rules for International Carriage by Air (popularly known as Montreal
 Convention, 1999) at a Diplomatic Conference held on 28th May, 1999.
3.     The salient features of the Montreal Convention are­ :
(i)    amount  of compensation for death or injury has been enhanced to 1,00,000 Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) instead of Gold
 Francs which after conversion came to US $ 20,000;
(ii)   choice of jurisdiction has been expanded to include the place of domicile of the passenger;
(iii) provision for advance payment in case of death or bodily injury;
(iv) provision for review of limits of liability based on inflation so that the need to amend the Convention is obviated;
        (v)    recognition of the use of electronic documents such as e-ticket, etc.; and
(vi) to bring uniformity in the application of liability regime ending the multiplicity of international instruments.
4.     In view of the above, it is proposed-to accede to the Convention for unification of certain rules for international carriage by air so
 that India is at par with other major countries of the world. In order to give effect to the provisions of the Convention in India, it is
 imperative that appropriate legislative action is taken. For this purpose, it is proposed to amend certain provisions of the Carriage by Air
 Act, 1972 and also to include the text of the Montreal Convention to the said Act as the Third Schedule.
5.     The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                          PRAFUL PATEL.
The 12th March, 2007.
 
 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CARRIAGE BY AIR ACT, 1972
(69 OF 1972)
s.
An Act to give effect to the Convention for the unification of
 certain rules relating to international carriage by air signed at
 Warsaw on the 12th day of October, 1929 and to the said
 Convention as amended by the Hague Protocol on the 28th
 day of September, 1955 and to make provision for applying
 the rules contained in the said Convention in its original form
 and in the amended form (subject to exception, adapations
 and modifications) to non-international carriage by air and for
 matters connected therewith.
*      *       *      *                     *
        2. In this Act, unless the context requires,­–
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
n of Convention to
n of amended
on to India.
 n case of Death.
n of Act to carriage
   ch is not
*      *       *      *                     *
     3. (1)   *      *                     *                        *
        (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the
 Official Gazette, certify who are the High Contracting Parties
 to the Convention, in respect of what territories they are
 parties and to what extent they have availed themselves of the
 provisions of rule 36 in the First Schedule and any such
 notification shall be conclusive evidence of the matters
 certified therein.
*      *       *      *                     *
        (5) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) of
 section 2 of the Indian Carriage by Air Act, 1934 and in force
 immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be
 deemed to have been issued under sub-section (2) of this
 section and shall continue to be in force until such
 notification is superseded.
     4. (1)   *      *                     *                        *
        (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the
 Official Gazette, certify who are the High Contracting Parties
 to the amended Convention and in respect of what territories
 they are parties, and any such notification shall be conclusive
 evidence of the matters certified therein.
*      *       *      *                     *
        5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Fatal
 Accidents Act, 1855 or any other enactment or rule of law in
 force in any part of India, the rules contained in the First
 Schedule and in the Second Schedule shall, in all cases to
 which those rules apply, determine the liability of a carrier in
 respect of the death of a passenger.
*      *       *      *                     *
        (5) The Court before which any such action is brought
 may, at any stage of the proceedings, make any such order as
 appears to the Court to be just and equitable in view of the
 provisions of the First Schedule or of the Second Schedule, as
 the case may be, limiting the liability of a carrier and of any
 proceedings which have been or are likely to be commenced
 outside India in respect of the death of the passenger in
 question.
*      *       *      *                     *
     8. (1)   *      *                     *                        *
        (3) Every notification issued by the Central Government
 under section 4 of the Indian Carriage by Air Act, 1934 and
 in force immediately before the commencement of this Act
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 of l934.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 of l855.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 nal.
 shall be deemed to have been issued under sub-section (1)
 and shall continue to be in force until such notification is
 superseded.
*      *       *      *    *
 
 
20 of l934.
 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
___________________
 
 
 
 
 
A
BILL
further to amend the Carriage by Air Act, 1972.
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
 
___________________
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Praful Patel, Minister of Civil Aviation)
 
 
 
ANNEXURE - II
(Vide Para 44 of the Report)
‘THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 4A)
RULES
CHAPTER I
SCOPE OF APPLICATION
        1.     (1)    These rules shall apply to all international carriage of persons, baggage or cargo performed by aircraft for reward. They
 shall apply also to such carriage when performed gratuitously by an air transport undertaking.
               (2)    In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,­–
(a) “baggage” means both checked baggage and unchecked baggage;
(b) “days” means calendar days and not working days;
(c) “depository” means the International Civil Aviation Organisation;
(d) “State Party” means a signatory or acceding State to the Montreal Convention whose instrument of ratification or
 accession has been deposited with the depository.
        (3)    For the purposes of these rules, the expression, “international carriage” means any carriage in which, according to the
 agreement between the parties, the place of departure and the place of destination, whether or not there be a break in the carriage or
 a transshipment, are situated either within the territories of two State Parties, or within the territory of a single State Party if there is
 an agreed stopping place within the territory of another State, even if that State is not a State Party. A carriage between two points
 within the territory of a single State Party without an agreed stopping place within the territory of another State shall not be deemed
 to be international carriage for the purposes of these rules.
        (4)    A carriage to be performed by several sccessive air carriers shall be deemed for the purposes of these rules, to be one
 undivided carriage if it has been regarded by the parties as a single operation, whether it has been agreed upon under the form of a
 single contract or of a series of contracts, and it shall not lose its international character merely because one contract or a series of
 contracts is to be performed entirely within the territory of the same State.
        (5)    These rules shall apply also to carriage as set out in Chapter V, subject to the terms contained therein.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
        2.     (1)    These rules shall apply to carriage performed by the State or by legally constituted public bodies provided it falls within
 the conditions laid down in rule 1.
        (2)    In the carriage of postal items, the carrier shall be liable only to the relevant postal administration in accordance with the
 rules applicable to the relationship between the carriers and the postal administration.
        (3)    Except as provided in sub-rule (2), these rules shall not apply to the carriage of postal items.
CHAPTER II
DOCUMENTATION AND DUTIES OF THE PARTIES RELATING TO THE
 CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS, BAGGAGE AND CARGO
        3.     (1)    In respect of carriage of passengers, an individual or collective document of carriage shall be delivered containing­ –
        (a)         an indication of the places of departure and destination;
        (b)         if the places of departure and destination are within the territory of a single State Party, one or more agreed
 stopping places being within the territory of another State, an indication of at least one of such stopping places.
        (2)    Any other means which preserves the information indicated in sub-rule (1) may be substituted for the delivery of the
 document referred to in that sub-rule. If any such other means is used, the carrier shall offer to deliver to the passenger a written
 statement of the information so preserved.
        (3)    The carrier shall deliver to the passenger a baggage identification tag for each piece of checked baggage.
        (4)    The passenger shall be given written notice to the effect that where these rules are applicable it governs and may limit the
 liability of carriers in respect of death or injury and for destruction or loss of, or damage to, baggage, and for delay.
        (5)    Non-compliance with the provisions of sub-rules (1), (2) and (3) shall not affect the existence or the validity of the
 contract of carriage, which shall, nonetheless, be subject to these rules including those relating to limitation of liability.
        4.     (1)    In respect of the carriage of cargo, an air waybill shall be delivered.
        (2)    Any other means which preserves a record of the carriage to be performed may be substituted for the delivery of an air
 waybill. If such other means are used, the carrier shall, if so requested by the consignor, deliver to the consignor a cargo receipt
 permitting identification of the consignment and access to the information contained in the record preserved by such other means.
        5.     The air waybill or the cargo receipt shall include­ –
               (a) an indication of the places of departure and destination;
        (b) if the places of departure and destination are within the territory of a single State Party, one or more agreed stopping places
 being within the territory of another State, an indication of at least one of such stopping places; and
        (c) an indication of the weight of the consignment.
        6.     The consignor may be required, if necessary to meet the formalities of customs, police and similar public authorities, to deliver
 a document indicating the nature of the cargo. This provision shall not create for the carrier any duty, obligation or liability resulting
 therefrom.
        7.     (1)    The air waybill shall be made out by the consignor in three original parts. The first part shall be marked “for the carrier”
 and it shall be signed by the consignor. The second part shall be marked “for the consignee” and it shall be signed by the consignor and
 by the carrier. The third part shall be signed by the carrier who shall hand it to the consignor after the cargo has been accepted.
        (2)    The signature of the carrier and of the consignor may be printed or stamped.
        (3)    If, at the request of the consignor, the carrier makes out the air waybill, the carrier shall be deemed, subject to proof to the
 contrary, to have done so on behalf of the consignor.
        8.     When there is more than one package­ –

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
        (a) the carrier has the right to require the consignor to make out separate air waybills;
        (b) the consignor has the right to require the carrier to deliver separate cargo receipts when the other means referred to in sub-
rule (2) of rule 4 are used.
        9.     Non-compliance with the provisions of rules 4,5,6, 7 and 8 shall not affect the existence or the validity of the contract of
 carriage, which shall, nonetheless, be subject to these rules including those relating to limitation of liability.
        10.   (1)    The consignor is responsible for the correctness of the particulars and statements relating to the cargo inserted by it or on
 its behalf in the air waybill or furnished by it or on its behalf to the carrier for insertion in the cargo receipt or for insertion in the record
 preserved by the other means referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 4. The foregoing shall also apply where the person acting on behalf of the
 consignor is also the agent of the carrier.  
        (2)    The consignor shall indemnify the carrier against all damage suffered by it, or by any other person to whom the carrier is
 liable, by reason of the irregularity, incorrectness or incompleteness of the particulars and statements furnished by the consignor or
 on its behalf.
        (3)    Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (1) and (2), the carrier shall indemnify the consignor against all damages suffered
 by it, or by any other person to whom the consignor is liable, by reason of the irregularity, incorrectness or incompleteness of the
 particulars and statements inserted by the carrier or on its behalf in the cargo receipt or in the record preserved by the other means
 referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 4.
        11.   (1)    The air waybill or the cargo receipt shall be prima facie evidence of the conclusion of the contract, of the acceptance of
 the cargo and of the conditions of carriage mentioned therein.
        (2)    Any statements in the air waybill or the cargo receipt relating to the weight, dimensions and packing of the cargo, as well
 as those relating to the number of packages, are prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein; those relating to the quantity,
 volume and condition of the cargo do not constitute evidence against the carrier except so far as they both have been, and are stated
 in the air waybill or the cargo receipt to have been, checked by it in the presence of the consignor, or relate to the apparent
 condition of the cargo.
        12.   (1)    Subject to its liability to carry out all its obligations under the contract of carriage, the consignor has the right to dispose
 of the cargo by withdrawing it at the airport of departure or destination, or by stopping it in the course of the journey on any landing, or
 by calling for it to be delivered at the place of destination or in the course of the journey to a person other than the consignee originally
 designated, or by requiring it to be returned to the airport of departure. The consignor shall not exercise this right of disposition in such a
 way as to prejudice the carrier or other consignors and shall reimburse any expenses occasioned by the exercise of this right.
        (2)    If it is impossible to carry out the instructions of the consignor, the carrier shall so inform the consignor forthwith.
        (3)    If the carrier carries out the instructions of the consignor for the disposition of the cargo without requiring the production
 of the part of the air waybill or the cargo receipt delivered to the latter, the carrier shall be liable, without prejudice to its right of
 recovery from the consignor, for any damage which may be caused thereby to any person who is lawfully in possession of that part
 of the air waybill or the cargo receipt.
        (4)    The right conferred on the consignor ceases at the moment when that of the consignee begins in accordance with rule 13.
 Nevertheless, if the consignee declines to accept the cargo, or cannot be communicated with, the consignor shall resume its right of
 disposition.         
        13.   (1)    Except when the consignor has exercised its right under rule 12, the consignee shall be entitled, on arrival of the cargo at
 the place of destination, to require the carrier to deliver the cargo to it, on payment of the charges due and on complying with the
 conditions of carriage.
        (2)    Unless it is otherwise agreed, it shall be the duty of the carrier to give notice to the consignee as Soon as the cargo arrives.
        (3)    If the carrier admits the loss of the cargo, or if the cargo has not arrived at the expiration of seven days after the date on
 which it ought to have arrived, the consignee shall be entitled to enforce against the carrier the rights which flow from the contract
 of carriage.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
        14.   The consignor and the consignee may respectively enforce all the rights given to them by rules 12 and 13, each in its own
 name, whether it is acting in its own interest or in the interest of another, provided that it carries out the obligations imposed by the
 contract of carriage.
        15.   (1)    The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 shall not affect either the relations of the consignor and the consignee with each
 other or the mutual relations of third parties whose rights are derived either from the consignor or from the consignee.
        (2)    The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 shall be varied only by express provision in the air waybill or the cargo receipt.
        16.   (1)    The consignor shall furnish such information and such documents as are necessary to meet the formalities of customs,
 police and any other public authorities before the cargo can be delivered to the consignee. The consignor shall be liable to the carrier for
 any damage occasioned by the absence, insufficiency or irregularity of any such information or documents, unless the damage is due to
 the fault of the carrier, its servants or agents.
        (2)    The carrier shall be under no obligation to enquire into the correctness or sufficiency of such information or documents.
CHAPTER III
LIABILITY OF THE CARRIER AND EXTENT OF COMPENSATION FOR
DAMAGES
        17.   (1)    The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in case of death or bodily injury of a passenger upon condition only that
 the accident which caused the death or injury took place on board the aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or
 disembarking.
        (2)    The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in case of destruction or loss of, or of damage to checked baggage upon
 condition only that the event which caused the destruction, loss or damage took place on board the aircraft or during any period
 within which the checked baggage was in the charge of the carrier. However, the carrier shall not be liable if and to the extent that
 the damage resulted from the inherent defect, quality or vice of the baggage. In the case of unchecked baggage, including personal
 items, the carrier is liable if the damage has resulted from its fault or that of its servants or agents.
        (3)    If the carrier admits the loss of the checked baggage, or if the checked baggage has not arrived at the expiration of
 twenty-one days after the date on which it ought to have arrived, the passenger shall be entitled to enforce against the carrier the
 rights which flow from the contract of carriage.
        18.   (1)    The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in the event of the destruction or loss of, or damage to, cargo upon
 condition only that the event which caused the damage so sustained took place during the carriage by air.
        (2)    However, the carrier shall not be liable if and to the extent it proves that the destruction, or loss of, or damage to, the
 cargo resulted from one or more of the following:­
        (a) inherent defect, quality or vice of that cargo;
        (b) defective packing of that cargo performed by a person other than the carrier or its servants or agents;
        (c) an act of war or an armed conflict; and
        (d) an act of public authority carried out in connection with the entry, exit or transit of the cargo.
        (3)    The carriage by air within the meaning of sub-rule (1) comprises the period during which the cargo is in charge of the
 carrier.
        (4) The period of the carriage by air shall not extend to any carriage by land, by sea or by inland waterway performed outside
 an airport. If, however, such carriage takes place in the performance of a contract for carriage by air, for the purpose of loading,
 delivery or transshipment, any damage is presumed, subject to proof to the contrary, to have been the result of an event which took
 place during the carriage by air. If a carrier, without the consent of the consignor, substitutes carriage by another mode of transport
 for the whole or part of a carriage intended by the agreement between the parties to be carriage by air, such carriage by another
 mode of transport is deemed to be within the period of carriage by air.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
        19.   The carrier shall be liable for damage occasioned by delay in the carriage by air of passengers, baggage or cargo. Nevertheless,
 the carrier shall not be liable for damage occasioned by delay if it proves that it and its servants and agents took all measures that could
 reasonably be required to avoid the damage or that it was impossible for it or them to take such measures.
        20.   If the carrier proves that the damages was caused or contributed to by the negligence or other wrongful act or omission of the
 person claiming compensation, or the person from whom he or she derives his or her rights, the carrier shall be wholly or partly
 exonerated from its liability to the claimant to the extent that such negligence or wrongful act or omission caused or contributed to the
 damage. When by reason of death or injury of a passenger compensation is claimed by a person other than the passenger, the carrier shall
 likewise be wholly or partly exonerated from its liability to the extent that it proves that the damage was caused or contributed to by the
 negligence or other wrongful act or omission of that passenger. This rule applies to all the liability provisions of these rules, including
 sub-rule (1) of rule 21.
        21.   (1)    For damages arising under sub-rule (1) of rule 17 not exceeding one lakh Special Drawing Rights for each passenger, the
 carrier shall not be able to exclude or limit its liability.
        (2) The carrier shall not be liable for damages arising under sub-rule (1) of rule 17 to the extent that they exceed for each
 passenger one lakh Special Drawing Rights if the carrier proves that­ –
        (a) such damage was not due to the negligence or other wrongful act or omission of the carrier or its servants or agents; or
        (b) such damage was solely due to the negligence or other wrongful act or omission of a third party.
        22.   (1)    In the case of damage caused by delay as specified in rule 19 in the carriage of persons, the liability of the carrier for each
 passenger is limited to four thousand one hundred and fifty Special Drawing Rights.
        (2)    In the carriage of baggage, the liability of the carrier in the case of destruction, loss, damage or delay shall be limited to
 one thousand Special Drawing Rights for each passenger unless the passenger has made, at the time when the checked baggage was
 handed over to the carrier, a special declaration of interest in delivery at destination and has paid a supplementary sum, if so
 required. In that case, the carrier shall be liable to pay a sum not exceeding the declared sum, unless it proves that the sum is greater
 than the passenger’s actual interest in delivery at destination.
        (3) In the carriage of cargo, the liability of the carrier in the case of destruction, loss, damage or delay is limited to a sum of
 seventeen Special Drawing Rights per kilogramme, unless the consignor has made, at the time when the package was handed over
 to the carrier, a special declaration of interest in delivery at destination and has paid a supplementary sum, if so required. In that
 case, the carrier shall be liable to pay a sum not exceeding the declared sum, unless it proves that the sum is greater than the
 consignor’s actual interest in delivery at destination.
        (4)    In the case of delay, destruction, loss or damage of part of the cargo, or of any object contained therein, the weight to be
 taken into consideration in determining the amount to which the carrier’s liability is limited shall be only the total weight of the
 package or packages concerned. Nevertheless, when the delay, destruction, loss or damage of a part of the cargo, or of an object
 contained therein, affects the value of other packages covered by the same air waybill, or the same receipt or, if they were not
 issued, by the same record preserved by other means referred to in sub-rule (2), of rule 4, the total weight of such package or
 packages shall also be taken into consideration in determining the limit of liability.
        (5)    The provisions of sub-rules (1) and (2) shall not apply if it is proved that the damage resulted from an act or omission of
 the carrier, its servants or agents, done with intent to cause damage or recklessly and with knowledge that damage world probably
 result:         
        Provided that, in the case of such act or omission of a servant or agent, it is also proved that such servant or agent was acting
 within the scope of its employment.
        (6)    The limits prescribed in rule 21 and in this rule shall not prevent the court from awarding, in accordance with its own law,
 in addition, the whole or part of the court costs and of the other expenses of the litigation incurred by the plaintiff, including
 interest. The foregoing provision shall not apply if the amount of the damages awarded, excluding court costs and other expenses of
 the litigation, does not exceed the sum which the carrier has offered in writing to the plaintiff within a period of six months from

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 the date of the occurrence causing the damage, or before the commencement of the action, if that is later.
        23.   The sums mentioned in terms of Special Drawing Right in these rules shall be deemed to refer to the Special Drawing Right as
 defined by the International Monetary Fund and its conversion into national currencies shall, in case of judicial proceedings, be made in
 accordance with the method of valuation applied by the International Monetary Fund, in effect at the date of the judgment, for its
 operations and transactions.
        24.   (1)    Without prejudice to the provisions of rule 25 and subject to sub-rule (2), the limits of liability prescribed in rules 21, 22
 and 23 shall be reviewed by the depository at five-year intervals, the first such review to take place at the end of the fifth year following
 the date of coming into force of these rules. The measure of the rate of inflation to be used in determining the inflation factor shall be the
 weighted average of the annual rates of increase or decrease in the Consumer Price Indices of the States whose currencies comprise the
 Special Drawing Right mentioned in rule 23.
        (2)    If the review referred to in sub-rule (1) concludes that the inflation factor has exceeded ten per cent., the depositary shall
 notify State Parties of a revision of the limits of liability. Any such revision shall become effective six months after its notification
 to the State Parties. If within three months after its notification to the State Parties, a majority of the State Parties register their
 disapproval, the revision shall not become effective and the depositary shall refer the matter to a meeting of the State Parties. The
 depositary shall immediately notify all States Parties about the coming into force of any revision.
        (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the procedure referred to in sub-rule (2) shall be applied at any time
 provided that one-third of the State Parties express a desire to that effect and upon condition that the inflation factor referred to in
 sub-rule (1) has exceeded thirty per cent since the previous revision or since the date of entry into force of the Montreal Convention
 if there has been no previous revision. Subsequent reviews using the procedure specified in sub-rule (1) shall take place at five-year
 intervals starting at the end of the fifth year following the date of the reviews under the provisions of this sub-rule.
        25.   A carrier may stipulate that the contract of carriage shall be subject to higher limits of liability than those provided for in these
 rules or to no limits of liability whatsoever.
        26.   Any provision tending to relieve the carrier of liability or to fix a lower limit than that which is laid down in these rules shall be
 null and void, but the nullity’ of any such provision does not involve the nullity of the whole contract, which shall remain subject to the
 provisions of these rules.
        27.   Nothing contained in these rules shall prevent the carrier from refusing to enter into any contract of carriage, from waiving any
 defence available in these rules, or from laying down conditions, which are not contrary to the provisions of these rules.
        28.   Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where the aircraft accident results in death or
 injury of passengers, the carrier shall make advance payments without delay to a natural person or persons who are entitled to claim
 compensation in order to meet the immediate economic needs of such persons. Such advance payments shall not constitute a recognition
 of liability and may be offset against any amounts subsequently paid as damages by the carrier.
        29.   In the carriage of passengers, baggage and cargo, any action for damages, however founded, whether under these rules or in
 contract or in tort or otherwise, can only be brought subject to the conditions and such limits of liability as are set out in these rules
 without prejudice to the question as to who are the persons who have the right to bring suit and what are their respective rights. In any
 such action, punitive, exemplary or any other noncompensatory damages shall not be recoverable.
        30.   (1)    If an action is brought against a servant or agent of the carrier arising out of damage to which these rules relate, such
 servant or agent, if they prove that they acted within the scope of their employment, shall be entitled to avail themselves of the
 conditions and limits of liability which the carrier itself is entitled to invoke under these rules.
        (2)    The aggregate of the amounts recoverable from the carrier, its servants and agents, in that case, shall not exceed the said
 limits.
        (3)    Except in respect of the carriage of cargo, the provisions of sub-rules (1) and (2) shall not apply if it is proved that the
 damage resulted from an act or omission of the servant or agent done with intent to cause damage or recklessly and with the
 knowledge that damage would probably result.
        31.   (1)    Receipt by the person entitled to delivery of checked baggage or cargo without complaint is prima facie evidence that the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 same has been delivered in good condition and in accordance with the document of carriage or with the record preserved by the other
 means referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 3 and sub-rule (2) of rule 4.
        (2)    In the case of damage, the person entitled to delivery shall make a complaint to the carrier forthwith after the discovery of
 the damage, and, at the latest, within seven days from the date of receipt in the case of checked baggage and fourteen days from the
 date of receipt in the case of cargo. In the case of delay, the complaint shall be made at the latest within twenty-one days from the
 date on which the baggage or cargo have been placed at his disposal.
        (3)    Every complaint shall be made in writing and given or dispatched within the period specified in sub-rule (2).
        (4)    If no complaint is made within the period specified in sub-rule (2), no action shall lie against the carrier, except in the
 case of fraud committed by the carrier.
        32.   In the case of the death of the person liable, an action for damages lies in accordance with these rules against those legally
 representing his or her estate.
        33.   (1)    An action for damages shall be brought, at the option of the claimant of damages, in the territory of one of the State
 Parties, either before the court of the domicile of the carrier or of its principal place of business, or where it has a place of business
 through which the contract has been made or before the court at the place of destination.
        (2)    In respect of damage resulting from the death or injury of a passenger, an action may be brought before one of the courts
 mentioned in sub-rule (1), or in the territory of a State Party in which at the time of the accident the passenger has his or her
 principal and permanent residence and to or from which the carrier operates services for the carriage of passengers by air, either on
 its own aircraft, or on another carrier’s aircraft pursuant to a commercial agreement, and in which that carrier conducts its business
 of carriage of passengers by air from premises leased or owned by the carrier itself or by another carrier with which it has a
 commercial agreement.
        (3)    For the purposes of sub-rule (2)­
        (a) “commercial agreement” means an agreement, other than an agency agreement, made between carriers and relating to
 the provision of their joint services for carriage of passengers by air;
        (b) “principal and permanent residence” means the one fixed and permanent abode of the passenger at the time of the
 accident. The nationality of the passenger shall not be the determining factor in this regard.
        (4)    Questions of procedure shall be governed by the law of the court seized of the case.
        34.   (1)    Subject to the provisions of this rule, the parties to the contract of carriage for cargo may stipulate that any dispute relating
 to the liability of the carrier under these rules shall be settled by arbitration. Such agreement shall be in writing.
        (2)    The arbitration proceedings shall, at the option of the claimant, take place within one of the jurisdictions referred to in
 rule 33.
        (3)    The arbitrator or arbitration tribunal shall apply the provisions of these rules.
        (4)    The provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) shall be deemed to be part of every arbitration clause or agreement, and any term
 of such clause or agreement which is inconsistent therewith shall be null and void.
        35.   (1)    The right to damages shall be extinguished if an action is not brought within a period of two years, reckoned from the date
 of arrival at the destination, or from the date on which the aircraft ought to have arrived, or from the date on which the carriage stopped.
        (2)    The method of calculating the period shall be determined by the law of the court seized of the case.
        36.   (1)    In the case of carriage to be performed by various successive carriers and falling within the definition set out in sub-rule
 (4) of rule 1, each carrier which accepts passengers, baggage or cargo shall be subject to the provisions of these rules and shall be
 deemed to be one of the parties to the contract of carriage in so far as the contract deals with that part of the carriage which is performed
 under its supervision.
        (2)    In the case of carriage of this nature, the passenger or any person entitled to compensation shall be entitled to take action

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 only against the carrier which performed the carriage during which the accident or the delay occurred, except where, by express
 agreement, the first carrier has assumed liability for the whole journey.
        (3)    In respect of baggage or cargo, the passenger or consignor shall have a right of action against the first carrier, and the
 passenger or consignee who is entitled to delivery shall have a right of action against the last carrier, and further, each may take
 action against the carrier which performed the carriage during which the delay, destruction, loss or damage took place. These
 carriers shall be jointly and severally liable to the passenger or to the consignor or consignee.
        37.   Nothing in these rules shall prejudicially affect the right of a person liable for damages to take recourse against any other
 person.
CHAPTER IV
COMBINED CARRIAGE
        38.   (1)    In the case of combined carriage performed partly by air and partly by any other mode of carriage, the provisions of these
 rules shall, subject to the provisions of subrule (4) of rule 18, apply only to the carriage by air, provided that the carriage by air falls
 within the meaning of rule 1.
        (2)    Nothing in these rules shall prevent the parties in the case of combined carriage from inserting in the document of air
 carriage conditions relating to other modes of carriage, provided that the provisions of these rules are observed with regard to
 carriage by air.
CHAPTER V
CARRIAGE BY AIR PERFORMED BY A PERSON OTHER THAN THE
CONTRACTING CARRIER
        39.   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply when a person (hereinafter referred to as the contracting carrier) as a principal makes
 a contract of carriage under these rules with a passenger or consignor or with a person acting on behalf of the passenger or consignor,
 and another person (hereinafter referred to as the actual carrier) performs, by virtue of authority from the contracting carrier, the whole
 or part of the carriage, but is not with respect to such part, a successive carrier within the meaning of these rules. Such authority shall be
 presumed in the absence of proof to the contrary.
        40.   If an actual carrier performs the whole or part of carriage which, according to the contract referred to in rule 39, is governed by
 these rules, both the contracting carrier and the actual carrier shall, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, be subject to the
 provisions of these rules, the former for the whole of the carriage contemplated in the contract, the latter solely for the carriage which it
 performs.
        41.   (1) The acts and omissions of the actual carrier and of its servants and agents acting within the scope of their employment shall,
 in relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, be deemed to be also those of the contracting carrier.
        (2) The acts and omissions of the contracting carrier and of its servants and agents acting within the scope of their employment
 shall, in relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, be deemed to be also those of the actual carrier. Nevertheless, no
 such act or omission shall subject the actual carrier to liability exceeding the amounts referred to in rules 21, 22, 23 and 24. Any
 special agreement under which the contracting carrier assumes obligations not imposed by the provisions of these rules or any
 waiver of rights or defences conferred by the provisions of these rules or any special declaration of interest in delivery at
 destination contemplated in rule 22 shall not affect the actual carrier unless agreed to by it.
        42.   Any complaint to be made or instruction to be given under the provisions of these rules to the carrier shall have the same effect
 whether addressed to the contracting carrier or to the actual carrier. Nevertheless, instructions referred to in rule 12 shall only be
 effective if addressed to the contracting carrier.
        43.   In relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, any servant or agent of that carrier or of the contracting carrier shall,
 if they prove that they acted within the scope of their employment, be entitled to avail themselves of the conditions and limits of liability
 which are applicable under the provisions of these rules to the carrier whose servant or agent they are, unless it is proved that they acted

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 in a manner that prevents the limits of liability from being invoked in accordance with the provisions of these rules.
        44.   In relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, the aggregate of the amounts recoverable from that carrier and the
 contracting carrier, and from their servants and agents acting within the scope of their employment, shall not exceed the highest amount
 which shall be awarded against either the contracting carrier or the actual carrier under the provisions of these rules, but none of the
 persons mentioned shall be liable for a sum in excess of the limit applicable to that person.
        45.   In relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, an action for damages may be brought, at the option of the
 complainant, against that carrier or the contracting carrier, or against both together or separately. If the action is brought against only one
 of these carriers’, that carrier shall have the right to require the other carrier to be joined in the proceedings, the procedure and effects
 being governed by the law of the court seized of the case.
        46.   Any action for damages contemplated in rule 45 must be brought, at the option of the complainant, in the territory of one of the
 State Parties, either before a court in which an action may be brought against the contracting carrier, as provided under rule 33, or before
 the court having jurisdiction at the place where the actual carrier has its domicile or its principal place of business.
        47.   Any contractual provision tending to relieve the contracting carrier or, the actual carrier of liability under this Chapter or to fix
 a lower limit than that which is applicable according to this Chapter shall be null and void, but the nullity of any such provision does not
 involve the nullity of the whole contract, which shall remain subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
        48.   Except as provided in rule 45, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the carriers between themselves,
 including any right of recourse or indemnification.
CHAPTER VI
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
        49.   Any clause contained in the contract of carriage and all special agreements entered into before the damage occurred by which
 the parties purport to infringe the rules laid down by these rules, whether by deciding the law to be applied, or by altering the rules as to
 jurisdiction, shall be null and void.
        50.   State Parties shall require their carriers to maintain adequate insurance covering their liability under the provisions of these
 rules. A carrier may be required to furnish evidence that it maintains adequate insurance covering is liability under the provisions of
 these rules.
        51.   The provisions of rules, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 relating to the documentation of carriage shall not apply in the case of carriage
 performed in extraordinary circumstances outside the normal scope of a carrier’s business.
        52.   The expression “days” when used in this Schedule means calander days and not working days.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XVIII 
 EIGHTEENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 2nd July 2007 in Committee Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
           MEMBERS PRESENT
      1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury       ––      Chairman
           RAJY A SABHA
      2.   Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
      3.   Shri S.S. Chandran
      4.   Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
      5.   Shri Janardhana Poojary
      6.   Shri Shatrughan Sinha
           LOK SABHA
      7.   Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
      8.   Shri Joachim Baxla
      9.   Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
    10.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
    11.   Dr. K. Dhanaraju
    12.   Shri P. Karunakaran
    13.   Dr. P.P. Koya
    14.   Shri Samik Lahiri
    15.   Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
    16.   Shri Madan Lal Sharma
    17.   Shri Dushyant Singh
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
           Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Director
           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Deputy Director
           Representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation:
           Shri Ashok Chawla, Secretary
           Shri Raghu Menon, Additional Secretary
           Shri K.Gohain, Director-General (CA)
           Shri R.K.Singh, Joint Secretary
           Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
           (Legislative Department):
           Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
           Shri K.V. Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
2.     At the outset, the Chairman briefed the Members about the Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007 which has been referred to the
 Committee for examination and report. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the subject. The Secretary while presenting his views replied to the points raised by the Members.
3.     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.      *                                                                 *                                                                        *
5.      *                                                                 *                                                                        *
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
 
 
 
 
I 
 FIRST MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 31st August 2007 in Committee Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
           MEMBERS PRESENT
      1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury       ––      Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
      2.   Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
      3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
      4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
      5.   Shri Janardhana Poojary
      6.   Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
      7.   Shri Shahid Siddiqui
           LOK SABHA
      8.   Shri Adhir Chowdhury
      9.   Shri Samik Lahiri
    10.   Shri Hemlal Murmu
    11.   Shri Madan Lal Sharma
           SECRETARIAT
           Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
           Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
           Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director
           Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
           (Legislative Department):
           Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
           Shri K.V. Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
           Representatives of the National Aviation Company of 
           India Ltd. (NACIL):
           Shri V. Thulasidas, CMD
           Shri S. Mukherjee, Executive Director-Corporate Affairs
           Shri D.S. Kohli, Executive Director-Northern Region
           Shri S.K. Kundra, Executive Director (F)
           Shri H.S. Grover, Executive Director (Coop.)
           Representatives of the Jet Airways:
           Capt. K. Mohan, Vice-President, Flight Operations
           Shri A.K. Sivanandan, Senior General Manager, PR
           Representatives of the Travel Agents Association of India:

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
           Shri Jagdeep Rikhy, Managing Committee Member
           Shri Sanjay Nirula, Managing Committee Member
           Representatives of the Travel Agents Federation
           Association of India:
           Shri Praveen Chug, President
           Shri P. Sampath Kumar, Committee Member
           Representatives of the Air Cargo Agents Association of India:
           Shri Vipin Vohra, President
           Shri Deepak Dadlani, Past President
           Shri Sunil Arora, Chairman, Northern Region
2.      *                                                                 *                                                                        *
3.     Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the above-mentioned stakeholders on the Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
 The Members raised queries on various provisions of the Bill and the stakeholders explained their position thereon.
4.     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
5.     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II
 SECOND MEETING
        The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25th September 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
           MEMBERS PRESENT
      1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury      ––      Chairman

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/124.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:04]
           RAJYA SABHA
      2.   Shri Naresh Gujral
      3.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
      4.   Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
      5.   Shri Shahid Siddiqui
      6.   Shri Shatrughan Sinha
           LOK SABHA
      7.   Shri Joachim Baxla
      8.   Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
      9.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
    10.   Dr. K. Dhanaraju
    11.   Shri P. Karunakaran
    12.   Dr. P.P. Koya
    13.   Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
    14.   Shri Madan Lal Sharma
           SECRETARIAT
           Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
           Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
           Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director
           WITNESSES
            *                                                              *                                                                        *
2.     At the outset, the Committee took up consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
 After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to decide suitable date for
 presentation of the Report to the Parliament.
3.      *                                                                 *                                                                        *
4.      *                                                                 *                                                                        *
5.     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
6.     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M.
 