 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
‘Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), 
Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots’
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
September , 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
‘Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), 
based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots’
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
357 
REPORT   
‘Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), 
based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots’ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT  
‘Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), 
Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-v 
 4. REPORT                                1-43 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   44-63  
6. ANNEXURES         64-138 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
139-158

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha  
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. (vacant ) 
10. (vacant ) 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer  
 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty Seventh Rep ort on ‘Development of Niche Tourism 
(including Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the representat ives of the Ministry of Tourism, on 
the subject, on 26 th  June, 2023. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of 
the Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations  of India (FHRAI); Indian Association of 
Tour Operators (IATO); Indian Tourist Transporters Association (ITTA); and Adventure 
Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI), in its  meeting on the subject, held on 18 th  
July, 2023. Further, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs, on the subject, on 26 th  July, 2023. The Committee also took up the issue 
during its Study Visit to Mumbai and Goa from 5 th  to 8 th  July, 2023 and held discussions with 
the Ministry of Tourism; various Travel & Tour Oper ators; and State Governments of 
Maharashtra & Goa.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of Tourism; 
Ministry of External Affairs; State Governments of Maharashtra & Goa; FHRAI; IATO; 
ITTA; ATOAI; and various Travel & Tour Operators, f or placing before the Committee, the 
material and information desired in connection with  the subject and for clarifying the points 
raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19
th  
September, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
September 19, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Bhadra 28, 1945 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
A&N Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
AHCI Assistant High Commission of India 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATM Arabian Travel Market 
ATOAI Adventure Tour Operators Association of India 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
B&B Bed & Breakfast 
B2B Business to Business 
BBA Bachelor of Business Administration 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CFA Central Financial Assistance 
CGI Consulate General of India 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CNA-AT Central Nodal Agency for Adventure Tourism 
CNA-ET Central Nodal Agency for EcoTourism 
CNA-ST Central Nodal Agency for Sustainable Tourism 
CoI Consulate of India 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EoI Embassy of India 
EOI Expression of Interest 
FAM Familiarization 
FHRAI Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Associations of India 
FITUR Feria Internacional del Turismo 
FTA Foreign Tourist Arrival 
G20 Group of Twenty 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GOI Government of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HCI High Commission of India 
HCIKL High Commission of India, Kuala Lumpur 
IATO Indian Association of Tour Operators 
ICCA International Congress and Convention Association 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
IDY International day of Yoga 
IEC Information, Education & Communication 
IFD Integrated Finance Division 
IFS Indian Foreign Services 
IGCS Indo-German Consultancy Services 

iv 
 
IGTC India Golf Tourism Committee 
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
IMEX Worldwide Exhibition for Incentive Travel, Meetings and Events 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
IT Information Technology 
ITB Internationale Tourismus-Börse Berlin 
ITDC India Trade Development Corporation 
ITEC Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation 
ITF International Tennis Federation 
ITTA Indian Tourist Transporters Association 
J&K Jammu & Kashmir 
JCI Joint Commission International 
JSTA Jordan Society of Tourist and Travel Agents 
LED Light Emitting Diode 
LiFE Lifestyle for Environment 
M Mission 
MATTA Malaysian Association of Tour and Travel Agents 
MBA Master of Business Administration 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MENA Middle East and North Africa 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MICE Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions 
MITT The International Travel & Hospitality Show 
MoHFW Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
MoT Ministry of Tourism 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPR Monthly Progress Report 
MSME Micro, Medium and Small Enterprises 
MTI Medical Tourism Index 
MVT Medical Value Travel 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare 
Providers 
NCAER National Council of Applied Economic Research 
NMWTB National Medical & Wellness Tourism Board 
NORKA Non Resident Keralites Affairs 
O&M/OM Operations & Maintenance 
ODOP One District, One Product 
OHEC Oman Health Exhibition & Conference 
OSP Other Service Provider 
OTM Outbound Travel Mart 
P Post 
PDMC Project Development Management Consultants 
PMI Permanent Mission of India 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation & Spiritual Augmentation Drive 

v 
 
R.O. Representative of 
RTSOI Responsible Tourism Society of India 
SATTE South Asia's Travel & Tourism Exchange 
SCCI Slovak Chamber of Commerce 
SD 1.0 Swadesh Darshan Scheme-1.0 
SD 2.0 Swadesh Darshan Scheme-2.0 
SEPC Services Export Promotion Council 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
STCI Sustainable Tourism Criteria of India 
TAFI Travel Agents Federation of India 
TFC Trade Facilitation Centre 
TITF Thai International Travel Fair 
TTAA Thai Travel Agents Association 
TURSAB Türkiye Seyahat Acentaları Birli ği (The Association of Turkish 
Travel Agents) 
TWG Tourism Working Group 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UAE United Arab Emirates 
UK United Kingdom 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation 
UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization 
US/ USA United States of America 
USD/ US$ United States Dollar 
UT Union Territory 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VFS Visa Facilitation Services 
VOA Visa on Approval 
WTM World Travel Market 
YOY Year on Year 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
A. INTRODUCTION 
1. Niche tourism is a specialised segment of the tourism market, where specific tourism 
products are tailored to meet the needs of a particular section/market segment.  As opposed to 
the more conventional mass tourism which is characterised by large numbers of tourists 
visiting popular holiday destinations  on standardised tour packages, niche tourism caters to 
small groups of people sharing the same, often uncommon interests, and provides curated and 
personalised tour packages to appeal to  the customers‟ interests.  While mass tourism is 
homogenous in nature with a standardised product for a large market segment , niche tourism 
is defined by its heterogeneous nature with unique products/services meant for small market 
segments.   
2. Niche Tourism is an all encompassing  term covering a wide range of special ised 
tourism products like cultural, medical, rural, adventure, wi ldlife, historical, gastronomic  
tourism, etc. These niches offer travellers the right avenues to immerse themselves in 
particular aspects that align with their innate passions.  Once considered expensive and elitist, 
niche tourism is now gaining popularity and is one of the fastest growing sectors in tourism. 
The growing popularity of niche tourism  can be largely attributed to ch anges in consumer 
behaviour as an increasing number of tourists seek immersive and more fulfilling travel 
experiences, the effect of Covid-19 pandemic which changed the preferences of the travelling 
public, the rise in awareness of sustainable tourism and such other factors.   
3. India has great potential for niche tourism being b lessed with diverse geography  
from mountains and forests to deserts and beaches, rich tangible and intangible culture with 
majestic palaces, forts and historical monuments, rich traditions of music and dance , yoga 
and Ayurveda. Modern India also showcases world class medical facilities and resources for 
conventions, meetings and exhibitions for the corporate world. In short, India offers a wide 
range of all-year-round tourism options with tourism products for all reasons and seasons and 
something for every kind of tourist. These undeniable advantages notwithstanding, both mass 
tourism and niche tourism have still vast unrealised potential.  Meanwhile, Thailand is poised 
to become the top golf destin ation in the world ; Nepal has a thriving mountain tourism ; and 
Bhutan has a successful Sustainable Tourism Strategy.  India is a land of spirituality being the 
birthplace and home  of se veral major religions. Despite being a land of immense spiritual 
significance, the full potential of Spiritual Tourism is yet to be realised in India.  
4. The Committee decided to examine the reasons why India has not been able to fully 
tap its potential for mass tourism and niche tourism when even its much smaller neighbo urs 
have successfully done so. The Committee also decided to study the impact of the Thematic 
Circuits launched under the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 , the PRASHAD Scheme on Spiritual 
Tourism and the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 with its emphasis on  destination tourism. Since ease 
of obtaining v isas is a major factor impacting  foreign tourist arrivals, t he Committee also 
heard the representatives of the  MEA on the subject of issuance  of visas and promotion of 

2 
 
Indian Tourism abroad as the Indian Missions have the sole charge of promoting India abroad 
after the closure of the Overseas Tourist Offices of the Ministry of Tourism.  
5. The first Meeting of the Committee was held on 26.06.2023 with  the Ministry of 
Tourism.  The Committee then heard the private Tour Operators and agencies, namely, The 
Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India ( FHRAI), Indian Tourist 
Transporters Association ( ITTA), Adventure Tour Operators Association of India ( ATOAI) 
and Indian Association of Tour Operators  (IATO) on 18.07.2023. The Committee also heard 
the views of the Ministry of External Affairs on 26.07.2023 on issuance of visa and 
promotion of Indian tourism abroad. 
 
B. NICHE TOURISM AREAS IDENTIFIED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Tourism , in her deposition before the Committee 
submitted that the following Niche Tourism Products are being currently promoted in India:- 
 
(i) Sustainable Tourism 
(ii) Rural Tourism 
(iii) Adventure Tourism 
(iv) Eco-tourism 
(v) MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences & Exhibitions) and Wedding Tourism 
(vi) Cruise Tourism 
(vii) Medical and Wellness tourism 
(viii) Film Tourism 
(ix) Golf tourism 
(x) Spiritual Tourism 
 
7. New Niche tourism products may be added in due course as the Ministry takes the 
initiatives for identification, diversification, development, and promotion of niche tourism 
products to  overcome the aspect of „seasonality‟ and to  promote India as a perennial 365 
days‟ destination, to attract tourists with specific interest s, and to ensure repeat visits for the 
unique products in which India has a comparative advantage. 
8. The Ministry informed that the first step in development of all these Niche tourism 
areas was to outline a shared vision and roadmap in consultation with industry and State 
Governments.  The subsequent course of action involved institutionalising a support system 
for the Ministry,  establishing a mechanism for coordination with stakeholders and State 
Governments and lastly formulation of the project scheme and the allocation of the budget for 
development.  
9. In the first course of action, National Strategies and Roadmaps for d evelopment 
have been identified for Sustainable Tourism, Rural Tourism, Adventure Tourism, Eco -
Tourism, MICE  and Wedding Tourism , Cruise  Tourism, Medical and Wellness Tourism , 

3 
 
Film Tourism and Golf Tourism . Guidelines have also been formulated by the  Ministry to 
support Golf, Polo, Medical and Wellness Tourism . The details of the strate gic pillars in the 
National Strategies formulated for the Niche Tourism areas are placed at Annexure – I.     
10. The Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management (IITTM) has been designated 
as the Central Nodal Agency for Sustainable Tourism (CNA -ST), Rural Tourism & Rural 
Homestays, Adventure Tourism  and Eco-Tourism, for technical assistance and institutional 
support for implementation of the National Strategies. 
11. The Ministry also informed that it is jointly working with other Central Ministries on 
the Niche tourism areas which fall under their jurisdiction, like the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change for  Eco-Tourism, Ministry of Shipping, Ports and Waterways, for 
developing coastal areas/destinat ions under Cruise Tourism,  the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare Medical to promote Wellness Tourism and the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting for Film Tourism . The Ministry has undertaken convergence initiatives. 
Detailed areas of convergence are also being formulated by the Ministry of Tourism to guide 
effective convergence between line ministries/departments, states and private sector. 
12. Consultation with the Line Ministry was held on areas pertaining to Connectivity 
and Infrastructure, Skilling and Entrepreneurship, Tourism Product & Experiences.   
 
 
1. SUSTAINABLE TOURISM  
13. Sustainable Tourism is tourism that takes full account of its current and future 
economic, social and environmental impacts, and addresses the needs of visitors, the industry, 
and the  environment and host communities. The three basic principles of Sustainable 
Tourism are :- 
 Environmental Sustainability – Making optimal use of environmental resources and 
helping to conserve natural heritage and bio-diversity. 
 Socio-cultural Sustainability – Respecting the socio -cultural authenticity of host 
communities and conserving their built and living cultural heritage and traditional 
values. 
 Economic Sustainability – Ensuring viable, long -term economic operations, stable 
employment and social services to host communities and contributing to poverty 
alleviation.  
14. The Committee was informed that a  National Board for Sustainable Tourism and 
Eco-Tourism has been constituted under the Chairpersonship of  Secretary (Tourism) on 30 th 
June, 2022, comprising representatives from identified Central Ministries/organisations; State 
Governments/ UT Administrations and Industry Stakeholders. The Board shall guide the 

4 
 
operationalisation and implementation of various strategic initiatives as detailed below for 
development of sustainable tourism and eco-tourism in the country: 
(i) Detailed action plans and formulation of dedicated schemes  
(ii) Certification Schemes 
(iii) Capacity building, replication of national and global best practices  
(iv) Marketing and promotion 
(v) Private Sector Participation 
(vi) Destination and Product Development  
(vii) Specific strategies for sustainable and ecotourism 
(viii) Any other measures for growth of sustainable and ecotourism 
 
15. Three meetings of the Board have been organised till date. 
16. The Ministry apprised the Committee that sustainable tourism is not one part icular 
aspect of tourism but it  informs all segments of tourism, on how to make tourism more 
sustainable and responsible.  Since the formulation of the strategy, education and awareness 
have been the first course of action for which a National Summit and five regional workshops 
have been held.   The Travel for Li FE programme takes it to the next dimension of 
participation of the citizens or the tourist in promoting sustainable tourism.   
17. The Travel for LiFE Initiative  has been formulated on the philosophy of Mission 
Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) which is a global mass movement against clim ate change 
led by Hon'ble Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi. The programme was launched during the 
third Tourism Working Group (TWG) meeting held in Srinagar, Jammu &  Kashmir. Travel 
for LiFE aims to promote sustainable tourism in the country in convergence with the National 
Strategy for Sustainable Tourism, through mindful and deliberate actions mobili sed toward 
tourists and tourism businesses in the consumption of tourism resources.  
 
18. Initiatives by the Ministry for promotion of Sustainable Tourism  
 Organisation of a  national summit for developing sustainable and responsible tourism 
destinations and Responsible Traveller Campaign in association with Responsible 
Tourism Society of India ( RTSOI) and United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) on 4th June, 2022 at New Delhi on the eve of World Environment Day.  
 Five Regional Workshops organised in association with IITTM, UNEP and RTSOI to 
promote sustainable and responsible tourism. First workshop for States/ UTs of Central 
and Western region was organised on 29th November, 2022 at Khajuraho, M.P; Second 
workshop for States/ UTs of Eastern Region on 11 th January, 2 023 at Kolkata ; Third 
workshop for States /UTs of So uthern region at  Hyderabad on 28 th February, 2023; 
fourth workshop for States/ UTs of Northern region at Delhi on 22 nd March, 2023; and 

5 
 
the Fifth Regional Workshop for States/ UTs of North Eastern region at Guwahati on 
28th April, 2023.  
 In order to create mass awareness , the Ministry in collaboration wi th IITTM (Central 
Nodal Agency – Sustainable Tourism) releases a Sustainable Tourism Monthly 
Newsletter with a reach of 20,000 stakeholders of the tourism sector giving information 
about the best practices, change makers , and state initiatives tow ards sustainable 
tourism. 
 The Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with CNA -ST (IITTM) launched a Webinar 
series based on the pillars and principles identified in the National Strategy. The 
webinar consists of a panel of experts to discuss state -of-the-art topics in the tourism 
industry that can l ay down a clear path to achieving sustainability . It is organised on a 
fortnightly basis and is live -streamed on YouTube for the general public . So far four 
webinars have been successfully completed with a reach of about 3000 people. 
 Social Media handles in the name of “Sustainable Tourism India” have been created on 
the most popular and engaging social media platforms to sensitize the general public 
about the National Strategy, its core elements, and initiatives taken by the Ministry to 
implement the strategy. 
 The Ministry of Tourism had launched the Sustainable Tourism Criteria of India 
(STCI) for assessing and approving tourism enterprises on the basis of well -established 
and scientifically develop ed principles in 2014. Recently, the Ministry of Tourism in 
partnership with CNA -ST (IITTM) revised the criteria. It was re -established as a 
mechanism to recognize the tourism stakeholders that provide services based on 
principles of sustainability. The certification currently covers Accommodation Units, 
Tour Operators, and Destinati ons and is live  on Nidhi+ Portal. The first certification 
was completed recently with a Hotel in Odisha receiving a Silver Badge for its 
sustainability performance.  
 The Ministry is also looking into incentivizing „Green Tourism‟, which has been one of 
the major points of discussion in G -20 meetings. In the G -20 Tourism Working Group, 
the Ministry created the „Goa Road Map‟ giving recommendations for Sustainable and 
Responsible Tourism, best digitization practices of various countries, skill 
development, and tourism Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).  
19. The Committee notes that India has be en ranked at 139, 134, and 128 in the 
years 2015, 2017 and 2019 , respectively  under Environmental Sustainability in  the 
World Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Ranking . While the new National Strategy 
and National Board for Sustainable Tourism have come into force in 2022, the Ministry 
had been promoting Sustainable Tourism in India for  nearly a decade after the launch 
of Sustainable To urism Criteria for India in 2014 . Not much progress has , however, 
been made in development of Sustainable Tourism in the last decade as substantiated by 
India‟s low rankings in this category . The Committee emphasizes that economic 
development should not be at the cost of the environment and recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that the revised Sustainable Tourism Criteria  be scrupulously 

6 
 
implemented to minimize the adverse impact of tourism on the environment. While a 
Certification programme for tourism stakeholders, who have successfully implemented 
sustainable criteria, has been in existence for nearly a decade, only one Certification has 
been effected till date. The Committee desires to know the number of hotels surveyed 
for the Certification Programme and the strategy adopted for the survey. The 
Committee observes that while disbursement of monthly newsletters to stakeholders 
and workshops are useful for dissemination of information, the feedback from 
stakeholders like hoteliers and tour operators is equally important to comprehend the 
problems being faced while  implementing policies on the g round level. The Committee 
feels that the pace of the Ministry in promotion of sustainability in tourism is sluggish 
and recommends that the Ministry may step up its coordination efforts with both the 
stakeholders and the other Central Ministries for effective promotional campaigns.   
 
20. The Committee desires to know about the action taken on formulation of 
dedicated schemes, destination, and product development and other initiatives taken by 
the National Board for Promotion of Sustainable Tourism.     
 
2. RURAL TOURISM 
21. Rural Tourism is any form of tourism that showcases the rural life, art, culture, and 
heritage at rural locations, thereby benefiting the local community economically and socially as 
well as enabling interaction between the tourists and the locals for a mor e enriching tourism 
experience. 
22. The Committee was informed that a  Task Force for Development of Rural Tourism 
has been constituted  under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (Tourism) on 30 th June, 2022, 
comprising representatives from  identified Central Ministries/ organisations, State 
Governments/UT Administrations and Industry Stakeholders. The Task Force shall review 
progress on the implementation of the Strategy and coordinate action with all the 
stakeholders covering: 
 
(i) Preparation of detailed Action Plan for implementation of the Strategy for Rural 
Tourism and Rural Home stays 
(ii) Identifying national and global best practice and preparation of tool kits for their 
replication by the States and Rural Tourism Destinations  
(iii) Benchmarking State policies and standards and prepare model policies and minimum 
standards for rural tourism including B&B, Farm Stays, Home stays etc. 
(iv) Capacity Building measures including setting up of Resource Centres and Centres of 
Excellence  

7 
 
(v) Toolkits and guidelines for identification of clusters for rural tourism and preparation 
of development plans for the cluster, destination and product development  
(vi) Facilitating adoption of digital technologies for rural tourism 
(vii) Formulation of dedicated scheme to suppo rt development of rural tourism in the 
Country 
(viii) Private Sector Participation 
(ix) Any other measure, which can facilitate development of rural tourism in the Country. 
 
23. Two meetings of the Task Force have been organised till date. 
 
24. Initiatives by the Ministry for promotion of Rural Tourism 
 Rural Tourism India Website  - The Rural Tourism Village portal was launched on 
16th February, 2023. The website has information about the rural tourism destinations in 
India, rural homestays in India, Government and industry initiatives for rural tourism, etc.  
 Newsletter - The Ministry of Tourism in partnership with Central Nodal Agency  – 
Rural Tourism and Rural Homestays (IITTM) has come up with the Quarterly Newsletter of 
Rural Tourism India . The Newsletter will act as a communication tool to publicis e the 
initiative taken for the development of rural tourism in India. 
 Side event on Rural Tourism during the G20 meeting  - A side event on Rural 
Tourism for Community Empowerment and Poverty Alleviation on 07 th February, 2023 
during the 1st Tourism Working Group meeting held at Rann of Kutch. The event saw sharing 
of perspective by UNWTO on “Tourism and Rural Developm ent: Maximizing 
opportunities.” R ural tourism cases from India‟s regional governments, industry and 
community leaders, also showcased the potential of rural tourism in creating opportunities for 
livelihood and community empowerment. 
 Best Tourism Village Competition - The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India 
has launched the Best Tourism Village Competition on 16th February, 2023. The core aim of 
the competition is to develop the competitive feeling among  the villages of India which, in 
turn, will induce social and infrastructural development. Th e Best Tourism Villages 
recognised after the final evaluation will receive a national award from the Ministry of 
Tourism, Government of India. The villages will get featured on the Government of India's 
various online platforms. The first phase of competition i.e. the application of Best  Tourism 
Village Competition has been completed on 18th May, 2023. The competition received a total 
of 795 applications from 31 states and Union territories.  
 
 Developing Model Rural Tourism Clusters  - The Ministry of T ourism is working 
on the development of the model tourism village cluster development plan. A pilot study of 

8 
 
the Cluster Harshil – Bagori – Mukhwa – Dharali shall be undertaken. Also, the Ministry 
may engage an agency for planning and implementation from t he empanelled consultants for 
PDMCs and further explore funding opportunities under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0. 
This village cluster is located in the border area of the Uttarakhand. This project will be in 
convergence with the Vibrant Village Programme of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). 
25. The Committee is at a loss to note that the 2022 list of the United Nations World 
Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) featuring the 32 best tourism villages from 22 
countries,  does not contain a single village from India while several countries have two 
villages in the list, and Spain having even three villages. The Committee desires to be 
informed about the number of Indian villages which were nominated for the selection 
by the UNWTO.  The Committee notes that Khonoma in Nagaland has been selected for 
the “Upgrade” programme which would enable the village to receive the necessary 
support from the UNWTO to improve its conditions to meet the selection criteria.  The 
Committee wishes to know the e fforts being taken for the development of Khonoma 
after its inclusion in the upgrade list  of the UNWTO .  The Committee also desires to 
know as to how many Indian villages have so far been selected by the UNWTO in its 
best tourism villages list and the impact of such selection on the village tourism.  
26. The Committee observes that in a predominantly agrarian and rural economy 
like India, rural tourism has immense potential for boosting employment and income 
for villagers while offering opportunities to the city dwellers to take a break from the 
hectic pace of urban life to experience nature and local culture at a much slower pace. 
India is home to a diverse range of unique villages, each with its own cultural, 
architectural and historical significance. Unique villages such as „Mattur‟ in Karnataka 
where all the residents speak only Sanskrit and many others offer a glimpse into India‟s 
rich traditions and culture. The Committee, however, observes that the Rural Tourism 
website doe s not provide details as to how to travel to the unique villages nor details 
regarding rural homestays for most of the villages. Even the Khonoma village page does 
not provide any useful details for the tourists. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that the Rural Tourism website has all details of rural homestays, 
travel connectivity and tourist  spots in respect of every village featured for the 
convenience of the tourists.   
27. The Committee while appreciating the Best Village Competition initiated by the 
Ministry, is dismayed to note that in the past one year, only one Model Rural Cluster 
has been identified, without any action being taken on the ground. The Committee notes 
that the villages to be covered in the Vibrant Villages programme are located in far -
flung areas, and close to borders, often in difficult terrains. The Committee feels that 
the State of Uttarakhand has a number of border villages with rich traditions and local 
culture and recommends that the Ministry may make concerted efforts to develop the 
Model Rural Cluster in Uttarakhand within a targeted time schedule.   
 

9 
 
3. ADVENTURE TOURISM 
28. Adventure tourism is a type of niche tourism where exploration or travel involves 
some degree of risk (real or perceived) and may require special skills, and physical effort.  
Adventure tourism is very popular with the younger generation seeking experienti al travel 
that transcends traditional sightseeing to create meaningful and authentic experiences.   
 
29. National Board for Adventure Tourism  
30. The Committee was informed that a National Board for Adventure Tourism has been 
constituted under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (Tourism) on 30th June, 2022, comprising 
representatives from  identified Central Ministries/ organisations, State Governments/ UT 
Administrations and Industry Stakeholders. The Board shall guide the operationalisation and 
implementation of the strategy to promote and develop adventure tourism in the c ountry 
covering: 
(i) Detailed action plan and formulation of dedicated scheme  
(ii) Certification Scheme 
(iii) Safety guidelines  
(iv) Capacity building, replication of national and global best practices  
(v) Assessment of state policies and ranking 
(vi) Marketing and promotion 
(vii) Destination and product development 
(viii) Private sector participation 
(ix) Specific strategies for adventure tourism 
(x) Any other measures for growth of adventure tourism in the country. 
 
31. Four meetings of the Board have been organised so far. 
32. Other Initiatives by the Ministry for promotion of Adventure Tourism 
 Website of Adventure Tourism  - A website with the domain name 
adventure.tourism.gov.in is now live , consisting of document information, information 
related to vibrant villages, adventure tourism institutes and the latest efforts of Indian states 
towards adventure tourism. 
 Social Media Handles  - The Ministry in partnership with CNA -AT (IITTM) is 
operating social media handles for adventure tourism to promote adventure tourism of our 
country. Currently CNA -AT is having a ctive accounts on Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook and 
Instagram. 
 
 Side Event on Adventure Tourism during G20 meeting  - A side event on 
Tourism in Mission Mode: Advantage Adventure Tourism was organised on 02nd April, 2023 

10 
 
during the 2 nd Tourism Working group Meeting at Siliguri with focus on North Eastern 
States. During the event , North Eastern States shared their current policies and future plans 
for adventure tourism. The Industry provided feedback on the same to help the States develop 
better strategies for promoting adventure tourism in the North East. 
 Draft Model Adventure Tou rism Law  - The Ministry of Tourism with CNA -AT 
(IITTM) has drafted t he Adventure Tourism Model law which covers the Obligations, 
Institutional Framework, Penalties, Registration and the Provision of Insurance. The Draft 
Model Adventure Tourism Law is a ref erence for the States which can be adopted with 
requisite modifications at their level. The draft has  been circulated to all States/ UTs for 
feedback. 
 Night Sea Kayaking Guidelines  - The Ministry of Tourism with CNA -AT (IITTM) 
has drafted Night Sea Kayaking  Guidelines which was further circulated to the States/ UTs. 
This document will help the States situated on Coastline to implement Night Sea Kayaking 
activity in a secured manner. The inputs received from the States/UTs are under examination. 
 Adventure Tourism Rescue Centers - The Ministry in consultation with CNA -AT 
(IITTM) has prepared  a draft concept of Adventur e Tourism Rescue Centre (ATRC) across 
the country to provide immediate response during incidents. The draft document has been 
circulated to the States and the Stakeholders for their comments and suggestions. CNA -AT is 
incorporating the suggestions received from the States and the stakeholders.  
 Mega Trails - The Ministry of Tourism is progressing towards the launch of 2 Mega 
Trails (Western Himalaya Trail and Ganga Trail) in the country. The industry stakeholders 
have submitted a detailed plan along with Terms of Reference.  
33. The Committee notes that there have been an increasing number of accidents in 
Adventure sports, especially in paragliding, which has claimed the lives of a number of 
tourists in the last few years. As per media reports , even “soft adventur e” sports like 
trekking have led to casualties in certain situations . The Committee has been informed 
by stakeholders that 3 Gs  - Guidelines, Guides and Gears  – are critical in risk 
mitigation. The Committee has also been informed that the Ministry has released 
guidelines for safety a nd quality norms for 15 Land Based, 07 Air Based and 07 Water 
Based adventure tourism activities, which cover the entire range of thrilling activities. 
Besides, some States have also adopted  various regulatory measures and safety 
protocols to address the inherent concerns of adventure tourism. ISO 21101:2014 and 
BIS have laid down safety management standards for compliance by adventure 
activities service providers that act as benchmarks for safe adv enture activities. The 
Committee desires to know about the impact of such safety guidelines on reduction of 
accidents in adventure tourism. The Ministry may give data on the number of accidents 
as also the casualties which have taken place in a dventure tourism in the country in  the 
last five years.  The Committee has also been informed that while testing and 
certification of  PPE (Personal Protectiv e Equipment) kits is necessary, it is difficult for 
small Indian manufacturing enterprises to obtain the universally accepted  international 

11 
 
certifications like  UIAA (French) (International Climbing and Mountaineering 
Federation). The Committee recommends that testing labs where certification is done 
by the BIS may help small enterprises in this field.   
34. The Committee feels that strict adherence to  safety guidelines and 
implementation of safety protocols can be possible only if responsible and licensed / 
certified adventure tour operators handle the activities. Licensed tour operators play an 
important role in promotion of adventure tourism as they conduct thorough risk 
assessments, implement safety measures, and provide high quality safety gears, besides 
engaging experienced and professional guides to handle emergency situations. The 
Committee has been informed that presently, adventure tour operators‟ licenses are 
issued by either the Centre or the States and there are still a lot of unlicensed tour 
operators in the country‟s adventure tourism sector who operate without requisite 
permits, certifications and regulatory approvals  to meet the requirements of safety, 
quality and also the law in the field. The Committee desires to know what action has 
been taken or is proposed to be taken by the Ministry on the unlicensed adventure tour 
operators. The Committee has also been informed  that the Ministry has circulated a 
draft model adventure tourism law to all the States/UTs for feedback. The Committee 
stresses that  high risk adventure sports cannot be regulated only by guidelines and 
recommends that the Ministry may make all efforts t o come out with laws soon so that 
only licensed and responsible operators who adhere to the  laid down  safety norms 
remain in business to provide adventure tourism services.  
35. The Committee has been informed that the government run institutions like 
Himalayan Mountaineering Institution in Darjeeling, the Nehru Institution of 
Mountaineering in Uttarkashi are booked two -three years in advance for a course in 
mountaineering or skiing or water sports. There is, therefore, a dearth of well trained 
guides in adventure sports . The Committee recommends that the Ministry should roll 
out more training programmes for guides and explore the possibility of establishing 
more institutions of international standards for adventure sports across the country.  
The Committee also feels that the training institutes are mostly located in North India 
with focus on high altitude mountaineering which is not so relevant for adventure sports 
in South India.  The Committee recommends that at least one or two Training In stitutes 
should be established in South India which focus on adventure sports suitable for its 
topography, altitude and climate.   
36. Regarding the standardization of safety gears, the Committee has been 
informed that presently, there is no s ingle system of certification of adventure 
equipments in our country . The Bureau  of Indian Standards (BIS)  is working towards 
setting standards for adventure equipment s that can demonstrate proven track record 
of reliability to help ensure a safe adventure experience. The Committee expresses its 
displeasure that India does not have standardized safety gears even for high risk 
adventure sports and recommends that the Ministry may expeditiously implement a 
uniform standard across the country for all adventure tourism verticals, prepared by 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).  

12 
 
37. The Committee appreciates the initiative of Adventure Tourism Rescue Centre 
of the Min istry to provide for specialized facilities in emergency situations and urges 
that the Ministry may ensure that  medical treatment facilities are available near all 
adventure tourism locations.   
38. The Committee recommends that National I nsurance companies may also be 
encouraged to have policies covering adventure  tourism for licensed adventure tour 
operators, adventur e guides and the tourists  to provide support and promotion of  
adventure tourism.  
39. The Committee notes that since adventure tours are usually conducted in 
remote areas, adventure tourism has a significant impact on  economic development by 
way of income generation for local communities , increased business opportunities, and 
job creation. Besides, adventure tourism can empower local communities by involving 
them in tourism-related activities. At the same time, the Ministry should take proactive 
steps to determine the carrying capacity of popular adventu re tourism destinations to 
mitigate potential negative impacts such as environmental degradation and over  
tourism. The Committee observes that the Ministry should promote sustainabl e and 
responsible tourism management practices to harness the full development potential of 
adventure tourism.  
 
4. ECOTOURISM 
40. Ecotourism is responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment and 
improves the well-being of local people. The guiding principles for eco -tourism as laid down 
by the Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change are to adopt low impact 
wildlife tourism that protects the ecological integrity of forests and wildlife areas and builds 
environmental and cult ural awareness and respect . Use of indigenous, locally produced, and 
ecologically sustainable activities for tourism activities is also prescribed.   
 
41. National Board for Sustainable Tourism ( including subjects related to Eco -
Tourism) 
42. A National Board for S ustainable Tourism has been constituted under the 
Chairpersonship of Secretary (Tourism) on 30 th June, 2022, comprising representatives from 
identified Central Ministries/ organisations, State Governments/ UT Administrations and 
Industry Stakeholders. The Board guide s the operationalization and implementation of 
various strategic initiatives for development of s ustainable tourism and eco -tourism in the 
country. 
43. Three meetings of the Board have been held so far. 

13 
 
 Social Media Handles for Eco -Tourism - The Ministry of Tourism in partnership 
with CNA-ET (IITTM) has created Social Media Handles for promotion and propagation of 
Eco-Tourism activities. 
44. Side Event on Ecotourism during G20 meeting  - The Ministry of Tourism 
organised an event “Ecotourism as a vehicle for achieving Sustainable Development Goals” 
on 23rd, May, 2023 on the side lines of 3 rd Tourism Working Group meeting held at Srinagar 
to deliberate on various challenges and opportunities for developing Ecotourism in th e 
country following the principles of sustainability. The event provided an opportunity  to 
present India‟s efforts to develop and promote Ecotourism in the country. The event saw the 
participation of Line Ministries of Central Government, key States and Un ion Territories, 
Industry Stakeholders, national and international experts and academia.  
45. The Committee observes that guides and naturalists are one of the most 
important elements in imparting quality ecotourism experience by way of providing 
valuable educational, interpretive and experiential services to the visitors . The 
Committee has been informed that a Certification Scheme for tour operators and other 
service providers for ecotourism and adventure tourism is to be framed by the Ministry. 
The Committee desires to know whether the Scheme has been framed and the number 
of guides/naturalists who have been certified under this scheme so far.   
 
5. MEETINGS, INCENTIVES, CONFERENCES, AND EXHIBITIONS (MICE) & 
WEDDING TOURISM 
46. MICE is an acronym for Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions. The 
MICE industry also known as the “Meetings” or “Events” industry is a sub -segment of 
business travel but can also involve a  significant leisure component. MICE is a year round 
business and is beneficial for offsetting the lean seasons for leisure tourism. MICE is a high 
revenue-generating tourism as most delegates tend to opt for high end accommodations. It 
also creates huge employment opportunities in related hospitality service p roviding sectors 
like accommodation, food and beverage, convention services, transportation, tourism and 
entertainment. 
47. The Committee was informed about the  following i nitiatives by the Ministry for 
promotion of MICE Tourism. 
48. Formation of India MICE Board  - An India MICE Board  has been constituted  
under the Chairpersonship of the Secretary (T ourism), comprising representatives from 
identified Central Ministries/ organisations, State Governments/ UT Administrations and 
Industry Stakeholders. The Board shall coordinate implementation of various initiatives and 
strategies to facilitate growth of MICE Industry in India covering: 
(i) Detailed action plan and dedicated scheme for promotion of  MICE 
(ii) Institutional support for MICE  

14 
 
(iii) Developing Eco-system for MICE, replicating national and global best practices  
(iv) Enhance competitiveness of Indian MICE industry  
(v) Enhance ease of doing business for MICE events  
(vi) Marketing India as a MICE destination  
(vii) Skill development for MICE industry 
(viii) Any other measure, which can facilitate development of MICE Industry 
 
49. Two meetings of the Board have been held so far. 
 
 „Meet in India‟  – „Meet in India ,‟ a distinct sub -brand under „Incredible India‟ to 
promote the country as a MICE destination was launched during the Khajuraho MICE 
Roadshow. The sub brand will sharpen promotional campaigns to position India as an 
attractive MICE destination with all prere quisites – excellent connectivity, world class 
infrastructure, a knowledge hub and unique tourist attractions. 
 The Ministry of Tourism has recently launched a new Incredible India brand film on 
MICE Tourism. 
 The Ministry of Tourism is planning to launch a campaign shortly on MICE Tourism 
through Incredible India Digital Platform to showcase India as a preferred MICE 
Tourism destination globally.  
 E-Conference Visa has been i ntroduced for foreign visitors and the E-Visa scheme is 
now available to the nationals of 166 Countries.  
50. The Committee notes that India has less than 1% share in the Global MICE 
business despite being one of the fastest growing economies. India was ranked 28th with 
158 meetings in 2019 International Congress and Convention Association ( ICCA) 
ranking of countries. Indian cities are ranked poorly in the intern ational ranking of 
cities by ICCA in terms of the number of international associations meetings. There are 
only 07 cities of India in the top 475 cities,  the topmost being Delhi at the 75 th position 
with 37 meetings held and Ahmedabad at the bottom at the 424 th position with 04 
meetings. Even Goa, which is one of the country‟s top tourist destinations, is ranked at 
the 307th position with 08 meetings. The Committee also notes that India‟s outbound 
MICE market is one of the fastest growing markets globally.  
51. The Committee observes that a s per the National Stra tegy document on MICE, 
India‟s core MICE infrastructure and amenities are at par with most of the developed 
countries. The main reasons for the poor performance of India in MICE tourism is lack 
of focussed approach on MICE tourism, absence of system for capturing information 
about various national and international  MICE events and preparing for winning the 
bids,  high tax structure and costs and lack of standardization of processes and services. 
Besides, most of the successful international cities have their convention bureaus to 
market and provide support to the organisations and associations hosting event s 

15 
 
whereas there are no city convention bureaus in India.  Singapore, Thailand, UAE, 
China, Macau and Malaysia are already preferred destinations for MICE events in the 
region and India faces tough competition from these countries.     
52. The Committee notes that the Ministry has set the goals of enhancing India‟s share 
in the MICE business to 2% in five years from the current 1% and  India‟s ICCA ranking to 
the top 20, encourage the State Governments to set up 06 City level MICE Promotion 
Bureaus at major MICE destinations of Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Kolkata and 
Goa, in the country in two years  and encourage the Convention Bureaus to bid for 
international events  so that  50% of the events coming to the country should be through 
MICE Bureaus. To achieve these targets,  the National Strategy for MICE, inter -alia, plans to 
set up a National Advisory Council for MICE under the Chairm anship of the Minister  of 
Tourism. The MICE Promotion Bureaus in every State and major cities would be the single 
point of contact for seeking information and facilitation for organizing MICE events.   
53. The Committee observes that  the Convention industry can enhance a city‟s 
reputation and visibility.  Creating a marke ting body to get more events will help, 
nurture and market the  MICE investmen ts in the city . The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may make all efforts to ensure that such MICE Promotion Bure aus 
may be set up in the six identified cities within a targ eted time schedule to market and 
showcase the respective destinations as a favourable location for hosting business events 
and activities. 
54. The Committee observes that there are about 80,000 ,  04 star and 05 star hotel 
rooms in approved hotels, which for a country of the size of India, is quite insignificant 
(Annexure – II). The total number of rooms in the city of Bangkok is nearly three times 
than that of India. Adequacy of quality hotels can enhance the reputation of a 
destination as a suitable location for hosting MICE events, thus contributing to 
satisfaction of participants, repeat business besides word -of-mouth recommendation. 
Therefore, a dequate four and five star categories hotel rooms w ould have to be 
increased, for realising the goals of MICE tourism. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may assess the number of Convention Centres in the 04 and 05 star hotels 
of international stan dards in the country and determine the shortfall that would be 
required to host the targeted MICE events.  
55. The Committee also observes that connectivity, especially by air,  is one of the  
important aspect s that promotes  MICE tourism.  Since good international air 
connectivity reduces travel time and logistical challenges, t he Ministry should 
coordinate with the Ministry of Civil  Aviation to ensure that the identified cities of 
MICE destinations are well connected for international flights.   
  
6. WEDDING TOURISM 

16 
 
56. India has innumerable sites of historical, cultural, and aesthetic importance which can 
be leveraged for wedding tourism. The Committee was informed that a campaign  is being 
launched by the Ministry of Tourism to promote wedding tourism in India. The campaign 
will showcase spectacular and diverse locales, heritage, ethn ic diversity, profound rituals,  
well established wedding ecosystem, delectable cuisines and heart-warming hospitality, to 
invite both domestic and international clientele to create lasting memories. 
57. The Committee has been informed that one crore weddings take place in India 
every year and the number is bound to increase in the coming years. The Committee 
observes that Destination Weddings with events and celebrations spread out over many 
days can offer several benefits to the local economy and local ecosystem. But, India‟s 
huge potential for wedding tourism has not been exploited.  The Committee appreciates 
that Kerala Tourism has launched a music video, “Shubha Mangalyam”  in 
collaboration with a Youtuber and singer, for promotion o f wedding tourism in Kerala 
which has garnered much popularity.   The Committee recommends that similar efforts 
may be made by other states to promote destination wedding tourism.  
58. The Committee recommends that apart from development of infrastructure  and 
facilities to support the growth of wedding tourism, the Ministry may also facilitate easy 
and uniform process of registration of marriages in every state of India even for couples 
belonging to other states. 
 
7. CRUISE TOURISM 
59. Cruise Shipping is one of the most dynamic and fastest growing components of the 
leisure industry worldwide.  India with its vast and beautiful coastline, virgin forests and 
undisturbed idyllic islands, rich historical and cultural heritage, can be a fabulous tourist 
destination for cruise tourists. With the Indian economy developing at a steady pace, middle 
class growing in number and increasingly possessing disposa l incomes which could be spent 
on leisure activities, Indians could also take on cruise shipping in a big w ay. However, in 
2022, it was estimated  that the global cruise Tourism market was around $ 8 bn and the 
Indian market was estimated at around $100 mn which was an estimated share of around 1%, 
despite all the competitive advantages India has globally in cruise tourism. 
60. The Committee has been informed that the  National strategy for Cruise Tourism shall 
be finalised after detailed stakeholder consultation.   
61. The Committee was informed about the following initiatives taken by the Ministry of 
Tourism for promotion of Cruise Tourism in India -  
 The Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the State 
Governments/ UT Administrations/ Central Government Agencies for development of 
Tourism including Cruise Touris m and Cruising along rivers, under the Scheme for 
„Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development.‟  

17 
 
 The coastline of the country and its inland waterways have enormous potential to 
develop cruise tourism, both international and domestic. To harness this, a Task Force 
has been constituted with Secretary (Tourism) as the Chairman and Secretary 
(Shipping) as the Co -chairman. The Task Force consists of representatives from the 
ports, Ministries of Health, Home Affairs, External Affairs, Customs, CISF, Coastal 
States, etc. The 14th Meeting of the Task Force was held on 03rd May, 2023.  
 The Ministry of Tourism organised the event “Cruise Tourism” on the side lines of 4 th 
Tourism Working Group Meeting under India‟s G20 Presidency on 19 th June, 2023. 
The event deliberated on the strategies to promote Cruise Tourism as a Model for 
Sustainable and Responsible Travel and see the participation of G20 member 
countries, invited countries and industry stakeholders.  
62. The Committee observes that prior to Covid, there was a 35 per cent year -on-
year growth of cruise traffic in t he country. P ost-Covid, from 2021 onwards, there has 
been an increase in cruise traffic but the pre-Covid growth has still not been achieved. 
Prior to Covid, there were 4.7 l akh passengers on cruises and now, about 3 lakh 
passengers have been on cruises.  
63. The Committee also observes that the Cruise Shipping Policy was first 
formulated by the Ministry in 2008 when the industry was  in its infancy in India. The 
Policy aimed, inte r-alia, to increase the number of cruise passengers by 10 lakh by the 
year 2010, well developed rail, road and air connectivity and promotion of cruise 
vessels. Customs duty on bunkering for cruise and coastal ships, then at 33%, was cited 
as a factor towards making cruise operations uncompetitive. As part of conducive fiscal 
regime measures this issue was resolved by the Department of Revenue vide Notification 
No. 31/2014 dated November 11, 2014 by exempting Customs and Excise duty leviable 
on bunker fuels. Some progress has definitely been made in cruise tourism inasmuch as 
India now has its own luxury cruise liners . The first International Cruise Vessel from 
Chennai to Sri Lanka has recently been flagged off in June, 2023. India is , however, still 
way behind achieving the target of 10 lakh passengers as even in 2023, not even half the 
target has been achieved . The statistics on cruise vessels at some of the Major Ports 
provided by the Ministry show that cruise tourism has a long way to go to catch up with 
the pre-Covid numbers. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
endeavour to calibrate the strategy for Cruise tourism by addressing the challenges like 
inadequate infrastructure, lack of proper facilities at ports, environmental concerns due 
to waste disposal and pollution, etc. in a time -bound manner, besides  giving incentives 
to cruise companies to come to Indian ports.     
64. The Committee has been informed about five projects sanctioned under the 
Assistance to Central Agencies Sc heme for promotion of Cruise Tourism in Kerala 
(Annexure- III) from 2016 -17 to 2019 -20.   The Committee desires to know if similar 
assistance has been given for promotion of Cruise Tourism in other States.   
 

18 
 
8. MEDICAL AND WELLNESS TOURISM 
65. Medical tourism  is travel for treatment for  curative purposes. Wellness tourism is 
about travelling for the primary purpose of achieving, promoting and maintaining maximum 
health and a sense of well -being and though often clubbed with medical tourism, the two 
types operate in separate domains and meet different consumer needs. India has been ranked 
10th in Medical Tourism Index (MTI) for 2020 -21 out of 46 destinations of the world by 
Medical Tourism Association. As per estimates by Global Wellness Tourism, India ranked 7th 
position in 2017 with 56 million trips in wellness tourism and total revenue of USD 16.3 
Billion. 
66. The Committee was informed about the following initiatives taken by the Ministry 
of Tourism for promotion of Medical Tourism in India. 
67. The Ministry of Tourism constituted the National Medical & Wellness Tourism 
Board (NMWTB) with the Hon‟ble Minister (Tourism) as its Chairman in 2015 to provide a 
dedicated institutional framework to take forwa rd the cause of promotion of Medical and 
Wellness Tourism including the Indian system of medicine covered by Ayurveda, Yoga, 
Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH).   ITDC is the Nodal Agency for medical and 
wellness tourism.  
 
 Medical Visa – „Medical Visa‟ category has been introduced, which can be given for 
specific purpose to foreign travellers coming to India for medical treatment. „E - Medical 
Visa‟ and „E -Medical Attendant Visa‟ have also been introduced. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs vide its OM dated 15.03.2022 restored e -Tourist Visa with immediate effect  for 
nationals of 156 countries. 
 Wellness Tourism - Most of the hotels/resorts are coming up with Ayurveda Centers. 
The leading tour operators have included Ayurveda in their information brochures to attract 
the tourists. 
68. The steps taken by the Government to promote medical/ health tourism include 
promotion in overseas markets through roadshows, participation in travel marts, and 
production of brochures, CDs, films, and other publicity mat erial. Health tourism has been 
specifically promoted at various international platforms such as World Travel Mart, London, 
and ITB, Berlin. Yoga/ Ayurveda/ Wellness are being promoted in the past years in the print, 
electronic, internet and outdoor medium under the Ministry of Tourism‟s “Incredible India 
Campaign.” 
69. Celebration of International Day of Yoga - The Ministry of Tourism conducts 
International Day of Yoga (IDY) on 21st June every year for promotion of wellness Tourism . 
It is celebrated all across India with the active participation of Travel Trade, Yuva Tourism 
clubs, Hospitality Industry, Tourists etc. Activities were conducted in order to raise awareness 
of the many benefits of practicing yoga. 

19 
 
70. The Committee was informed that India is a sought after medical tourism destination 
because of state-of-the-art medical facilities, high quality healthcare professionals, relatively low 
cost of quality treatment as compared to western countries and no waiting time for treatment.   
India also has a unique advantage of offering Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy and other 
traditional systems of medicine for the treatment of various ailments . In order to highlight all 
the strengths of the country, India will be marketed as a medical and wellness tourism 
destination under the “Heal in India” brand.  
71. However, the medical tourism potential remains unrealised because there is lack of 
government regulations for the medical travel sector  which means that quality of services 
cannot be monitored. India maintains a robust ac creditation system through the National 
Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH). There is , however, not 
much awareness about NABH in foreign countries and the international patient s still attach 
much greater value to JCI accredita tion. India still has relatively a smaller number of JCI 
accredited hospitals. Unavailability of Medical Insurance Portability and non -coverage of 
traditional systems of medicine under insurance policies at the international level impacts the 
choice of India as Medical Value Travel (MVT) destination. 
 
72. The Committee observes that lack of regulation on quality of service is a major 
concern and appreciates that the National Strategy is to encourage registration of all 
medical tourism facilitators with the Government. The Committee, however, 
recommends that such registration should be mandatory as standardisation of services 
is the biggest impediment affecting med ical tourism in India. The Committee 
recommends that while NABH accreditation may be highlighted in various source 
markets, the Ministry should encourage major Indian hospitals to obtain the JCI 
accreditation.  
73. The Committee also observes that till now, no  significant efforts or investments 
have been made to build an ecosystem around hospitals. Guesthouses and patient 
specific hotels need to be built around hospitals.   
74. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may explore the 
opportunities in cross border telemedicine as India has sufficient skilled personnel to 
become a global hub in this regard. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry 
may promote the traditional medicines of India like Ayurveda on an equal footing.  
 
9. FILM TOURISM 
75. The Committee has been informed that the National strategy for Film Tourism shall 
be finalised after detailed stakeholder consultation.   
76. In order to leverage the power of Film Tourism to promote destinations, an event on 
“Promoting Incredible India through Film Tourism” was organ ised on 22nd May 2023 on the 

20 
 
sidelines of the third Tourism Working Group meeting held at Srinagar. The event provided 
an opportunity to the States/ UTs to share their policies and best practices which helped them 
develop film tourism. The event also provided an opportunity to the Industry s takeholders to 
give their suggestions and feedback on the factors that will encourage filmmakers to shoot in 
various locations in the country. Deliberations on national strategies  required to promote film 
tourism both for domestic and foreign films were also made. 
77. The Committee observes that films can have a massive im pact on destination 
marketing as visitors are often inspired to visit filming locations featured in popular 
films. The impact is such that the annual tourist influx is said to have increased by 40 % 
in New Zealand, the site of the movie trilogy of “Lord of the Rings ” after the release of 
the films. In India, the release of the film "3 Idiots" led to a significant increase in 
tourist arrivals in Ladakh to visit the Pangong Lake featured in the film. India produces 
the highest n umber of films in the world and film tourism has significant potential for 
growth in India. Many Indian films , especially those regarding per iod dramas,  
showcase historical places and characters and can be useful to highlight the history 
behind the tourist places. The Tamil movie “Ponniyin Selvan” based on one of the 
greatest novels in Tamil literature, is a fictional account of the historical character of 
Raja Raja Chola, the Chola king who built the Brihadeeswarar Temple in Thanjavur, 
one of the biggest temples of India. The Chola dynasty was famous for building temples, 
many of which are now World Heritage Sites. The Committee notes that the Tamil 
Nadu Tourism Development Corporation has announced a “Chola Tourism Circuit” 
covering the Chola Temples and the Veeranam Lake, also built by the Cholas. Tourism 
potential of such historical and religious sites can be harnessed through the medium of 
films. The Committee feels that while India has the advantage of producing the highest 
number of films in the world which also in a way depict the innate  historical 
significance of the places of tourism interests, the Ministry has not paid adequate 
attention to the great potentia l of films to showcase India. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should endeavour to devise the strategy to fully tap into the benefits of 
film tourism.   
 
10. GOLF TOURISM 
78. The Ministry of Tourism has framed guidelines for extending financial support for 
promotion of Golf Tourism. The Ministry invites Expressions of Interest (EOI) from the Golf 
Clubs, Golf Event Managers, State Governments/ UT Administrations, Approved Tour 
Operators/ Approved Travel Agents and Corporate Houses seeking financial support from the 
Ministry of Tourism for Golf Events, Golf Shows, Golf Promotional Workshops/ Events/ 
Annual Meetings/ Seminars eligible  for financial support, with a view to promote Golf 
Tourism to and/or within India under Incredible India brand as well as to provide an 
opportunity for these events to use the association with the Incredible India brand to achieve 
international standards. Applications received through EOI are evaluated by the India Golf 
Tourism Committee (IGTC) headed by Secretary (T) in its meetings held from time to time. 

21 
 
79. Presently the Ministry is in the process of reviewing these guidelines and is profiling 
lesser known Golf Tourism destinations for promotion. 
80. The Committee observes that Golf was introduced to India by the British and 
in 1829, the first golfing establishment, the Royal Calcutta Golf Club, was established . 
In contrast, Thailand‟s first professional golf was established only in 1924. Yet Thailand 
has emerged as  the world‟s top golfing destination while golf tourism is yet to take 
shape in India . In fact, many Indians visit Thailand as golf tourists . The Committee 
observes that India has much of the same landscapes and climatological conditions as 
Thailand, like a sunny climate all year around in most places which makes winter golf 
possible. Yet, India has not taken any special initiative to  attract both domestic and 
international golf enthusiasts . Thailand has promoted a Thai Golf Pass which is a 
unique loyalty program me exclusive to Thailand providing a seamless golf experience . 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with initiatives such as 
developing world -class golf infrastructure, p romoting tournament s, and providing 
holistic tourism experience to the visiting golfers in the country. 
81. During its Study Tour in Kerala, the Committee had been informed tha t an 
amount of Rs. 2464.99 lakh  had been sanctioned to Sports Authority of India under the 
Scheme “Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development”  in 
Kerala for upgradation of the Golf Course at the 165 year old SAI Trivandrum Golf 
Club under the  Sports Authority . The Committee observes that the project was 
sanctioned in 2016 -17 but as per media reports, the upgradation seems to have been 
taken up only in 2020-21.  The Committee further observes that only half the sanctioned 
amount has been released and the status of the project is stated to b e “Project Closed”.  
The Committee desires to know the reasons behind this when in reality, the project is 
not completed. The Committee also desires to know whether other Golf clubs in the 
country have been given similar assistance under the Scheme.  
82. The Committee observes that the Ministry is yet to take significant action on 
Golf Tourism, Eco -tourism, Film Tourism, and Wedding Tourism while taking some 
measures to promote  Sustainable Tourism, Rural Tourism, MICE and Medical 
Tourism, and Cruise Tourism. A plethora of wildlife sanctuaries and tiger reserves exist 
in India yet not much attention seems to have been paid to Wildlife Tourism. Kerala has 
shown the way for Caravan Tourism  with the establishment of one Caravan Park and  
proposal for  3 new Caravan Parks, 10 Caravans and subsidy of Rs. 7.5 lakhs for 
Caravan owners. Despite the successful efforts of Kerala towards promotion of Caravan 
Tourism, the Ministry has not endeavored to replicate the same in other states . The 
Committee also appr eciates the efforts of Kerala Tourism to develop the “Muziris 
Heritage Circuit”, the largest Heritage Conservation Project in India which would 
reinstate the historical and cultural signif icance of the legendary port of  Muziris and 
also the Alappuzha Heritage Circuit which includes the development of the defunct port 
of Alappuzha into a marina . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
explore the potential of Casino Tourism, Culinary Tourism, and Polo tourism, the last 
being believed to have originated in Manipur. The Committee also observes that in the 

22 
 
aftermath of the pandemic “Remote Working” has gained traction. Due to the rise in 
online work, workers often move to locations even in other countries which offer a 
lower cost of living or scenic locations , etc. and continue to stay for a long period of 
time. India offers all modern facilities required for such remote working,  like good 
internet facilities, a low cost of living compared to Western countries and many  serene 
and beautiful plac es for living . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
explore the possibilities of such niche tourism experience.  
83. The Committee further observes that though the Ministry has drafted the 
National Strategies and constituted National Boards for most areas of Niche Tourism, 
developed web sites and published newsletters yet, coordination with the concerned 
Ministries and formulation of project schemes und er the various niche areas seem to be 
wanting. The pace of implementation on the ground appears slugg ish. Most of the 
National Boards and Task Forces have held only 2 -3 meetings in a year . Most of the 
websites for Niche Tourism do not provide complete and detailed information , 
necessary for the tourists . The Ministry‟s interactions with the stakeholders a nd State 
Governments appear  sporadic. The growing gap between the strategic vision and 
implementation needs to be bridged and the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may take necessary action for the same. 
84. The Committee observes that while the Ministry‟s tourism policies stress the 
importance of attracting private investment and developing Public Private Partnerships 
for development of tourist infrastructure and facilities, the Ministry has not given any 
information on PPP projects in any scheme, be it niche tourism, thematic circuits or 
destination tourism . The National Strategy on Eco -Tourism has PPP partnerships as 
one of its strategic components. The Committee has come to know from the website of 
the Department of Economic Affairs regarding PPP projects that Eco -tourism projects 
have been proposed in Andaman & Nicobar Islands by Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA). The Committee desires to know the status of these projects and whether the  
Ministry of Tourism proposes to develop similar projects under Eco -tourism and other 
niche tourism areas and Swadesh Darshan 2.0 on PPP basis . The Committee directs the 
Ministry to submit details of PPP projects taken in the various schemes so far . The 
Committee observes that private participation in product development or marketing 
and promotion in tourism can be valuable and recommends that the Ministry may  
endeavour to bring in private investments in its various tourism products and schemes.  
85. The Commit tee observes that most of the tourists in India come from four 
source countries of US, Canada, Bangladesh and UK which account for nearly 60%  of 
the inbound tourists. India has only a small percentage of tourists from Europe, Africa, 
Central and South Amer icas. The tourist inflow from West Asian countries is also very 
low though the number of outbound tourists from India to these countries is much 
higher. The Ministry has informed the Committee  that improving connectivity with 
other regions especially direc t flight connectivity, tapping the potential of medical 
tourism, promoting India as a hub for MICE tourism , especially after the inauguration 
of world -class convention centre at Pragati Maidan, creating better infrastructure for 

23 
 
eco-tourism, adventure tour ism, religious tourism circuits, emphasizing on cleanliness 
and security, etc. are some of the steps that can be taken to increase inbound tourism in 
India. The Committee acknowledges that synergy among the various Central Sector 
Schemes of different Minis tries is essential for promotion of   tourism. To achieve this, 
inter-Ministerial coordin ation is of crucial importance. The Committee has been 
informed by the stakeholders that consultations between the Ministry of Tourism, other 
Ministries and the associations take place in a fragmented m anner and there is no 
proper coordination and consultations among Ministries involving matters of tourism in 
the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may step up 
efforts for coordination with other concerned Ministries for tourism promotion.  
86. The Committee stresses that connectivity to places especially to places of niche 
tourism which are often in far flung areas is of utmost importance in  the direction of 
promoting tourism in the country . The Committee has been informed by stakeholders 
that even places like Aurangabad, which as part of the Golden Triangle, used to be well 
connected to as many as eight cities is now connected to only two places. The Committee 
desires to know from the Ministry, the reason behind this drastic measure. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may pay special attention to the air 
connectivity of tourist places being promoted as also of the existing popular places  of 
tourism interest.   
87. The Committee has been informed by  the stakeholders that the present level of 
training and skilling is not adequate as niche tourism demands high level of training 
and skilling to meet the specific requirements and expectations of the tourists pertaining 
to that sector of niche tourism . The Committee recommends that the tourism sector 
needs to undertake reskilling and upscaling of its manpower by way of imparting them 
skill upgradation capacity building training in different niche areas from time to time.  
88. The Committee has been informed that availability of good quality hotel 
accommodation is currently very low in India as compared to other leading countries having 
tourism potential. India has less than 0.2 million cla ssified rooms which may  have a 
correlation to our global tourism share which is around 1%. In comparison , China‟s global 
tourism share is estimated to be above 5% and they have an estimated more than 4 million 
hotel rooms. The USA is estimated to have more than 6 m illion hotel r ooms and their 
international tourism share is estimated to be above 7%. The Committee observes that out 
of the 1,291 approved hotels in India only 565 hotels belong to Three Star and below 
categories and out of the 1,00 ,980 hotels rooms only 18,225 rooms belong to these 
categories which is grossly inadequate to meet  the tourism numbers targeted by the 
Ministry. The Committee also observe s that tourists, especially in n iche tourism, come 
from all strata of society and the hotel accommodation should cater to all  categories of 
tourists. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should incentivise those in the 
hospitality business to make concerted efforts  to ensure the availability of sufficient 
number of hotel rooms of all categories for the optimal growth of tourism sector.   

24 
 
89. The Committee further observes that creation of hotel infrastructure would involve a 
mammoth capital investment.   The Committee has been informed that as return on 
investment in the hospitality sector takes at least 15 years, availability of long term 
loans becomes a problem.  The Committee recommends that grant of infrastructure 
status to the hotel industry may be examined on priority as loans with longer repayment 
schedule and suitable interest rates would be available for creation of hotel 
infrastructure.  The Committee has been informed that though industry status has been 
accorded to hotels by many state Governments, but the incentives and privileges 
associated with the industry status have not been conferred to the hospitality sector.  
Granting Industry status to the tourism and hospitality sector would entitle the sector 
across all states to pay various taxes and tar iffs on industrial rates instead of on 
commercial rates presently.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
consider grant of Industry status to the tourism and hospitality sector by way of a 
uniform central notification as it would enhance the over all competitiveness of the 
tourism industry.   
90. The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that Tourist transport 
vehicles are treated on par with trucks and other commercial vehicles due to which the 
speed limit is restricted for tourist vehicles whereas private cars have  higher speed 
limits and faster movement.  In areas of niche tourism like MICE and luxury tourism, 
high-end tourists do not enjoy the rides especially in long road journeys and as such, the 
speed restrictions cause avoidable annoyance in the tourist experience. The Committee 
has learnt from the media reports that the Government is planning to review the speed 
limits and recommends that the Tourist transport vehicles may not be treated in the 
same category as other commercial vehicles  and the speed limits may suitably be 
revised/increased. Another minor but significant point raised by the stakeholders was 
that curtains should be allowed in tourist buses as tourists, especially  the foreigners, are 
not used to tropical weather, especially the heat of Indian summers. The Committee 
observes that tourism promotion is as much about the wholesome journey experience as 
it is about the destinations and recommends that the Ministry may consider the issue.   
91. The Committee has been informed by  the stakeholders that high tax rates in 
India in comparison to neighb ouring countries (Annexure – IV) is affecting tourist s‟ 
arrival in India. The Committee observes that in 2019, the GST rates had been reduced 
for hotel room from 28% to 18% for hotel rooms with tariffs of Rs. 7500/ - and above, 
18% to 12% for tariffs of less than Rs. 7500/ - and none for tariffs of less than Rs. 1000.  
The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Ministry of Finance and recommends 
that the Ministry of Tourism may examine the impact of the 2019 reduction in GST on 
tourist arrivals and appropriately take up with the Ministry of Finance for  further 
reduction in GST, if need be, for the targeted growth of tourism sector.   
92. The Committee observes that under the Service Exports from India Scheme 
(SEIS), the Government offered domestic exports duty credit scrips in the range of 5% 
to 7% of the net foreign exchange earned depending upon the nature of services.  These 
SEIS scrips  could be used to pay import duty or can be encashed by selling it to any 

25 
 
importer.  The SEIS Scheme had not been extended beyond 2019 -20.  While examining 
the Demand for Grants 2023 -24, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry 
take up the SEIS issu e with the Ministry of Commerce to increase the rate of SEIS 
benefits to 10% and extend the scheme for a further period of 2 -3 years.  The 
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation as even after 02 years after the 
pandemic, the tourism sector is yet to redeem its pre-pandemic position.  
 
11. SPIRITUAL TOURISM  
93. India is the land of many religions and faiths since ages and these have immensely 
contributed to the development of Indian heritage values. Religion and spirituality are 
common motivations for travel, with major tourist destinations having developed large ly as a 
result of their connections to sacred places, persons, and events. The growth of domestic 
tourism in India largely depends on pilgrimage tourism.  
94. Spiritual Circuits under Swadesh Darshan Scheme:- 
 The Ministry of Tourism launched „Swadesh Darshan ‟ Scheme in 2014 -15 and 
provided financial assistance to the State Governments/ UTs Administration/Central 
Agencies for development of tourism infrastructure at various destinations. Under the 
scheme 15 thematic circuits have been identified which also incl udes Krishna Circuit, 
Buddhist Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, Ramayana Circuit and Tirthankara Circuit.  
 Under the Spiritual theme i.e. Buddhist Circuit, Krishna Circuit, Ramayana Circuit, 
Spiritual Circuit and Tirthankara Circuit, 23 projects are sanctioned in various 
States/UTs for an amount of ₹ 1365.01 Cr. out of which the Ministry has released an 
amount of ₹ 1185.00 Cr. till date. List of projects sanctioned under the Spiritual theme 
of Swadesh Darshan is at Annexure – V. 
 The Ministry of Tourism is promot ing destinations related to spiritual tourism through 
the portals – incredibleindia.org and utsav.gov.in to celebrate the diverse faiths and 
belief systems of the country.   Spiritual events and festivals are showcased along with 
live darshan of various religious places through Utsav Portal. Also, destinations 
associated with spiritual tourism are amplified through the Social Media handles of  the 
Ministry of Tourism. 
 The Ministry of Tourism extensively promotes spiritual tourism, as one of the 
important tourism products of the country in print and  electronic media as also in their 
respective social media handles such as Facebook, Twitter , etc. Religious places, 
pilgrimage centers, etc. are being included in the Tourist Itinerary and recommended to 
both international and domestic tourists. 
 Recently, the Ministry and various State Tourism Departments attended World Travel 
Market (WTM)  2022 in London, Feria Internacional del Turismo  (FITUR) 2023 in 
Madrid and ITB 2023 in Berlin, Arabian Travel Market (ATM ) 2023, Dubai. The 

26 
 
Ministry of Tourism promoted and showcased varied tourism products 
of India including Spiritual Tourism through India pavilions. 
95. The Committee notes that of 23 Spiritual Circuits, 05 are yet to be completed 
out of which 02 circuits of Kera la are lagging much behind schedule. The work on the 
Sabarimala-Erumeli-Pampa-Sannidhanam circuit in Pathanamthitta district in Kerala 
had been initiated in 2016 -17 while the  Sivagiri Sree Narayana Guru Ashram circuit 
had been initiated in 2018 -19. At the time of the Demands for Grants 2023 -24, the 
Committee had been informed that the reason for delays in these two Kerala Circuits 
was due to lack of clearance from the Temple A uthorities. The Committee has been 
informed during its Study Visit to Kerala in September, 2023 that the status of physical 
completion of the two projects is 76% and 51% , respectively. The Committee is 
disappointed to see the slow progress  on these importa nt projects which have a target 
completion date of June, 2023 and October, 2023 respectively . The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should develop a clear cut Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) and obtain prior clearances and approvals from relevant authorities 
for future compliance in the interest of timely completion of projects.  
96. The Committee notes that the Buddhist circuit has been fully developed but as 
can be seen from the Tourism Statistics 2022, the numbers of foreign tourists from 
predominantly Buddhist countries has not shown any significant uptick. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may focus on promotion of Buddhist C ircuit in these 
countries and desires to know the number of events conducted by the Indian Missions 
there, showcasing  India‟s Buddhist circuit. The Committee recommends Audio -Visual 
Guides that offer information about Buddhist sites and monuments. 
97. The Committee has been informed that Bodh  Gaya, one of the most important 
sites in the Buddhist circuit, does not have good connectivity with the rest of the places 
in the Buddhist circuit. The Committee calls upon  the Ministry to examine the 
connectivity issue of Bodh Gaya and focus on improving the overall connectivity of all 
the Spiritual Circuits for increasing tourist footfall. 
 
C. PRASHAD SCHEME  
98. The “National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage 
Augmentation Drive (PRASHAD)” was launched by the Ministry of Tourism as a Central 
Sector Scheme with the objective of integrated development of identified pilgrimage/heritage 
destinations. The scheme aims at creation of pilgrimage/spiritual tourism infrastructure 
development at the identified destinations. Details of the project s sanctioned under this 
scheme are placed at Annexure – VI.  
99. The Committee observes that at the time of  the Demands for Grants, 2023 -24, 
the Committee had been informed that 20 out of 45 projects under this scheme had been 
completed, 09 projects were ongoing and 16 projects were yet to be developed.  The 

27 
 
Committee observes that the status remains almost the same as only  21 projects have 
been completed. Most of the reasons for delay given by the Ministry earlier were due to 
lack of appro vals from the ASI, temple authorities, forest clearance , etc. Upon further 
query by the Committee, the Ministry has now given the general reasons for delay that 
projects are usually sanctioned at Brownfield locations and well -known pilgrimage/heritage 
destinations with heavy footfall and hence , pose a challenge for carrying out construction 
activities during the peak visit hours at the destination. In a few instances, delays have been 
encountered due to cert ain unavoidable factors. These factors include religious and local 
issues, challenges faced in hilly areas or difficult terrains, and adverse weather conditions or 
natural calamities that affect project execution, etc. The period of the pandemic (March, 2020 
to January, 2022) also had an adverse impact on the project execution and performance of the 
Scheme. Despite these occasional delays, a significant number of projects, 21 in total, have 
been successfully completed, and an additional 05 projects are near ing completion. The 
Ministry strives to address issues related to religious beliefs and local stakeholder s concerns 
in order to minimize delays and ensure the smooth completion of the project. 
100. The Committee observes that the PRASHAD scheme was launched in 2014-15 
and completion of 21 projects out of 45 is certainly not a significant achievement , even 
taking into account the Covid years. The Committee points out that spiritual circuit 
projects were taken under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0 also and the Ministry has had 
adequate experience of the kind of problems that ordinarily come up while dealing with 
construction and development  at pilgrimage sites.  The Committee calls upon the 
Ministry to be mindful of the potential problems and calibrate suitable response at the 
DPR stage, so that the projects are not held up at later stages , causing both time and 
cost overrun.   
101. Upon being asked about the steps taken to complete the projects under this scheme, 
the Ministry has informed that it is closely following up with respective State & UT 
Governments for timely completion of approved projects. The Ministry of Tourism had done 
midterm amendments in scheme guidelines and changed the funding pattern. As per the 
guidelines, the first instalment shall be disbursed post subm ission of tender documents by the 
State Governments/UTs. The Ministry of Tourism also conducts regular site visits and 
follow-up meetings with the implementing agencies to monitor the progress of projects. 
Monthly Progress Reports from State /UT Governments are evaluated to track the progress of 
the scheme and identify any areas where there are delays or challenges. The Ministry of 
Tourism conducts routine virtual meetings with implementing agencies to discuss the 
progress of the projects, identify any challenges or issues, and provide advice and guidance to 
the State Government so that projects are implemented in a transparent and accountable 
manner. The Ministry is also working on a dedicated online PRASHAD Dashboard so that 
timely updates of the projects can be tracked and monitored. The dashboard will provide real-
time updates on project status, including financial information, physical progress, and 
implementation challenges. 
102. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken the initiative to amend 
guidelines and funding pattern midterm where necessary and recommends that the 

28 
 
Ministry may revise the timeline of the delayed projects and  ensure that the projects 
under this sc heme are completed within the revised timeline . The Committee also 
recommends that the PRASHAD Dashboard when online may be  monitored on a real 
time basis at the level of a senior functionary in the Ministry to ensure the completion of 
all pending projects.  
 
D. THEME-BASED TOURIST CIRCUITS – SWADESH DARSHAN 1.0 AND 2.0 
SCHEMES 
103. The mission of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme was to create a robust framework for 
integrated development of tourism destinations in partnership with the States/ UTs and local 
governments for promoting sustainable and responsible tourism in the country. Under the 
Scheme, 15 thematic circuits have been identified which also includes Spiritual Circuits i.e. 
Krishna Circuit, Buddhist Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, Ramayana Circuit and Tirthankara 
Circuit. Theme -based Tourist Circuits are the circuits around themes su ch as spiritual, 
culture, ecology, niche, etc. A theme-based circuit can be related to a state or region covering 
more than one State or Union territory. The 76 projects under Swadesh Darshan had multiple 
destinations, and covering 900 Tier-II and Tier-III cities.   
104. The Committee was informed that the „Swadesh Darshan ‟ Scheme was launched in 
2014-15 and the Ministry provided financial assistance to the State Governments/ UTs 
Administration/ Central Agencies for development of tourism infrastructure at vario us 
destinations.   
105. Since the inception of  the Scheme, 76 projects  have been sanctioned in 31 
States/UTs for an amount of ₹ 5292.57 crore. Out of these, 63 projects are completed till date 
and remaining projects are scheduled to be completed by December, 2023. 
106. Under the said Scheme, basic amenities and various tourism products were 
developed across various destinations such Convention Centres, Log Huts, Cafeteria, Public 
Facilities, Tourist Facilitation Centres, Souvenir shops, Cultural Centres, Interpret ation 
Centre, Last Mile Connectivity, Provision of Ramps at public places, Adventure Activities, 
Facade beautification, Landscaping works (Hard & Soft), Parking, Signage etc.  Six 
Convention Centers have been created under „Swadesh Darshan‟ 1.0  
107. The table below shows the number of projects sanctioned under different themes of 
the Swadesh Darshan scheme 1.0: 
 
S.No. Name of the 
Circuit 
No. of 
projects 
Amount 
Sanctioned (₹ Cr.) 
Amount 
Released (₹ Cr.) 
1.  North-East Circuit 10 0 743.70 
2.  Buddhist Circuit 05 0 743.7 
3.  Himalayan Circuit 07 0 1487.4 
4.  Coastal Circuit 10 00 2974.8 
5.  Krishna Circuit 02 0 5949.6 

29 
 
S.No. Name of the 
Circuit 
No. of 
projects 
Amount 
Sanctioned (₹ Cr.) 
Amount 
Released (₹ Cr.) 
6.  Desert Circuit 01 50.01 50.01 
7.  Tribal Circuit 04 50.01 11949.21 
8.  Eco Circuit 06 100.02 23898.42 
9.  Wildlife Circuit 02 200.04 47796.84 
10.  Rural Circuit 02 400.08 95593.68 
11.  Spiritual Circuit 13 800.16 191187.36 
12.  Ramayana Circuit 02 1600.32 382374.72 
13.  Heritage Circuit 10 3200.64 764749.44 
14.  Tirthankara Circuit 01  33.97 30.04 
15.  Wayside 01 15.07 14.32 
TOTAL 76 6450.32 1529543.24 
 
108. The State wise & theme wise detail s of project sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan 
scheme are enclosed in Annexure – VII. 
 
E. PROMOTION OF SWADESH DARSHAN SCHEMES 
109. The Committee was informed that the State Governments/UT Administrations play a 
key role in identifying and developing the theme -based tourism circuits in their respective 
states. The Ministry of Tourism through its various initiatives supports the States 
Governments to develop and promote these theme -based tourism circuits. Further, the 
Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to the States/UTs through its major 
schemes for development of tourism infrastructure at various destinations such as Swadesh 
Darshan, PRASHAD, etc.  
110. The Ministry of Tourism promotes tourist destinations including theme-based tourist 
destinations through its website www.incredibleindia.org, Social Media platforms and other 
promotional material such as digital creatives, films , etc. Further, the Ministry of Tourism 
provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) upto Rs.50.00 Lakh to State Governments & 
UT Administrations on the proposal of fairs/festival and tourism related events (i.e. seminars, 
conclaves, conventions, etc.). 
 
111. Utsav Portal  - The Utsav Portal website ( www.utsav.gov.in), a digital initiative 
launched by the Ministry of Tourism, aims at showcasing all the events, festivals and live 
darshans across India to promote different regions of the country as popular tourist 
destinations worldwide. The objective is to showcase var ious events and festivals of India on 
a global platform and increase tourism awareness, attractions, and opportunities by providing 
tourists with contextual digital experiences. 
112. The Ministry has showcased 1118 Events and 55 Live Darshans  on the Utsav 
Portal website till date. 

30 
 
113. Recent Initiatives:- 
 The IRCTC has launched Baba Saheb Ambedkar Yatra by Bharat Gaurav Tourist 
Train on the recommendation of the Mi nistry of Tourism. The 7 nights / 8 days tour 
was launched on the auspicious occasion of 132 nd Birth Anniversary of Dr. Baba 
Saheb Ambedkar in 2023. The Yatra includes visit  to prominent places associated 
with the life of Baba Saheb Ambedkar like New Delhi, Mhow, Nagpur and sacred 
Buddhist sites like Sanchi, Sarnath, Gaya, Rajgir and Nalanda. 
 The Ministry of Tourism organ ised a Familiarization (FAM) Trip on Bharat Gaurav 
Tourist train tour on Ambedkar Circuit to promote and popularize this special 
initiative.  
 The Committee was also informed that the Ministry of Tourism regularly reviews the 
physical progress of the project at various levels. The delay in completion of project 
has occurred due to various reasons including clearance, local issues, etc. A statement 
containing project -wise issues of various ongoing projects as informed by State is 
given at Annexure – VIII. It may be noted that no escalation in project cost is 
noticed and all the projects are with in the original sanction cost . The Ministry of 
Tourism regularly holds review mee ting with officials of State/UT Government for 
tackling various issues, addressing bottlenecks and ensuring speedy completion of the 
project. 
114. The Committee notes that at the time of the Demand for Grants 2023 -24, the 
Ministry had informed that 17 projects of Swadesh Darshan 1.0 were pending  for 
completion. Four more projects have been completed and now 13 projects are targeted 
for completion by December, 2023. The Committee notes that out of the remaining 13 
projects, only 04 are showing some progress and the rest are still at the same stage as 
they were in Marc h, 2023. The Committee further notes that 02 projects are delayed 
due to court case/arbitration, 04 due to lack of clearance from forest/temple authorities 
and the remaining 03 due to delays in procurement of cruise boats and floating 
restaurants, contract or issues and inclement weather and difficult terrain (in case of 
J&K). The Committee feels that the lack of progress in these projects in the past few 
months does not augur well for their timely completion by December, 2023. The 
Committee also notes that most of these projects began in 2016 -17 and are already 
much behind their schedule. The Committee also notes that the four projects which are 
delayed due to lack of clearances from forest or temple authorities  are at the final stage 
of completion. The Committee desires to know why the clearances have not been 
obtained at the time of the finalisation of the DPR and are pending even at the 
culmination of the project. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make  every 
effort to complete the remaining 13 projects by December 2023 as the projects have 
already been considerably delayed. The Committee also desires the Ministry to  monitor 
the real time progress of the projects at the level of a senior functionary and e nsure 
their completion without any further delay.  

31 
 
115. The Committee appreciates the Utsav Portal website and the Tourist Train 
initiatives of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study 
the impact of the projects completed under the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 scheme on the 
tourism and analyse the shortcomings so that the same could be improved in SD 2.0.   
 
F. SWADESH DARSHAN 2.0 
116. The Secretary , Ministry of Tourism,  in her deposition before the Committee 
informed that no new projects were sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0 after 
2018-19. After a very high level and detailed review the  Swadesh Darshan Scheme was 
revamped to ensure that the funding under t he Scheme remains more impactful an d visible. 
Even while the Theme -based Circuits remain relevant, it was felt that keeping in view the 
resources, only 40 -50 destinations be focused on in the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 Scheme. The 
following areas were identified for improvement in the Second Phase of the Scheme: 
(i) Broad-basing of Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
(ii) State-level Institutional Structure for the Scheme 
(iii) Strategic selection of the destinations 
(iv) Detailed benchmarking and gap analysis of destination 
(v) Focus on both hard and soft Interventions 
(vi) Strengthening of Project Implementation and Monitoring 
(vii) Operations and maintenance on sustainable basis 
(viii) Promotion & marketing of the destinations 
(ix) Impact Assessment 
 
117. Swadesh Darshan 2.0 brings about a major shift in  the scheme to make it a holistic 
mission to develop sustainable and responsible tourism destinations.  The key principles to 
be followed under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0 are:- 
(i) Develop benchmarks and standards for major tourism themes 
(ii) Sustainable and responsible tourism 
(iii) Destination and tourist-centric approach 
(iv) Integrated development of tourism destination 
(v) Focus on Domestic Tourism 
(vi) Policy and Institutional Reforms 
(vii) Operation and maintenance on sustainable basis 
(viii) Synergy with other central and state schemes 
 
118. Following major themes have been identified for tourism under the Scheme:- 
(i) Culture and Heritage Tourism 
(ii) Adventure Tourism 
(iii) Eco-Tourism 
(iv) Wellness Tourism 
(v) MICE Tourism 

32 
 
(vi) Rural Tourism 
(vii) Beach Tourism 
(viii) Cruises – Ocean & Inland 
 
119. As per statutory requirement, 10% of the allocation for Schemes has to be earmarked 
for the development of the North-Eastern Region. Accordingly, the Ministry has provided an  
allocation of Rs. 229.00 crore  under BE 2023 -2024. Under the Swadesh Darshan 2.0,  12 
destinations have already been identified in North -Eastern States including Sikkim with an  
average outlay of Rs. 50 crore . Out of total budget allocation of Rs 1412 crore for Swadesh 
Darshan scheme, Rs. 98.50 crore is earmarked specifically for Tribal Sub-Plan for creation of 
tourism infrastructure in the tribal areas. 
120. When enquired by the Committee on the criteria of selec tion of 55 destinations 
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme  2.0, the Ministry informed that the States had been 
consulted on the same and a format had been circulated to the States for preparing the 
State Perspective Plan . The Ministry further informed that there are two principles 
involved in selection of a destination that states which have not been represented should 
find a place in the list and places with immense potential should also be included . The 
Committee recommended that a wide consultation process should be initiated before the 
selection of any such destinations as they have a great impact on the local economy.  
121. Upon observation of the Committee that 50 destinations had also been 
announced in the Union budget speech, 2023, the Ministry confirmed that these 50 
destinations were over and above the 55 dest inations under the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
and would be selected in challenge mode. Both the State Governments and the 
Stakeholders at the Chintan Shivir meeting had been asked for feedback and the 
selection process would be fairly competitive . The Committee emphasised that selection 
of destinations should be a consultative process so that there is an equitable distribution 
of destinations in the country across sectors.   
122. The Committee observes the differences ( Annexure – IX) in  funding pattern, 
disbursal of funds and receipt of Utilisation Certificates in the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
Scheme, and appreciates the new features of Impact Assessment of the projects under 
the Scheme and monitoring of the Scheme through a Comprehensive Porta l. The 
Committee, however, observes that all the themes of the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 Scheme 
have been repeated in the 2.0 Scheme with no new additions. The claim of the Ministry 
to focus on fewer destinations in the second phase of the Scheme has also been d iluted 
by the addition of 50 more destinations.   
123. Upon query , the Ministry has replied that as per  guidelines, the scheme will 
encourage development of benchmarks and standards for generic and theme specific 
development of tourism destinations and the Stat es will follow the benchmarks and standards 
while planning and developing the projects. While major  themes have been identified in the 
guidelines under the scheme, all other themes will fall in one of the major themes and a 
destination may be developed for one or more major themes. 

33 
 
124. The Committee observes that there does not appear to be a clear cut distinction 
between the two phases of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme as the same theme based 
strategy seems to  have guided the implementa tion of the second phase also. The 
Committee is also not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that all themes evolved in 
future will fall in one of the major themes as the basic idea of n iche tourism is that it 
provides a particular experience which cannot be obtained in other forms of tourism.  
Regarding benchmarks and standards, the Committee fails to understand why the same 
were not provided in the earlier phase of the scheme. The Commi ttee feels that the 
Ministry has in the past decade alternated between theme -based tourism and 
destination based tourism and has endeavoured to incorporate elements of both in all 
the programmes that it has formulated. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that the guidelines issued to the states are unambiguous in the kind of 
destinations and themes to be developed. 
125. The Committee observes that given the immense potential of niche tourism in India, 
there is a need to create capacity and ensure skilling of employees for various segments of 
niche tourism. Specially trained manpower is needed to cater to the growing demand for 
niche tourism especially among foreigners. The Committee wishes to know from the 
Ministry, the steps being taken to increase the capacity and availability of skilled manpower 
in the niche tourism sector. 
126. The Committee has been informed that the Ministry of Tou rism through the 
Capacity Building For Service Providers (CBSP) scheme is taking steps for capacity building 
in hospitality, travel and tourism sector by skilling the newly inducted persons and re-skilling 
and upskilling the already employed persons at tourist destinations. However, for catering to 
the growing demand for niche tourism , especially among foreigners, the challenge could be 
to identify the youth interested in learning various foreign languages and also the trained 
trainers in various languag es. The Ministry h as entrusted IITTMs to conduct l inguistic 
programs, all over the country. Other challenge s being faced while working on c apacity 
building and skilling in niche tourism areas include lack of Data of Master Trainers, lack of 
awareness among  the community, lack of industry support, inadequate community 
involvement, etc. 
127. The Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management, an autonomous body under 
the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India through its five Centres and two camp offices 
is d eveloping the skilled manpower to strengthen the Indian Tourism Industry. IITTM has 
established courses for the tourism sector to train and certify manpower to strengthen tourism 
industry. IITTM offers MBA and BBA courses in Tourism, conducts guide trainin g 
programme and short-term skill development training programme. 
128. The National Institute of Water sports , a centre of IITTM, under the Ministry of 
Tourism, Govt. of India offers various tailor -made Water based adventure and also certifies 
the persons. 

34 
 
129. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry to prepare a 
skilled workforce for catering to the  increasing demands of the tourism industry for its  
anticipated growth.  The Committee desires to know the number of students in the 
tourism cours es at IITTM, the number of trained guides and whether the numbers 
would be adequate to meet future demand.  
130. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken the digital initiative of 
the Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) Online Programme to enable people to 
learn about tourism at their pace, earn Certificates as Facilitators , and become part of 
the tourism industry. The Committee has been informed that the Facilitators certified 
under the IITF scheme are not allowed to enter the monuments as a result of which 
their employment prospects are affected. Tour Operators hesitate to employ Facilitators 
as they would also have to separately employ guides to go into the Monuments with the 
tourists. The Committee desires to be informed of the status in this regard and 
recommends that the Tourist Facilitators may be imparted training  in all aspects of 
tourism so that they may act as Guides inside the monuments as well . The Committee 
also observes that in places like Serengeti  National Park in Tanzania, the drivers of the 
Safari Vehicles are well trained to act as guides to the Park . The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of multi -skilling of the 
Tourist Facilitators so that they may also perform  the roles of Drivers and Gu ides, 
depending on the requirements.  
 
G. POTENTIAL TOURIST SPOTS 
131. The Ministry informed that  the States/UTs play a key role in identifying and 
developing the potential tourist spots in their respective states. The Ministry of Tourism 
through its various initiatives supports the State/Union Territory Governments to promote 
various t ourism spots through marketing and  promotion, destination development, skill 
development, etc.  The Ministry of Tourism also conducts media campaigns on various 
platforms including Online and Social Media to promote the potential tourist spots.  
132. Further, the Ministry of Tourism organises various tourism related events such as 
Bharat Parv, Paryatan Parv, International Tourism Mart, etc and participates in various events 
such as Tra vel Fairs/Exhibition for tourism promotion and marketing. The Ministry of 
Tourism also extends financial assistances to States/UTs for Fairs, Festivals & Events.  
133. The Ministry of Tourism through its various schemes such as Swadesh Darshan, 
PRASHAD and C entral Financial Assistance (C FA) to Central Agencies provides financial 
assistance to State Governments / UTs /Central Agencies for developing tourism 
infrastructure at various tourist destinations.  
134. In the meetings with the stakeholders, the Committee was in formed about 
various potential tourist spots in the country which hav e been placed at Annexure – X. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the concept of Greenfield 

35 
 
Tourism where new locations can be developed as potential tourism spots with the 
participation of Government of India and the concerned State Government with private 
investments for creation of modern tourist infrastructure, hotels and all tourist facilities 
and connectivity by air, rail and road . The Statue of Unity near Kevadia in Gujarat is a 
classic example of Greenfield Tourism, being a man -made tourist destination which has 
earned a formidable reputation as a popular tourism spot . Another example is tourism 
on the sand dunes near the Salasar Balaji Temple in the Churu Dis trict of Rajasthan 
where hotels and restaurants have come up to cater to the tourists who visit the temple 
and stay to enjoy the sand dunes in the desert . The Committee observes that 
development of such Greenfield tourist spots would take the pressure off the already 
established tourist spots which sometimes suffer from the adverse effects of 
overtourism.     
135. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may while promoting 
destinations in Arunachal Pradesh or Lakshadweep or such areas which require special 
permits, highlight the requirement in its campaigns so that tourists are aware of the 
rules and are able to plan their schedule accordingly.  
136. The Committee further observes that the Ministry had formulated the Draft 
National Tourism Policy in July, 2022 incorporating key recommendations of NITI 
Aayog, Sectoral Group of Secretaries, global best practices from organizations such as 
UNWTO and polic ies and strategies formulated by other countries after multiple 
rounds of consultations and feedback from Central Ministries, State Goverments and 
Industry Stakeholders.  More than a year later, the policy, however, has still not been 
finalized.  The Commi ttee recommends that the Ministry may make every effort to 
ensure that all concerns of the stakeholders in the tourism and hospitality sector are 
addressed and the National Tourism Policy is put in place in a time-bound manner.  
 
H. PROMOTION OF TOURISM ABROAD BY INDIAN MISSIONS 
137. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of External Affairs has been playing 
a key role in promoting Indian Tourism abroad through its collective efforts along with its 
Missions/Posts abroad. Indian Missions have been closely working with the Overseas Tourist 
Offices before their closure on 31st March 2023. 
138. In October 2021, the Tourism Officers have been designated in 20 Indian Missions 
abroad (Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Myanmar, Oman, 
Portugal, Russia, Singapore South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, The Netherlands, UK 
and USA) to promot e tourism. The Tourism Officers in 20 Missions are IFS Officers in the 
ranks of Second Secretary, First Secretary, or Counsellor. All 20 Tourism Officers have held 
detailed discussions with the Ministry of Tourism in March , 2022 wherein they presented 
country specific strategy papers on promotion of tourism to India for their respective 
countries.  

36 
 
139. The Indian Missions maintain a database of the local tour -operators and agencies 
and remain in regular touch with them. Sometimes, they also purchase tickets for  Indian 
Technical and Economic Cooperation  (ITEC) scholars proceeding to India through tour 
operators. Information exchange with tour operators/agencies is promoted through 
meetings/emails/mutual discussions. Missions also consult with seve ral state governments to 
organise familiaris ation visits and awareness building about tourism among foreign tour 
operators. Tour operators are invited by the Missions to participate in information awareness 
and state tourism promotion programmes. Missions send the details  of Indian tourism 
including promotional material, website links for Incredible India, Utsav India, famous tourist 
places, etc. regularly to the operators. In addition, WhatsApp groups have been formed for  
faster and efficient communication. 
140. The MEA does not have a separate earmarked budget for tourism promotion but the 
Ministry does so under the budget for overall trade and cultural promotion under three types 
of funds: 
a) States Facilitation Abroad Fund  – The MEA coordinates and facilitates the efforts of 
the States and Union Territories in the areas of trade, investment, culture and tourism, 
with the help of Indian Missions/ Posts abroad through States Facilitation Abroad 
Fund. The Missions/Posts abroad may ut ilize the funds allotted, inter -alia, for 
promotion of Tourism (inbound) of States/Union Territories. The details of  funds 
allocated to the Missions/ Posts under the head -States Facilitation Abroad during last 
three years are enclosed at Annexure – XI (Table 1). 
b) Publicity Fund - This is managed by MEA‟s External Publicity and Public Diplomacy 
Division and is used for promotion of tourism and culture abroad. The details of funds 
allocated to the Missions/ Posts under the head -„Publicity‟ during the last three years 
are enclosed at Annexure – XI (Table 2). 
c) Market Expansion Fund - To enable our Missions/Posts abroad to effectively respond 
to the growing demands of Indian industry and business, the MEA disburses funds for 
“Market Expansion Activities ”. Missions/Posts abroad may utilize this fund, inter -
alia, for promotion of Tourism. Details are included at Annexure – XI (Table 3). 
141. Several initiatives undertaken by the Missions/Posts in this regard are as follows: 
 Tourism Road shows and Know India Seminars: Missions and Posts regularly organize 
tourism Road shows and „Know India‟ seminars in their host countries both for the 
Ministry of Tourism, Go vernment of India,  as well as State -led initiatives. These help 
in popularizing Indian tourism, connect ing the tour operators of both sides for tie ups 
and garnering interest in outreach among the travel industry in host countries. 
 Incredible India Campaign: Missions have been actively working for the promotion of 
Incredible India Campaign. This is being do ne by distribution of Incredible India 
brochures translated in several languages; and organizing Incredible India road shows. 
The Missions have also been organizing Travel to India campaigns under which 

37 
 
promotion of Incredible India is being done through b illboards at prominent locations 
and advertisements on local city buses plying on busy routes. 
 Social Media Outreach : Missions also undertake promotion of Incredible India 
campaign though their social media channels, which has found resonance in the last 
few years. These efforts have been complemented by online competitions. 
 Participating in Travel Expos : Missions have been participating in global and regional 
travel markets and travel expos to promote tourism in India. 
 Tourism as a part of commercial and a cademic events: Missions also promote India for 
its plethora of tourist attractions across themes during the programs/engagements at all 
platforms – Universities, Think -tanks, Business and Commerce Chambers and 
interactions thereof.  
 Promotion Material : Mi ssions have also been working to publish and distribute 
promotional material positioning India as a favourite Tourist destination. Missions also 
work for the promotion of State tourism through distribution of publicity material 
during their various Commerc ial events, state days and seminars. Missions also 
promote tourism through slide shows and posters, LED screens and billboards at the 
prominent places. 
 Medical Tourism:  Missions have been organis ing several outreach seminars, 
exhibitions, and investors‟ summits to promote medical tourism in India, and AYUSH 
systems of medicine and related wellness therapies. Missions have organ ised AYUSH 
promotion campaigns among travel and tourism industry operators, medical industry 
and among spas/resorts/wellness centers. 
 Signing several Memorandum of Understanding  for Promotion of Tourism with 
Foreign Governments 
 Inviting Artists to India and organize their events in association with ICCR. 
 Providing „Grants in Aid‟ to local artists/groups  who promotes Indian Culture, Dances, 
etc. 
142. Other activities include:  
 Special Day/  Weeks for promotion of tourism such as Celebration of India Day, 
Constitution Day, Gandhi Jayanti, International Yoga Day, etc. 
 Celebrating Indian Festivals - Promoting Indian Culture and Cuisine (Food Festival) 
 Exhibition 
 Indian Film Festival- Screening Indian Movies/Biopic of Freedom Fighters 
 Setting up of India Corners in several Universities, Institutions, Art Galleries, Indian 
Missions/Posts 
 Participating in local festivals for promotion of India tourism 

38 
 
 
143. On a query by the Committee regarding the number of MOUs signed with foreign 
governments for promotion of Indian tourism and the impact of such MO Us, the Ministry 
informed that t he signing of Agreemen ts / Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with 
various countries is an ongoing process and the Ministry of Tourism has signed Agreements/  
MoUs in the field of tourism cooperation with other countries and multilateral fora. The ma in 
objective of such Agreemen ts/ MoUs signed by the Ministry of Tourism is primarily to 
promote tourism between both sides. The importa nt components of the Agreements / MoUs 
include the following: 
(i) Exchange of information and data related to tourism. 
(ii) Cooperation between tourism stakeholders including hotels & Tour operators. 
(iii) Exchange of visits of Tour Operators/Media/Opinion Makers for promotion of two way 
tourism 
(iv) Exchange programmes for cooperation in Human Resource Development. 
(v) Investment in the Tourism and Hospitality sector. 
(vi) Exchange of experience in the areas of promotion, marketing, destination development 
and management. 
(vii) Participation in travel fairs/exhibitions in each other‟s country 
 
144. The det ails of countries for tourism Mo Us signed with foreign cooperation are 
placed at Annexure – XII. 
 
145. The MEA has created 3Ts Dashboard (Trade, Tourism, and Technology). Indian 
Missions are uploading data on the dashboard, as and when available to them. Our Missions 
continue to make efforts to increase bilateral trade, enhance inbound tourism and make 
available advanced and critical technology to India 
146. The Committee observes that there were 10.93 million Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
(FTAs) in India during pre -pandemic year 2019, but the current FTA numbers are still 
well below the pre -pandemic levels . In one of the studies by the National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER), it is estimated that tourism in India would not 
regain its pre -pandemic levels till 2026 . In this scenario, promotion and marketing of 
tourist destinations and products, especially by the Indian Missions abroad, assumes 
importance if India is to regain its pre-pandemic tourism numbers.  
147. The Committee had been informed by the stakeholders that  currently no tourism 
promotion is being conducted overseas. When enquired by the Committee, the MEA gave the 
details regarding events and campaigns organ ised by the MEA after the closure of the 
Overseas Tourism Offices.  The MEA also informed that response to such events/campaigns 
has been enthusiastic among the foreign communit y, sometimes with the feedback of 
repeating them periodically. These events have generated greater interest and curiosity about 
India and its tourist places. These efforts had a positive impact on tourists‟ arrival from many 
countries to India. For example , 3,69,007 Australian tourists visited India during  the year 

39 
 
2022 which is higher than 3,67,241 Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) from Australia in the 
year 2019. In comparison to 500 tourist visa and 7 ,779 medical visa  issued by the Indian 
Embassy in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) from Jan -Dec 2022, Mission has issued 703 tourist visa 
and 10,792 medical visa during Jan-Jun 2023. In Q1 of FY 2023-24, 1789 tourist visas were 
issued in Kuwait, a growth of 30% YOY. Social media out reach by the Missions is getting 
higher impressions and thereby reaching wider audiences. After the closure of overseas 
offices, the Ministry of Tourism in coordination with Indian Missions has participated in 
Arabian Travel Market, Dubai held from 1st to 4th May, 2023 and IMEX, Frankfurt from 23 rd 
to 25th May, 2023. Further details in this regard, are placed at Annexure – XIII.   
148. The Ministry also informed that all possible assistance, including visa facilitation, is 
extended to travel and tour operators/agencies, to enable them to participate in travel expos.   
149. The Committee notes the events and programmes organ ised by the Indian 
Missions abroad to promote tourism and the budgets for the same. The Committee has 
been informed that the Tourism Officers posted in Indian Missions have tourism 
promotion as additional charge . The Committee recommends that as responsibility for 
tourism promotion abroad now rests solely with the Indian Missions in all countries, the 
Tourism Officers may be given sole charge as far as possible as it is necessary for the 
transitional change from the Overseas Tourist Offices to the Missions in many countries 
and to create confidence among the stakeholders that the Missions are attaching top 
priority to tourism promotion . The Tourism Officers were des ignated by MEA in 
October, 2021. The Committee has been informed that since then the Tourism Officers 
have had only one meeting with the Indian stakeholders a year back and desires to 
know how many meetings have been held with them as also the foreign tour ism agents 
and B2B players since their appointment. 
150. Upon enquiry by the Committee on the background of these Tourism Officers 
and whether they have been imparted training in promotion of tourism, it has been 
informed that these officers were already dealin g with  the subject of  promotion of 
Indian culture and commerce and hence were having some domain understanding.  The 
Ministry also informed that as such, the Missions and Posts had been carrying on 
promotional activities wherever there we re no Overseas Tour ism Offices. The 
Committee appreciates the competence of the MEA officers but feels that the MEA may 
explore the possibility of posting officers from the Ministry of Tourism, who are well 
trained and experienced i n tourism promotion,  in Indian Missions ab road. The 
Committee has also been informed that the MEA is considering a proposal to the 
Ministry of Tourism to designate Tourism Officers in all Missions, in addition to the 20 
Tourism Officers already designated in top 20 source markets of tourism and 
recommends that it would be beneficial to have designated officers in more Missions 
abroad for tourism promotion. 
151. The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders tha t after the closure of 
the Overseas Tourist Officers, India did not figure in  the brochures of the overseas 
tourism agents, adversely impacting the prospects of Indian tourism. In its interaction 

40 
 
with the MEA, the Committee has been informed that the Overs eas Tourist Offices had 
a lot of funds available for this purpose and the Ministry of Tourism is still having 
discussions with the MEA on how to place a separate budget for tourism at the disposal 
of the MEA which would enable them to give brochure support  for the agents and other 
promotional work. The Committee is surprised that these aspects of budget for 
promotion and campaign schedule for the Missions have not yet been resolved as the 
Overseas Tourist Offices had gradually been shut down over the last two years and only 
the last eight were closed in March, 2023.  There was sufficient time for the two 
Ministries to have the transition formalities in place. Upon further query, the 
Committee has been informed that the MEA is in consultation with the Ministry of 
Tourism to jointly address such concerns arising out of closure of Overseas India 
Tourism Offices. 
152. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may settle the 
matters expeditiously so that the MEA would have both the funds and the programme 
to go ahead with the work relating to  tourism promotion . Exclusion of India from 
tourism brochure is a major issue in the absence of which  the visibility of Indian 
tourism places would be difficult to maintain.  
153. Upon  query by the Committee regarding the institutional linkages between the 
Ministry of Tourism and the MEA for meaningful coordination to ensure that inbound 
and outbound tourists are not put to any inconvenience, it was informed that the MEA 
regularly interacts with the Ministry of Tourism on all tourism related matters.  The 
Joint Secretary (Economic Diplomacy) is represented as the MEA nominee on boards of 
many tourism-related committees formed by the Ministry of Tourism like the National 
Board for Adventure Tourism, Medical Value Travel Servi ces and Wellness Services 
Sectional Committee , India MICE Board , etc. The Ministry of Tourism organises 
various meetings from time to time with the MEA and Tourism Officers designated by 
the MEA in Indian Missions regarding enhancing foreign tourist arriva ls to the country 
and to chalk out action plan for popularizing India as a Favourite Tourist Destination 
for enhanced foreign tourist arrivals. 
154. The Committee recommends that at regular intervals, virtual meetings can be 
conducted between the two Ministries by involving the Missions, and other stakeholders 
like tour operators to understand the gaps in tourism promotion and  to identify actions 
required by each stakeholder. 
 
Visa facilitation by Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
155. In its meeting with the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, the 
Committee was informed that the MEA acts as an effective coordinating agency for smooth 
implementation of visa related policies between the MHA and Missions/Posts abroad which  
act as implementing agencies. Indian Visa is being granted under three schemes, details of 
which are explained under: 

41 
 
a) Regular (Paper) Tourist Visa:  Tourist Visa is admissible for an applicant coming to 
India for recreation, sightseeing, casual visit to me et friends or relatives, attending a 
short term yoga programme, voluntary work of short duration , etc. Under this scheme, 
an applicant shall have to submit an application on the on -line system in the standard 
visa application form, and thereafter, has to submit hard copy of the same along with 
the supporting documents either themselves or through post/author ised outsourced 
service provider. 
b) E-Visa: With a view to liberalization of Indian Visa policies and ease of travel, the 
Government of India launched e -Visa or electronic Visa (i.e., Digital Visa) Scheme in 
November, 2014 for foreign nationals applying for visa under five sub-categories 
including e-Tourist Visa can be availed for all the purposes which are covered in 
Regular Tourist Visa. It can be availed from any geographical location by the nationals 
of 166 countries. Under e -Visa Scheme, electronic Travel authorization is normally 
granted within 72 hours via e -mail. E-Visa Scheme is therefore convenient and paper -
less. 
c) Visa-on-Arrival (VOA) can be granted to a Japanese, Republic of Korea and United 
Arab Emirates (UAE ) nationals  who are visiting India for a period not exc eeding 60 
days for business, tourism, conference and medical purposes. In the case of UAE, VOA 
facility will be available only to those UAE nationals who had earlier obtained e -Visa 
or normal paper Visa for India irrespective of whether the pe rson has visi ted India or 
not. Upon enquiry by the Committee on whether Visa -on-Arrival was given on 
reciprocal basis, the representatives of the MEA stated that it was based on some 
assessment by the MHA, the Nodal Ministry. 40 countries give Visa on arrival for 
Indians. However, more emphasis is given on e-Visa as it is much more convenient.  
156. Owing to onset of Covid -19 Pandemic, a ll visas (including e -Visas which were 
admissible to nationals of 171 countries) were suspended  from March, 2020. With continued 
ease i n prevalent COVID situation, Visas were restored in a phased manner. Tourist Visa 
(both regular and e -visa) was fully restored from  March, 2022. In pre-Covid period in 2019, 
almost 48 per cent of the visas issued were e-visa whereas 52 per cent were regular visa.   
157. The Committee was informed that the rules and regulations for Visas are formulated 
by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) as per the Allocation of Business Rules. The e -Visa 
is completely online and its p ortal is maintained by the Bureau of Immigration, MHA. Only 
the regular or Paper visa is issued by the Missions as it is required to be stamped.  
158. Upon enquiry by the Committee whether sluggishness in  issuance of visas by 
the MEA was adversely affecting tourism as alleged by some stakeholders, the 
representatives of the MEA submitted that the MEA responds very quickly to any 
difficulty in the ease of obtaining visas . They further clarified that due to the onset of 
Covid, visa regime  was suspended and then after consultation with the Ministries of 
Home Affairs and Health, the same was gradually restored, first the regular visa in 
certain categories, later e-visa and at last, the tourist visa.  

42 
 
159. On 15 th October, 2021, the Government announced that t o promote tourism, 
the first five lakh foreign tourists will be given visas on gratis basis.  Till 31 st March, 
2022 this was implemented. The Committee accepts the submissions of the MEA but 
cautions that all efforts may be taken for expeditious issuance of visas and to ensure 
that tourists are not put to any avoidable inconvenience in obtaining visas, especially the 
medical visas. 
160. The Committee observes that China issues Stapled Visas to the people of J&K, 
Arunachal Pradesh and Ladakh , etc. but travel under su ch visas is not allowed by the 
Government even in cases of sportsmen selected for various international sporting 
events. The Committee recommends that t he MEA may look into the issue with due 
seriousness in the interest of finding a durable solution to this vexatious problem. 
 
I. OUTSOURCING OF VISA ISSUE FUNCTIONS  
161. Upon enquiry by the Committee, it was informed that the Ministry of External 
Affairs has outsourced front -end visa - related support services in some of the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad. Outsourced Service Providers (OSPs) are selected on the basis of 
competitive bidding in open tender process. At present, VFS Global is OSP for 27 Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad in 14 countries. VFS Global is OSP for visa -related services for many 
foreign Embassies/Consulates in India. Besides VFS Global, the other OSPs are: BLS 
International Services Ltd., IVS Global Private Ltd. and Indo -German Consultancy Servic es 
(IGCS). 
162. In its meeting with the representatives of the MEA, the Committee had raised 
the matter of the poor quality of services being provided by the Visa Facilitation 
Services (VFS) at New Delhi and enquired about the selection process of such companies 
and the steps taken to ensure that such companies provide seamless travel to tourists, 
both Indian and foreign and their adherence to the laws of the land they are operating 
from. The representatives of the MEA informed that VFS is hired by Missions abro ad 
and the Government is not involved in the process. 
163. The Committee is not satisfied by the reply as the deficient services rendered by 
such companies reflects poorly on India both inside the country and abroad. The 
Committee asked the MEA for a written reply on this issue.  In its written reply, the MEA 
has stated that OSPs are selected by concerned foreign Embassies/Consulates on the basis of 
their own procedures and practices. OSPs including VFS Global are required to comply with 
Indian laws and rules & regulations pertaining to health, unprecedented situations like 
COVID-19 pandemic, finance, labor laws, etc . In case of any breach, necessary action may 
be taken by the concerned Department/authorities against them. With respect to foreign 
tourists seeking Indian visa, it is submitted that at present consular, passport and visa services 
are outsourced in 59 Indian Missions/Posts abroad in 31 countries. Out of this, VFS Global 
provides consular, passport and visa services in 27 Indian Missions/Posts abroad i n 14 
countries. They have to abide by the terms and conditions stipulated in the contracts. These 

43 
 
contracts are framed as per GoI GFRs and other extant instructions and vetted by Legal 
Division of the Ministry. In case of any violation of the contractual p rovisions, there are 
provisions to impose fines and penalties.  
 
164. The Committee reiterates its stand that the poor quality of services rendered by 
visa issuing companies reflects on India‟s image as a tourist destination. The first 
interaction of a foreign tourist before arrival in India lies with the Visa issuing 
authorities and he gets his first impression of the country from that interaction. Poor 
quality of services, serpentine queues, long waiting times, harassment inside the Visa 
office, all portray a negative impression of the destination country. The situation is no 
better for the Indian tourists who are made to run from pillar to  post to be able to get 
the visa . The Committee also disagrees with the MEA‟s view that OSPs are not a 
concern of the Indian Government as they are selected by foreign Embassies in India 
and by Indian Missions abroad. The Committee stresses that in India, all companies are 
obliged to obey Indian laws and the concerned Ministry has to monitor the situation to 
ensure that visa services, both in India and abroad, are being rendered smoothly for it 
substantially affects the inbound tourists.  
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 

44 
 
B. NICHE TOURISM AREAS IDENTIFIED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
1. SUSTAINABLE TOURISM  
The Committee notes that India has been ranked at 139, 134, and 128 in the 
years 2015, 2017 and 2019, respectively under Environmental Sustainability in the 
World Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Ranking. While the new National Strat egy 
and National Board for Sustainable Tourism have come into force in 2022, the Ministry 
had been promoting Sustainable Tourism in India for nearly a decade after the launch 
of Sustainable Tourism Criteria for India in 2014. Not much progress has, however , 
been made in development of Sustainable Tourism in the last decade as substantiated by 
India‟s low rankings in this category. The Committee emphasizes that economic 
development should not be at the cost of the environment and recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that the revised Sustainable Tourism Criteria be scrupulously 
implemented to minimize the adverse impact of tourism on the environment. While a 
Certification programme for tourism stakeholders, who have successfully implemented 
sustainable criteria, has been in existence for nearly a decade, only one Certification has 
been effected till date. The Committee desires to know the number of hotels surveyed 
for the Certification Programme and the strategy adopted for the survey. The 
Committee observes  that while disbursement of monthly newsletters to stakeholders 
and workshops are useful for dissemination of information, the feedback from 
stakeholders like hoteliers and tour operators is equally important to comprehend the 
problems being faced while im plementing policies on the ground level. The Committee 
feels that the pace of the Ministry in promotion of sustainability in tourism is sluggish 
and recommends that the Ministry may step up its coordination efforts with both the 
stakeholders and the other Central Ministries for effective promotional campaigns.   
(Para 19) 
The Committee desires to know about the action taken on formulation of 
dedicated schemes, destination, and product development and other initiatives taken by 
the National Board for Promotion of Sustainable Tourism.     
(Para 20) 
2. RURAL TOURISM 
The Committee is at a loss to note that the 2022 list of the United Nations World 
Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) featuring the 32 best tourism villages from 22 
countries,  does not contain a single village from India while several countries have two 
villages in the list, and Spain having even three villages. The Committee desires to be 
informed about the number of Indian villages which were nominated for the selection 
by the UNWTO.  The Committee notes that Khonoma in Nagaland has been selected for 
the “Upgra de” programme which would enable the village to receive the necessary 
support from the UNWTO to improve its conditions to meet the selection criteria.  The 
Committee wishes to know the efforts being taken for the development of Khonoma 
after its inclusion in the upgrade list of the UNWTO.  The Committee also desires to 

45 
 
know as to how many Indian villages have so far been selected by the UNWTO in its 
best tourism villages list and the impact of such selection on the village tourism.  
(Para 25) 
The Committee observes that in a predominantly agrarian and rural economy 
like India, rural tourism has immense potential for boosting employment and income 
for villagers while offering opportunities to the city dwellers to take a break from the 
hectic pace of urban lif e to experience nature and local culture at a much slower pace. 
India is home to a diverse range of unique villages, each with its own cultural, 
architectural and historical significance. Unique villages such as „Mattur‟ in Karnataka 
where all the residents speak only Sanskrit and many others offer a glimpse into India‟s 
rich traditions and culture. The Committee, however, observes that the Rural Tourism 
website does not provide details as to how to travel to the unique villages nor details 
regarding rural homestays for most of the villages. Even the Khonoma village page does 
not provide any useful details for the tourists. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that the Rural Tourism website has all details of rural homestays, 
travel connecti vity and tourist spots in respect of every village featured for the 
convenience of the tourists.   
(Para 26) 
 The Committee while appreciating the Best Village Competition initiated by the 
Ministry, is dismayed to note that in the past one year, only one M odel Rural Cluster 
has been identified, without any action being taken on the ground. The Committee notes 
that the villages to be covered in the Vibrant Villages programme are located in far -
flung areas, and close to borders, often in difficult terrains. T he Committee feels that 
the State of Uttarakhand has a number of border villages with rich traditions and local 
culture and recommends that the Ministry may make concerted efforts to develop the 
Model Rural Cluster in Uttarakhand within a targeted time schedule.   
(Para 27) 
3. ADVENTURE TOURISM 
 The Committee notes that there have been an increasing number of accidents in 
Adventure sports, especially in paragliding, which has claimed the lives of a number of 
tourists in the last few years. As per media reports, even “soft adventure” sports like 
trekking have led to casualties in certain situations. The Committee has been informed 
by stakeholders that 3 Gs - Guidelines, Guides and Gears – are critical in risk 
mitigation. The Committee has also been informed that the Ministry has released 
guidelines for safety and quality norms for 15 Land Based, 07 Air Based and 07 Water 
Based adventure tourism activities, which cover the entire range of thrilling activities. 
Besides, some States have also adopted various regulatory measures and safety 
protocols to a ddress the inherent concerns of adventure tourism. ISO 21101:2014 and 
BIS have laid down safety management standards for compliance by adventure 
activities service providers that act as benchmarks for safe adventure activities. The 
Committee desires to kno w about the impact of such safety guidelines on reduction of 

46 
 
accidents in adventure tourism. The Ministry may give data on the number of accidents 
as also the casualties which have taken place in adventure tourism in the country in the 
last five years. The Committee has also been informed that while testing and 
certification of  PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) kits is necessary, it is difficult for 
small Indian manufacturing enterprises to obtain the universally accepted international 
certifications lik e UIAA ( French) (International Climbing and Mountaineering 
Federation). The Committee recommends that testing labs where certification is done 
by the BIS may help small enterprises in this field.   
(Para 33) 
The Committee feels that strict adherence to safety guidelines and implementation of 
safety protocols can be possible only if responsible and licensed/ certified adventure 
tour operators handle the activities. Licensed tour operators play an important role  in 
promotion of adventure tourism as they conduct thorough risk assessments, implement 
safety measures, and provide high quality safety gears, besides engaging experienced 
and professional guides to handle emergency situations. The Committee has been 
informed that presently, adventure tour operators‟ licenses are issued by either the 
Centre or the States and there are still a lot of unlicensed tour operators in the 
country‟s adventure tourism sector who operate without requisite permits, certifications 
and regulatory approvals to meet the requirements of safety, quality and also the law in 
the field. The Committee desires to know what action has been taken or is proposed to 
be taken by the Ministry on the unlicensed adventure tour operators. The Committee 
has also been informed that the Ministry has circulated a draft model adventure 
tourism law to all the States/UTs for feedback. The Committee stresses that  high risk 
adventure sports cannot be regulated only by guidelines and recommends that the 
Ministry m ay make all efforts to come out with laws soon so that only licensed and 
responsible operators who adhere to the laid down safety norms remain in business to 
provide adventure tourism services.  
(Para 34) 
 The Committee has been informed that the governmen t run institutions like 
Himalayan Mountaineering Institution in Darjeeling, the Nehru Institution of 
Mountaineering in Uttarkashi are booked two -three years in advance for a course in 
mountaineering or skiing or water sports. There is, therefore, a dearth of well trained 
guides in adventure sports. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should roll 
out more training programmes for guides and explore the possibility of establishing 
more institutions of international standards for adventure sports across the country.  
The Committee also feels that the training institutes are mostly located in North India 
with focus on high altitude mountaineering which is not so relevant for adventure sports 
in South India.  The Committee recommends that at least one or two Training Institutes 
should be established in South India which focus on adventure sports suitable for its 
topography, altitude and climate.   
(Para 35) 

47 
 
 Regarding the standardization of safety gears, the Committee has been 
informed that presently, there is no single system of certification of adventure 
equipments in our country. The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is working towards 
setting standards for adventure equipments that can demonstrate proven track record 
of reliability to help ensure a safe ad venture experience. The Committee expresses its 
displeasure that India does not have standardized safety gears even for high risk 
adventure sports and recommends that the Ministry may expeditiously implement a 
uniform standard across the country for all ad venture tourism verticals, prepared by 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).  
(Para 36) 
 The Committee appreciates the initiative of Adventure Tourism Rescue Centre 
of the Ministry to provide for specialized facilities in emergency situations and urges 
that th e Ministry may ensure that medical treatment facilities are available near all 
adventure tourism locations.   
(Para 37) 
The Committee recommends that National Insurance companies may also be 
encouraged to have policies covering adventure tourism for licens ed adventure tour 
operators, adventure guides and the tourists to provide support and promotion of 
adventure tourism.  
(Para 38) 
 The Committee notes that since adventure tours are usually conducted in 
remote areas, adventure tourism has a significant impa ct on economic development by 
way of income generation for local communities, increased business opportunities, and 
job creation. Besides, adventure tourism can empower local communities by involving 
them in tourism-related activities. At the same time, th e Ministry should take proactive 
steps to determine the carrying capacity of popular adventure tourism destinations to 
mitigate potential negative impacts such as environmental degradation and over 
tourism. The Committee observes that the Ministry should p romote sustainable and 
responsible tourism management practices to harness the full development potential of 
adventure tourism.  
(Para 39) 
4. ECOTOURISM 
 The Committee observes that guides and naturalists are one of the most 
important elements in imparting quality ecotourism experience by way of providing 
valuable educational, interpretive and experiential services to the visitors. The 
Committee has been informed that a Certification Scheme for tour operators and other 
service providers for ecotourism and adventure tourism is to be framed by the Ministry. 
The Committee desires to know whether the Scheme has been framed and the number 
of guides/naturalists who have been certified under this scheme so far.   
(Para 45) 

48 
 
5. MEETINGS, INCENTIVES, CONFERENCES, AND EXHIBITIONS (MICE) & 
WEDDING TOURISM 
The Committee notes that India has less than 1% share in the Global MICE 
business despite being one of the fastest growing economies. India was ranked 28th with 
158 meetings in 2019 International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA) 
ranking of countries. Indian cities are ranked poorly in the international ranking of 
cities by ICCA in terms of the number of interna tional associations meetings. There are 
only 07 cities of India in the top 475 cities, the topmost being Delhi at the 75 th position 
with 37 meetings held and Ahmedabad at the bottom at the 424 th position with 04 
meetings. Even Goa, which is one of the coun try‟s top tourist destinations, is ranked at 
the 307 th position with 08 meetings. The Committee also notes that India‟s outbound 
MICE market is one of the fastest growing markets globally.  
(Para 50) 
 The Committee observes that as per the National Strateg y document on MICE, 
India‟s core MICE infrastructure and amenities are at par with most of the developed 
countries. The main reasons for the poor performance of India in MICE tourism is lack 
of focussed approach on MICE tourism, absence of system for captu ring information 
about various national and international MICE events and preparing for winning the 
bids,  high tax structure and costs and lack of standardization of processes and services. 
Besides, most of the successful international cities have their c onvention bureaus to 
market and provide support to the organisations and associations hosting events 
whereas there are no city convention bureaus in India. Singapore, Thailand, UAE, 
China, Macau and Malaysia are already preferred destinations for MICE even ts in the 
region and India faces tough competition from these countries.     
(Para 51) 
The Committee observes that the Convention industry can enhance a city‟s 
reputation and visibility. Creating a marketing body to get more events will help, 
nurture and m arket the MICE investments in the city. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may make all efforts to ensure that such MICE Promotion Bureaus 
may be set up in the six identified cities within a targeted time schedule to market and 
showcase the respective destinations as a favourable location for hosting business events 
and activities. 
(Para 53) 
The Committee observes that there are about 80,000, 04 star and 05 star hotel 
rooms in approved hotels, which for a country of the size of India, is quite insig nificant 
(Annexure – II). The total number of rooms in the city of Bangkok is nearly three times 
than that of India. Adequacy of quality hotels can enhance the reputation of a 
destination as a suitable location for hosting MICE events, thus contributing to  
satisfaction of participants, repeat business besides word -of-mouth recommendation. 
Therefore, adequate four and five star categories hotel rooms would have to be 
increased, for realising the goals of MICE tourism. The Committee recommends that 

49 
 
the Ministry may assess the number of Convention Centres in the 04 and 05 star hotels 
of international standards in the country and determine the shortfall that would be 
required to host the targeted MICE events. 
(Para 54) 
 The Committee also observes that connectivity, especially by air, is one of the 
important aspects that promotes MICE tourism. Since good international air 
connectivity reduces travel time and logistical challenges, the Ministry should 
coordinate with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to ensure that the identified cities of 
MICE destinations are well connected for international flights.   
(Para 55) 
6. WEDDING TOURISM 
The Committee has been informed that one crore weddings take place in India 
every year and the  number is bound to increase in the coming years. The Committee 
observes that Destination Weddings with events and celebrations spread out over many 
days can offer several benefits to the local economy and local ecosystem. But, India‟s 
huge potential for wedding tourism has not been exploited.  The Committee appreciates 
that Kerala Tourism has launched a music video, “Shubha Mangalyam” in 
collaboration with a Youtuber and singer, for promotion of wedding tourism in Kerala 
which has garnered much popularity.   The Committee recommends that similar efforts 
may be made by other states to promote destination wedding tourism.  
(Para 57) 
The Committee recommends that apart from development of infrastructure and 
facilities to support the growth of wedding tourism, the Ministry may also facilitate easy 
and uniform process of registration of marriages in every state of India even for couples 
belonging to other states. 
(Para 58) 
7. CRUISE TOURISM 
The Committee observes that prior to Covid, there was a 35 per cent year -on-
year growth of cruise traffic in the country. Post -Covid, from 2021 onwards, there has 
been an increase in cruise traffic but the pre -Covid growth has still not been achieved. 
Prior to Covid, there were 4.7 lakh passengers on cruises and now, about 3 la kh 
passengers have been on cruises.  
(Para 62) 
 The Committee also observes that the Cruise Shipping Policy was first 
formulated by the Ministry in 2008 when the industry was in its infancy in India. The 
Policy aimed, inter -alia, to increase the number of cruise passengers by 10 lakh by the 
year 2010, well developed rail, road and air connectivity and promotion of cruise 
vessels. Customs duty on bunkering for cruise and coastal ships, then at 33%, was cited 
as a factor towards making cruise operations uncom petitive. As part of conducive fiscal 

50 
 
regime measures this issue was resolved by the Department of Revenue vide Notification 
No. 31/2014 dated November 11, 2014 by exempting Customs and Excise duty leviable 
on bunker fuels. Some progress has definitely bee n made in cruise tourism inasmuch as 
India now has its own luxury cruise liners. The first International Cruise Vessel from 
Chennai to Sri Lanka has recently been flagged off in June, 2023. India is, however, still 
way behind achieving the target of 10 lak h passengers as even in 2023, not even half the 
target has been achieved . The statistics on cruise vessels at some of the Major Ports 
provided by the Ministry show that cruise tourism has a long way to go to catch up with 
the pre -Covid numbers. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
endeavour to calibrate the strategy for Cruise tourism by addressing the challenges like 
inadequate infrastructure, lack of proper facilities at ports, environmental concerns due 
to waste disposal and pollution, etc. in a time -bound manner, besides giving incentives 
to cruise companies to come to Indian ports.     
(Para 63) 
 The Committee has been informed about five projects sanctioned under the 
Assistance to Central Agencies Scheme for promotion of Cruise Tourism in Kerala 
(Annexure-III) from 2016 -17 to 2019 -20. The Committee desires to kn ow if similar 
assistance has been given for promotion of Cruise Tourism in other States.   
(Para 64) 
8. MEDICAL AND WELLNESS TOURISM 
The Committee observes that lack of regulation on quality of service is a major 
concern and appreciates that the National S trategy is to encourage registration of all 
medical tourism facilitators with the Government. The Committee, however, 
recommends that such registration should be mandatory as standardisation of services 
is the biggest impediment affecting medical tourism i n India. The Committee 
recommends that while NABH accreditation may be highlighted in various source 
markets, the Ministry should encourage major Indian hospitals to obtain the JCI 
accreditation.  
(Para 72) 
The Committee also observes that till now, no sig nificant efforts or investments 
have been made to build an ecosystem around hospitals. Guesthouses and patient 
specific hotels need to be built around hospitals.   
(Para 73) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may explore the 
opportunities in cross border telemedicine as India has sufficient skilled personnel to 
become a global hub in this regard. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry 
may promote the traditional medicines of India like Ayurveda on an equal footing. 
(Para 74) 

51 
 
9. FILM TOURISM 
 The Committee observes that films can have a massive impact on destination 
marketing as visitors are often inspired to visit filming locations featured in popular 
films. The impact is such that the annual tourist influx is said to have increased by  40% 
in New Zealand, the site of the movie trilogy of “Lord of the Rings” after the release of 
the films. In India, the release of the film "3 Idiots" led to a significant increase in 
tourist arrivals in Ladakh to visit the Pangong Lake featured in the film. India produces 
the highest number of films in the world and film tourism has significant potential for 
growth in India. Many Indian films, especially those regarding period dramas, 
showcase historical places and characters and can be useful to highlight  the history 
behind the tourist places. The Tamil movie “Ponniyin Selvan” based on one of the 
greatest novels in Tamil literature, is a fictional account of the historical character of 
Raja Raja Chola, the Chola king who built the Brihadeeswarar Temple in Thanjavur, 
one of the biggest temples of India. The Chola dynasty was famous for building temples, 
many of which are now World Heritage Sites. The Committee notes that the Tamil 
Nadu Tourism Development Corporation has announced a “Chola Tourism Circuit” 
covering the Chola Temples and the Veeranam Lake, also built by the Cholas. Tourism 
potential of such historical and religious sites can be harnessed through the medium of 
films. The Committee feels that while India has the advantage of producing the highes t 
number of films in the world which also in a way depict the innate historical 
significance of the places of tourism interests, the Ministry has not paid adequate 
attention to the great potential of films to showcase India. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should endeavour to devise the strategy to fully tap into the benefits of 
film tourism.   
(Para 77) 
10. GOLF TOURISM 
The Committee observes that Golf was introduced to India by the British and in 
1829, the first golfing establishment, the Royal  Calcutta Golf Club, was established. In 
contrast, Thailand‟s first professional golf was established only in 1924. Yet Thailand 
has emerged as the world‟s top golfing destination while golf tourism is yet to take 
shape in India. In fact, many Indians visi t Thailand as golf tourists. The Committee 
observes that India has much of the same landscapes and climatological conditions as 
Thailand, like a sunny climate all year around in most places which makes winter golf 
possible. Yet, India has not taken any spe cial initiative to attract both domestic and 
international golf enthusiasts. Thailand has promoted a Thai Golf Pass which is a 
unique loyalty programme exclusive to Thailand providing a seamless golf experience. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry s hould come up with initiatives such as 
developing world -class golf infrastructure, promoting tournaments, and providing 
holistic tourism experience to the visiting golfers in the country. 
(Para 80) 

52 
 
 During its Study Tour in Kerala, the Committee had been informed that an 
amount of Rs. 2464.99 lakh had been sanctioned to Sports Authority of India under the 
Scheme “Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development”  in 
Kerala for upg radation of the Golf Course at the 165 year old SAI Trivandrum Golf 
Club under the Sports Authority. The Committee observes that the project was 
sanctioned in 2016 -17 but as per media reports, the upgradation seems to have been 
taken up only in 2020-21. The Committee further observes that only half the sanctioned 
amount has been released and the status of the project is stated to be “Project Closed”.  
The Committee desires to know the reasons behind this when in reality, the project is 
not completed. The Co mmittee also desires to know whether other Golf clubs in the 
country have been given similar assistance under the Scheme.  
(Para 81) 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry is yet to take significant action on 
Golf Tourism, Eco -tourism, Film Tourism, and  Wedding Tourism while taking some 
measures to promote Sustainable Tourism, Rural Tourism, MICE and Medical 
Tourism, and Cruise Tourism. A plethora of wildlife sanctuaries and tiger reserves exist 
in India yet not much attention seems to have been paid to Wildlife Tourism. Kerala has 
shown the way for Caravan Tourism with the establishment of one Caravan Park and 
proposal for 3 new Caravan Parks, 10 Caravans and subsidy of Rs. 7.5 lakhs for 
Caravan owners. Despite the successful efforts of Kerala towards promotion of Caravan 
Tourism, the Ministry has not endeavored to replicate the same in other states. The 
Committee also appreciates the efforts of Kerala Tourism to develop the “Muziris 
Heritage Circuit”, the largest Heritage Conservation Project in India wh ich would 
reinstate the historical and cultural significance of the legendary port of Muziris and 
also the Alappuzha Heritage Circuit which includes the development of the defunct port 
of Alappuzha into a marina.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
explore the potential of Casino Tourism, Culinary Tourism, and Polo tourism, the last 
being believed to have originated in Manipur. The Committee also observes that in the 
aftermath of the pandemic “Remote Working” has gained traction. Due to the rise in 
online work, workers often move to locations even in other countries which offer a 
lower cost of living or scenic locations, etc. and continue to stay for a long period of 
time. India offers all modern facilities required for such remote working, like g ood 
internet facilities, a low cost of living compared to Western countries and many serene 
and beautiful places for living. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
explore the possibilities of such niche tourism experience.  
(Para 82) 
The Committee  further observes that though the Ministry has drafted the 
National Strategies and constituted National Boards for most areas of Niche Tourism, 
developed websites and published newsletters yet, coordination with the concerned 
Ministries and formulation of project schemes under the various niche areas seem to be 
wanting. The pace of implementation on the ground appears sluggish. Most of the 
National Boards and Task Forces have held only 2 -3 meetings in a year. Most of the 

53 
 
websites for Niche Tourism do not pr ovide complete and detailed information, 
necessary for the tourists. The Ministry‟s interactions with the stakeholders and State 
Governments appear sporadic. The growing gap between the strategic vision and 
implementation needs to be bridged and the Commit tee recommends that the Ministry 
may take necessary action for the same. 
(Para 83) 
The Committee observes that while the Ministry‟s tourism policies stress the 
importance of attracting private investment and developing Public Private Partnerships 
for development of tourist infrastructure and facilities, the Ministry has not given any 
information on PPP projects in any scheme, be it niche tourism, thematic circuits or 
destination tourism. The National Strategy on Eco -Tourism has PPP partnerships as 
one of its strategic components. The Committee has come to know from the website of 
the Department of Economic Affairs regarding PPP projects that Eco -tourism projects 
have been proposed in Andaman & Nicobar Islands by Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA). The Commi ttee desires to know the status of these projects and whether the 
Ministry of Tourism proposes to develop similar projects under Eco -tourism and other 
niche tourism areas and Swadesh Darshan 2.0 on PPP basis. The Committee directs the 
Ministry to submit de tails of PPP projects taken in the various schemes so far. The 
Committee observes that private participation in product development or marketing 
and promotion in tourism can be valuable and recommends that the Ministry may 
endeavour to bring in private investments in its various tourism products and schemes. 
(Para 84) 
 The Committee observes that most of the tourists in India come from four 
source countries of US, Canada, Bangladesh and UK which account for nearly 60% of 
the inbound tourists. India has only  a small percentage of tourists from Europe, Africa, 
Central and South Americas. The tourist inflow from West Asian countries is also very 
low though the number of outbound tourists from India to these countries is much 
higher. The Ministry has informed th e Committee that improving connectivity with 
other regions especially direct flight connectivity, tapping the potential of medical 
tourism, promoting India as a hub for MICE tourism, especially after the inauguration 
of world -class convention centre at Pra gati Maidan, creating better infrastructure for 
eco-tourism, adventure tourism, religious tourism circuits, emphasizing on cleanliness 
and security, etc. are some of the steps that can be taken to increase inbound tourism in 
India. The Committee acknowledg es that synergy among the various Central Sector 
Schemes of different Ministries is essential for promotion of   tourism. To achieve this, 
inter-Ministerial coordination is of crucial importance. The Committee has been 
informed by the stakeholders that consultations between the Ministry of Tourism, other 
Ministries and the associations take place in a fragmented manner and there is no 
proper coordination and consultations among Ministries involving matters of tourism in 
the country. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Tourism may step up 
efforts for coordination with other concerned Ministries for tourism promotion. 
(Para 85) 

54 
 
The Committee stresses that connectivity to places especially to places of niche 
tourism which are often in far flung areas is of utmost importance in the direction of 
promoting tourism in the country. The Committee has been informed by stakeholders 
that even places like Aurangabad, which as part of the Golden Triangle, used to be well 
connected to as many as eight cities is now connected to only two places. The Committee 
desires to know from the Ministry, the reason behind this drastic measure. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may pay special attention to the air 
connectivity of tourist places being promoted as also of the existing popular places of 
tourism interest.   
(Para 86) 
The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that the present level of 
training and skilling is not adequate as niche tourism demands high level of training 
and skilling to meet the specific requirements and expectations of the tourists pertaining 
to that sector of niche tourism. The Committee recommends that the tourism sector 
needs to undertake reskilling and upscaling of its manpower by way of imparting them 
skill upgradation capacity building training in different niche areas from time to time.  
(Para 87) 
The Committee observes that out of the 1,291 approved hotels in India only 565 
hotels belong to Three Star and below categories and out of the 1,00,980 hotels rooms 
only 18,225 rooms belong to these categories which is grossly inadequate to meet the 
tourism numbers targeted by the Ministry. The Committee also observes that tourists, 
especially in niche tourism, come from all strata of society and the hotel accommodation 
should cater to all categories of tourists. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should incentivise those in the hospitality business to make concerted efforts to ensure 
the availability of sufficient number of hotel rooms of all categories for the optimal 
growth of tourism sector. 
(Para 88) 
  The Committee further observes that creation of hotel infrastructure 
would involve a mammoth capital investment.  The Committee has been informed that 
as return on investment in the hospitality sector takes at least 15 years, availability of 
long term loans becomes a problem. The Com mittee recommends that grant of 
infrastructure status to the hotel industry may be examined on priority as loans with 
longer repayment schedule and suitable interest rates would be available for creation of 
hotel infrastructure. The Committee has been informed  that though industry status has 
been accorded to hotels by many state Governments, but the incentives and privileges 
associated with the industry status have not been confer red to the hospitality sector. 
Granting Industry status to the tourism and hospita lity sector would entitle the sector 
across all states to pay various taxes and tariffs on industrial rates instead of  on 
commercial rates presently. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
consider grant of Industry status to the tourism and hospit ality sector by way of a 

55 
 
uniform central notification as it would enhance the overall competitiveness of the 
tourism industry.   
(Para 89) 
The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that Tourist transport 
vehicles are treated on par with trucks an d other commercial vehicles due to which the 
speed limit is restricted for tourist vehicles whereas private cars have higher speed 
limits and faster movement. In areas of niche tourism like MICE and luxury tourism, 
high-end tourists do not enjoy the rides especially in long road journeys and as such, the 
speed restrictions cause avoidable annoyance in the tourist experience. The Committee 
has learnt from the media reports that the Government is planning to review the speed 
limits and recommends that the Tou rist transport vehicles may not be treated in the 
same category as other commercial vehicles and the speed limits may suitably be 
revised/increased. Another minor but significant point raised by the stakeholders was 
that curtains should be allowed in tourist buses as tourists, especially the foreigners, are 
not used to tropical weather, especially the heat of Indian summers. The Committee 
observes that tourism promotion is as much about the wholesome journey experience as 
it is about the destinations and recommends that the Ministry may consider the issue.   
(Para 90) 
The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that high tax rates in 
India in comparison to neighbouring countries (Annexure – III) is affecting tourists‟ 
arrival in India. The Committee observes that in 2019, the GST rates had been reduced 
for hotel room from 28% to 18% for hotel rooms with tariffs of Rs. 7500/ - and above, 
18% to 12% for tariffs of less than Rs. 7500/ - and none for tariffs of less than Rs. 1000.  
The Committee appreciates  the initiative of the Ministry of Finance and recommends 
that the Ministry of Tourism may examine the impact of the 2019 reduction in GST on 
tourist arrivals and appropriately take up with the Ministry of Finance for further 
reduction in GST, if need be, for the targeted growth of tourism sector.   
(Para 91) 
 The Committee observes that under the Service Exports from India Scheme 
(SEIS), the Government offered domestic exports duty credit scrips in the range of 5% 
to 7% of the net foreign exchange earned d epending upon the nature of services. These 
SEIS scrips could be used to pay import duty or can be encashed by selling it to any 
importer. The SEIS Scheme had not been extended beyond 2019 -20. While examining 
the Demand for Grants 2023 -24, the Committee ha d recommended that the Ministry 
take up the SEIS issue with the Ministry of Commerce to increase the rate of SEIS 
benefits to 10% and extend the scheme for a further period of 2-3 years. The Committee 
reiterates its earlier recommendation as even after 02 years after the pandemic, the 
tourism sector is yet to redeem its pre-pandemic position.  
(Para 92) 
 

56 
 
11. SPIRITUAL TOURISM  
The Committee notes that of 23 Spiritual Circuits, 05 are yet to be completed out 
of which 02 circuits of Kerala are lagging much behind schedule. The work on the 
Sabarimala-Erumeli-Pampa-Sannidhanam circuit in Pathanamthitta district in Kerala 
had been initiated in 2016 -17 while the Sivagiri Sree Narayana Guru Ashram circuit 
had been initiated in 2018 -19. At the time of the Demands for Grants 2023 -24, the 
Committee had been informed that the reason for delays in these two Kerala Circuits 
was due to lack of clearance from the Temple Authorities. The Committee has been 
informed during its Study Visit to Kerala in September, 2023 that t he status of physical 
completion of the two projects is 76% and 51% , respectively. The Committee is 
disappointed to see the slow progress on these important projects which have a target 
completion date of June, 2023 and October, 2023 respectively . The Comm ittee 
recommends that the Ministry should develop a clear cut Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) and obtain prior clearances and approvals from relevant authorities 
for future compliance in the interest of timely completion of projects.  
(Para 95) 
The Committee notes that the Buddhist circuit has been fully developed but as 
can be seen from the Tourism Statistics 2022, the numbers of foreign tourists from 
predominantly Buddhist countries has not shown any significant uptick. The Committee 
recommends that th e Ministry may focus on promotion of Buddhist Circuit in these 
countries and desires to know the number of events conducted by the Indian Missions 
there, showcasing India‟s Buddhist circuit. The Committee recommends Audio -Visual 
Guides that offer informati on about Buddhist sites and monuments are trained by a 
proper agency. 
(Para 96) 
The Committee has been informed that Bodh Gaya, one of the most important 
sites in the Buddhist circuit, does not have good connectivity with the rest of the places 
in the Budd hist circuit. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to examine the 
connectivity issue of Bodh Gaya and focus on improving the overall connectivity of all 
the Spiritual Circuits for increasing tourist footfall. 
(Para 97) 
C. PRASHAD SCHEME  
The Committee observes that at the time of the Demands for Grants, 2023 -24, 
the Committee had been informed that 20 out of 45 projects under this scheme had been 
completed, 09 projects were ongoing and 16 projects were yet to be developed.  The 
Committee observes that the status remains almost the same as only 21 projects have 
been completed. Most of the reasons for delay given by the Ministry earlier were due to 
lack of approvals from the ASI, temple authorities, forest clearance, etc.  
(Para 99) 

57 
 
The Commi ttee observes that the PRASHAD scheme was launched in 2014 -15 
and completion of 21 projects out of 45 is certainly not a significant achievement, even 
taking into account the Covid years. The Committee points out that spiritual circuit 
projects were taken under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0 also and the Ministry has had 
adequate experience of the kind of problems that ordinarily come up while dealing with 
construction and development at pilgrimage sites. The Committee calls upon the 
Ministry to be mindful of t he potential problems and calibrate suitable response at the 
DPR stage, so that the projects are not held up at later stages, causing both time and 
cost overrun.   
(Para 100) 
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken the initiative to amend 
guidelines and funding pattern midterm where necessary and recommends that the 
Ministry may revise the timeline of the delayed projects and ensure that the projects 
under this scheme are completed within the revised timeline. The Committee also 
recommends that the PRASHAD Dashboard when online may be monitored on a real 
time basis at the level of a senior functionary in the Ministry to ensure the completion of 
all pending projects.  
(Para 102) 
E. PROMOTION OF SWADESH DARSHAN SCHEMES 
The Ministry of Tourism pro motes tourist destinations including theme -based 
tourist The Committee notes that at the time of the Demand for Grants 2023 -24, the 
Ministry had informed that 17 projects of Swadesh Darshan 1.0 were pending for 
completion. Four more projects have been comp leted and now 13 projects are targeted 
for completion by December, 2023. The Committee notes that out of the remaining 13 
projects, only 04 are showing some progress and the rest are still at the same stage as 
they were in March, 2023. The Committee furthe r notes that 02 projects are delayed 
due to court case/arbitration, 04 due to lack of clearance from forest/temple authorities 
and the remaining 03 due to delays in procurement of cruise boats and floating 
restaurants, contractor issues and inclement weath er and difficult terrain (in case of 
J&K). The Committee feels that the lack of progress in these projects in the past few 
months does not augur well for their timely completion by December, 2023. The 
Committee also notes that most of these projects began in 2016 -17 and are already 
much behind their schedule. The Committee also notes that the four projects which are 
delayed due to lack of clearances from forest or temple authorities are at the final stage 
of completion. The Committee desires to know why the  clearances have not been 
obtained at the time of the finalisation of the DPR and are pending even at the 
culmination of the project. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make every 
effort to complete the remaining 13 projects by December 2023 as the p rojects have 
already been considerably delayed. The Committee also desires the Ministry to monitor 
the real time progress of the projects at the level of a senior functionary and ensure 
their completion without any further delay.  

58 
 
(Para 114) 
The Committee appreciates the Utsav Portal website and the Tourist Train 
initiatives of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study 
the impact of the projects completed under the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 scheme on the 
tourism and analyse the shortcomings so that the same could be improved in SD 2.0.   
(Para 115) 
F. SWADESH DARSHAN 2.0 
When enquired by the Committee on the criteria of selection of 55 destinations 
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, the Ministry informed that the States had been 
consulted on the same and a format had been circulated to the States for preparing the 
State Perspect ive Plan. The Ministry further informed that there are two principles 
involved in selection of a destination that states which have not been represented should 
find a place in the list and places with immense potential should also be included . The 
Committee recommended that a wide consultation process should be initiated before the 
selection of any such destinations as they have a great impact on the local economy. 
(Para 120) 
Upon observation of the Committee that 50 destinations had also been 
announced in the Union budget speech, 2023, the Ministry confirmed that these 50 
destinations were over and above the 55 destinations under the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
and would be selected in challenge mode. Both the State Governments and the 
Stakeholders at the Chintan S hivir meeting had been asked for feedback and the 
selection process would be fairly competitive. The Committee emphasised that selection 
of destinations should be a consultative process so that there is an equitable distribution 
of destinations in the country across sectors.   
(Para 121) 
The Committee observes the differences (Annexure – VIII) in funding pattern, 
disbursal of funds and receipt of Utilisation Certificates in the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
Scheme, and appreciates the new features of Impact Assessmen t of the projects under 
the Scheme and monitoring of the Scheme through a Comprehensive Portal. The 
Committee, however, observes that all the themes of the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 Scheme 
have been repeated in the 2.0 Scheme with no new additions. The claim of the Ministry 
to focus on fewer destinations in the second phase of the Scheme has also been diluted 
by the addition of 50 more destinations.   
(Para 122) 
The Committee observes that there does not appear to be a clear cut distinction 
between the two phases of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme as the same theme based 
strategy seems to have guided the implementation of the second phase also. The 
Committee is also not sa tisfied with the reply of the Ministry that all themes evolved in 
future will fall in one of the major themes as the basic idea of niche tourism is that it 
provides a particular experience which cannot be obtained in other forms of tourism.  

59 
 
Regarding benchmarks and standards, the Committee fails to understand why the same 
were not provided in the earlier phase of the scheme. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry has in the past decade alternated between theme -based tourism and 
destination based tourism and  has endeavoured to incorporate elements of both in all 
the programmes that it has formulated. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that the guidelines issued to the states are unambiguous in the kind of 
destinations and themes to be developed. 
(Para 124) 
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry to prepare a 
skilled workforce for catering to the increasing demands of the tourism industry for its 
anticipated growth.  The Committee desires to know the number of students  in the 
tourism courses at IITTM, the number of trained guides and whether the numbers 
would be adequate to meet future demand.  
(Para 129) 
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken the digital initiative of 
the Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) Online Programme to enable people to 
learn about tourism at their pace, earn Certificates as Facilitators, and become part of 
the tourism industry. The Committee has been informed that the Facilitators certified 
under the IITF scheme are  not allowed to enter the monuments as a result of which 
their employment prospects are affected. Tour Operators hesitate to employ Facilitators 
as they would also have to separately employ guides to go into the Monuments with the 
tourists. The Committee d esires to be informed of the status in this regard and 
recommends that the Tourist Facilitators may be imparted training in all aspects of 
tourism so that they may act as Guides inside the monuments as well. The Committee 
also observes that in places like Serengeti National Park in Tanzania, the drivers of the 
Safari Vehicles are well trained to act as guides to the Park. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of multi -skilling of the 
Tourist Facilitators so that they may als o perform the roles of Drivers and Guides, 
depending on the requirements.  
(Para 130) 
G. POTENTIAL TOURIST SPOTS 
In the meetings with the stakeholders, the Committee was informed about 
various potential tourist spots in the country which have been placed a t Annexure – IX. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the concept of Greenfield 
Tourism where new locations can be developed as potential tourism spots with the 
participation of Government of India and the concerned State Government with private 
investments for creation of modern tourist infrastructure, hotels and all tourist facilities 
and connectivity by air, rail and road. The Statue of Unity near Kevadia in Gujarat is a 
classic example of Greenfield Tourism, being a man -made tourist destination which has 
earned a formidable reputation as a popular tourism spot. Another example is tourism 
on the sand dunes near the Salasar Balaji Temple in the Churu District of Rajasthan 

60 
 
where hotels and restaurants have come up to cater to the tourists who visit the temple 
and stay to enjoy the sand dunes in the desert. The Committee observes that 
development of such Greenfield tourist spots would take the pressure off the already 
established tourist spots which sometimes suffer from the adverse effects of 
overtourism.     
(Para 134) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may while promoting destinations 
in Arunachal Pradesh or Lakshadweep or such areas which require special permits, 
highlight the requirement in its campaigns so that tourists are aware of the rules and 
are able to plan their schedule accordingly.  
(Para 135 
 The Committee further observes that the Ministry had formulated the Draft 
National Tourism Policy in July, 2022 incorporating key recommendations of NITI 
Aayog, Sectoral Group of Secretaries, global best practices from organizations such as 
UNWTO and polic ies and strategies formulated by other countries after multiple 
rounds of consultations and feedback from Central Ministries, State Goverments and 
Industry Stakeholders.  More than a year later, the policy, however, has still not been 
finalized.  The Commi ttee recommends that the Ministry may make every effort to 
ensure that all concerns of the stakeholders in the tourism and hospitality sector are 
addressed and the National Tourism Policy is put in place in a time-bound manner.  
(Para 136) 
H. PROMOTION OF TOURISM ABROAD BY INDIAN MISSIONS 
The Committee observes that there were 10.93 million Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
(FTAs) in India during pre -pandemic year 2019, but the current FTA numbers are still 
well below the pre -pandemic levels. In one of the studies b y the National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER), it is estimated that tourism in India would not 
regain its pre -pandemic levels till 2026. In this scenario, promotion and marketing of 
tourist destinations and products, especially by the Indian Missions abroad, assumes 
importance if India is to regain its pre-pandemic tourism numbers.  
(Para 146) 
The Committee notes the events and programmes organised by the Indian 
Missions abroad to promote tourism and the budgets for the same. The Committee has  
been informed that the Tourism Officers posted in Indian Missions have tourism 
promotion as additional charge. The Committee recommends that as responsibility for 
tourism promotion abroad now rests solely with the Indian Missions in all countries, the 
Tourism Officers may be given sole charge as far as possible as it is necessary for the 
transitional change from the Overseas Tourist Offices to the Missions in many countries 
and to create confidence among the stakeholders that the Missions are attaching top  
priority to tourism promotion. The Tourism Officers were designated by MEA in 
October, 2021. The Committee has been informed that since then the Tourism Officers 

61 
 
have had only one meeting with the Indian stakeholders a year back and desires to 
know how ma ny meetings have been held with them as also the foreign tourism agents 
and B2B players since their appointment. 
(Para 149) 
Upon enquiry by the Committee on the background of these Tourism Officers 
and whether they have been imparted training in promotion of tourism, it has been 
informed that these officers were already dealing with the subject of promotion of 
Indian culture and commerce and hence were having some domain understanding. The 
Ministry also informed that as such, the Missions and Posts had been  carrying on 
promotional activities wherever there were no Overseas Tourism Offices. The 
Committee appreciates the competence of the MEA officers but feels that the MEA may 
explore the possibility of posting officers from the Ministry of Tourism, who are w ell 
trained and experienced in tourism promotion, in Indian Missions abroad. The 
Committee has also been informed that the MEA is considering a proposal to the 
Ministry of Tourism to designate Tourism Officers in all Missions, in addition to the 20 
Tourism Officers already designated in top 20 source markets of tourism and 
recommends that it would be beneficial to have designated officers in more Missions 
abroad for tourism promotion. 
(Para 150) 
The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that after the closure of 
the Overseas Tourist Officers, India did not figure in the brochures of the overseas 
tourism agents, adversely impacting the prospects of Indian tourism. In its interaction 
with the MEA, the Committee has been informed that the Overseas Tourist Offices had 
a lot of funds available for this purpose and the Ministry of Tourism is still having 
discussions with the MEA on how to place a separate budget for tourism at the disposal 
of the MEA which would enable them to give brochure support for the agents and other 
promotional work. The Committee is surprised that these aspects of budget for 
promotion and campaign schedule for the Missions have not yet been resolved as the 
Overseas Tourist Offices had gradually been shut down over the last two years and only 
the last eight were closed in March, 2023.  There was sufficient time for the two 
Ministries to have the transition formalities in place. Upon further query, the 
Committee has been in formed that the MEA is in consultation with the Ministry of 
Tourism to jointly address such concerns arising out of closure of Overseas India 
Tourism Offices. 
(Para 151) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may settle the matters 
expeditiously so that the MEA would have both the funds and the programme to go 
ahead with the work relating to tourism promotion. Exclusion of India from tourism 
brochure is a major issue in the absence of which the visibility of Indian tourism places 
would be difficult to maintain.  
(Para 152) 

62 
 
Upon  query by the Committee regarding the institutional linkages between the 
Ministry of Tourism and the MEA for meaningful coordination to ensure that inbound 
and outbound tourists are not put to any inconvenience, it was informed that the MEA 
regularly interacts with the Ministry of Tourism on all tourism related matters. The 
Joint Secretary (Economic Diplomacy) is represented as the MEA nominee on boards of 
many tourism-related committees formed by the Ministry of Tourism  like the National 
Board for Adventure Tourism, Medical Value Travel Services and Wellness Services 
Sectional Committee , India MICE Board, etc. The Ministry of Tourism organises 
various meetings from time to time with the MEA and Tourism Officers designate d by 
the MEA in Indian Missions regarding enhancing foreign tourist arrivals to the country 
and to chalk out action plan for popularizing India as a Favourite Tourist Destination 
for enhanced foreign tourist arrivals. 
(Para 153) 
The Committee recommends that at regular intervals, virtual meetings can be 
conducted between the two Ministries by involving the Missions, and other stakeholders 
like tour operators to understand the gaps in tourism promotion and to identify actions 
required by each stakeholder. 
(Para 154) 
Visa facilitation by Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
Upon enquiry by the Committee whether sluggishness in issuance of visas by the 
MEA was adversely affecting tourism as alleged by some stakeholders, the 
representatives of the MEA submitted that the MEA responds very quickly to any 
difficulty in the ease of  obtaining visas. They further clarified that due to the onset of 
Covid, visa regime was suspended and then after consultation with the Ministries of 
Home Affairs and Health, the same was gradually restored, first the regular visa in 
certain categories, later e-visa and at last, the tourist visa.  
(Para 158) 
On 15th October, 2021, the Government announced that to promote tourism, the 
first five lakh foreign tourists will be given visas on gratis basis. Till 31 st March, 2022 
this was implemented. The Committee accepts the submissions of the MEA but cautions 
that all efforts may be taken for expeditious issuance of visas and to ensure that tourists 
are not put to any avoidable inconvenience in obtaining visas, especially the medical 
visas. 
(Para 159) 
The Committee observes that China issues Stapled Visas to the people of J&K, 
Arunachal Pradesh and Ladakh, etc. but travel under such visas is not allowed by the 
Government even in cases of sportsmen selected for various international sporting 
events. The Comm ittee recommends that the MEA may look into the issue with due 
seriousness in the interest of finding a durable solution to this vexatious problem. 
(Para 160) 

63 
 
I. OUTSOURCING OF VISA ISSUE FUNCTIONS  
In its meeting with the representatives of the MEA, the Committee had raised the 
matter of the poor quality of services being provided by the Visa Facilitation Services 
(VFS) at New Delhi and enquired about the selection process of such companies and the 
steps taken to ensure that such companies provide seamless  travel to tourists, both 
Indian and foreign and their adherence to the laws of the land they are operating from. 
The representatives of the MEA informed that VFS is hired by Missions abroad and the 
Government is not involved in the process. 
(Para 162) 
The Committee is not satisfied by the reply as the deficient services rendered by 
such companies reflects poorly on India both inside the country and abroad. The 
Committee asked the MEA for a written reply on this issue. 
(Para 163) 
The Committee reiterates it s stand that the poor quality of services rendered by 
visa issuing companies reflects on India‟s image as a tourist destination. The first 
interaction of a foreign tourist before arrival in India lies with the Visa issuing 
authorities and he gets his first  impression of the country from that interaction. Poor 
quality of services, serpentine queues, long waiting times, harassment inside the Visa 
office, all portray a negative impression of the destination country. The situation is no 
better for the Indian to urists who are made to run from pillar to post to be able to get 
the visa. The Committee also disagrees with the MEA‟s view that OSPs are not a 
concern of the Indian Government as they are selected by foreign Embassies in India 
and by Indian Missions abroad. The Committee stresses that in India, all companies are 
obliged to obey Indian laws and the concerned Ministry has to monitor the situation to 
ensure that visa services, both in India and abroad, are being rendered smoothly for it 
substantially affects the inbound tourists.  
(Para 164) 
 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
Annexure – I 
The National Strategies formulated for the Niche Tourism areas 
S.N
o. 
Sustaina
ble 
Tourism 
Rural 
Tourism 
Adventure 
Tourism 
Eco-
tourism 
 
MICE 
and 
Weddin
g 
Tourism 
Cruise 
Tourism 
Medica
l  & 
Wellne
ss 
Touris
m 
Film 
Tourism 
Golf 
Tourism 
1. (i) Prom
oting 
Environ
mental 
Sustaina
bility 
(ii) Prote
cting 
Biodiver
sity 
(iii) Prom
oting 
Economi
c 
Sustaina
bility 
(iv) Prom
oting 
Socio-
Cultural 
Sustaina
bility 
(v) Sche
me for 
Certificat
ion of 
Sustaina
ble 
Tourism 
(vi) IEC 
and 
Capacity 
Building 
(vii) Gov
ernance  
(i) Bench
marking 
of state 
policies 
and best 
practices 
(ii) Digital 
technologi
es and 
platforms 
for rural 
tourism 
(iii) Develo
ping 
clusters 
for rural 
tourism 
(iv) Market
ing 
support 
for rural 
tourism 
(v) Capaci
ty 
building 
of 
stakehold
ers 
(vi) Govern
ance and 
Institution
al 
Framewor
k  
(i) State 
assessment
, ranking & 
strategy 
(ii) Skills, 
capacity 
building 
and 
certificatio
n 
(iii) Marketin
g and 
promotion 
(iv) Strength
ening 
adventure 
tourism 
safety 
manageme
nt 
framework 
(v) National 
and State -
level 
rescue and 
communic
ation grid 
(vi) Destinati
on and 
Product 
Developm
ent 
(vii) Governa
nce and 
Institutiona
l 
Framewor
k 
(i) State 
assessment 
and 
ranking 
(ii) State 
Strategy 
for 
Ecotouris
m 
(iii) IEC, 
Capacity 
Building 
and 
Certificatio
n 
(iv) Marketin
g and 
Promotion 
(v) Destinati
on and 
Product 
Developm
ent 
(vi) Public-
Private and 
Communit
y 
Partnership
s 
(vii) Governa
nce and 
Institutiona
l 
Framewor
k 
 
(i) 
Institutio
nal 
support 
for MICE 
(ii) 
Developi
ng Eco -
system 
for MICE 
(iii) 
Enhance 
the 
competiti
veness 
industry 
(iv) 
Enhance 
ease of 
doing 
business 
for MICE 
events 
(v) 
Marketin
g India as 
a MICE 
destinatio
n 
(vi) Skill 
developm
ent for 
the MICE 
industry 
(i) 
Infrastruct
ure & 
Circuit 
Enablemen
t 
(ii) Market 
Developm
ent 
(iii) Ease 
of Doing 
Business 
for Cruise 
Tourism 
(iv) 
Integrated 
Tourism 
around 
cruise 
terminals 
(v) Fiscal 
Support 
(vi) 
Investment 
Facilitation 
and 
Promotion 
(vii) 
Skilling 
Developm
ent for 
Cruise 
Tourism 
(viii) 
Institutiona
l Structure 
and 
Governanc
e 
(i) 
Develop 
a brand 
for India 
as a 
wellness 
destinati
on 
(ii) 
Strength
en the 
ecosyste
m for 
medical 
and 
wellness 
tourism 
(iii) 
Enable 
digitaliz
ation by 
setting 
up 
Online 
MVT 
Portal 
(iv) 
Enhance
ment of 
accessibi
lity for 
MVT 
(v) 
Promoti
ng 
Wellness 
Tourism 
(vi) 
Governa
nce and 
Institutio
nal 
Framew
(i) 
National & 
State level 
Coordinati
on 
(ii) 
Country & 
Destinatio
n Branding 
(iii) 
Destinatio
n 
Infrastruct
ure 
Developm
ent 
(iv) 
Internation
al scale 
skilling 
(v) 
Financial 
Incentives 
(vi) Post 
Film travel 
& tourism 
outreach 
(vii) 
Institutiona
l Structure 
and 
Governanc
e 
Mechanis
m 
(i) Buildin
g major 
golfing 
events in 
India by 
building 
relations
hip with 
sponsors, 
broadcast
ers and 
the other 
stakehold
ers. 
(ii) Improv
ed access 
to India‟s 
signature 
& other 
golf 
courses 
and 
working 
closely to 
make 
such 
courses 
more 
accessibl
e to the 
tourists. 
(iii) Raisin
g the 
profile of 
golf 
courses 
and other 
golf 
infrastruc
ture. 

66 
 
ork 
Source: Ministry of Tourism’s Guidelines of respective Niche segments  
        
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
Annexure – II 
Number of Approved Hotel Rooms and hotel rooms available in India 
S.No. Category of Hotels No. of Hotels No. of 
Rooms 
1 One Star 18 610 
2 Two Star 23 879 
3 Three Star 524 16,736 
4 Four Star with Alcohol 212 13,386 
5 Four Star without Alcohol 143 5,367 
6 Five Star Deluxe 172 39,212 
7 Five Star with Alcohol 143 18,972 
8 Five Star without Alcohol 56 5,818 
  Total 1,291 1,00,980 
(Source: Table 22 - India Tourism Statistics At A Glance 2023 of the 
Ministry of Tourism) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68 
 
Annexure – III 
List of projects sanctioned under the Scheme Assistance to Central Agencies for 
Tourism Infrastructure Development in Kerala 
 
S.N
o. 
Year Nam
e of 
Stat
e 
Name of Project Agency Amount 
Sanctione
d 
Amoun
t 
Release
d 
Status 
1. 2016-
17 
Kera
la 
Development of a 
Walkway/Promenad
e on Willingdon 
Island, Cochin 
Cochin 
Port 
Trust 
901.00 826.59 Complete
d 
2. 2016-
17 
Kera
la 
Central Financial 
Assistance for 
Upgrading of Births 
& Backup area of 
Ernakulam Wharf. 
Cochin 
Port 
Trust 
2141.00 1912.80 Complete
d 
3. 2016-
17 
Kera
la 
Project for 
Upgradation of Golf 
Course at SAI 
Trivandrum Golf 
Club by the Sports 
Authority of India 
Sports 
Authorit
y of 
India 
2464.99 1232.49 Project 
closed 
4. 2018-
19 
Kera
la 
Developing 
infrastructure at 
Cochin Port Cruise 
Terminal 
Cochin 
Port 
Trust 
120.79 114.17 Complete
d 
5. 2018-
19 
Kera
la 
Creation of 
additional tourism 
facilities at the 
Cochin Port Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin 
Port 
Trust 
466.47 466.47 Complete
d 
6. 2019-
20 
Kera
la 
Development of 
Additional 
infrastructure in the 
new Cochin Port 
Trust Terminal 
Cochin 
Port 
Trust 
1029.70 888.62 Complete
d 
(Source: Ministry of Tourism’s Background Note for Study Visit -7-8 September, Bekal) 
 
 

69 
 
Annexure – IV 
Tax Rates on Hotel Rooms in India vs. Neighbouring countries 
S.No. Name of the country FTAs in 2019 Tax Rate on Hotel Rooms 
 
1 China 145.3 million 9% VAT + 5 % business tax 
2 Thailand 40 million 7 % VAT + 10 % Service 
Charge 
3 Malaysia 26.1 million RM 10 per room per night (For 
foreign passport holders) 
4 Singapore 19.1 million 8 % GST + 10 % Service 
Charge 
5 India 10.93 million Rs. 7500 or below@ 12 % Rs 
7501 and above @ 18% 
(Source: FHRAI’s Reply to Chairman’s Questionnaire for 18.07.2023 Meeting )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Annexure – V 
 
Details of projects sanctioned under the Spiritual theme of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
S.
No
. 
State Sancti
on 
Year 
Circui
t 
Project Name Amoun
t 
Sanctio
ned (₹ 
Cr.) 
Amount 
Release
d 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Progress 
 
1.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
(2016-
17) 
Buddhi
st 
Development of 
Sanchi-Satna-Rewa-
Mandsaur-Dhar. 
74.02 72.75 Complete 
2.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2016-
17) 
Buddhi
st 
Development of 
Srawasti, Kushinagar, 
& Kapilvastu. 
87.89 
 
72.56 Complete 
3.  Bihar (2016-
17) 
Buddhi
st 
Construction of 
Convention Centre at 
Bodhgaya 
95.18 93.22 Complete 
4.  Gujarat (2017-
18) 
 
Buddhi
st 
Development of 
Junagadh- Gir 
Somnath- Bharuch-
Kutch- Bhavnagar- 
Rajkot- Mehsana 
26.68 22.28 
 
Complete 
5.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
(2017-
18) 
 
Buddhi
st 
Development of 
Buddhist Circuit: 
Shalihundam-
Thotlakonda- 
Bavikonda- Amravati- 
Anupu in Andhra 
Pradesh  
24.14 24.14 Complete 
6.  Haryana (2016-
17) 
Krishn
a 
Development of 
Tourism 
Infrastructures at 
Brahmsarovar, Sanhit 
Sarovar, Narkatari, 
Jyotisar in 
Kurukshetra. 
70.91 77.88 Complete 
7.  Rajastha
n 
(2016-
17) 
Krishn
a 
Development of 
Govind Dev ji temple 
(Jaipur), Khatu Shyam 
Ji (Sikar) and 
Nathdwara 
(Rajsamand). 
75.80 72.01 99% 
8.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2016-
17) 
Ramay
ana 
Development of 
Chitrakoot and 
Shringverpur 
69.45 64.09 Complete 
9.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2017-
18) 
Ramay
ana 
Development of 
Ayodhya 
127.21 115.46 Complete 

71 
 
S.
No
. 
State Sancti
on 
Year 
Circui
t 
Project Name Amoun
t 
Sanctio
ned (₹ 
Cr.) 
Amount 
Release
d 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Progress 
 
10.  Kerala (2016
-17) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Sabarimala - Erumeli-
Pampa-Sannidhanam 
as a Spiritual Circuit 
in      District 
Pathanamthitta, 
Kerala. 
54.88 27.44 77% 
11.  Manipur (2016-
17) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of Shri 
Govindajee Temple, 
Shri Bijoy Govindajee 
Temple – Shri 
Gopinath Temple – 
Shri Bungshibodon 
Temple – Shri Kaina 
Temple. 
45.34 43.04 Complete 
12.  Kerala 
 
(2016-
17) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of Sree 
Padmanabha Temple, 
Aranmula- Sabrimala 
78.08 
 
73.77 
 
Complete 
13.  Bihar 
 
(2016-
17) 
Spirit
ual 
Development of 
Kanwaria Route: 
Sultanganj- Mojma- 
Banka. 
44.76 
 
42.52 
 
Complete 
14.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2016-
17) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Spiritual Circuit-
I(Shahjahanpur-
Allahabad-Basti-
 Ahar-Aligharh-
Kasgunj-Sarosi-
Pratapgarh-Unnao-
Kaushambi- 
Mirzapur-Gorakpur- 
Kairana- 
Doamriyagunj- 
Bagpat-Barabanki- 
Azamgarh) 
71.91 68.32 Complete 
15.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2016-
17) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Bijnor- Meerut- 
Kanpur- Kanpur 
Dehat- Banda- 
Ghazipur- Salempur- 
Ghosi- Balia- 
Ambedkar Nagar - 
Aligarh- Fatehpur- 
Deoria- Mahoba- 
Sonbhadra- 
67.51 64.14 Complete 

72 
 
S.
No
. 
State Sancti
on 
Year 
Circui
t 
Project Name Amoun
t 
Sanctio
ned (₹ 
Cr.) 
Amount 
Release
d 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Progress 
 
Chandauli- Mishrikh- 
Bhadohi 
16.  Rajastha
n 
(2016-
17) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Spiritual Circuit – 
'Development of 
Churu (SalasarBalaji) -
Jaipur (Shri Samodke 
Balaji, GhatkeBalaji, 
Bandheke Balaji) - 
Viratnagar (Bijak, 
Jainnasiya, Ambika 
Temple)- Bharatpur 
(Kaman Region) - 
Dholpur (Muchkund) 
– Mehndipur Balaji - 
Chittorgarh 
(Sanwaliyaji) 
87.05 72.23 Complete 
17.  Puducher
ry 
(2017-
18) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Karaikal, Yanam and 
Puducherry 
34.96 30.94 Complete 
18.  Bihar (2017-
18) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Mandar Hill &  Ang 
Pradesh. 
44.55 42.32 Complete 
19.  Maharas
htra 
(2018-
19) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Waki- Adasa- 
Dhapewada- 
Paradsingha- Chota 
Taj Bagh - 
Telankhandi- Girad 
53.96 32.04 
 
93% 
20.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2018-
19) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Jewar-Dadri-
Sikandrabad-Noida-
Khurja-Banda 
12.03 11.43 Complete 
21.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
(2018-
19) 
Spiritu
al 
Development of 
Gorakhnath Temple 
(Gorakhpur), 
Devipattan Temple 
(Balrampur) and 
Vatvashni Temple 
(Domariyaganj) 
18.30 16.81 95% 
22.  Kerala (2018-
19) 
Spiritu
al 
Development 
SivagiriSree Narayana 
Guru Ashram - 
Arruvipuram- 
Kunnumpara Sree 
66.43 15.57 52% 

73 
 
S.
No
. 
State Sancti
on 
Year 
Circui
t 
Project Name Amoun
t 
Sanctio
ned (₹ 
Cr.) 
Amount 
Release
d 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Progress 
 
Subrahmania-   
Chembazhanthi Sree 
Narayana Gurukulam 
23.  Bihar (2016-
17) 
Tirthan
kara 
Development of 
Vaishali- Arrah- 
Masad- Patna- Rajgir- 
Pawapuri- 
Champapuri. 
33.97 
 
30.04 Complete 
TOTAL 1365.01 1185.00  
(Source: Ministry of Tourism  Background Note for 26.06.2023 Meeting )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
Annexure – VI 
 
Details of projects sanctioned under the PRASHAD Scheme 
 
S.
No
. 
State/
UTs 
Name 
of the 
Project 
Sancti
on 
Year 
Planne
d 
Comple
tion 
Date 
Projec
ted 
Closin
g Year 
Origi
nal 
Cost 
Final/Ap
proved 
cost 
Amou
nt 
Relea
sed 
Till 
Date 
Phys
ical 
Prog
ress 
as in 
Mar
ch, 
2023 
Reason 
for 
Delay 
Physic
al 
Progre
ss as in 
Augus
t, 2023 
1 
Andhr
a 
Prades
h 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Amenit
ies at 
Sri 
Varaha 
Laksh
mi 
Narsim
ha 
Swami 
Vari 
Devast
hanam 
at 
Simhac
halam 
in 
Visakh
apatna
m 
2022-
23 Dec-24 2024-
25 54.04 54.04 0.00 0% 
Project 
recently 
sanctione
d 
0% 

75 
 
2 Karna
taka 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Amenit
ies at 
Sri 
Chamu
ndeshw
ari 
Devi 
Temple
, 
Mysuru 
2023-
24 - - - 45.71 0.00 0% - 0% 
3 Mizor
am 
Develo
pment 
of 
infrastr
ucture 
for 
Pilgrim
age and 
Heritag
e 
Touris
m 
2022-
23 Dec-24 2023-
24 44.89 44.88 0.00 0% 
Project 
sanctione
d 
recently 
0% 
4 Gujar
at 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim 
Plaza 
with 
Queue 
Manag
ement 
Comple
x, 
Somnat
h  
2021-
22 Mar-24 2024-
25 49.97 49.97 0.00 0% 
Project 
delayed 
due to 
master 
plan 
approval  
0% 

76 
 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Touris
m 
Infrastr
ucture 
at 
Ambaji 
Temple 
of 
Banask
antha  
2022-
23 Jul-25 2024-
25 50 50.00 10.54 0% 
Work in 
progress 
as per 
schedule.  
5% 
5 Telang
ana 
Develo
pment 
of 
Jogula
mba 
Devi 
Temple
, 
Alamp
ur 
2020-
21 Jan-21 2023-
24 36.73 36.73 13.76 32% 
Delay 
due to 
site 
geologica
l 
condition
s. 
32% 
Develo
pment 
of 
pilgrim
age 
infrastr
ucture 
at 
Bhadra
chalam, 
Bhadra
dri 
Kottag
udam 
Distt., 
Telang
ana 
2022-
23 Dec-24 2024-
25 41.38 41.38 0.00 0% 
Project 
recently 
sanctione
d 
0% 

77 
 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age and 
Heritag
e 
Touris
m 
infrastr
ucture 
at 
Rudres
hwar 
(Ramap
pa) 
Temple
, 
Mulugu 
2022-23 Dec-24 2024-
25 62 62.00 0.00 0% 
Project 
recently 
sanctioned 
6 Nagal
and 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Infrastr
ucture 
2018-19 Mar-21 2022-
23 25.26 25.26 21.33 75
% 
Flash 
floods, 
landslides 
and Covid-
19 led to 
delay 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age and 
Touris
m 
infrastr
ucture 
at 
Zunheb
oto 
2022-23 Nov-24 2024-
25 18.18 18.18 5.45 0% 
Recently 
sanctioned 
and work 
order has 
been 
awarded. 

78 
 
7 Uttara
khand 
Develo
pment 
of 
Infrastr
ucture 
for 
Pilgrim
age 
Facilita
tion in 
Badrina
thJi 
Dham 
2018-19 Apr-20 2023-
24 56.15 56.13 20.79 62
% 
The project 
is delayed 
due to 
master plan 
approval  
Augme
ntation 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Infrastr
ucture 
Faciliti
es at 
Gangot
ri and 
Yamun
otri 
Dham 
2021-22 Jun-24 2024-
25 54.35 54.36 14.06 20
% 
Delay due 
to difficult 
terrain and 
weather 
conditions. 
8 Punja
b 
Develo
pment 
of 
Chamk
aur 
Sahib 
at 
Rupar, 
Punjab 
2021-22 Mar-24 2023-
24 31.56 31.57 7.26 8% 
Project is 
running as 
per 
schedule. 
There has 
been delay 
in payments 
due to 
change in 
financial 
process. 

79 
 
9 Odish
a 
Infrastr
ucture 
Develo
pment 
at Puri, 
Shree 
Jagann
ath 
Dham -
Ramac
handi - 
Prachi 
River 
front at 
Deuli 
under 
Mega 
Circuit 
2014-15 Mar-17 2022-
23 50 50.00 10.00 27
% 
The State 
Governmen
t is 
implementi
ng their 
own master 
plan for the 
developme
nt. The 
project has 
been 
closed. 
10 
Madh
ya 
Prades
h 
Develo
pment 
of 
Amark
antak 
2020-21 Jan-23 2023-
24 49.99 49.99 4.86 12
% 
Delay in 
clearance 
from ASI, 
forest and 
covid-19 
11 
Aruna
chal 
Prades
h 
Develo
pment 
of 
Parasur
am 
Kund, 
Lohit 
Distt. 
2020-21 Jan-23 2023-
24 37.88 37.88 7.34 25
% 
Delay to do 
geographic
al 
conditions. 
Special 
slope 
stabilizatio
ns had to 
be done on 
hill in 
coordinatio
n with IIT. 
Further, 
Covid-19 
caused the 
delay. 

80 
 
12 Sikki
m 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Facilita
tion at 
Four 
Patron 
Saints, 
Yukso
m 
2020-21 Jan-23 2023-
24 33.32 33.32 28.30 38
% 
Delay due 
to difficult 
terrain and 
heavy 
rainfall. 
Covid-19 
led to 
further 
delay. ASI 
approval of 
certain 
component
s led to 
further 
delay. 
13 Tripur
a 
Develo
pment 
of 
Tripura 
Sundari 
Temple
, 
Udaipu
r, 
Tripura 
2020-21 Jun-23 2023-
24 37.80 37.80 21.18 47
% 
Delay due 
to clearance 
from NHAI 
and temple 
authority.  
14 
Chhat
tisgar
h 
Develo
pment 
of Maa 
Bamles
hwari 
Devi 
Temple
, 
Dongar
garh, 
Rajnan
dgaon 
Distt. 
2020-21 Oct-22 2023-
24 43.33 43.33 24.33 30
% 
Delay due 
to covid-19, 
land 
acquisition, 
and 
removal of 
overhead 
high-
tension 
wire. 
Further 
design 
change for 
special 
structural 
requirement 
of the main 
TFC as per 
IIT 
recommend
ation 

81 
 
15 Mahar
ashtra 
Develo
pment 
of 
Trimba
keshwa
r 
2017-18 Jul-20 2022-
23 52.92 52.92 27.67 61
% 
Delay in 
ASI and 
forest 
approval 
and land 
acquisition 
issues. 
Further 
flash floods 
and Covid-
19 caused 
the delay. 
16 Harya
na 
Develo
pment 
of 
Nada 
SahebG
urudwa
ra and 
Mata 
Mansha 
Devi 
Temple 
in 
Panchk
ula 
District 
2019-20 Jan-22 2023-
24 49.52 49.52 28.77 63
% 
Delay due 
to Covid-19 
and Land 
availability 
issues. 
17 Megha
laya 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pilgrim
age 
Facilita
tion in 
Meghal
aya  
2020-21 Nov-21 2024-
25 29.32 29.32 24.92 30
% 
Delay due 
to difficult 
terrain and 
heavy 
rainfall. 
Covid-19 
led to 
further 
delay. 
18 
Uttar 
Prades
h 
Develo
pment 
of 
Infrastr
ucture 
facilitie
s at 
Govard
han, 
Mathur
a 
2018-19 Jan-21 2023-
24 39.74 39.74 30.97 85
% 
Delay due 
to Covid-
19, and 
local issues. 

82 
 
19 
Jamm
u & 
Kash
mir 
Develo
pment 
at 
Hazratb
al 
Shrine 
2016-17 Dec-19 2022-
23 40.46 40.46 34.30 68
% 
Difficulty 
in approval 
from local 
authorities 
and weather 
conditions. 
20 Rajast
han 
Integrat
ed 
Develo
pment 
of 
Pushka
r/Ajmer 
2015-16 Oct-17 2022-
23 32.64 32.64 26.11 90
% 
Major 
components 
developed 
within the 
timeline. 
Delay in 
certain 
components 
due to local 
approval at 
the Ajmer 
Sharif. 
21 West 
Bengal 
Develo
pment 
of 
Belur 
Math 
2016-17 Dec-18 2022-
23 30.03 30.03 23.39 92
% 
Component
s completed 
within 
timeline. 
Additional 
component 
added 
which got 
delayed 
during 
Covid-19. 
Total 1051.5 1097.2 385.3     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Annexure – VII 
The State wise & theme wise detail of project sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan 
scheme 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
1.  Andama
n & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
Coastal 
Circuit  
 
 2016-17 
Development of 
Long Island -Ross 
Smith Island - Neil 
Island- Havelock 
Island- Baratang 
Island-Port Blair 
27.57 20.89 14.51 Complete 
2.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
  2014-
15 
Development of 
Kakinada - Hope 
Island - Coringa 
Wildlife Sanctuary 
- Passarlapudi - 
Aduru - S Yanam - 
Kotipally 
67.84 67.84 67.84 Complete 
3.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Nellore- Pulikat 
Lake- 
Ubblamadugu 
Water Falls - 
Nelapattu- 
Kothakoduru- 
Mypadu- 
Ramateertham –  
Iskapalli 
49.55 49.55 50.96 Complete 
4.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of: 
Shalihundam- 
Bavikonda- 
Amravati- Anupu 
24.14 24.14 24.14 Complete 
5.  Arunac
hal 
Pradesh 
 
North-
East   
Circuit 
 
2014-15 
Development of 
Bhalukpong- 
Bomdila and 
Tawang 
49.77 47.28 47.28 Complete 
6.  Arunac
hal 
Pradesh 
 
North 
East   
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Nafra- Seppa- 
Pappu, Pasa, Pakke 
Valleys- 
Sangdupota- New 
96.72 91.88 91.88 Complete 

84 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Sagalee- Ziro- 
Yomcha 
7.  Assam 
 
Wildlife 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Manas- Probitora- 
Nameri-Kaziranga- 
Dibru- Saikhowa 
94.68 89.94 89.53 Complete 
8.  Assam 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
2016-17 
Development of 
Tezpur- Majuli- 
Sibsagar 
90.98 86.42 86.43 Complete 
9.  Bihar 
 
Tirthanka
r Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Vaishali- Arrah- 
Masad- Patna- 
Rajgir- Pawapuri- 
Champapuri 
33.97 30.04 
 
26.19 Complete 
10.  Bihar 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Kanwaria Route: 
Sultanganj - 
Dharmshala- 
Deoghar 
44.76 
 
42.52 
 
40.51 Complete 
11.  Bihar 
 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Buddhist circuit - 
Construction of 
Convention Centre 
at Bodhgaya 
95.18 93.22 93.22 Complete 
12.  Bihar 
 
Rural 
Circuit 
2017-18 
Development of 
Bhitiharwa- 
Chandrahia- 
Turkaulia 
44.27 39.96 35.72 Complete 
13.  Bihar 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of 
Mandar Hill & 
Ang Pradesh 
44.55 42.32 39.34 Complete  
14.  Chhattisg
arh 
 
Tribal 
Circuit 
2015-16 
 
Development of 
Jashpur- Kunkuri- 
Mainpat- 
Kamleshpur - 
Maheshpur -
Kurdar - 
Sarodhadadar- 
Gangrel- 
Kondagaon– 
Nathiyanawagaon- 
96.10 94.23 94.23 Complete 

85 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Jagdalpur- 
Chitrakoot- 
Tirthgarh 
15.  Goa 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 2016-17 
 
Development of 
Sinquerim-Baga, 
Anjuna-Vagator, 
Morjim-Keri, 
Aguada Fort and 
Aguada Jail    
97.65 92.76 92.76 Complete 
16.  Goa 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of 
Coastal Circuit II: 
Rua De Orum 
Creek - Dona Paula 
- Colva - Benaulim 
99.35 99.35 94.38 Complete 
17.  Gujarat 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Ahmedabad- 
Rajkot - Porbandar 
- Bardoli - Dandi 
58.42 56.21 55.67 Complete 
18.  Gujarat 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Vadnagar- 
Modhera  
91.12 87.25 85.63 Complete  
19.  Gujarat 
 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
  
2017-18 
Development of 
Junagadh- Gir 
Somnath- Bharuch-
Kutch- Bhavnagar- 
Rajkot- Mehsana 
26.68 22.28 19.96 Complete 
20.  Haryana 
 
Krishna 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Tourism 
Infrastructures at 
places related to 
Mahabharata in 
Kurukshetra 
70.91 77.88 69.53 Complete  
21.  Himach
al 
Pradesh 
 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Himalayan Circuit: 
Kiarighat, Shimla, 
Hatkoti, Manali, 
Kangra, 
Dharamshala, Bir, 
Palampur, Chamba 
68.34 64.55 60.80 Complete 
22.  Jammu 
& 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Development of 
Jammu-Srinagar-
77.33 67.37 59.30 Complete 

86 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Kashmi
r 
 
2016-17 
 
Pahalgam-
Bhagwati Nagar -
Anantnag-
Salamabad Uri -
Kargil-Leh 
23.  Jammu 
& 
Kashmi
r 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Tourist Facilities at 
Jammu-Rajouri-
Shopian-Pulwama. 
81.60 67.35 59.41 Complete 
24.  Jammu 
& 
Kashmi
r 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Tourist Facilities - 
Construction of 
Assets in lieu of 
those Destroyed in 
Floods in 2014 
under PM 
Development 
Package 
90.43 74.70 67.07 Complete 
25.  Jammu 
& 
Kashmi
r 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Tourist facilities at 
Mantalai and 
Sudhmahadev 
92.00 87.19 86.78 Complete 
26.  Jammu 
& 
Kashmi
r 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Tourist facilities at 
Anantnag-
Pulwama-
Kishtwar-
Pahalgam-Zanskar 
Padum - Daksum - 
Ranjit Sagar Dam  
86.39 69.95 63.25 Complete 
27.  Jammu 
& 
Kashmi
r 
Himalay
an 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Tourist Facilities at 
Gulmarg-
Baramulla- 
Kupwara- Kargil - 
Leh   
91.84 73.45 
 
57.50 78.42 
28.  Jharkha
nd 
 
Eco 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Eco Tourism 
circuit: Dalma - 
Betla National 
park- Mirchaiya- 
30.11 26.37 24.80 72.74 

87 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Netarhat 
29.  Kerala 
 
Eco 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Pathanamthitta- 
Gavi- Vagamon- 
Thekkady 
64.08 64.08 64.08 Complete 
30.  Kerala 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Sabarimala - 
Erumeli-Pampa-
Sannidhanam 
54.88 27.44 21.05 76.37 
31.  Kerala 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Sree  Padmanabha  
Arnamula 
78.08 73.77 70.00 Complete 
32.  Kerala 
 
Rural 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Malanad Malabar 
Cruise Tourism 
Project 
57.35 30.98 20.74 54.60 
33.  Kerala 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Sivagiri Sree 
Narayana Guru 
Ashram- 
Arruvipuram- 
Kunnumpara  Sree  
Subrahmania-   
Chembazhanthi  
Sree Narayana 
Gurukulam 
66.43 15.57 8.81 51.74 
34.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
Wildlife 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
 
Development of 
Wildlife Circuit at 
Panna- 
Mukundpur- 
Sanjay- Dubri-
Bandhavgarh- 
Kanha- Mukki- 
Pench 
92.10 86.31 83.83 Complete 
35.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Sanchi-Satna-
Rewa-Mandsaur-
Dhar 
74.02 72.75 69.08 Complete 
36.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
Development of 
Gwalior - Orchha – 
Khajuraho – 
89.82 
 
89.49 87.39 Complete 

88 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
2016-17 
 
Chanderi- 
Bhimbetka- Mandu 
37.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
Eco 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
 
Development of 
Gandhisagar Dam - 
Mandleshwar 
Dam- 
Omkareshwar 
Dam- Indira Sagar 
Dam- Tawa Dam - 
Bargi Dam - Bheda 
Ghat- Bansagar 
Dam- Ken River 
93.76 89.08 88.58 Complete 
38.  Maharas
htra 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Sindhudurg 
Coastal Circuit - 
Sagareshwar, 
Tarkarli, Vijaydurg 
(Beach & Creek), 
Mitbhav 
19.06 18.11 16.45 Complete 
39.  Maharas
htra 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Waki- Adasa- 
Dhapewada- 
Paradsingha- 
Telankhandi- Girad 
53.96 32.04 22.04 91.51 
40.  Manipu
r 
 
North-
East   
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Tourist Circuit in 
Manipur: Imphal- 
Khongjom 
72.23 61.32 61.25 Complete 
41.  Manipu
r 
 
 Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Shri Govindajee 
Temple, Shri Bijoy 
Govindajee 
Temple – Shri 
Gopinath Temple – 
Shri Bungshibodon 
Temple – Shri 
Kaina Temple 
45.34 43.04 42.91 Complete 
42.  Meghal
aya 
 
North 
East 
Circuit 
 
Development of 
Umium (Lake 
View), U Lum 
Sohpetbneng-
99.13 99.11 94.97 Complete 

89 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
2016-17 
 
Mawdiangdiang – 
Orchid Lake Resort 
43.  Meghal
aya 
 
North 
East 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
West Kh asi Hills 
(Nongkhlaw- 
KremTirot- Khudoi 
& Kohmang Falls 
– Khri River - 
Mawthadraishan, 
Shillong), Jaintia 
Hills (Krang Suri 
Falls- Shyrmang- 
Iooksi), Garo Hills 
(Nokrek Reserve, 
Katta Beel, Siju 
Caves) 
84.97 72.22 50.00 Complete 
44.  Mizora
m 
North 
East   
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Thenzawl & South 
Zote, District 
Serchhip and 
Reiek. 
92.26 92.26 90.24 Complete 
45.  Mizora
m 
 
Eco 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Eco-Adventure 
Circuit Aizawl –
Rawpuichhip- 
Khawhphawp – 
Lengpui- Chatlang- 
Sakawrhmuituaitla
ng- Muthee - 
Beratlawng -
Tuirial Airfield - 
Hmuifang 
66.37 49.53 49.53 58.78 
46.  Nagalan
d 
 
Tribal 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Tribal Circuit 
Peren- Kohima- 
Wokha 
97.36 92.49 92.49 Complete 
47.  Nagalan
d 
 
Tribal 
Circuit  
2016-17 
Development of 
Mokokchung-
Tuensang-Mon 
98.14 98.14 93.24 Complete 
48.  Odisha 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
Development of 
Gopalpur, Barkul, 
Satapada and 
70.82 
 
67.28 59.93 94.72 

90 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
2016-17 Tampara 
49.  Puduch
erry 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Dubrayapet – 
Arikamedu – 
Veerampattinam – 
Chunnambar - 
Nallavadu/Naramb
ai - Manapet- 
Kalapet -   
Puducherry - 
Yanam 
58.44 58.44 58.08 Complete 
50.  Puduch
erry 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of 
Franco- Tamil 
Village, Karaikal, 
Mahe and Yanam  
49.44 45.70 43.93 Complete 
51.  Puduch
erry 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of 
Puducherry- 
Thirukanch- 
Karaikal- Yanam 
34.96 30.94 30.94 Complete 
52.  Punjab 
 
Heritage  
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Anandpur Sahib - 
Fatehgarh Sahib - 
Chamkaur Sahib - 
Ferozpur - Khatkar 
Kalan- Kalanour - 
Patiala 
94.51 67.14 67.13 84.79 
53.  Rajasth
an 
 
Desert  
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Sambhar Lake 
Town and Other 
Destinations 
50.01 50.01 55.89 Complete 
54.  Rajasth
an 
 
Krishna  
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Govind Dev ji 
temple (Jaipur), 
Khatu Shyam Ji 
(Sikar) and 
Nathdwara 
(Rajsamand) 
75.80 72.01 67.30 99.17 
55.  Rajasth
an 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Spiritual Circuit – 
Development of 
Churu (Salasar 
Balaji)-Jaipur (Shri 
87.05 72.23 68.91 Complete 

91 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Samodke Balaji, 
Ghatke Balaji, 
Bandheke Balaji) - 
Viratnagar (Bijak, 
Jainnasiya, Ambika 
Temple)- 
Bharatpur (Kaman 
Region)- Dholpur 
(Muchkund) - 
Mehndipur Balaji - 
Chittorgarh 
(Sanwaliyaji) 
56.  Rajasth
an 
 
Heritage 
 Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of 
Heritage Circuit 
Development of 
Rajsamand 
(Kumbhalgarh 
Fort) - Jaipur 
(Facade 
Illumination in 
Jaipur and 
Nahargarh Fort) -
Jhalawar (Gagron 
Fort) - Chittorgarh 
(Chittorgarh Fort) 
– Jaisalmer 
(Jaisalmer Fort) - 
Hanumangarh 
(Gogamedi) - 
Udaipur (Pratap 
Gaurav Kendra) - 
Dholpur (Bagh -I-
Nilofor and Purani 
Chawani) - Nagaur 
(Meera Bai 
Smarak, Merta) - 
Tonk (Sunehri 
Kothi) 
70.61 60.91 56.24 Complete 
57.  Sikkim 
 
North 
 East  
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Tourist Circuit 
linking Rangpo 
(entry) – 
Rorathang- Aritar- 
Phadamchen- 
98.05 97.41 92.77 Complete 

92 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Nathang-
Sherathang- 
Tsongmo- 
Gangtok-Phodong- 
Mangan- Lachung-
Yumthang- 
Lachen- Thangu-
Gurudongmer- 
Mangan- Gangtok-
TuminLingee- 
Singtam (exit) 
58.  Sikkim 
 
North 
East 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Tourist Circuit 
Linking Singtam – 
Maka- Temi-
BermoikTokel- 
Phongia- Namchi –
Jorthang- Okharey- 
Sombaria-
Daramdin- 
Jorethang- Melli 
(Exit) 
95.32 90.55 85.18 Complete 
59.  Tamil 
Nadu 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
(Chennai- 
Mamamallapuram 
– Rameshwaram – 
Manpadu – 
Kanyakumari) 
73.13 69.48 69.48 Complete 
60.  Telanga
na 
 
Eco 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Eco Tourism 
Circuit in 
Mahaboobnagar 
district 
91.62 91.25 91.62 Complete 
61.  Telanga
na 
 
Tribal 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Mulugu-
Laknavaram- 
Medavaram- 
Tadvai- Damaravi- 
Mallur- Bogatha 
Waterfalls 
79.87 79.87 79.87 Complete 
62.  Telanga
na 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
Development of 
Qutub Shahi 
Heritage Park - 
96.90 70.61 69.11 86.23 

93 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
2017-18 Paigah Tombs - 
Hayat Bakshi 
Mosque- 
Raymond's Tomb 
63.  Tripura 
 
North 
East   
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Agartala - 
Sipahijala - 
Melaghar - 
Udaipur - 
Amarpur- 
Tirthamukh- 
Mandirghat– 
Dumboor- 
NarikelKunja- 
Gandachara– 
Ambassa 
82.85 73.30 71.45 Complete 
64.  Tripura 
 
North  
East 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Surma  Cherra- 
Unakoti- Jampui 
Hills- Gunabati - 
Bhunaneshwari- 
Neermahal- 
Boxanagar- 
Chottakhola- Pilak- 
Avangchaarra 
44.83 18.37 8.27 49.50 
65.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Srawasti, 
Kushinagar, & 
Kapilwastu 
87.89 
 
72.56 69.82 Complete 
66.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Ramayana 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Chitrakoot and 
Shringverpur 
69.45 64.09 56.03 Complete 
67.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Ahar-Aligarh-
Kasganj-Sarosi 
(Unnao)-
Pratapgarh- 
Kausambi-
Mirzapur-
Gorakhpur-
Domariyaganj-
Basti-Barabanki-
71.91 68.32 66.56 Complete 

94 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
Azamgarh-
Kairana- Baghpat- 
Shahjahanpur 
68.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Bijnor- Meerut- 
Kanpur- Kanpur 
Dehat- Banda- 
Ghazipur- 
Salempur- Ghosi- 
Balia- Ambedkar 
Nagar- Aligarh- 
Fatehpur- Deoria- 
Mahoba- 
Sonbhadra- 
Chandauli- 
Mishrikh- Bhadohi 
67.51 64.14 63.62 Complete 
69.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
Development of 
Kalinjar Fort 
(Banda)- Maghar 
Dham (Sant Kabir 
Nagar)- Chauri 
Chaura, Shaheed 
Sthal (Fatehpur) - 
Mahuar shaheed 
Sthal (Ghosi) - 
Shaheed Smarak 
(Meerut) 
33.92 32.27 32.30 Complete 
70.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Ramayana 
Circuit 
 
2017-18 
Development of 
Ayodhya  
127.21 115.46 108.62 Complete 
71.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Jewar-Dadri-
Sikandrabad-
Noida-Khurja-
Banda 
12.03 11.43 11.69 Complete 
72.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
 
2018-19 
Development of 
Gorakhnath 
Temple 
(Gorakhpur), 
Devipattan Temple 
(Balrampur) and 
Vatvashni Temple 
18.30 16.81 12.61 95.09 

95 
 
Sn State/ 
UT 
Circuit / 
Sanction 
Year 
Name of the 
Project 
Amt. 
Sanctio
ned 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Releas
ed 
(₹ Cr.) 
Amt. 
Utilised 
(₹ Cr.) 
Physical 
Status 
(%) 
(Domariyagunj) 
73.  Uttarakh
and 
 
Eco 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
Development of 
Tehri-Chamba- 
Sarain around 
Tehri Lake. 
69.17 69.17 69.20 Complete 
74.  Uttarakh
and 
 
Heritage 
Circuit 
 
2016-17 
 
Development of 
Kumaon Region - 
Katarmal - 
Jogeshwar - 
Baijnath - 
Devidhura. 
76.32 67.62 68.91 Complete 
75.  West 
Bengal 
 
Coastal 
Circuit 
 
2015-16 
 
Development of 
Beach Circuit: 
Udaipur- Digha- 
Shankarpur- 
Tajpur- 
Mandarmani- 
Fraserganj-
Bakkhlai- Henry 
Island 
67.99 65.07 65.07 Complete 
76.  - Wayside 
Amenitie
s 
 
2018-19 
 
 
Development of 
Wayside Amenities 
in Uttar Pradesh 
and Bihar at 
Varanasi-Gaya; 
Kushinagar-Gaya- 
Kushinagar in 
collaboration with 
MoRTH 
15.07 14.32 14.15 Complete 
TOTAL 5292.57 4771.38 4539.98  
(Source: Ministry of Tourism Background Note for 26.06.2023 Meeting )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

96 
 
Annexure – VIII 
 
A statement containing project-wise issues of various ongoing projects in various States 
S.N
o. 
State/U
T 
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctio
n Cost 
(₹ 
Lakhs) 
Actual 
Comp
letion 
Date 
Exten
sion 
Requ
ested 
Physic
al 
Progr
ess 
(%) 
Reason for 
Delay 
1. Odisha Development of 
Gopalpur, Barkul, 
Satapada and 
Tampara 
7081.66 31st 
March 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
94.72 Delay in 
procurement 
of Cruise 
boats and 
Floating 
restaurant 
2. Rajastha
n 
Development of 
Churu - Jaipur - 
Viratnagar - 
Bharatpur - Dholpur 
- MehandipurBalaji 
- Chittorgarh 
8704.80 31st 
March 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
99.17 Delay due to 
contractor 
issue. 
3. Telanga
na 
Development of 
Heritage Circuit: 
QutubShahi 
Heritage Park - 
Paigah Tombs - 
Hayat Bakshi 
Mosque- Raymond's 
Tomb 
9689.90 31st 
March 
2022 
30th 
Septe
mber  
2023 
86.23 Delay due to 
Court case 
4. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Development of 
Spiritual Circuit IV - 
Gorakhnath Temple 
(Gorakhpur), 
Devipattan Temple 
(Balrampur) and 
Vatvashni Temple 
(Domariyagunj) 
1830.18 31st 
March 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
95.09 Delay due to 
contractor 
issue. 
5. Jammu 
& 
Kashmir 
Development of 
Tourist Facilities at 
Gulmarg - 
Baramulla - 
Kupwara - Kargil - 
Leh 
9183.64 31st 
Dec 
2022 
30th 
Oct 
2023 
78.42 Delay due to 
difficult 
terrain and 
harsh weather 
conditions. 
6. Jharkhan
d 
Development of 
Dalma - Chandil - 
Getalsud- Betla 
National park - 
Mirchaiya - 
Netarhat 
3010.81 31st 
Dec 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
72.74 Delay due to 
clearance from 
forest 
department. 

97 
 
S.N
o. 
State/U
T 
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctio
n Cost 
(₹ 
Lakhs) 
Actual 
Comp
letion 
Date 
Exten
sion 
Requ
ested 
Physic
al 
Progr
ess 
(%) 
Reason for 
Delay 
7, Kerala Development of 
Spiritual Circuit: 
SivagiriSree 
Narayana Guru 
Ashram- 
Arruvipuram- 
KunnumparaSreeSu
brahmania- 
ChembazhanthiSree 
Narayana 
Gurukulam in 
Kerala. 
6642.99 31st 
Dec 
2022 
31st 
Oct 
2023 
51.74 Delay due to 
clearance from 
Temple 
Authorities 
and delay in 
tendering of 
additional 
components. 
8. Kerala Development of 
Sabarimala - 
Erumeli-Pampa- 
Sannidhanam.as 
Spiritual Circuit in 
Kerala 
5488.10 31st 
Dec 
2022 
31st 
Dec 
2023 
76.37 Delay due to 
clearance from 
Temple 
Authorities. 
Difficult 
terrain  
9. Kerala Development of 
Rural Circuit 
Malanad Malabar 
Cruise Tourism 
Project in Kerala 
8037.38 31st 
Dec 
2022 
31st 
Dec 
2023 
54.60 Delay due to 
Environmental 
clearance. 
10. Maharas
htra 
Development of 
Waki- Adasa- 
Dhapewada- 
Paradsingha- 
Telankhandi- Girad 
5396.13 31st 
Dec 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
91.51 Delay due to 
clearance from 
forest 
department 
and delay in 
tendering of 
additional 
components.  
11. Mizora
m 
Development of 
Eco-Adventure 
Circuit Aizawl - 
Rawpuichhip - 
Khawhphawp - 
Lengpui - Chatlang - 
Sakawrhmuituaitlan
g - Muthee - 
Beratlawng - Tuirial 
Airfield - Hmuifang 
6637.47 31st 
Dec 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
58.78 Delay due to 
arbitration 
with vendor. 
12. Punjab Development of 
Anandpur Sahib - 
Fatehgarh Sahib - 
Chamkaur Sahib - 
9451.14 31st 
Dec 
2022 
30th 
June 
2023 
84.79 Delay due to 
tendering of 
additional 
components. 

98 
 
S.N
o. 
State/U
T 
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctio
n Cost 
(₹ 
Lakhs) 
Actual 
Comp
letion 
Date 
Exten
sion 
Requ
ested 
Physic
al 
Progr
ess 
(%) 
Reason for 
Delay 
Ferozpur - Khatkar 
Kalan - Kalanour - 
Patiala in Punjab 
13. Tripura Development of 
SurmaCherra- 
Unakoti- Jampui 
Hills- Gunabati-
Bhunaneshwari- 
Matabari- 
Neermahal- 
Boxanagar- 
Chottakhola- Pilak- 
Avangchaarra in 
Tripura under 
North-East circuit of 
Swadesh Darshan 
4483.40 31st 
Dec 
2022 
31st 
Dec 
2023 
49.50 Delay due to 
difficult 
terrain and 
tendering of 
additional 
components 
and clearance 
from ASI.  
(Source: Ministry of Tourism Replies to Chairman’s Questionnaire for 26.06.2023 Meeting )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

99 
 
Annexure – IX 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SWADESH DARSHAN 1.0 AND 2.0 
S.No. Descriptio
n 
Swadesh Darshan 1 Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
1 Themes (i) Culture and Heritage  
(ii) Wildlife-Tourism 
(iii) Rural Tourism  
(iv) Beach Tourism  
 
(i) Culture and Heritage  
(ii)  Adventure Tourism 
(iii)  Eco-Tourism 
(iv)  Wellness Tourism  
(v) MICE Tourism  
(vi) Rural Tourism  
(vii) Beach Tourism  
(viii) Cruises – Ocean & Inland 
2 Vision and 
mission 
 Thematic Circuit approach Destination and Tourist Centric 
approach 
 - To develop sustainable and 
responsible tourism destinations in 
the country. 
3 Disbursal 
of Funds 
30% of the project cost on 
submission of work orders 
 
30% of the project cost after 
receipt of utilization certificate 
for the first installment 
 
 25% of the project cost after 
receipt of utilization certificate 
for the second installment 
 
 10% of the project cost on 
completion of the work and 
receipt of utilization certificate 
 
5% of the project cost after 
successful Operations & 
Maintenance ( O&M) of 
Toilet, TFC, Cafeteria facilities 
for one year as certified by an 
independent agency 
On sanction of project (mobilization 
advance) -10% of the sanction cost. 
 
On su bmission of work orders/ 
agreements -30% of the tendered cost 
(after adjusting mobilization advance) 
 
 35% of the tendered cost upon 
Utilization of minimum 100% of the 
1st & 75% of the 2nd installment - 
 
 30% of the tendered cost upon 
Utilization of 100% of 1 st & 2 nd and 
minimum 75% of the 3rd installment. 
 
5% of the tendered cost upon Physical 
completion of the project : Utilization 
of 100% of 1st, 2nd &  3rd and 
minimum 75% of the 4th installment, 
Certificate of 100% physical 
completion of the project from 
Implementing Agency countersigned 
by Administrative Secretary.  
 
O&M costs as per the tendered cost to 
be paid annually Successful 
completion of annual  O&M of the 
project as certified by an independent 
agency. (3 years) 
 

100 
 
4 Funding 
Pattern 
The Scheme is 100% centrally 
funded; 
 
1. Other schemes of Central 
and State Governments and 
also to leverage the voluntary 
funding available for 
Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) 
initiatives of Central Public 
Sector Undertakings and 
Corporate Sector. 
 
2. Suitable Public Private 
Partnerships to be taken up for 
improved sustainability of the 
projects.  
 
3.  A Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) may be created for the 
purpose, wherever feasible.    
 
4. The funds would be released 
to the Implementing Agency, 
under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme. The funds shall be 
sanctioned strictly in 
conformity with the  
GFRs and the directions issued 
by the M/O Finance from time 
to time. All the proposals will 
be routed through IFD of M/O 
Tourism.  
 
5. Funds would be released 
only after submission of copy 
of work orders and good for 
construction DPR by the 
implementing ag ency to the 
Ministry. 
6.  Upto 10% funds shall be 
earmarked for IEC components 
(like workshops, seminars, 
publications, stakeholder 
outreach, skill development , 
etc.) & Professional & 
Administrative Services. 
The Scheme 100% Centrally Funded; 
 
Funds for Pr ofessional and 
Administrative services  
1.  3% funds for Professional, 
Administrative and Office Expenses 
by MOT. The fund will be util ised at 
the National Mission Directorate level 
for : 
(i) Hiring of National Program 
Management Unit  
(ii) Fees for Central Technical Nodal 
Agency  
(iii) Administrative expenditure on 
Mission Directorate activities 
including national and regional 
review meetings, workshops and field 
visits, etc.  
(iv) Capacity building through 
National Resource Centres/COE  for 
various themes identified under the 
Scheme: 
 (a) IEC material for capacity building  
(b) National & regional workshops 
for capacity building 
 (c) Giving awards and recognition of 
best practices 
 (d) Up-scaling and replication of best 
practices and smart solutions  
(e) Research and applied studies  
(f) International cooperation for 
capacity building and technology 
development  
(v) Setting up IT portal  
(vi) The Apex Committee will decide 
on the use of these funds for any other 
purpose. 
 
2. 5% funds for Professional, 
Administrative and Office Expenses - 
State Level/ Implementing Agency 
The amount will be util ised by the 
States/Implementing Agencies for the 
following purpose:  
(i) Hiring of Project Development and 
Supervision Consultants, other 
professionals and support teams on 
contract to support the 
implementation of Mission at 
State/destination levels will be 

101 
 
permissible as set out in the 
guidelines and after following fair and 
transparent procedures.  
(ii) Institutional arrangements that 
support Missio n implementation will 
be eligible to be funded.  
(iii) It shall not be used for purchase 
of vehicles, construction and 
maintenance of buildings, creation of 
posts, payment of salary of existing 
staff and purchase of furniture and 
fixtures, etc. 
5 Utilisation 
Certificate 
To be submitted at the time of 
release of first, second and 
third instalments 
The implementing agency shall 
submit the Utilization Certificate of 
the funds released as follows: 
(i) The UC shall be as per Form 12 -C 
of General Financial Rules-2017.  
(ii) The UC shall be verified by 
Technical/ Engineering Head of 
the Agency for compliance with 
technical/ engineering codal 
formalities. 
(iii) The UC shall be verified by 
Finance & Accounts Head of the 
Agency for compliance with 
financial and accounting c odal 
formalities. 
(iv) The UC should thereafter be 
countersigned by Administrative 
Head of the Agency.  
(v) The UC signed by Implementing 
Agency shall then be 
countersigned by Administrative 
Secretary In-charge of Department 
of Tourism of the State 
Government and s hould be 
forwarded with a forwarding letter 
from the State Department of 
Tourism to the Ministry of 
Tourism. 
(vi) Relevant provisions under GFR & 
related amendments/directions 
issued by the Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India from time to 
time towards util ization 
certificates & refund of unspent 
amount/interest, etc. shall be 
applicable. 
6 Impact 
Assessme
-  (i) Increase in tourist footfall, 
duration of stay and spend at the 

102 
 
nt destination 
 
 (ii) Employment generation at the 
destination 
 
(iii) Enhancement of skills of local 
youth in tourism and hospitality  
 
(iv) Private sector investment at the 
destination 
7 Monitorin
g 
1. Ministry of Tourism would 
periodically monitor the 
scheme through designated 
officers.  
2. Both online & offline mode  
monitoring would be done. 
 3. Implementing agencies 
shall submit the updated 
Monitoring Framework by 5 th 
of every month.  
4. Third party service audit 
would be done for WSA/Toilet 
blocks for regular monitoring 
purposes. 
1. Setting up of Portal for the Scheme. 
- A comprehensive portal on Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme should be set up, 
which will serve the Central, State 
and district authorities to monitor the 
progress of the scheme and various 
objectives. All the processes of the 
scheme will be digit ised and wi ll be 
executed through the portal. It will 
provide the requisite management and 
analytical reports and a dashboard. 
All proceedings of the review 
meetings at various levels will also be 
uploaded on the portal.  
 
2 Monthly Progress Report: Monthly 
progress report (MPR) shall be 
submitted by the State/UT 
Implementation agency on the 5 th of 
every month online on the portal. All 
proceedings of the review meetings 
will also be uploaded on the portal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
Annexure – X 
Potential Tourist Spots identified by various stakeholders 
S.No
. Potential Spots State Niche Segment 
1 Gorichen Peak Arunachal Pradesh 
Film Tourism  2 Umiam Lake Meghalaya 
3 Pelling Town Sikkim 
4 Manas National Park,  Assam 
Wildlife Tourism  
5 Lunglei Mizoram, 
6 Touphema Village Nagaland 
7 Shnongpdeng Meghalaya, 
8 Keibul Lamjao National Park Manipur 
9 Bandhavgarh and Kanha National Parks Madhya Pradesh 
10 Gir National Park Gujarat 11 Dholavira   
12 Mehrangarh Fort, Jodhpur 
Rajasthan 
  
13 Jaisalmer   
14 Ranthambhore National Park Wildlife Tourism  15 Tadoba National Park Maharashtra  
16 Aurangabad 
Maharashtra  
Buddhist Circuit 
Tourism  
17 Sindhudurg  Beach Tourism  
18 Lonar Lake   
19       
20 Naland Bihar   
21 Mahabodhi Temple Bodhgaya   
22 Golden Temple Punjab   
23 Shirdi Maharashtra    
24 Ajanta Ellora Caves   
25 Vaishnodevi Jammu and Kashmir   
26 Konark Temples Odisha   
27 Jagganath Temple, Puri   
28 Goa Goa Casino Tourism 
29 Kargil and Leh 
Ladakh 
Adventure Tourism 
30 Pangong Lake 
31 Nubra 
32 Pithoragarh, Chilyanisaur and Gauchar 
Uttarakhand 33 The inner sanctuary of the Nanda Devi 
sanctuary 
34 Khajjiyar, Himachal Pradesh 35 Spiti 
36 Pasighat Arunachal Pradesh 
37 Somnath Temple 
Gujarat 
  
38 MT. GIRNAR, the highest point in Gujarat   
39 Great Rann of Kutch   
40 Statue of Unity, Kevadia   
41 Kashi Vishwanath Corridor Uttar Pradesh   

104 
 
42 Bara Imambara, Lucknow   
43 Agra Fort   
44 Fatehpur Sikri, Agra   
45 Ashoka Pillar, Sarnath   
46 Ayodhya   
47 5000 years old Fossil Park near Varanasi   
48 The Taj Mahal, Agra   
49 50.Cave Temples, Badam 
Karnataka 
  
50 Mysore Palace, Mysore   
51 Hampi   
52 Red Fort, Qutab Minar 
Delhi 
  
53 India Gate   
54 War Museum   
55 Jama Masjid   
56 Film City, Mumbai 
Mumbai 
  
57 Elephanta Caves   
58 Gateway of India   
59 Mecca Masjid Hyderabad   
60 Film City   
61 Kumbhalgarh Fort     
62 Amber Fort Jaipur 
Rajasthan 
  
63 Dilwara Temples   
64 Ajmer-e-Sharif   
65 Hawa Mahal, Jaipur   
66 Mahabalipuram Tamil Nadu   
67 Meenakshi Temple, Madurai   
68 Khajuraho Madhya Pradesh   
69 Rohtang Pas, Manali Himachal Pradesh   
70 Victoria Memorial, Kolkata    
71 Sundarbans  West Bengal   
72 Jallianwala bagh, Amritsar Punjab   
73 Cellular Jail Andaman Nicobar   
74 Haridwar and Rishikesh     
75 Jim Corbett National Park Uttarakhand   
76 Naini Lake, Nainital   
77 Vivekananda Rock KanyaKumari   
78 Basilica of Bom Jesus Goa   
79 Auroville Puducherry   
(Source: FHRAI’s suggestions and IATO’s Background Note for 18.07.2023 Meeting) 
 
 
 
 
 

105 
 
Annexure – XI 
Table 1: Budget expenditure by Indian Missions under the head „State 
Facilitation Abroad‟ 
S.No. 
Name of 
Country 
Name of 
Mission/Post 
Expenditure 
in 2020-
21(Rs.) 
Expenditure 
in 2021-
22(Rs.) 
Expenditure 
in 2022-
23(Rs.) 
1 Algeria EoI, Algiers 0 Nil 60,661.51/- 
2 Angola EoI, Luanda 1,00,000/- 3,00,000/- 4,30,000/- 
3 Argentina EoI, Buenos Aires 8,46,865/- 4,85,632/- 5,72,505.75/- 
4 Australia HCI,Canberra 1,09,435/- 4,39,560/- 5,00,000/- 
5 Australia CGI, Sydney 1,00,145/- 2,89,309/- 6,15,498/- 
6 Australia CGI, Melbourne 0 0 2,00,000/- 
7 Australia CGI, Perth 2,22,222/- 2,97,752/- 4,00,000/- 
8 Austria EoI, Vienna 2,402/- 0 1,90,870.31/- 
9 Azerbaijan EoI, Baku 1,56,522/- 2,68,621/- 2,81,992/- 
10 Bangladesh AHCI, Sylhet Nil 1,00,000/- Nil 
11 Belarus EoI, Minsk 0 0 2,99,948/- 
12 Bhutan EoI, Thimphu 81,840/- 4,00,000/- 4,00,000/- 
13 Bhutan 
CGI, 
Phuentsholing Nil Nil 42,480/- 
14 Botswana HCI, Gaborone 0 0 1,15,607/- 
15 Brazil CGI, Sao Paulo 1,83,232/- 3,99,693/- 3,50,676/- 
16 Bulgaria EoI, Sofia NIl 3,46,779/- 3,88,784/- 
17 Canada HCI, Ottawa 2,00,000/- 9,07,100/- 14,81,400/- 
18 Canada CGI, Toronto 5,00,000/- 9,83,883/- 18,00,000/- 
19 Canada CGI, Vancouver 0 0 0 
20 China EoI, Beijing 0 247376 3,77,822/- 
21 China CGI, Shanghai - 5,87,820/- 0 
22 Combodia EoI, Phnom Penh 1,99,559/- 178536 2,75,686/- 
23 Congo EoI, Brazzaville 2,51,827/- 2,99,940/- 4,00,000/- 
24 Congo EoI, Kinshasa 0 0 0 
25 Cyprus HCI, Nicosia 0 3,99,882/- 4,95,990/- 
26 Czech EoI, Prague 0 3.91,826/- 1,94,000/- 
27 
Domanican 
Republi 
EoI, Santo 
Domingo 0 0 1,81,640/- 
28 Egypt EoI, Cairo 29,946/- 2,04,386/- 4,33,268/- 
29 Estonia EoI, Tallinn - - 0 
30 Eswatini HCI, Mbabane 1,00,890/- 2,00,435/- 1,09,496/- 
31 Ethiopia EoI, Addis Ababa 0 0 3,99,632.48/- 
32 Fiji HCI, Suva 0 72,695/- 0 
33 Finland EoI, Helsinki 3,33,088/- 4,72,285/- 499601 
34 Germany CGI, Frankfurt Nil Nil 6,83,620/- 
35 Germany CGI, Munich Nil Nil 4,59,762.85/- 
36 Germany CGI, Hamburg Nil Nil Nil 
37 Ghana HCI, Accra 6,71,643/- 2,74,799/- 9,99,397/- 
38 Guatemala 
EoI, Guatemala 
City 2,43,000/- 2,88,000/- 5,49,970/- 

106 
 
39 Guyana EoI, Georgetown Nil 0/- 0 
40 Hungary EoI, Budapest 2,33,550/- 59,200/- 1,73,500/- 
41 Iceland EoI, reykjavik Nil 0/- 0 
42 Indonesia EoI, Jakarta 0 1,00,000/- 0 
43 Indonesia CGI, Medan 0 2,47,337/- 5,64,346/- 
44 Indonesia CGI, Bali Nil Nil Nil 
45 Iraq CGI, Erbil Nil 79,818/- 98,000/- 
46 Ireland EoI, Dublin 0 Nil 53,661/- 
47 Italy EoI, Rome 58,871/- Nil 3,85,585/- 
48 Ivory Coast EoI, Abidjan Nil 99,975/- 0 
49 Jamaica HCI, Kingston Nil Nil 98,764/- 
50 Japan CGI, Osaka-Kobe 0 4,50,000/- 19,69,911/- 
51 Japan EoI, Tokyo 76,379/- 52,525/- Nil 
52 Jordan EoI, Amman 0 1,42,820/- 1,49,894.46/- 
53 Kazakhstan EoI, Astana 0 2,00,358/- 0 
54 Kenya HCI, Nairobi 51,975/- - 3,32,474/- 
55 Kuwait EoI, Kuwait 9,98,446/- 19,80,430/- 25,84,739.17/- 
56 Lebanon EoI, Beirut  1,32,540/- 2,30,000/- 
57 Liberia EoI, Monrovia - - - 
58 Peru EoI, Lima 59,540/- 90,148/- 1,49,942.84/- 
59 Maldives HCI, Male 0 0 3,41,381/- 
60 Mali EoI, Bamako Nil Nil 0 
61 Malta Valletta 0 0 9,56,128/- 
62 
Mozambiqu
e EoI, Maputo 0 4,00,000/- 3,49,989/- 
63 Myanmar EoI, Yangon 0 0 - 
64 Namibia HCI, Windhoek Nil Nil 47,500/- 
65 Nepal EoI, Kathmandu 2,35,625/- 8,00,000/- 15,00,000/- 
66 Nepal CGI, Birgunj 0 30,000/- 89,884/- 
67 
New 
Zealand EoI, Wellington 3,01,773/- 3,97,618/- 3,15,997/- 
68 Nigeria HCI, Abuja 2,49,783/- 4,05,907/- 5,50,000/- 
69 Nigeria CGI, Lagos 0 0 0 
70 Norway EoI, Oslo 0 0 - 
71 Oman EoI, Muscat 0 0 99,114/- 
72 Palestine 
Representative of 
India, Ramallah 5,62,889/- 3,91,731.89/- 45533 
73 Paraguay EoI, Asuncion Nil Nil 2,43,550/- 
74 Philippines EoI, Manila 1,79,173/- 4,00,000/- 9,80,255/- 
75 Qatar EoI, Doha 0 2,98,044/- 1,67,291/- 
76 
Reunion 
Island CGI, Saint Denis 0 1,71,018/- 1,94,644/- 
77 Russia EoI, Moscow 69,000/- 2,68,342/- 5,15,181/- 
78 Russia 
CGI, St. 
Petersburg Nil 64,000/- 1,00,000/- 
79 Sao Tome 
EoI, Sao Tome, 
and Principe 
Mission was 
Not there Nil - 
80 
Saudi 
Arabia EoI, Riyadh 1,74,000/- Nil 2,43,600/- 

107 
 
81 
Saudi 
Arabia CGI, Jeddah 61,768/- 1,98,567/- 4,99,336/- 
82 Senegal EoI,Dakar 4,50,000/- Nil 0 
83 Singapore HCI, Singapore 0 0/- 4,00,000/- 
84 Slovakia EoI, Bratislava 44,000/- 1,93,925/- 0 
85 Slovenia EoI, Ljubljana    
86 
South 
Africa HCI, Pretoria 0 52,056/- 0 
87 
South 
Africa 
CGI, 
Johannesburg 1,09,013/- 2,41,212/- 3,43,006.35/- 
88 
South 
Africa CGI, Durban Nil Nil Nil 
89 Spain EoI, Madrid Nil 2,08,822/- 7,12,962/- 
90 Sri Lanka HCI, Colombo 10,00,000/- 1199469 7,96,984/- 
91 Suriname Paramaribo Nil Nil Nil 
92 Sweden EoI, Stockholm 0 0 78,263/- 
93 Switzerland EoI,Berne 10,90,957/- 7,88,635/- 11,95,572/- 
94 Switzerland 
Permanent 
Misson of India 
Geneva 0 0 0 
95 Syria EoI, Damascus 0 Nil 37,970/- 
96 Tanzania CGI, Zanzibar 0 24,290/- 1,26,539/- 
97 Thailand EoI, Bangkok 5,32,443/- 3,08,924/- 5,00,000/- 
98 
Togo 
(Lome) EoI, Togo 0 0 99,999/- 
99 Turkey EoI, Ankara 0 2,17,280/- 99,904/- 
100 Turkey CGI, Istanbul 15,549/- 47,325/- 1,88,737/- 
101 
Turkmenist
an EoI, Ashgabat 1,92,082/- 2,98,941/- 4,39,492/- 
102 UAE CGI, Dubai 1,00,000/- 3,00,000/- 0 
103 Uganda EoI, Kampala Nil 1,77,070/- 2,20,667/- 
104 Ukraine Kyiv Nil 65,494/- Nil 
105 
United 
Kingdom CGI, Edinburgh 0 0 0 
106 USA 
EoI, Washington 
DC Nil Nil 2,12,345/- 
107 USA CGI, New York 21,19,603/- 12,00,000/- 45,00,000/- 
108 USA 
CGI, San 
Francisco 1,16,800/- 7,71,720/- 1341566 
109 USA CGI, Atlanta 0 0 2,00,000/- 
110 USA CGI, Chicago 0 Nil --- 
111 Venezuela EoI, Caracas 0 1,00,000/- 2,75,000/- 
112 Vietnam EoI, Hanoi 0 3,17,989/- 0 
113 Zambia HCI, Lusaka - - - 
114 Zimbabwe EoI, Harare Nil 1,99,968/- 2,99,593/- 
115 Brazil EoI, Brasilia 25,273/- 0 2,82,875.61/- 
116 Cameroon HCI, Yaounde 0 0 1,50,000/- 
117 China CGI, Hong Kong 5,28,000/- 5,00,000/- 7,00,000/- 
118 Colombia EoI, Bogota 0 49,200/- 6,35,360/- 

108 
 
119 Guinea EoI, Conakry 0 0 0 
120 Iraq EoI, Baghdad 0 7,78,285/- 10,42,025/-/- 
121 Israel EoI, Tel Aviv 0 1,13,293/- 2,79,141/- 
122 Italy CGI, Milan 0 0 1,97,156/- 
123 Lao PDR EoI, Vientiane 0 0 0 
124 Madagascar EoI, Antananarivo 0 1,00,000/- 1,42,960/- 
125 Malaysia 
HCI, Kuala 
Lumpur 3,46,250/- 9,21,656/- 11,16,167.48/- 
126 Mexico EoI, Mexico City 0 1,20,825/- 5,12,908/- 
127 Netherlands EoI, The Hague 0 0 0 
128 Pakistan HCI, Islamabad 0 3,16,949/- 4,76,104/- 
129 Panama EoI, Panama 33,000/- 1,90,400/- 62,160/- 
130 Portugal EoI, Lisbon 1,95,133/- 1,26,076/- 0 
131 Romania EoI, Bucharest 0 1,99,887/- 6,69,408/- 
132 
South 
Africa CGI, Cape Town 0 0 0 
133 Sri Lanka CGI, Jaffna 47,824/- 2,99,886/- 4,96,415/- 
134 Tanzania 
HCI, Dar es 
Salaam 26,657/- 1,95,822/- 2,49,932.75/- 
135 Thailand CGI, Chiang Mai 0 0 0 
136 
United 
Kingdom HCI, London 0 0 7,94,280/- 
137 
United 
Kingdom CGI, Birmingham 0 4,33,763/- 0 
138 Uzbekistan EoI, Tashkent 0 2,29,000/- 2,49,905/- 
139 Bangladesh HCI, Dhaka 1,63,800/- 4,24,931/- 2,85,000/- 
140 Croatia EoI, Zagreb 7,00,000/- 4,00,000/- 7,00,000/- 
141 Sri Lanka AHCI, Kandy 1,89,203/- 1,14,672/- 87,856/- 
142 Vietnam 
CGI, Ho Chi 
Minh City 2,86,318/- 2,00,000/- 1199405.08 
Total Amount 1,59,57,293/- 2,87,24,453/- 5,06,18,166/- 
(Source: Ministry of External Affairs Questionnaire Replies for Meeting dtd 26.07.2023) 
 
Table 2: Budget disbursed to Missions/Posts for the Head „Publicity‟ 
(Figures in Rs. Thousands) 
S NO Name of the 
Mission/Post 
BE  2021-22 BE  2022-23 BE  2023-24 
1 EoI, Abidjan 1100 1277 782 
2 HCI, Abuja 2500 1961 12000 
3 B.O. Lagos 125 111 213 
4 EoI, Abu Dhabi 9500 4500 7975 
5 EoI, Accra 2300 1702 977 
6 EoI, Addis Ababa 1850 1665 904 
7 EoI, Astana 900 740 447 
8 EoI, Algiers 450 592 425 
9 EoI, Amman 600 525 306 
10 EoI, Ankara 2000 2220 1170 

109 
 
11 EoI, Antananarivo 620 481 510 
12 EoI, Ashgabat 200 185 160 
13 EoI, Athens 500 370 213 
14 EoI, Baghdad 430 433 497 
15 EoI, Bahrain 1350 1000 798 
16 EoI. Baku 900 666 532 
17 CoI, Bandar Abbas 40 30 16 
18 EoI, Bangkok 3500 3000 1861 
19 EoI, Beijing 5000 3034 1922 
20 EoI, Beirut 1000 518 638 
21 EoI, Belgrade 1995 1480 638 
22 EoI, Berlin 4000 7000 6380 
23 EoI, Berne 7250 5550 4254 
24 CGI, Birgunj 600 607 582 
25 CGI, Birmingham 2500 2442 1755 
26 EoI, Bishkek 350 333 186 
27 EoI, Bogota 1850 1400 744 
28 EoI, Brasilia 5000 4000 3456 
29 EoI, Bratislava 720 1110 651 
30 EoI, Brussels 2400 1850 1276 
31 HCI, Brunei 400 370 319 
32 EoI, Bucharest 945 1480 1063 
33 EoI, Budapest 2000 1480 798 
34 EoI, Buenos Aires 3000 3700 1861 
35 EoI, Cairo 2100 1554 826 
36 HCI, Canberra 3000 2220 851 
37 EoI, Capetown 1200 977 479 
38 HCI, Caracas 1600 1480 1063 
39 C.I, Chiangmai 100 200 218 
40 CGI, Chicago 1900 1406 1010 
41 AHCI, Chittagong 1520 1125 798 
42 HCI, Colombo 5500 4588 3297 
43 EoI, Copenhagen 1320 524 2020 
44 EoI, Dakar 1800 1480 2000 
45 EoI, Damascus 350 444 319 
46 HCI, Dar-es-salam 1026 1500 1329 
47 HCI, Dhaka 14500 10000 5923 
48 EoI, Doha 1000 888 638 
49 CGI, Dubai 2242 2017 1090 
50 EoI, Dublin 1000 999 851 
51 CGI, Durban 800 629 479 
52 EoI, Dushanbe 616 481 256 
53 CGI, Edinburgh 800 592 425 
54 CGI, Frankfurt 1200 1110 702 
55 HCI, Gaborone 600 488 683 
56 PMI, Geneva 1800 3000 1861 
57 CD Wing, Geneva 165 148 80 
58 HCI, Georgetown 2500 2220 1595 
59 EoI, The Hague 5000 3700 2393 
60 CGI, Hamburg 450 333 239 
61 EoI, Hanoi 2500 1850 1037 
62 HCI, Harare 1300 1110 4488 
63 EoI, Havana 800 740 950 
64 EoI, Helsinki 1100 2146 1276 
65 CGI, Herat 0 0 0 

110 
 
66 CGI, Ho-Chi-Minh City 3800 3330 2658 
67 CGI, Hong Kong 3000 3034 2285 
68 CGI, Houston 2000 1628 904 
69 EoI, Islamabad 1000 888 479 
70 CGI, Istanbul 650 740 372 
71 EoI, Jakarta 2400 1776 957 
72 ASEAN, Jakarta 50 740 433 
73 CGI, Jalalabad 50 37 0 
74 CGI, Jeddah (Cha) 1800 2050 1223 
75 CGI, Johannesburg 2500 1850 1595 
76 EoI, Kabul 1323 979 479 
77 HCI, Kampala 520 444 319 
78 AHCI, Kandy 400 592 266 
79 CGI, Kanadhar 200 148 0 
80 EoI, Kathmandu 12100 10000 8507 
81 EoI, Khartoum 2000 2220 1595 
82 EoI, Kyiv 1500 2294 1220 
83 HCI, Kingston 1500 1500 1595 
84 CGI, Kobe-Osaka 800 977 5456 
85 HCI, Kuala Lumpur 2000 1480 1542 
86 EoI, Kuwait 2000 6000 4488 
87 EoI, Lima 1400 1036 798 
88 EoI, Lisbon 1100 592 638 
89 HCI, London 22088 10000 6646 
90 EoI, Luanda 655 1000 851 
91 EoI, Lusaka 600 925 1284 
92 EoI, Madrid 4000 3108 1861 
93 HCI, Mahe (Victoria) 1514 1643 1063 
94 EoI, Male 2775 2259 1622 
95 CGI, Mandalay 1350 962 511 
96 EoI, Manila 4000 3700 798 
97 HCI, Maputo 818 1140 994 
98 CGI, Mazar-e-sharif 200 148 0 
99 CGI, Medan 300 400 266 
100 EoI, Mexico City 4780 2500 1605 
101 CGI, Milan 750 555 425 
102 EoI, Minsk 200 800 638 
103 AHCI, Mombasa 150 111 66 
104 EoI, Moscow 17500 14134 10049 
105 CGI, Munich 3000 4500 3988 
106 EoI, Muscat 2200 1776 1382 
107 HCI, Nairobi 650 518 372 
108 CGI, New York 7186 10000 13292 
109 PMI, New York 12236 6000 8975 
110 HCI, Nicosia 5225 4847 2658 
111 EoI, Oslo 1000 3000 1063 
112 HCI, Ottawa 13144 6500 13984 
113 EoI, Panama 700 555 479 
114 EoI, Paramaribo 1202 1110 532 
115 EoI, Paris 13500 9000 10634 
116 EoI, Phnom Penh 1800 1250 798 
117 CGI, Phuentsholing 250 370 266 
118 HCI, Port Louis 2000 2590 4254 
119 HCI, Port Moresby 1200 1776 1077 
120 HCI, Port of Spain 1250 1110 798 

111 
 
121 EoI, Prague 3500 3330 1329 
122 EoI, Pretoria 1200 1110 744 
123 EoI, Pyongyang 300 0 0 
124 EoI, Rabat 3500 1500 1329 
125 AHCI, Rajshahi 500 407 425 
126 R.O. Ramallah 600 592 372 
127 EoI, Riyadh 700 518 798 
128 EoI, Rome 4000 3580 2386 
129 CGI, Saint Denis 350 296 160 
130 CGI, St. Petersburg 455 400 266 
131 CGI, San Francisco 3000 2000 1595 
132 EoI, Sana'a 0 111 53 
133 EoI, Santiago 2000 1628 1170 
134 CGI, Sao Paulo 400 326 479 
135 EoI, Seoul 8700 5000 4254 
136 CGI, Shanghai 1600 1184 851 
137 HCI, Singapore 5000 5550 4254 
138 EoI, Sofia 1500 1166 798 
139 EoI, Stockholm 5200 4500 2552 
140 HCI Suva 3300 2800 2658 
141 CGI, Sydney 1450 2000 1329 
142 EoI. Tashkent 400 400 234 
143 EoI, Tehran 2000 1480 930 
144 EoI, Tel Aviv 3500 2590 1595 
145 EoI, Thimpu 2365 2500 1542 
146 EoI, Tokyo 3000 2000 3329 
147 CGI, Toronto 3500 3500 4785 
148 EoI, Tripoli 0 0 0 
149 EoI, Tunis 400 518 292 
150 EoI, Ulaan Baatar 750 555 319 
151 CGI, Vancouver 2000 1480 2658 
152 EoI, Vienna 1000 3200 1861 
153 EoI, Vientiane 850 814 319 
154 CGI, Vladivostok 950 814 1489 
155 EoI, Warsaw 900 888 1329 
156 EoI, Washington 20000 13000 15951 
157 HCI, Wellington 980 1110 1329 
158 HCI, Windhoek 600 1000 558 
159 EoI, Yangon 1200 407 255 
160 EoI, Yerevan 1000 1480 1170 
161 EoI, Zagreb 1050 1036 551 
162 CGI, Zahidan 40 37 27 
163 CGI, Zanzibar 285 185 133 
164 EoI, Kinshasa 300 159 133 
165 CGI, Melbourne 1338 1110 649 
166 EoI, Ljubljana 1500 1850 1223 
167 CGI, Guangzhou 600 962 1755 
168 EoI, Juba 500 407 370 
169 EoI, Reykjavik 400 370 213 
170 EoI, Bamako 600 444 319 
171 EoI, Niamey 360 740 391 
172 EoI, Guatemala 560 528 319 
173 CGI, Jaffna 150 148 213 
174 CGI, Hambantota 700 518 314 
175 CGI, Perth 300 300 532 

112 
 
176 CGI, Atlanta 1500 1110 798 
177 CGI, Bali 1500 592 425 
178 HCI, Lilongwe 1000 1110 798 
179 CGI, Sittwe 140 104 80 
180 CGI, Erbil 600 533 160 
181 HCI, Valetta 750 999 638 
182 AHCI, Sylhet 400 333 213 
183 AHCI, Khulna 500 592 319 
184 HCI, Kigali 600 444 346 
185 EoI, Djibouti 800 592 319 
186 EoI, Malabo 400 300 160 
187 EoI, Conakry 1000 814 425 
188 EoI, Ouagadougou 100 592 360 
189 EoI, 
Yaounde(Cameroon) 
500 518 319 
190 HCI, 
Mbabane(Eswatini) 
150 200 149 
191 EoI, Brazzaville 600 740 425 
192 EoI, Asmara 350 300 160 
193 EoI, Freetown 200 1110 798 
194 EoI Sao Tome 150 185 213 
195 EoI Monrovia 150 370 266 
196 EoI, Lome 400 296 213 
197 EoI Nouakchott 0 400 213 
198 EoI Santo Domingo 0 400 266 
199 EoI Asuncion 0 444 798 
200 EoI Tallinn 0 3000 2658 
201 US (Cash) for Hqrs. 0 0 0 
202 EoI, N'Djamena(Chad) 0 0 798 
203 EoI, Vilnius(Lithuania) 0 0 1105 
204 EoI, Praia 0 0 556 
 Total 413103 350985 315382 
(Source: Ministry of External Affairs Questionnaire Replies for Meeting dtd. 
26.07.2023) 
 
Table 3: Budget disbursed to Missions/Posts under „market expansion‟ head 
Allocations 
S. No. County Mission/Post 2022-23 2023-24 
1 Algeria Algiers ₹3,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
2 Angola Luanda ₹5,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
3 Argentina Buenos Aires ₹4,00,000 ₹3,50,000 
4 Armenia & 
Georgia 
Yerevan ₹3,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
5 Australia Melbourne ₹0 ₹1,50,000 
6 Australia Perth  (P) ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
7 Azerbaijan Baku ₹5,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
8 Australia Sydney ₹5,40,000 ₹5,00,000 
9 Australia Canberra ₹3,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
10 Austria Vienna ₹6,00,000 ₹5,00,000 

113 
 
11 Bahrain Bahrain ₹5,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
12 Bangladesh Chittagong  (P) ₹2,00,000 ₹1,50,000 
13 Bangladesh Dhaka (M) ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
14 Bangladesh Rajshahi (P) ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
15 Bangladesh Sylhet(P) ₹1,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
16 Belarus Minsk ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
17 Belgium Brussels ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
18 Bhutan Phuentsholing ₹0 ₹50,000 
19 Bhutan Thimphu ₹8,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
20 Brazil Brasilia ₹6,00,000 ₹3,50,000 
21 Brazil Sao Paulo ₹5,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
22 Brunei 
Darussalam 
Bander Seri 
Begawan 
₹2,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
23 Bulgaria Sofia ₹3,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
24 Cambodia Phnom Penh ₹3,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
25 Cameroon YAOUNDE ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
26 Canada Ottawa (M) ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
27 Canada Toronto (P) ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
28 Canada Vancouver(P) ₹3,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
29 Chile Santiago ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
30 China Beijing (M) ₹15,00,000 ₹15,00,000 
31 China Shanghai ₹5,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
32 China Guangzhou (P) ₹5,00,000 ₹3,00,000 
33 Colombia Bogota ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
34 Congo (DR) Kinshasa ₹1,00,000 ₹3,00,000 
35 Congo (Rep.) Brazzaville ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
36 Croatia Zagreb ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
37 Cuba Havana ₹1,00,000   
38 Cyprus Nicosia ₹8,00,000 ₹8,00,000 
39 Czech 
Republic 
Prague ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
40 Denmark Copenhagen ₹10,00,000   
41 Djibouti Djibouti ₹1,00,000   
42 Dominican 
Republic 
Santo Domingo ₹3,00,000 ₹3,00,000 
43 Egypt Cairo ₹3,50,000 ₹3,00,000 
44 Equitorial 
Guinea 
Malabo ₹50,000   
45 Eritrea Asmara ₹1,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
46 Estonia Tallinn ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
47 Ethiopia Addis Ababa ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
48 France Paris ₹20,00,000 ₹20,00,000 
49 Fiji Suva ₹6,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
50 Finland Helsinki ₹3,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
51 Germany Berlin (M) ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
52 Germany Frankfurt (P) ₹3,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
53 Germany Hamburg (P) ₹3,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
54 Germany Munich (P) ₹5,00,000 ₹3,50,000 

114 
 
55 Ghana Accra ₹3,00,000 ₹3,00,000 
56 Greece Athens ₹1,00,000   
57 Guatemala Guatemala City ₹8,00,000 ₹8,00,000 
58 Guyana Georgetown ₹1,00,000   
59 Hongkong Hongkong ₹25,00,000 ₹20,00,000 
60 Hungary Budapest ₹8,00,000 ₹5,50,000 
61 Iceland Reykjavik ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
62 Indonesia ASEAN ₹7,50,000 ₹7,00,000 
63 Indonesia Bali (P) ₹0 ₹2,00,000 
64 Indonesia Jakarta (M) ₹8,00,000 ₹8,00,000 
65 Indonesia Medan (P) ₹3,50,000 ₹5,00,000 
66 Iran Tehran ₹1,65,000 ₹1,00,000 
67 Iraq Baghdad (M) ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
68 Iraq Erbil (P) ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
69 Ireland Dublin ₹3,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
70 Israel Tel Aviv ₹7,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
71 Italy Milan (P) ₹1,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
72 Italy Rome (M) ₹3,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
73 Ivory Coast Abidjan ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
74 Jamaica Kingston ₹1,50,000 ₹1,50,000 
75 Japan Tokyo ₹15,00,000 ₹15,00,000 
76 Japan Osaka Kobe ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
77 Jordan Amman ₹5,00,000 ₹2,50,000 
78 Kazakhstan Astana   ₹2,50,000 
79 Kenya Nairobi ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
80 Kuwait Kuwait City ₹35,00,000 ₹25,00,000 
81 Kyrgyzstan Bishkek ₹3,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
82 Laos Vientiane ₹0 ₹50,000 
83 Lebanon Beirut ₹5,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
84 Liberia Monrovia ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
85 Madagascar Antananarivo ₹1,00,000 ₹50,000 
86 Malawi Lilongwe ₹5,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
87 Malaysia Kuala Lumpur ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
88 Maldives Male ₹20,00,000 ₹6,00,000 
89 Mali Bamako ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
90 Malta Valleta ₹2,50,000 ₹2,00,000 
91 Mauritania Nouakchott ₹1,00,000   
92 Mauritius Port Louis ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
93 Mexico Mexico City ₹8,00,000 ₹6,00,000 
94 Mongolia Ulaabaatar ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
95 Morocco Rabat ₹0 ₹2,00,000 
96 Mozambique Maputo ₹2,50,000 ₹2,50,000 
97 Myanmar Sittwe (P) ₹0 ₹50,000 
98 Myanmar Yangon (M) ₹5,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
99 Namibia Windhoek ₹1,00,000 ₹50,000 
100 Nepal Birgunj (P) ₹1,00,000 ₹50,000 
101 Nepal Kathmandu (M) ₹25,00,000 ₹20,00,000 
102 Netherlands The Hague ₹0 ₹5,00,000 

115 
 
103 New Zealand Wellington ₹15,50,000 ₹10,00,000 
104 Nigeria Lagos/Abuja ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
105 Norway Oslo ₹10,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
106 Oman Muscat ₹7,50,000 ₹7,00,000 
107 Pakistan Islamabad ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
108 Palestine Ramallah ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
109 Panama Panama City ₹0   
110 Paraguay Asuncion ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
111 Papua New 
Guinea 
Port Moresby ₹1,00,000   
112 Peru (& 
Bolivia) 
Lima ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
113 Philippines Manila ₹4,00,000 ₹4,00,000 
114 Poland (& 
Lithuania) 
Warsaw ₹2,00,000   
115 Portugal Lisbon ₹1,50,000 ₹2,50,000 
116 Qatar Doha ₹4,00,000 ₹3,50,000 
117 Romania Bucharest ₹5,00,000   
118 Russia Moscow (M) ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
119 Russia St. Petersburg ₹1,50,000 ₹1,50,000 
120 Rwanda Kigali ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
121 Sao Tome Sao Tome ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
122 Saudi Arabia Jeddah (P) ₹8,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
123 Saudi Arabia Riyadh (M) ₹6,50,000 ₹6,50,000 
124 Scotland Edinburgh ₹7,00,000   
125 Senegal Dakar ₹5,00,000   
126 Serbia Belgrade ₹3,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
127 Seychelles Victoria ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
128 Singapore Singapore ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
129 Slovak 
Republic 
Bratislava ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
130 Slovenia Ljubljana ₹10,00,000 ₹7,00,000 
131 South Africa Cape Town ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
132 South Africa Durban ₹1,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
133 South Africa Johannesburg ₹8,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
134 South Africa Pretoria ₹0 ₹10,00,000 
135 South Korea Seoul ₹30,00,000 ₹25,00,000 
136 Spain Madrid ₹10,00,000 ₹8,00,000 
137 Sri Lanka Colombo (M) ₹12,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
138 Sri Lanka Hambantota (P) ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
139 Sri Lanka Jaffna ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
140 Sri Lanka Kandy ₹1,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
141 Sudan Khartoum ₹10,00,000 ₹7,00,000 
142 Suriname Paramaribo ₹1,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
143 Swaziland Mbabane ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
144 Sweden Stockholm ₹15,00,000   
145 Switzerland Berne ₹45,00,000 ₹35,00,000 
146 Switzerland Geneva (PMI) ₹2,00,000 ₹1,00,000 

116 
 
147 Syria Damascus ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
148 Tajikistan Dushanbe ₹1,00,000   
149 Tanzania Dar es Salaam ₹5,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
150 Tanzania Zanzibar ₹25,000 ₹50,000 
151 Thailand Bangkok ₹8,00,000 ₹7,00,000 
152 Thailand Chiang Mai ₹50,000 ₹50,000 
153 Togo Lome ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
154 Trinidad and 
Tobago 
Port of Spain ₹2,50,000 ₹1,00,000 
155 Tunisia Tunis ₹2,00,000   
156 Turkey Ankara ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
157 Turkey Istanbul ₹1,00,000   
158 Turkmenistan Ashgabat ₹50,000 ₹1,00,000 
159 UAE Abu Dhabi ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
160 UAE Dubai ₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
161 Uganda Kampala ₹50,000 ₹1,00,000 
162 Ukraine Kyiv ₹0 ₹1,00,000 
163 United 
Kingdom 
Birmingham (P) ₹5,00,000   
164 United 
Kingdom 
London (M) ₹15,00,000 ₹8,00,000 
165 USA Atlanta (P) ₹2,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
166 USA Chicago (P) ₹5,00,000   
167 USA Houston (P) ₹7,00,000 ₹5,00,000 
168 USA New York (P) ₹50,00,000 ₹40,00,000 
169 USA San Francisco (P) ₹10,00,000 ₹8,00,000 
170 USA Washington DC 
(M) 
₹10,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
171 Uzbekistan Tashkent ₹1,00,000 ₹2,00,000 
172 Venezuela Caracas ₹1,00,000 ₹1,00,000 
173 Vietnam Hanoi (M) ₹15,00,000 ₹10,00,000 
174 Vietnam Ho Chi Minh City 
(P) 
₹20,00,000 ₹15,00,000 
175 Zambia Lusaka   ₹1,50,000 
175 Zimbabwe Harare ₹2,50,000 ₹1,50,000 
(Source: Ministry of External Affairs Questionnaire Replies for 26.07.2023 
Meeting) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

117 
 
Annexure – XII 
Agreements / Memorandum of Understanding / LoI Signed with foreign 
countries by the Ministry of Tourism 
 
S.No. Country 
with whom 
MoU/ 
Agreement 
singed 
MoU / 
Agreement / 
LoI 
Date of 
signature 
Valid Till Status 
1 Iraq  Protocol 25.10.1986 5+5 years period each Valid 
2 Portugal  Agreement 29.07.1991 5+5 year periods Valid 
3 Syria  Agreement 08.10.1991 5+5 year periods Valid 
4 Israel  Agreement 18.05.1993 5+5 year periods Valid 
5 Singapore  Agreement 24.01.1994 5+5 year periods Valid 
6 Russia  Agreement 30.06.1994 5+5 year periods Valid 
7 Iran  MoU 18.04.1995 No validity clause Valid 
8 Mexico  Agreement 28.03.1996 5+5 year periods Valid 
9 Cyprus  Agreement 07.11.1996 5+5 year periods Valid 
10 Greece  Agreement 13.01.1998 5+5 year periods Valid 
11 Indonesia  MoU 08.02.2000 5+5 years period each Valid 
12 Italy  Agreement 26.06.2000 5+5 year periods Valid 
13 Sri Lanka  MoU 23.01.2004 5+5 year periods Valid 
14 Brazil  Agreement 25.01.2004 5+5 year periods Valid 
15 Serbia  MoU 02.11.2004 valid until either party 
terminates 
Valid 
16 IBSA 
Tripartite 
Agreement 
Agreement 15.10.2008 5+5 year periods Valid 
17 Poland  Agreement 25.04.2009 5+5 year periods Valid 
18 ASEAN  MoU 12.01.2012 12.01.2022 (5+5 years 
period) Valid 
19 Mauritius  MoU 12.03.2013 5+5 year periods Valid 
20 Japan  Memorandum 22.01.2014 5+5 year periods Valid 
21 Nepal  MoU 25.11.2014 5+5 year periods Valid 
22 France  LoI 09.04.2015 No validity clause Valid 
23 China  Agreement 15.05.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
24 Tanzania  MoU 19.06.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
25 Uzbekistan  Agreement 06.07.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
26 Turkmenistan  MoU 11.07.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
27 Egypt  MoU 24.08.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
28 U.A.E. MoU 03.09.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
29 Cambodia  MoU 16.09.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
30 Maldives  MoU 10.04.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
31 Qatar  MoU 05.06.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
32 South Africa  MoU 08.07.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
33 Kyrgyzstan  MoU 20.12.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 

118 
 
34 Oman MoU 11.02.2018 5+5 years period valid 
35 Bulgaria MoU 05.09.2018 5+5 year periods Valid 
36 Malta MoU 17.09.2018 5+5 years  Valid 
37 Romania MoU 19.09.2018 Indefinite period Valid 
38 Colombia MoU 04.10.2018 5+5 yeas periods Valid 
39 Korea MoU 05.11.2018 5+5 year period Valid 
40 Argentina MoU 18.02.2019 5+5 year period Valid 
41 Saudi Arabia MoU 20.02.2019 5+1 years Valid 
42 Croatia MoU 26.03.2019 5+5 years period Valid 
43 Paraguay MoU 27.09.2019 5+5 years periods Valid 
44 Philippines MoU 18.10.2019 5+5 years periods Valid 
45 Finland MoU 21.11.2019 5 years Valid 
46 Australia  MoU 11.02.2022 5 years Valid 
(Source: Ministry of External Affairs Questionnaire Replies for Meeting dtd 26.07.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

119 
 
Annexure – XIII 
 
Country  Promotional Events by Missions 
 
 Travel Expos in which Missions 
have participated 
 
Seychelles 
 
(i) Organizing Cultural Events (showcasing 
performances of incoming ICCR Troupe/ 
local Diaspora groups) where Incredible 
India promotional material is distributed 
(on 24th January, 2023, and planned 
for 09 August 2023). 
(ii) Organizing Traditional Exchange by 
sending a Seychelles Troupe to 
Surajkund Mela every year (most 
recently in  Feb 2023) and setting up of 
India Corner at the High Commission 
premises during National Events. 
(iii) Sharing p romotional material on social 
media exhibiting Indian Tourism 
regularly. 
(iv) Publishing testimonies of visiting ITEC 
scholars to India (especially the tourism 
aspect related to Delhi, Agra, and 
Hyderabad). 
(v) Facilitating a familiarization visit for 
local journal ists to India (most recently 
in Oct, 2022). 
(vi) 1198 visas were issued by Mission in 
2022 and 679 visas have been issued till 
date in 2023. 
Mission has facilitated participation 
of delegates from travel companies 
and tour operators in the recent past, 
such as,  participation of Air 
Seychelles and Tourism Seychelles at 
OTM India Expo and SATTE Travel 
Expo in March, 2022 and Feb, 2023 
respectively. 
 
  
 
Morocco 
 
Holi was celebrated with great favor & 
enthusiasm in Morocco. The Indian Embassy 
Rabat & local cultural  group ANAMA also 
organised dance and yoga workshop & 
mehendi art in the event organ ised as part of 
Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav. 
The Embassy of India Rabat invited all 
Indians and friends of India for a live webinar 
hosted by Ministry of Tourism on 25 th 
January, 2022 from 06:30 Hrs local time on 
the occasion of National Tourism Day. 
A week of Celebration was held in different 
Moroccan cities to mark 73th Republic day of 
India and Azadi Ka  Amrit Mahotsav 
including cultural performances by Moroccan 
Mission has supported participation 
of India travel groups such as Satguru 
Travels to partic ipate in the regional 
Travel Expos held in Casablanca, 
Marrakesh and in the MENA region . 
It may be noted that the flow of 
tourists (in form of issuance of visas 
by the E oI Rabat) has grown 
significantly post Covid. 
 

120 
 
artists in Casablanca, inauguration of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat Corner in Rabat, Indian 
Textile, and Henna in Casablanca. 
The Indian Embassy in Rabat and Moroccan 
Indian friendship association organ ised a 
cultural event with enthusiastic performance 
by Moroccan artist s, participants also paid 
special tribute to Lata Mangeshkar on 
February, 2022. 
The Indian Embassy Rabat was honoured to 
participate in the Guardian Ring for Yoga. 
Yoga enthusiasts gathered at the UNESCO 
world heritage site of Kasbah des Oudayas in 
Rabat i n Morocco to celebrate International 
Day of Yoga. 
During the 76 th Independence Day 
celebrations the visiting Moroccans and 
diaspora showed interest in the newly opened 
herbal garden and handicrafts corner which 
has been set up in the Embassy. 
Morocco hosted the 117th UN World Tourism 
Organisation Executive Council meeting in 
Marrakesh in the month of November, 2022 
for resilient and sustainable tourism. Mr. 
Rakesh Kumar Verma, Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Tourism participated in the 
meeting and put up India‟s perspective on the 
subject. 
An India Day was organ ised by the Embassy 
and India-Morocco Friendship Association in 
Casablanca, was celebrated with great 
enthusiasm, reflecting immense love for 
Indian culture in Morocco. Local Moroccan 
artistes perfo rmed Indian cultural dance and 
music shows, attended by around 500 people 
on March , 2023. The event was a great 
success towards promoting Indian tourism & 
culture. 
Malta 
 
Mission has participated in some  of the major 
events like Malta International Food Fair 
which is very popular with both locals and 
tourists. The participation in these fairs had 
provided an opportunity to the Mission to 
promote tourism to India, especially to the 
states like Kerala and T amil Nadu the 
cuisines of which were featured by the 
Mission in these fairs. 
- 

121 
 
Australia 
 
Mission has held following India tourism 
promotional events in conjunction with other 
related events:- 
(i) On 22nd October, 2022, High Commission 
of India, Canberra organised a Windows 
To The World event on 22nd October 
2022 in collaboration with local state 
government. An Open Day was organ ised 
by the Embassies/High Commissions in 
Canberra, so as to give local community a 
taste and exposure to the different cultures 
of the world and promote inter -cultural 
exchange. Mission also participated in the 
event and held Ope n Day in the Chancery 
premises. Event highlights were Yoga 
session, Saree Draping, Henna making and 
Chancery tour and distribution of tourism 
promotional material. The event was very 
well attended and appreciated by the local 
community. 
(ii) On 22 nd January, 2023 Mission put up a 
stall in Kite flying festival, Canberra. 
Approx. footfall was 2,000 in this festival. 
India tourism and millets were promoted 
during this festival. Tourism related videos 
were played on TV Screen and handouts 
of various states, tourism guide books, 
caps and other promotional material was 
distributed. 
(iii) 19th Feb, 2023 Mission put up one stall 
promoting India Tourism and Millets in 
National M ulticultural Festival, Canberra, 
Australia. Information brochures regarding 
Indian Tourism and Millets were 
distributed. Tourism related videos were 
played on TV Screen and handouts of 
various states, tourism guide books, caps 
and other promotional materia l was 
distributed. 
(iv) There has been positive resp onse to these 
events. These events provide an 
opportunity to showcase India tourism to 
wider Australian community. These events 
have provided an excellent platform for 
networking and forging new connections 
with tourism stakeholders. 
(v) During the period January to March, 2023; 
1,14,345 tourists have visited India from 
Mission has not participated in any 
travel expo yet. Under the consular 
jurisdiction of the Mission, no such 
opportunity has arisen yet. 
 

122 
 
Australia. 
Serbia Mission took part in many local events in 
Serbia where Indian tourism was promoted. 
Mission also organ ised many exhibitions at  
the Embassy‟s premises and also posted on 
Facebook page. The details of last 6 months 
are as under: 
A Cultural event as  “Days of India in 
Vrnjacka Banja” in Vrnjacka Banja, Serbia 
The Embassy organ ised an exhibition on 
Natural Places in India at its premises. 
The Embassy set up a counter for 
tourism purpose with Vojvodina 
province of Serbia in International 
Belgrade Tourism Fair where many 
other countries‟ counters and corners 
were established. The Embassy also 
took part in a Cultural event as “Days 
of India in Vrn jacka Banja” in 
Vrnjacka Banja, Serbia where video 
on Indian culture and tourism was 
screened and some exhibitions were 
also organised. 
Indian Tourism related videos were 
screened near the counter to attract 
tour operators and visitors. Pamphlets 
were also  distributed at the Indian 
counter towards publicity of India 
tourism. The visitors appreciated the 
programme and showed interest in 
Indian culture and places. Some 
Serbians liked the India tour so much 
that they traveled many times in a 
year and after ret urn they promote 
Indian tourism in association with  the 
Embassy. 
Sri Lanka No Overseas India Tourism Office has been 
functioning in the jurisdiction of this Post. 
However, the list of events/campaigns 
conducted in the last 3 Financial Years are as 
follows:- 
On 30.12.2022 Promotion of tourism spots 
and handicraft products for the states of 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu 
On 15.01.2023 Thai Pongal Festival Event at 
Sri Meenatchi Sundareswarar Kovil, Galle 
On 15.03.2023 Promotion of Indian states of 
Tamil Nadu, Kerala,  Uttar Pradesh and Bihar 
in HDCC, Hambantota and printing of 
banners for promotion of these states. 
The Post has not participated in any 
travel expo. 
Kazakhst
an 
The Missions‟ activities on tourism as 
follows: 
Religious tourism:  Virtual Meeting on the 
Development of Buddhist and Sufi Circuits in 
Central Asia on  January 27, 2023.  
The event was attended by 8 local Kazakh 
tour operators. The meeting was chaired by 
 Participation in Travel Expos: 
Commercial representative 
participated in „Qaz Live 
Fest‟ twice on 17th June, 2022  and 
on 6th September, 2023. 
 

123 
 
the Joint Secretary (Eurasia) and attended by 
the management and representatives of the 
Indian As sociation of Tour Operators 
(IATO). After the meeting, the Mission sent 
the report on Buddhist and Sufi destinations 
in Kazakhstan, as well as inbound and 
outbound tour agencies, International 
Airports in the country, etc. 
Medical and Wellness Tourism:  B2B meeting 
to promote "Medical Value Tourism" 
between India and Kazakhstan on  20 
December, 2022.  
The aim of the event was to increase the flow 
of international patients to India, and develop 
cooperation between the health, hospitality, 
and insurance industr ies of India and 
Kazakhstan. 
As part of the event, a demonstration of the 
'Heal in India' Portal was conducted by the 
Indian side (MoHFW). From the Indian side, 
the event was attended in an online format by 
the Invest India,  FICCI, as well as leading 
medical care and healthcare companies such 
as Apollo hospitals, Artemis Hospitals, 
Shinon Healthcare, Magnus Medi, Simplify  
MVT, Medanta Hospital, Medijourn 
Solutions, and others.  
Kazakh government was represented by the 
Ministry of Health. At the same time the  
event was attended by more than 35 
representatives of health, hospitality and 
insurance industries.  After the list, an 
exhaustive list of all reputed hospitals and 
wellness centre was provided to Kazakh tour 
operators. 
Delegation visits:  The business dele gation of 
the Services Export Promotion Council 
(SEPC) of India visted  Almaty on 9 -10 
February, 2023. 
Delegation consisted of companies from 
various sectors such as logistics, medical 
tourism, health -care, education, consultancy, 
IT, construction, animatio n, etc.  
The Embassy of India in collaboration with 
Atameken (the Almaty Chamber of 
Entrepreneurs) ensured participation of 70 
Kazakh companies for a business 
matchmaking and networking B2B event in 

124 
 
Hotel Kazakhstan on 9th February, 2023. 
The Mission conducts on regular basis social 
media marketing campaigns (Instagram, 
Facebook, Twitter , etc.) to promote Indian 
tourism in Kazakhstan. 
Mexico On 09 th June, 2023, the Embassy of India, in 
collaboration with the Tour operator, the 
Indian Holiday Pvt. Ltd., organ ised an 
Incredible India Tourism Promotion event. 
Among the participants, the event saw 
presence of Direc tor General of the Ministry 
of Culture of Mexico Mr. Emmanuel Rey and 
30 other major tour operators and agencies 
from Mexico. 
On 2 nd October 2022, during the visit of 
Hon‟ble Minister of State for Parliamentary 
Affairs and Culture, Shri Arjun Ram 
Meghwal, the Embassy of India organ ised an 
exhibition on Gujarat showcasing trade & 
investment and touri sm opportunities in the 
State. Several tour operators were also invited 
during the event who also shared their views 
on tourism potential in the State of Gujarat . 
Dandiya was also organ ised during the event 
apart from serving Indian cuisine to the 
guests and the Indian diaspora. More than 300 
people attended the event including invitees 
from business and travel sector. 
The Embassy as well as Indian and 
local tour operators participated in the 
annual tourism fair organ ised by 
Ministry of Tourism of Mexico called 
„Tianguis Turistico‟  from 26 -29th 
March, 2023 in Mexico City. 
The Embassy also participated in 
Primitive Art Bazaar organised at one 
of the premier malls of Mexico called 
Plaza Loreto. This event showcased 
India's rich heritage and tourism 
potential which saw participation 
from various tour operators etc. 
 
 
Chile On relaxation on Visa & Travel restrictions 
for Foreign Tourists w.e.f. 15/10/2021, the 
Embassy widely public ised the information 
through social media platforms, the 
Embassy‟s web portal and Consular contacts. 
The information was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Government of Chile as well for the wid e 
publicity. 
The launch of Official app Indian Visa Su -
Swagatam Mobile app to facilitate foreigners 
visiting India was widely public ised on social 
media platforms, Mission‟s website and 
through Consular contacts. 
Indian tourism promotional videos and 
pictures are being posted regularly on the 
Embassy‟s social media handles. 
On the occasion of the 74 th Republic Day of 
India on 26th January, 2023 the Embassy also 
A webinar on Indian Tourism was 
organised by the Mission where 
videos and photographs on India‟s 
Tourism were showcased on the 
occasion of National Tourism Day 
(25th January, 2022). The webinar 
was attended by the representatives of 
prominent Tourist Agencies of Chile. 
A PowerPoint presentation was also 
given on „Relaxation on travel 
restrictions for the Foreign Tourists; 
and „usefulness of SUSWAGATAM 
APP.‟ 
 

125 
 
displayed photo exhibitions on Tourist 
Attractions of India at its premises for 
viewing to the large number of Indian 
Diaspora members, Chileans, and friends of 
India who attended the event and to also mark 
the National Tourism Day of India on 25 th 
January. 
On 17th June, 2023,  Mission celebrated 
International Day of Yoga in Santiago. On 
this occasion photo exhibition on Tourist 
attractions of India was also displayed for 
public viewing to the large gathering at the 
event for showcasing India‟s diverse, rich 
cultural and architectural heritage and India‟s 
rise as major tourist destination of the world. 
In the series of Amrit Mahotsav celebrations, 
a photo exhibition on the tourist attractions of 
India to promote India tourism was held by 
the Mission at its premises fo r public viewing 
on 19-20 July 2023. 
Jordan There was no Overseas India Tourism Office 
in Jordan. H owever, Mission had  organised 
an India Tourism promotion event on  March 
21, 2023 at Grand Hyatt,  Amman showcasing 
India‟s geographical diversity, world heritage 
sites and niche tourism products like cruises, 
adventure tourism, medical tourism, 
yoga tourism, wildlife and luxury tourism. 
The event was well attended by members of 
Jordan Society of Tourism & Travel  Agents 
(JSTA), representatives from Jordanian 
Businessman Association,  Business and 
Professional Women Association, Jordan 
India Friendship Society,  and media 
representatives. Reach of Indian Tourism has 
increased in Jordan, which is reflected in the 
number of tourist visas issued by the Mission. 
Mission disseminates information 
pertaining to tourism fair, expos, & 
events organised in India to various 
Chambers & JSTA and also regula rly 
posts tourism  related information on 
its social media handles to generate 
interest for Indian tourism.  Tour 
operators/agencies are invited in 
Mission's events, where, tourism 
related literature/brochures/pamphlets 
are distributed and engagement is 
continued. 
Turkey Mission and CGI, Istanbul organ ised a stand-
alone event on Gujarat Tourism in Istanbul in 
collaboration with TURSAB on 31.03.2023 . 
It was well attended by media and tour 
operators.  
This Mission has not participated in 
travel expos, etc. since the closure of 
the Overseas India Tourism Office in 
Dubai. 
Thailand 1. An Incredible India event was organised by 
this Mission in Udon  Thani Province on  11 
May, 2023.  Several Thai Tour Operators 
attended the event. 
2. This Mission organised "Incredible  India 
Thai International Travel Fair (TITF) 
and Thailand Travel Mart (TTM) are 
major events in Thailand. Mission 
participated in the 28th Thai 
International Travel Fair (TITF) 

126 
 
Tourism Expo" at ICONSIAM Mall, 
Bangkok from 15 -16th July, 2023  with the 
objective to promote varied tourism 
experiences available in India amongst the 
Thai people. During the two -day event, 
cultural performances were also organ ised to 
showcase diverse culture of India. The event 
witnessed participation from Thai -outbound 
Tour Operators, Hoteliers, Restaurant owners, 
as well as major associations representing 
Thai tourism including Thai Travel 
Agents Association, Tourism Council of 
India etc. 
3. On 25 th July 2023, the Embassy partnered 
with S.S. Travels, long -stamding GSA of Air 
India in Thailand, for organising an event for 
thanking Travel Agents in promoting 
outbound tourism to India. 
4. This Mission facilitated the Tourism 
Department of State Government of 
Odisha in organising a Tourism Roadshow, 
B2B and panel d iscussion on 26th July, 
2023 in Bangkok to showcase tourism 
opportunities in Odisha. 
The events/campaigns have generated 
awareness about Incredible India 
among Thai people, particularly youth. 
Traditionally, Buddhist Circuit in India has 
been very popular destination for Thai 
tourists. Lately, they are also visiting other 
tourist destinations particularly, hilly states 
like Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Uttarakhand, Himacha l Pradesh, and North 
Eastern States for A dventure and Eco-
Tourism. 
during 16 -19th February, 2023  at 
Queen Sirikit National Convention 
Center, Bangkok organised by Thai 
Travel Agents Association (TTAA). 
 
 This Mission publicises/disseminates 
the information among Tour 
Operators, travel agents and local 
people in Thailand, and encourages 
them to join these events. 
 
Oman On 8 th February, 2022,  the Embassy 
organised an India -Oman Webinar for 
Tourism Promotion to celebrate National 
Tourism Day. More than 40 tour operators 
from India and Oman actively participated in 
this Webinar. 
The Embassy organised an „Ambassador‟s 
Roundtable‟ on India -Oman Tourism on  16 
March, 2022. Over 40 prominent Omani tour 
operators participated in the event. 
The Ministry of Tourism together with  the 
Embassy of India, Muscat organ ised a virtual 
(i)  After more than two years of  lull 
caused by the Covid pandemic, Oman 
organised Oman Health Exhibition & 
Conference (OHEC)  at the Oman 
Convention and Exhibition 
Centre in September 
2022. Ambassador inaugurated the 
India pavilion on 26 September 2022. 
Four exhibitors from India 
participated in this pavilion. 
 
(ii)  As India remains a popular 
tourism destination for Omani 

127 
 
Tourism Roadshow „Incre dible India 
Reconnect 2022 – Oman‟ on 26th April, 2022. 
The Embassy supported Kerala Tourism in 
organising a Roadshow and B2B meeting in 
Muscat on  17th May, 2022  to promote 
different tourism products of Kerala in Oman. 
The Ambassador inaugurated India Pavi lion 
at the Oman Health exhibition & Conference 
on 26th September 2022  in which four 
exhibitors from India participated. 
The Embassy at its premises,  on 27th 
September, 2022, organised a symposium 
„India-Oman-Together for Better Health‟ to 
promote medical tourism in Oman. 
Kerala Tourism conducted an exclusive B2B 
Meet on  31st May, 2023  in association with 
the Embassy. Around 15 tourism stakeholders 
from Kerala met with more than 75 leading 
outbound tour operators in Muscat. 
nationals especially for medical 
tourism, a symposium  „India-Oman-
Together for Better Health'  and B2B 
meet on cooperation in the health care 
sector was organ ised by the Embassy 
on  27th September, 2022 to facilitate 
interaction between Indian health care 
organisations and hospitals and other 
medical institutions in Oman. 
Ambassador presided over the event 
and Dr. Waleed Khalid Al -Zadjali, 
President, Oman Medical 
Association; Dr. Sultan Al Harthi, 
Director, Treatment Abroad 
Committee; Mr. Khalifa Al Omari, 
Director, Diwan of Royal Court 
Affairs and other distinguished guests 
participated in the event. There were 
over 100 participants to this event. 
 
Bulgaria 
 
Some of the events organised by the mission 
in the recent times are as follows: 
• An evening of Indian Culture and Music 
„Amrit Sandhya‟ was organ ised by the 
Embassy with the support of „East West 
Indological Foundation‟ in the post city of 
Varna on 21 st August 2021, wi th a view to 
promote tourism in India. 
• A webinar on National Tourism Day on  25th 
January, 2022 in collaboration with Devam 
Foundation and GoI Tourism Office, 
Frankfurt to discuss measures to enhance 
bilateral tourism. 
• Participated in the Asian Festival hel d in 
South Park, Sofia on 2 nd July, 2022. The 
Embassy has put stalls displaying Indian 
products as well as tourism brochures Local 
artists presented Indian dance and cultural 
performances. 
The Mission also participates every 
year in the  International Econo my 
and Tourism Forum at Chirpan, 
International Tourism Fair at Ruse, 
International Tourism Fair at Veliko 
Tarnovo, Bulgaria International 
Tourism & Spa Expo in Sofia.  The 
Mission set up an  Incredible India‟ 
stall at the Fairs which is always a hit 
among vi sitors who are excited to 
learn more about India 

128 
 
Bratislav
a 
During the events held by Mission such as 
National Day Reception organised on  26th 
January, 2020, tourism  promotional videos 
were screened and Incredible India Standees 
& other tourism material were displayed at 
the venue of the event. An Article on India 
was published i n Slovak Chamber of 
Commerce (SC CI), one of the largest 
chambers in Slovakia, monthly magazine. 
On 23rd September, 2021, Mission organ ised 
a Seminar in coo peration with the Indian 
Chamber of Commerce in Slovakia and 
promoted tourism in the States of Rajasthan, 
Mizoram, and Uttar Pradesh. Standees on 
Atma Nirbhar Bharat, Make in India and 
Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav were displayed. 
Bilingual tourism booklets prin ted in 
Slovakia along with Incredible India 
brochures were distributed. 
On 18 th June 2023, during the celebration of 
International Day of yoga, Incredible India 
Standees and tourism material was displayed 
at the venue of the event. 
Mission participated in the Asian 
Weekend Event organ ised in 
Bratislava in August, 2020, Incredible 
India Standees were displayed, and 
tourism leaflets were distributed to 
the visitors. On 14th December, 2021, 
during online webinar organ ised by 
International Cooperation and 
European Integration Department, 
Slovak Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (SCCI) with Euro Chambers, 
Prime Minister Modi‟s historic 
initiatives such as Smart Cities, Clean 
India Mission, Digital India and Gati 
Shakti were highlighted. Mission 
attended the ITF S lovakia Tour & 
Danubius Gastro Fai r at Incheba 
Expo in Bratislava on January 
26, 2022 and interacted with 
exhibitors. 
Ethiopia There was no overseas Indian Tourism office 
in Ethiopia. The Mission organ ised following 
events during the last one year for tourism 
promotion:- 
(i)Roundtable at Debre Birhan on 19 th 
August, 2022. 
(iiSeminar in Harambee University on 9 th 
September, 2022. 
(iii)Showcasing tourism opportunity in ITEC 
day on 16th August, 2022. 
(iv)Displaying tourism promotion materials in 
Ethio Chamber International Trade Fair in 
Addis Ababa from 27th April- 1st May, 2023. 
(v)Business roundtable in Adama on  18th 
July, 2023. 
Ethiopia has not organ ised any global 
and regional travel markets and travel 
expos in recent years. The Mission 
has facilitated participation of 
Ethiopian tour companies in One 
Earth One Health Advantage Health 
Care-India 2023 held on 26 – 27th 
April, 2023 and scheduled on 17 -19th 
August, 2023. 
 
Saudi 
Arabia 
a) Kerala Utsav:  The Mission organised 
Kerala Utsav on  October 4, 2022. The event 
included display of commercial  products, 
food and culture of Kerala. Representatives 
from NORKA showcased a detailed 
presentation about Kerala tourism. The 
event witnessed participation from large 
number of Saudi and Indian businesspersons, 
Indian Pavilion at the Riyadh Travel 
Fair: The Mission supported the 
installation and promotion of India 
Pavilion in Riyadh Travel Fair 2023 
on 23 May , 2023. Various tourist 
companies from India participated in 
the Riyadh Travel Fair. 
 

129 
 
Diplomatic community and Indian Diaspora. 
b) Tourism Kiosk: The Mission established a 
permanent tourism kiosk at  VFS Global 
Office at Al Hada, Riyadh on  15th December, 
2022. The kiosk being placed at an office 
regularly visited by Saudi nationals and other 
nationalities enabled a targeted promotion of 
touristic avenues in India. The event was 
attended by prominent Saudi Tour operators. 
During the event, India Tourism videos, 
cultural performances were also showcased to 
the participants. 
c) Mobile Phone App:  This Mission 
supported the local tour operator M/s Al 
Mataar in launching an app for custom ised 
Tourist packages, Flight booking, Hotel 
Booking to India. d.  Strengthening Air 
connectivity: The Mission is closely working 
with Saudi civil aviation authorities to 
improve direct connectivity with various 
India cities from Saudi Arabia.  Head of 
Chancery in the Embassy attended the launch 
of inaugural Dammam  to Mumbai of Air 
Vista flight on 01st March, 2023. 
Bahrain Details of tourism promotion events 
organised by this Mission are as under : 
 
(a) A roadshow and B2B titled Yalla Kerala 
was organised by Kerala Tourism in 
association with the Embassy on 18 th May, 
2022. A bouquet of new tourism products 
from Kerala including ayurvedic and wellness 
programmes, backwater and hill stations, 
caravan, cultural and monsoon tourism were 
presented to more than 75 tour operators from 
Bahrain. 
(b) Promotion of Goa with a Goa corner 
displaying culinary and touristic attraction of 
Goa along with celebration of Republic Day 
(26th January, 2023). This was in light of Gulf 
Air's announcement to start direct flight from 
Bahrain to Goa w.e.f. March, 2023. 
In addition to these events, Mission also used 
its social media platforms to disseminate 
information about attractive tourist 
destinations in India. Tourism from Bahrain 
to India has shown an increasing trend in 
No major travel expo has taken place 
in Bahrain in last couple of years. 

130 
 
years 2021, 2022 and 2023. 
Helsinki  Kerala Tourism Meet up : Kerala Tourism 
Event, 2022 was organ ised on 03 rd October, 
2022 with the purpose of promoting outbound 
tourism from Finland to Kerala. During the 
event, a high-level delegation from the Indian 
State of Kerala visited Finland.  The 
delegation aimed to showcase the diverse 
range of tourism products offered by Kerala 
and to explore opportunities for expanding 
tourism to the region. 
Promotional Outbound Tourism Campaign on 
public transport in Helsinki for the State of 
Kerala and UT‟s of Jammu & Kashmir and 
Ladakh on 4th April - 10th April, 2022 and 20-
26th February, 2023. 
Marketing of Wellness Tourism through yoga 
workshops and organizing International Day 
of Yoga in June every year. 
Mission supports the participation by 
Finnish Indian Society and other 
organisations at the largest tourism 
fair Matkamessut held in Finland 20 th 
- 22nd January 2023. India tourism 
and State Tourism agencies 
participate in this event. 
 
Damascus In order to promote tourism and touristic 
destinations of India. The Embassy distributes 
photographs of the touristic destinations at 
various exhibitions that were organ ised in 
Syria, for example; during the last exhibition 
(BUILDEX & HITECH Expo hold on 7 -11 
June, 2023 at Damascus Fairground City), the 
Mission distributed about 30 photographs to 
VIP guests and pavilion visitors. 
 The Mission regularly conducts 
Information, Education, and 
Communication (IEC) campaigns on the 
social media pages of the Embassy to 
promote the touristic destinations in 
India. 
 The Mission recently organ ised a 
photography exhibition at Abu 
Rummaneh Cultural Center on  June 11, 
2023, which was inaugurated by the 
Minister of Culture in Syria, Dr. Lubanah 
Mshaweh. This exhibition was very 
successful in promoting the touristic 
destinations in India. 
Syria has been affected by the war 
since 12 years, and hence , the 
Embassy of India in Damascus has 
not been able to participate in any 
regional travel market/ travel expo. 
Malaysia The Mission has been publishing a monthly 
newsletter in the Mission‟s website, which 
includes a feature on Indian tourism. Through 
this, the public can view information about 
diverse and unique tourist destinations in 
India. 
MATTA Fair is the biggest travel fair 
in Malaysia, which is organ ised bi-
annually by the Malaysian 
Association of Tour and Travel 
Agents (MATTA). So far, the 
Mission had participated in 3 rounds 

131 
 
Tourism related posts are posted frequently 
on the social media channels of the Mission 
(Twitter, Facebook and Instagram). 
On every major event organ ised by the 
Mission, Incredibl e India banners are 
prominently displayed at the venue. Tourism 
brochures and coffee table books are also laid 
out in  a few places in the Mission. 
An ODOP (One District, One Product) corner 
was established at the Reception Hall of the 
Mission, featuring v arious distinctive arts, 
artifacts and handicraft products from 
different regions of India. 
To cater to the digital -savvy crowds, the 
Mission generates and exhibits QR codes to 
direct visitors to Incredible India / HCIKL 
website for further information reg arding 
Indian tourism. 
of MATTA Fair (April 2022, 
September 2023, and March 2023) to 
promote Indian tourism industry in 
Malaysia and to connect with 
travelers, tour operators, hotels, 
airlines, and other service providers. 
The Mission‟s booth provides visitors 
with not only information about 
Indian tourism, but also on various 
consular related queries. Distribution 
of questionnaires was also conducted 
to identify areas of interest among 
visitors, in regards to Indian tourism. 
More than 500 people turn up at the 
booth and express their interest to 
visit India for reasons such as for 
holiday, pilgrimage & spiritual, 
adventure, cultural & heritage, and 
wellness & medical. 
The Mission regularly communicates 
with various State Tourism Boards in 
India to encourage them to promote 
their respective states as favorable 
destination for Malaysians. 
In March 2023, on the invitation of 
the Mission, the Tamil Nadu Tourism 
Board had participated in the 
MATTA Fair. This was a significant 
step towards establishing Tamil Nadu 
as a major tourism hub in the 
international arena. 
Mission also a ssisted the Travel 
Agents Federation of India (TAFI)‟s 
Annual Convention at Sarawak 
Malaysia in September , 2022. High 
Commissioner joined the event and 
also met, along with the TAFI team, 
with the Premier of Sarawak, Chief 
Minister of Sarawak and Minister of 
Tourism of Sarawak. 
Cyprus Following events related to tourism were held 
by High Commission of India, Nicosia : 
Signing of Memorandum of Understanding 
between Goa Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry and Limassol Chamber of 
Commerce & Industry held virtually  on 20 
April 2023. 
High Commission of India in collaboration 
with Best Invest Congress organised Cyprus -
Travel Expos 
As there was no Travel Expo due to 
Covid-19, this Mission could not 
participate in them during the years 
2020, 2021 and 2022. 
Travel and tour operators/agencies 
are extended invitation to Travel 
Expos held in  India and encouraged 
to participate in them. 

132 
 
India Working Meeting.  High Commissioner 
of India, H.E. Mrs. Madhumita Hazarika 
Bhagat and Deputy Minister of Shipping, 
H.E. Ms. Marina Hadjimanolis ina ugurated 
the event.  Tourism was the central theme 
of Panel discussion  which also identified  the 
potential areas and road map for Cyprus-India 
economic cooperation (29 May 2023). 
In all events organised by this Mission, 
promotional material related to tourism are 
displayed prominently. 
 
 
Moscow Mission facilitated the participation of three 
Indian States (Goa, Karnataka, and Uttar 
Pradesh) in the 29 th International Travel & 
Hospitality Show - MITT 2023 in Moscow in 
March 2023. 
Mission also o rganised a Round Table on 
Tourism in March 2023 with participation of 
three Indian States (Goa, Karnataka, and 
Uttar Pradesh), Tourism Committees of the 
five Russian Regions, Russian tour operators, 
and other stakeholders in the tourism value -
chain. 
Mission also engages with social media 
influencers / bloggers to encourage them to 
promote the diverse tourism potential of 
Indian destinations. 
Mission regularly participates in the 
International Travel & Hospitality 
Show (MITT) and OTDYKH Leisure 
held every ye ar in Moscow. Tour 
operators are facilitated by the 
Mission to enable their participation 
in the travel expos in terms of 
information exchange, visa support, 
and connecting them with relevant 
Russian stakeholders. 
Czech 
Republic 
1. June 4, 2022 and  June 10, 2023 - 
India‟s attractiveness as a tourist destination 
was showcased in the Festival of Embassies, 
Food, and culture 2022 and 2023 with 
Bharatnatyam performance, distribution of 
Incredible India booklets, maps, and Indian 
cuisine and lifestyle pro duct stalls. India was 
among the 6 new countries to participate for 
the first time in this event in 2022. The 5 th & 
6th editions of this Festival of Embassies were 
visited by over 20 ,000 people and 
approximately 50 countries participated. 
2. Ambassador inaugu rated India's One 
District One Product (ODOP) exhibition at 
the For Home & Decor Expo in Prague 
on January 19 -21, 2023 in presence of 
members of the diplomatic community and 
businesspersons. Visitors were invited to 
watch presentations on ODOP, see the 
exhibits and were offered info -brochure on 
- 

133 
 
Incredible India. Select ODOP items for 
Interior decoration were exhibited. ODOP is 
inspired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi's 
call to recognise that each district of India has 
a potential equal to that of one countr y and 
there is need to understand this power and 
channelize this potential. This exhibition 
presents Indian local products in the 
international market, consequently amplifying 
the Prime Minister‟s vision of “Make in 
India” and “Make for World.” 
3. The Ministe r for Tourism of Tamil 
Nadu, along with a three -member delegation, 
visited Prague on March 12 -13. During their 
visit, they held meetings with the Deputy 
Minister of Tourism, officials from the 
Department of Tourism, and Travel Agency 
associations. The disc ussions focused on 
finding ways to increase the number of 
tourists visiting Tamil Nadu. Additionally, 
the delegation also met with officials from the 
Ministry of Culture to discuss the 
involvement of Czech artists in state culture 
fairs and the potential organisation of 
workshops on heritage building conservation. 
4. On May 3, 2023, an interaction 
session was hosted at the Embassy with the 
representatives of travel agent association of 
Czech Republic to promote Visit India 2023 
campaign. Experiences of delegates visiting 
India during its G20 presidency were shared 
and tie ups among Indian and Czech tour 
associations were also discussed. 
Uzbekista
n 
During 2022 & 2023, three promotional 
events promoting tourism in Bihar, UP and 
Maharashtra were organ ised. Besides, online 
sessions being organ ised by various agencies 
in India are also conducted in the Mission 
with participation of tour operators. 
One webinar was conducted by tour agencies 
for promotion of Buddhist circuit and Sufism 
in this year where tour  operators participated 
from Uzbekistan. The tour operators are also 
sent to attend seminars on Medical Tourism 
programs in India duly sponsored including 
airfare and accommodation arranged by 
concerned agencies and Gratis Visa by the 
Mission. In April 202 3, more than 20 tour 
- 

134 
 
operators attended an event in Delhi. The 
operators are also encouraged to operate 
chartered flights to various beach destinations 
like Goa which is popular in Central Asian 
countries. 
Vietnam Mission cooperated with the Odisha 
government on tourism roadshow promoting 
Odisha in Hanoi in July , 2023. Our 
International Day of Yoga celebrations that 
were organised in more than 30 provinces of 
Vietnam were very useful platforms for 
dissemination of information and promotion 
of Incredible India tourism promotion 
campaign. The Embassy also participates in 
tourism related events in Vietnam and uses its 
public events to generate awareness about 
tourism opportunities in India.  The Embassy 
of India, Hanoi is engaged with the Ministry 
of Tourism,  Government of India on 
undertaking systematic campaign for tourism 
promotion in Vietnam, including wider 
distribution of information. The Embassy of 
India, Hanoi is also consulting with several 
state governments to organize familiarization 
and awareness b uilding about tourism among 
Vietnamese tour operators. 
 
(Source: Ministry of External Affairs Questionnaire Replies for Meeting dtd. 26.07.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

135 
 
ANNEXURE – XIV 
INDIA TOURISM STATISTICS 
i. MONTH-WISE FOREIGN TOURIST ARRIVALS (FTAS) IN INDIA 
Month-wise Foreign Tourist Arrivals in India, 2019, 2021, 2022 & (Up to April) 2023 
(Provisional) 
Month 2019 2021 2022 2023 Percentage Change 
2022/21 2023/22 2022/2019 
January 11,11,040 94,662 2,01,546 8,68,160 112.91 330.75 -8.86 
February 10,90,516 1,10,312 2,40,896 8,65,779 118.38 259.40 -77.91 
March 9,78,236 1,33,768 3,42,308 7,95,827 155.90 132.49 -65.01 
April 7,74,651 78,718 3,92,930 6,03,985 399.16 53.71 -49.28 
May 6,15,136 19,765 4,23,70 - 2043.69 - -31.12 
June 7,26,446 36,070 5,22,737 - 1349.23 - -28.04 
July 8,18,125 72,501 6,40,858 - 783.93 - -21.67 
August 8,00,837 92,728 4,98,243 - 437.32 - -37.78 
September 7,51,513 1,15,661 5,36,340 - 363.72 - -28.63 
October 9,45,017 1,91,415 6,56,895 - 243.18 - -30.49 
November 10,92,440 2,63,867 7,68,675 - 191.31 - -29.64 
December 12,26,398 3,17,647 9,66,270 - 204.20 - -21.21 
Total 
(Jan-
April) 
39,54,443 4,17,460 11,77,680 31,33,751 182.11 166.09 -75.22 
Total 
(Jan-Dec) 1,09,30,355 15,27,114 61,91,399 - 305.43 - -43.36 
(Source: Table 14 - India Tourism Statistics At A Glance 2023 of the Ministry of Tourism) 
 
 


136 
 
 
Top 10 Source Countries for FTAs in India during 2022 
S.No Source Country FTAs Percentage 
Share 
Lean 
Month 
Peak 
Month 
1 UNITED 
STATES 13,73,817 22.19 January December 
2 BANGLADESH 12,55,960 20.29 February December 
3 UNITED 
KINGDOM 6,17,768 9.98 January December 
4 AUSTRALIA 3,69,023 5.96 February December 
5 CANADA 2,77,291 4.48 January December 
6 SRI LANKA 1,77,652 2.87 January December 
7 NEPAL 1,35,347 2.19 January December 
8 GERMANY 1,24,496 2.01 January December 
9 SINGAPORE 1,17,195 1.89 January December 
10 MALAYSIA 1,16,523 1.88 February December 
Total of Top 10 Country 45,65,072 73.73 - - 
Others 16,26,327 26.27 - - 
Grand Total 61,91,399 100 - - 
 (Source: Table 3 - India Tourism Statistics At A Glance 2023 of the Ministry 
of Tourism) 
 
 
ii. SHARE OF MAJOR COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD AND INDIA IN TERMS 
OF TOURIST ARRIVALS 
Share of Major countries of the world and India in International Tourist Arrivals in 
2019, 2021 and 2022 
S.No Source 
Country 
International Tourist Arrivals (in 
Million) Percentage Share 
2019 2021 2022 2019 2021 2022 
1 France 90.9 48.4 - 6.20 10.61 - 
2 Spain 83.5 31.2 71.7 5.70 6.84 7.45 
3 United States 79.4 22.1 50.9 5.42 4.85 5.29 
4 Turkey 51.2 29.9 50.5 3.49 6.56 5.24 
5 Italy 64.5 26.9 49.8 4.40 5.90 5.17 
6 Mexico 45 31.9 38.3 3.07 7.00 3.98 
7 UK 39.4 6.3 - 2.69 1.38 - 
8 Germany 39.6 11.7 28.5 2.70 2.57 2.96 
9 Greece 31.3 14.7 27.8 2.14 3.22 2.89 
10 Austria 31.9 12.7 26.2 2.18 2.79 2.72 
Other Countries 890.39 213.2 619.3 60.78 46.75 64.31 

137 
 
India 17.91 7.0 - 1.22 1.54 - 
World Total 1,465.0 456.0 963.0 100.00 100.00 100.00 
 ( Table 6 - India Tourism Statistics At A Glance 2023 of the Ministry of Tourism) 
 
 
 
 
iii. FEE ESTIMATES IN INDIA FROM TOURISM 
Year 
FEEs from 
Tourism in 
India (in 
Rs. Crore) 
FEEs from 
Tourism in 
India (in 
US$ 
million) 
Percentage change over the 
previous year 
(in Rs. 
Crore) 
(in US$ 
million) 
2011 83,037 17,707 25.49 22.20 
2012 95,606 17,972 15.14 1.50 
2013 1,07,563 18,396 12.51 2.36 
2014 1,20,366 19,699 11.90 7.08 
2015 1,34,843 21,012 12.03 6.67 
2016 1,50,750 22,428 11.80 6.74 
2017 1,78,189 27,365 18.20 22.01 
2018 1,95,312 28,565 9.61 4.40 
2019 2,16,467 30,721 10.83 7.54 
2020#2 50,136 6,958 -76.84 -77.35 
2021#2 65,070 8,797 29.79 26.43 
2022#1 1,34,543 16,926 106.77 92.41 
# 1 : Provisional estimates 
# 2: Revised estimates 
(Source: Table 7 - India Tourism Statistics At A Glance 2023 of the 
Ministry of Tourism) 
 


138 
 
 
iv. NUMBER OF RECOGN ISED TOURISM SERVICE PROVIDERS IN THE 
COUNTRY AS ON 30TH APRIL, 2023 
S.No. Category No. Of Units 
1 Green Shoots/ Start Up 176 
2 Tour Operator 795 
3 Tourist Transport Operator 104 
4 Travel Agent 233 
  Total 1308 
(Source: Table 23 - India Tourism Statistics At A 
Glance 2023 of the Ministry of Tourism) 
 
 
* * * * 
 

139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

140 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXVI 
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th June, 2023 in Committee Room -
4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.    Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy - Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A.A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
(i) ******* 
 
Ministry of Tourism 

141 
 
(i) Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Secretary, Ministry of Tourism 
    (Complete list of witnesses is attached as per Annexure-I)  
  
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them that the 
agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of ******* and the second item on the 
agenda is to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism on the subject 'Development of Niche 
Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist 
Spots. 
3.        ***** 
(After the representatives of ****** took their seats) 
4.        ******* 
5.        ******* 
6.  *******  
7.  ******* 
8. ******* 
9. *******1 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(After the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and other officials took their seats) 
10. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism. He then remarked that 
despite India being a 365 -day tourist destination offering a diverse array of products for Niche 
Tourism as well as various Theme -based Tourist Circuits and diverse geographica l features, the 
tourism potential still remains untapped. He queried about the reasons why India has been unable 
to fully exploit its potential for Niche Tourism as compared to its smaller neighbours, namely, 
Thailand, Nepal, and Bhutan who are achieving t remendous success in becoming the top golf, 
mountain, and sustainable tourism destinations respectively. He further queried about the areas 
identified for the development of Niche Tourism in the country, the number of Niche Tourism 
projects under implement ation, particularly in three important categories of Tourism - Medical, 
MICE, and Spiritual Tourism, challenges faced in developing a destination as a Niche Tourism 
hub and the coordination mechanisms employed by the Ministry with various State 
Governments/ Departments/ agencies. The Chairman asked the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the number of projects completed and those which are under development under 
the Theme-based Tourist Circuits identified under the ‘Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS) Phase -
1’ along with their physical and financial progress and the time and cost overruns, the status of 
Spiritual Circuit projects and further plans for their development.   He also enquired into the 
reasons for the SDS moving away from Theme -based tourist circuits and focusing on revamping 
Destination Tourism, potential tourist spots identified under the ‘SDS -2.0’ and the criteria 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matters 

142 
 
employed for selection, steps taken for the welfare of local communities and creation of 
employment opportunities in the areas identified for the Scheme. 
11. The Chairman then remarked that many States like Assam, Gujarat, Kerala, Rajasthan, 
Punjab, Goa, Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Tripura have granted 'industry' status to tourism, which provide s benefits such as electricity 
tariff, lower local taxes, availability of land on subsidized rates, etc. But the hotel and resort 
industry being capital-intensive require huge investments and has long gestation periods.   Hence, 
the Ministry should take up the issue with the State/Central Government to grant the hotel and 
resort industry the ‘infrastructure’ status to enable it to avail longer credit terms, greater 
investments, and better access to commercial borrowings as well as tax benefits/concessions. H e 
also queried about the reason for the delay in the implementation of the Draft National Tourism 
Policy which was released in July, 2022.  
12. Through her presentation, the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee 
that the Ministry is current ly promoting ten Niche Tourism Products, namely, Sustainable 
Tourism, Rural Tourism, Adventure Tourism, Eco -tourism, Meetings Incentives Conferences & 
Exhibitions (MICE), and Wedding Tourism, Cruise Tourism, Medical & Wellness, Film Tourism 
and Golf Touris m and Spiritual Tourism.   The Ministry informed the Committee of the steps 
taken for each Niche product, viz. formulation of National strategies in consultation with State 
Governments and Industry, guidelines and framework for each Niche tourism product, and 
launch of Travel for LIFE Programme under Sustainable Tourism. The Ministry has also 
launched the Best Tour ism Village Competition to identify the potential areas which received 
751 applications from Rural Tourism Villages.   E-Conference Visa was also granted for the 
MICE events.  Also, the Ministry has launched a new Incredible India film on MICE Tourism 
and is preparing for a much bigger digital campaign for MICE Tourism.   
13. The Ministry further informed that it is jointly working with other Central Ministries on 
the Niche tourism areas which fall under their jurisdiction.   It is working with (i) the Minist ry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change for   Eco-Tourism, (ii) the Ministry of Shipping, Ports, 
and Waterways, for developing coastal areas/destinations under Cruise Tourism, (iii)   the M/o 
Health and Family Welfare Medical to promote Wellness Tourism a nd (iv) the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting for Film Tourism.   
14. The Committee was informed that State Governments are spearheading the promotion 
and marketing of various Spiritual Tourism destinations to attract both domestic and 
international visitors.   The Ministry is also promoting various tourism destinations through its 3 
Schemes, namely, Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS), PRASHAD, and Central Financial 
Assistance for Central Agencies.   Under the SDS, 15 thematic circuits have been identified an d 
76 projects have been  sanctioned to date. Out of this 23 sanctioned projects worth Rs. 1365.01 
Crore belong to Spiritual Circuit, including Krishna Circuit, Buddhist Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, 
Ramayana Circuit, and Tirthankara Circuit. The revamped SDS 2.0 has 55 destinations identified 
across 32 States/UTs for development. The Committee was also informed of various successful 
projects of the Ministry under the SDS 1.0 in the States of Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Puducherry, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand, and Vadnagar (Gujarat). 
15. The Committee was informed that PRASHAD, which was launched in 2015 to create 
infrastructure for pilgrimage/spiritual tourism, has been allocated Rs. 1630.05 Crores for 46 

143 
 
sanctioned projects. Apart from its own website and the Incredible India website under the 
digital initiatives for tourism promotion, the Ministry has also set up the ‘Utsav Portal’ to 
provide live streaming of various destinations and their festivals. The Committee was further 
informed that the Ministry is promoting pote ntial tourist spots through its website as well as 
organizing tourism -related National Festivals such as ‘Bharat Parv,’ and ‘Paryatan Parv,’ 
conducting online and social media campaigns.  
16. The Ministry further informed that it is working on identifying 10 to 12 tourist 
destinations for which it has created a value chain focusing on tourism mapping. It is also 
looking into incentivizing ‘Green tourism’, which has been one of the major points of discussion 
in G-20 meetings. In the G-20 Tourism Working Group, the Ministry created the Goa Road Map 
giving recommendations for Sustainable and Responsible Tourism, best digitization practices of 
various countries, skill development, and tourism Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs). 
17. A Member commented o n the frequent changes in the Swadesh Darshan Scheme from a 
circuit to a single location and the lack of institutional memory regarding past issues and 
decisions. He also raised issues regarding the lack of an inclusive consultation process in 
deciding the  55 tourist spots and equitable distribution of tourist spots in various States.   The 
Secretary informed that 50 new destinations which were also announced in the Budget 2023, will 
be selected in challenge mode and are in an advanced stage of finalization.  The principles 
governing the selection process are the inclusion of states which have not been represented so far 
while keeping a balance between such states and other states.   
18. Another Member queried about the status of the request made by the State Government 
of Andhra Pradesh to develop Gandikota village situated in the Kadapa district of Andhra 
Pradesh, which is also known as the 'Grand Canyon of India,' as a heritage site. In reply, 
Secretary, M/o Tourism informed that Gandikota incidentally was a part of the 'Adopt a Heritage' 
Scheme which was given to the Dalmia Bharat Group, the status of which will be given to the 
Committee. 
19. A Member enquired about the lack of development of Sitamarhi the birthplace of Sita in 
Bihar.  He was informed that a  concept proposal has been requested from the State Government 
and the same was awaited.       
20. Members also queried about the procedure and time taken to issue a visa for MICE, 
Medical and Wellness Tourism, steps taken to relax the norms of obtaining a  medical visa, the 
details of leading countries with the highest number of medical tourists visiting India and the list 
of 156 countries for which e-visa has been restored by Ministry of Home Affairs. A Member also 
queried about the details of sectors and clusters identified for development under Rural Tourism 
and the steps taken to address the language barrier in promoting the same. Members also raised 
various queries regarding:- 
 Lack of basic amenities, such as sanitation facilities, clean water, healthcare services, and 
tourist-friendly infrastructure, such as well-placed signboards, transportation and parking 
facilities, tourist information and helpline centers at tourist destinations and lack of 
coordination among State and Central Governments; 
 Lack of medical facilities at the adventure tourism destinations; 

144 
 
 Need for development of coastal connectivity infrastructure such as “Roll On-Roll Off" 
(RoRo) ferry services around the 16,00 km coastline of the State of Gujarat under Cruise 
Tourism; 
 Developing a tourism destination providing Ayurveda-inspired wellness cuisine of 
various Indian States; 
 Promotion of the State of Manipur as the birthplace of modern polo; 
 Allocating special funds and devising a special master plan to explore responsible 
tourism in the State of Kerala; 
 Challenges and issues faced in obtaining permission from the Forest Department 
regarding carrying out adventure tourism activities such as river rafting, kayaking etc. in 
the forests; 
 Promoting Dolphin watching points at the Ganga River flowing between Patna to 
Bhagalpur in Bihar as a tourism destination; and 
 Developing a very strong Tourism Rating System in India to curb manipulation.  
 
21. The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of 
the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points 
which had not been answered and to the questions forwarded by him may be sent within a week. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
22.      A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
23.      The meeting adjourned at 6:12 PM. 
  
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                           Swarabji B. 
26th June, 2023                                                                                                               Director 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

145 
 
  
Annexure-I 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
26th June, 2023  
****** 
 
3:45 P.M. 
  
Ministry of Tourism 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Ms. V. Vidyavathi Secretary 
2. Ms. Manisha Saxena Director General  
3. Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Gyan Bhushan Sr. Economic Advisor 
5. Shri M. R. Synram Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Anita Baghel Additional Director General 
7. Shri Prashant Ranjan Director 
8. Shri Shreevats Sanjay Deputy Director General  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 

146 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXVIII 
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th July, 2023 in Committee Room -
D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy - Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Tapir Gao 
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India (FHRAI) 
i. Mr. Pradeep Shetty, Vice-President  
Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO) 
i. Mr. Rajiv Mehra, President  
Indian Tourist Transporters Association (ITTA) 
i. Mr. Amritpal Singh Mann, President 

147 
 
 
Adventure Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI) 
i. Mr. Ajeet Bajaj, President 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as per Annexure-1)  
 
The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and congratulated Smt. 
Phangnon Konyak on her nomination by Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the panel of Vice -
Chairmen.  He further informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the 
representatives of Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India (FHRAI), Indian 
Association of Tour Operators (IATO), Indian Tourist Transporters Association (ITTA) and 
Adventure Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI) on the subject 'Development o f Niche 
Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), Theme -based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist 
Spots. 
(After the representatives of FHRAI, IATO, ITTA and ATOAI took their seats) 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the FHRAI, IATO, ITTA and ATOAI 
and asked them to share their valuable suggestions/ perspectives on  the following aspects of the 
subject under examination:- 
 Impact of the 'Swadesh Darshan’ and PRASAD Schemes on Tourism in general and 
Spiritual Tourism in particular 
 Adequacy of infrastructure, connectivity of important tourist places and safety issues 
 General tourist experience in India as compared to other countries 
 Problems and challenges faced by tourists, especially foreign tourists, and suggestions to 
resolve the challenges and further development of the tourism industry 
 Marketing challenges of Niche Tourism  
 Safety measures taken in adventure sports such as paragliding and river rafting and 
whether such measures meet global safety standards 
 Measures taken by tour operators to ensure safety of women tourists 
 Post-pandemic outlook for both Mass Tourism and Niche Tourism and whether the 
tourism policy responses to the pandemic have been adequate to ensure full recovery of 
the industry 
 Views on the digital initiative - ‘Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) Certification 
Programme’ of the Ministry of Tourism 
 Coordination mechanism employed by the four Associations with the Government and 
other tourism agencies and stakeholders to promote Indian tourism and the challenges 
faced in this regard 

148 
 
 Suggestions for better coordination between the Government and important stakeholders 
3. The Vice President of FHRAI, through his presentation, informed the Committee that 
FHRAI is an   apex body of all hotels and restaurants in India, re presenting about 55,000 hotels 
and 5,00,000 restaurants and cooperating with the Government for the promotion of tourism. He 
informed that Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) were around 6.19 million in 2022 as compared to 
about 10 million in 2019 before the pandemic. He also stated that India is at 54 th rank globally in 
terms of FTA Arrivals while countries much smaller than India have had comparatively better 
FTA numbers. The Vice President acknowledged the initiative of the Ministry of Tourism in 
addressing the problem of lack of data and information on availability of hotel/guest rooms for 
tourists in India by starting an initiative to collect data on the number of hotel rooms available 
for tourists in India.  He also expressed his appreciation of the effort s of the Ministry to promote 
film tourism especially in Kashmir.  
 
4. The Vice -President, FHRAI, highlighted some locations mostly in North East India 
which could be considered for promotion under Niche Tourism.   He cited the connectivity 
problems in North -East India where only 3 Airports out of the existing 15 had International 
Arrivals and road transport posed a big problem and Inner Line Permit issues in some places in 
the North -East and Andaman islands due to which some tourists faced difficulties. The Vice 
President further stated that even famous locations like Aurangabad are facing connectivity 
problems. Though five years ago, the city was connected to eight destinations, now it is 
connected to only two. The Buddhist circuit is not well connected to B odh Gaya, one of the key 
areas. He however acknowledged that the Dekho Apna Desh campaign had given a boost to 
domestic tourism.  
 
5. Under Niche Tourism areas, he suggested that art tourism could be promoted by holding 
book and dance festivals like the Ka la Ghoda festival in Mumbai which attracts a lot of 
foreigners, casino tourism, and development of the coastline of South of Maharashtra as a beach 
destination. He also suggested that as the hotel industry requires long -term lending, the industry 
may be included in the Infrastructure Pipeline of the Government, which may solve the problems 
of availability of funds in the industry.  
 
6. The President, IATO informed that IATO is an apex body of the tourism industry 
founded in 1982 and has over 1,700 members f rom different segments of the tourism industry.   
He reiterated the areas of potential Niche Tourism already stated by the Vice -President, FHRAI 
and added that Destination Wedding is a potential area which could be developed in India if the 
Government facilitates formalities like registration of marriage in different states. Regarding the 

149 
 
Swadesh Darshan and other schemes of the Ministry, he stated that though infrastructure had 
been developed, lack of promotion of the places made such development futile whi le citing 
examples in Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh. He also suggested that all inbound tourism 
destinations should be connected with the UDAN Scheme.   
 
7. The President, IATO  drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that no overseas 
promotional activities have been initiated by the Ministry. He also alleged that the promotion of 
overseas tourism was an additional charge given to the Tourism Officers a ppointed in the 
Embassies and the officers were not trained in tourism promotion. To a remark of the Chairman 
that the Overseas Tourist offices were closed because they did not prove to be very effective, the 
President, IATO stated that the offices had als o been promoting India with the B2B people and 
putting India on tourism brochures.   
 
8. Upon being queried by a Member, all the representatives of the various Associations 
affirmed that none of them had been called by the Ministry on international promoti onal 
programmes. The Committee was also informed that the Tourist Facilitators accredited under the 
Certification Programme of the Ministry did not have the permission to enter the ASI 
monuments and hence could not be utilised as guides.             
 
9. The President, IATO also alleged lack of coordination among Ministries which affects 
policy formulations.  He cited the example of the speed restrictions on tourist cars and curtains in 
Volvo buses both of which cause inconvenience to foreign tourists.   
 
10. The Chairman stated that Cabinet notes on proposals of Ministries are circulated among 
the concerned Ministries and that Inter -Ministerial coordination and consultation is a continuous 
process. He enquired whether the Associations wanted a separate counc il apart from the 
consultation process already in existence between the Ministries. The President, IATO replied 
that the National Advisory Tourism Council was already operational at the local level. His 
suggestion was for the formation of a National Touris m Board. He also stated that an incentive 
scheme from the Ministry of Commerce for tourism and hospitality industry called SEIS and a 
Marketing Development Assistance Scheme from Ministry of Tourism which have been 
withdrawn should be implemented as soon as possible.   
 
11. Upon query from the Chairman regarding the impact of the SEIS scheme, it was 
informed that the incentives were being used for promotion of India abroad and its withdrawal 

150 
 
was hindering the tour operators from traveling abroad for promotional activities. Si nce the 
pandemic has posed many challenges for the tourism industry, the incentives should be restored.  
12. The President, Adventure Tour Operators Association (ATOAI), said that during the G20 
Summit in Siliguri and Darjeeling, adventure tourism was the focus of the Tourism Working 
Group. The President, ATOAI acknowledged that risk mitigation was the biggest concern in 
adventure tourism. Licenses can be given by either the Centre or the States but Many operators 
were unlicensed or had substandard equipmen t. Three Gs were critical in risk mitigation - 
Guidelines, Guides and Gears. More guides need to be trained as the guides of the government 
run institutions are booked years in advance. The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is 
standardizing the safety equipm ents in adventure tourism. He also raised the issues of provision 
of insurance coverage to licensed adventure tour operators, conducting study to determine the 
carrying capacity of tourist places and providing air connectivity Nubra and Spiti Valleys and 
open areas in Arunachal Pradesh for Adventure tourism and developing Vibrant Villages as 
destinations for soft adventure and nature tourism. 
 
13. The President, ITTA, stated that transport is the backbone of any country  but India 
however is the only countr y where   all vehicles are called Transport vehicles and there is no 
segregation of tourist vehicles. The speed limit of tourist vehicles are also fixed at 80 kph which 
annoys foreigners who travel in Mercedes and other high end cars.  In the last four years, Benz or 
BMW did not sell even a single luxury ‘S’ Class or BMW’s 7 Series car respectively to tour 
operators because they don’t have speed governors fitted in their vehicles. Stopping of vehicles 
on the pretext of checking papers which also happens in I ndia creates annoyance in tourists. 
Governments of Goa and Karnataka have specially issued notifications that vehicles cannot be 
stopped unless there is clear violation of traffic rules and this should be done pan India.  He also 
commented that the vehicle  capacity in India should be increased as in the past four years there 
have been no additions of vehicles in India, especially in terms of vans or luxury vehicles. 
 
14. The President, ITTA, also stated that since drivers are the backbone of the travel indu stry 
their welfare should be kept in mind. Government of Tamil Nadu has for instance issued a 
circular that hotels should have a dormitory for drivers. The President, IATO said that it was a 
development control rule which has to be discussed. The Chairman observed that such 
expenditure would be treated as overhead. Both Operating expenses and Overhead can be 
clubbed for fixing tariff. The President, IATO, agreed it could be done prospectively.   
 
15. A Member opined that India should initiate a Greenfield policy for Tourism Development 
which would involve declaring a specified area and giving incentives by the Central Government 

151 
 
for development of modern infrastructure, hotels, and all kinds of tourism facilities for potential 
tourism.  The Statute of Unity is a classic example of a Greenfield Tourism destination.  
16. A Member enquired about the meetings conducted by the four associations, and was 
informed that Federation of Associations in Indian Tourism & Hospitality (FAITH) is the 
umbrella body representing the four associations and its meetings happen every two months.  
 
17. A Member enquired about Identification and promotion of unexplored scenic places in 
the state of Nagaland,  whether digital technology, AI can be adopted to provide information to 
tourists and about the coordination meetings of the industry players with the Ministry.   Another 
Member suggested that adventure tourism and religious tourism could be promoted in North 
Eastern states. He also suggested that capital subsidy for hotels in the  North East should be 
resumed so that North East region could be developed for hotels and tourism.   
 
18. A Member opined that tourism had developed rapidly in the past decades and invited 
suggestions from the Associations about the new places in which nic he tourism could be 
developed especially in Yoga and Ayurveda. He also emphasized the need for a national portal 
on cuisine and culinary and Haats on highways like Delhi Haat so that a tourist while travelling 
in different parts of the country knows about the best restaurants and dhabas in those areas. 
 
19. Members also raised various queries and discussed matters such as: 
 Developing Adventure tourism and rural tourism in Rajasthan. 
 Skill training institutes for drivers. 
 GI tags for weaving and different crafts. 
 Connecting tourism to conference facilities viz., Sharm-El-Sheikh city in Egypt, which 
focuses on hosting conferences and events. 
 Concept of driver-cum-guide like in Serengeti, Tanzania.  
 
20. The representatives of the four Associations responded to some of the queries raised by 
the Members and took note of the suggestions made by the Members. The Chairman directed 
that written replies to the points which had not been answered and to the questions forwarded by 
him may be sent within a week. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
21.      A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
22.      The meeting adjourned at 06:09 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                            Monica Baa 

152 
 
18th July, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director 
  
Annexure-1 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
 
18th July, 2023 
3.00 P.M. 
Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India (FHRAI) 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Mr. Pradeep Shetty Vice President 
2. Mr. Chetan Mehta EC Member 
3. Mr. Pranay Aneja EC Member 
4. Mr. Nikhil Sharma EC Member 
5. Mr. Jaison Chacko Secretary General 
  
Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO) 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Mr. Rajiv Mehra President 
2. Mr. Ravi Gosain Vice President 
3. Mr. Rahul Chakravarty Chief Operating Officer (COO) 
  
Indian Tourist Transporters Association (ITTA) 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Mr. Amritpal Singh Mann President 
2. Mr. Sharat Chandra Vice President 
3. Mr. Vivek Bhatia E.C Member 
4. Mr. Karamvir Singh Nagar E.C Member 
  
Adventure Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI) 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1. Mr. Ajeet Bajaj President 
2. Ms. Sonam Bhutia General Manager 
  
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 

153 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXX 
THIRTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26 th July, 2023 in the Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Smt Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri A.A. Rahim 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
8. Shri Anto Antony 
9. Shri Tapir Gao 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Shri Dushyant Singh 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
18.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav ‘Nirahua’ 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 

154 
 
 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri Prabhat Kumar, Special Secretary (Economic Relations), Ministry of External Affairs. 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.   He 
further apprised the Members that Sh. Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, a Member of the Committee would 
retire from the membership of the Rajya Sabha on 28 th July, 2023 and placed on record his seminal 
contribution to Committee proceedings. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed Shri Prabhat Kumar, 
Special Secretary, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), and other senior officials of the Ministry 
and asked them to inform the Committee about the "Process of Issua nce of Visa for Inbound 
Tourism" and the "Overseas Promotion of Inbound Tourism" by the Embassie s.  The Chairman 
further enquired whether the Embassies and Missions abroad have successfully supplanted the 
Overseas Tourism Offices in promoting tourism after the closure of the Overseas Offices in March, 
2023. The Chairman noted that the country -wise inbound tourists show that the USA, Canada, UK 
and Bangladesh are the top source countries accounting for nearly 60% of inbound tourists and 
asked about the efforts being taken by the Ministry to increase the tourist inflow from other regions. 
The Chairman also asked for the details regarding efforts made by the MEA towards a lenient visa 
regime and rationalization of Visa/e-Tourist Visa fee.  
  
2. The representative of the Ministry of External Affairs stated that one of main tasks of the 
Ministry was to prom ote Brand India, relating to commercial tourism, abroad and the Ministry had 
already been performing this task in countries where there had been no Overseas Tourist Offices.   
After the closure of the Overseas Tourist Offices in March, 2023, 20 Officers working in the Indian 
Missions abroad, mostly as Commercial and Cultural Officers, have been deputed to look after 
tourism promotion. Responding to the  query of the Committee, the Secretary acknowledged that 
there was no separate posting of Tourism Officers a nd no selection criteria in place. B ut, as the 
officers had been dealing with commercial and cultural matters  in which tourism content formed an 
integral part, they had the requisite experience to deal with  the matters related to tourism promotion 
also.  
 
3. The representative of the MEA, thereafter, detailed the sources of funds for tourism 
promotion, namely the budget for Market Expansion Activities, the State Facilitation Budget used in 
case of promotion of State specific festivals or for delegations fro m a State, publicity budget from 
the MEA and the budget received from the Ministry of Culture for cultural activities.  Upon query of 
the Committee regarding the alleged d eletion of India ’s name  from tourist brochures, as brought 

155 
 
forth by the tour operators, the Secretary replied that the Overseas Tourist Offices used to have a lot 
of funds for brochure support and  promotional campaign, but such budgetary support  was presently 
not available with the Missions.  The MEA was in discussion with the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) 
on these issues. The Missions , however, were actively campaigning i n Social Media  about the 
tourism promotion.  The representative also described some of the promotional campaigns done by 
Indian Missions abroad like road shows, Know India Seminars, “Days of India” promotions, etc.  He 
also informed that the MEA integrated tourism in all its activities including making it  an integral 
part of the outreach programme.   
 
4. Regarding tourist visas, the representative of the MEA informs the Com mittee that while the 
rules and regulations concerning Visas remained under the purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA), the implementation part  fell under the MEA: Of  the three kinds of visas,   issuance of  
regular tourist visa is provided by the Emb assy, e-visa’s provided by  the Bureau of Immigration, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and ‘Visa o n Arrival, ’ which is at present given to citizens of three 
countries, Japan, Republic of Korea and United Arab Emirates.   When the Committee enquired 
about the increase or decrease in e -visas, post Covid,  the representative of the MEA could not 
present the current status of e -visa as the MHA, not the MEA is the  custodian of information in this  
regard.   
 
5. On a query by the Committee whether the slow proces s of issuing e -visas had decreased the 
foreign tourist arrivals to India, the representative responded that based on the correct and  complete 
documentation could be granted, e-visas within 72 hours and added that as a matter of fact, the MEA 
immediately responds to any difficulty in getting visas.   He also clarified that the visa regime had 
been suspended during Covid period and was restored gradually depending on the health conditions, 
first the regular visa in some categories, then the e-visa and lastly the tourist visa. 
  
6. Upon enquiry by the Committee whether the visa on arrival was bas ed on reciprocal 
arrangements, the representative of MEA said that there were 40 countries offering visa on arrival to 
the Indians whereas India grants the same facilit y to only three countries. Thus, it was not on 
reciprocal basis. Instead, e-visa is being promoted, as it is  more convenient than Visa on Arrival. 
The Chairman enquired about the reason for entrusting the power to issue e -visa with the MHA and 
was informed that as per the Business Allocation Rules, the subject of visas falls under the purview 
of the MHA.   Earlier, only regular visas were issued which had to be stamped on passports at the 
Missions abroad and that is why the MEA was tasked with the implement ation of visas. Now, the 
number of e -visas has increased to about 52% of total visas issued because of the convenience of 
applications. One of the  Members appreciated that in Covid times, the e -visa facility was utilised 

156 
 
well to bring back Indians from other countries.  He also appreciated the passport services being 
provided in Ahmadabad, Gujarat. One of the  Members suggested that all the concerned Ministr ies, 
the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs should 
discuss and come up with a consolidated action plan with regard to issuance of Visa. 
 
7. A Member enquired about the storage of the 105 antiquities retri eved from USA and was 
informed that they were presently in the Consulate General, New York but as the Ministry of 
Culture was the custodian of antiquities; a team of ASI officers would take over the documentation 
process and ensure return of antiquities to India.   Another Member raised the concerns of tourists, 
and sportspersons, from Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh not being allowed to 
visit China on the basis of stapled visa issued by China.   The representatives of the MEA assured 
that a written reply would be furnished to the Committee on the issue.  
 
8. Another Member raised the issue of preachers  from the Christian community being denied 
visa for religious conventions in Kerala and was informed that there is a separate category for people 
coming for religious activities and if the documentation is complete and visa is applied under the 
right category, clearance is given  without any delay.  A Member also pointed out that many foreign 
tourists coming for Ayurvedic treatment in Kerala face delays in getting visas , as a result their 
medical appointments get cancelled.  Kerala also has many tourist places which depend on tourism 
for inco me and delay s in granting visas , adversely affects the inbound tourism as also the local 
economy. 
 
9. A Member brought up the recent trend of “Remote Working” from anywhere around the 
globe and “Destination Weddings” and asked the Ministry if any initiatives have been taken for the 
encashing on such niche tourism possibilities. He also informed that the so ftware for the “Uber” 
brand had been made in Varkala, Kerala by persons while on ‘remote work’. A  Member enquired 
about the work done by the Ministry in the Incredible India campaign post 2019.   He asked for data 
on the social media outreach programmes, participation in Expos and promotional materials used.  
 
10. The Chairman raised the issue of poor quality of services rendered by Visa Facilitation 
Services (VFS) office at New Delhi and enquired whether the Ministry had selected the company on 
competitive bidding or on nomination basis. The Ministry responded that VFS was hired on 
competitive basis by the respective Embassies and the Ministry was not involved in the process. The 
Chairman was not satisfied with the reply and reiterated that the Company had been found to be 
grossly deficient in providing quality services and said that the company must  obey India n laws 
while operating in India. He directed that the Ministry may submit a written reply in this regard.   

157 
 
 
11. The Chairman also asked about the institutional linkage between the Ministries of Tourism 
and External Affairs to promote tourism and the alleged exclusion of India from the Tourism 
brochures.  
 
12. Members raised other queries as detailed below:- 
 Whether pre-Covid numbers had been reached in medical tourism.  
 Process of patenting basmati rice, turmeric, yoga and Ayurveda by World Intellectual 
Property Organisation and the role of India’s Permanent Mission in Geneva. 
 Possibility of posting well trained Tourism Officers from the Ministry of Tourism in 
Embassies and Missions abroad. 
 Promotion of Health tourism, yoga and Kalaripayattu. 
 Stoppage of border trade through Pangsau pass which is affecting Arunachal Pradesh and 
Myanmar. 
 Problems of accommodation of people coming over the border in U.P. and Gujarat with legal 
visas. 
 
13. Thereafter, the Chairman thanked the representatives of the MEA for their inputs and 
directed that written replies to all the q uestions raised by the Hon. Members and to the three 
questions raised by him may be sent within one week's time.  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
15. The meeting adjourned at 5:00 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                      Monica Baa 
26th July, 2023                                                                                Additional Director  
  

158 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
03.00 P.M. 
Ministry of External Affairs  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Prabhat Kumar Special Secretary (Economic Relations) 
2. Shri Devesh Uttam Joint Secretary (Consular, Passport and Visa) 
3. Shri Siddharth Malik Director (Economic Diplomacy) 
4. Ms. Gurleen Kaur Under Secretary (Economic Diplomacy) 
 
* * * * 
  
 
 