94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
NINETY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS
 EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF DEPARTMENT
 OF SHIPPING
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                  
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE              
5.ANNEXURE                                                                                               
6.MINUTES                                                                                                                                                   
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.Smt. Hema Malini
6.Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Vacant*
LOK SABHA
10.Shri Ramdas  Athawale
11.Shri Raj Babbar
12.Shri Anil Basu
13.Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
14.Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
15.Shri Adhir Chowdhury
16.Dr. K. Dhanaraju
17.Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
18.Shri Dip Gogoi
19.Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
20.Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
21.Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
22.Shri Samik Lahiri 
23.Shri Sudam Marandi
24.Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
25.Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
26.Shri Manabendra Shah
27.Shri Dushyant Singh
28.Shri Madan Lal Sharma
29.Shri Chengara Surendran
30Shri Umakant Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
                                   
* Vacancy caused by induction of Smt. Ambika Soni in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 29.1.2006
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-fourth Report of the
 Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its Eighty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Shipping.
2.       The Eighty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture was presented to the Parliament on the  29
th  April 2005. 
3.       The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth Report were
 received from the Department of Shipping on 29
th August 2005.
4.       The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the      22nd February 2006.
 
NEW DELHI;
February 22, 2006 
 Phalguna 3, 1927 (Saka)
NILOTPAL BASU
 Chairman
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
R E P O R T
           
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations as
 contained in its Eighty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) (Demand No. 85) of the Department of
 Shipping, which was presented to the Parliament on 29
th April, 2005.
2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 29th August, 2005 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows:-
(i)         Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
      Para Nos. 10,11,26,27, 31,62,63, 98 and 99.                                         Total - 9
Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
            in view of the Government replies:
Para Nos. 36,82,106 and 108.                                                                Total - 4
Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the  
            Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
            Para Nos.55                                                                                            Total - 1


94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the    Government are still awaited:
            Para Nos. 49, 50,51,56,76,91 and 110                                                Total - 7
 
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Eighty Sixth 
 Report, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
 action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2005-06
(Recommendation at Para No. 10&11)
 
5.The Committee expresses its concern over the failure of Department of Shipping to spend the approved outlay. 
 During the year 2004-05, out of the budgeted amount of Rs.2419.66 crore the Department could spent only Rs.1400.99
 crore which clearly indicates the poor fiscal management in the Department of Shipping.  The Committee observes that
 even while revising allocations, little consideration has been paid to the actual expenditure incurred in the past.  This
 shows that budgetary and revised estimates have always been made without taking into account the actual requirements
 as experienced in the previous years.
 6.The Committee feels that Department of Shipping has not evolved effective system or planning to systematically
 anticipate, assess and project its actual requirements of funds otherwise the investments could have yielded
 commensurate returns.  The Committee recommends that in future, the Department of Shipping should be transparent
 and realistic while making projections of required funds so that resources may not remain unused and are allocated
 more judiciously.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Ports Wing
7.         The Annual Plan outlay during the year 2004-05 for the Port Sector was Rs.1066.95 crores. Actual expenditure
 was Rs.341.62 crores (Provisional).
8.         The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are accepted and have been brought to the notice of Chairmen
 of Major Ports and heads of other organizations. Allocations for various projects under the Annual Plan are made after
 carrying out an assessment of the requirements on year to year basis. The Annual Plan proposals are formulated about
 five to six months in advance before the commencement of the Annual Plan period after factoring in the anticipated
 expenditure during the current year and the assessed requirements in the ensuing Annual Plan year for on-going
 projects and taking into account the assessed requirement of funds for the new projects to be taken up during the
 ensuing Annual Plan year. Requirements of funds at the Revised Estimates stage is projected after carrying out a review
 of the progress in the expenditure during the year till that time and after taking into account the anticipated expenditure
 during the remaining part of the year. This does not necessarily follow a uniform or standard pattern every year.
 
9.         In view of the time lag between the formulation process for Annual Plan and the implementation period, there is
 generally mismatch between the allocations and the actual expenditure. The ports were advised that there should be
 realistic approach while proposing the Annual Plan outlay for 2005-06 and that only token provision may be kept for
 projects for which administrative approval was yet to be accorded by the Competent Authority. The recommendations
 of the Committee will be kept in view while finalizing the allocation for Annual Plans in future also.
 
Shipping Wing
 
10.       The Budgetary Support to the extent of Rs. 152.50 crore was provided in BE 2004-05 for the Shipping Sector.
 This was reduced to Rs. 132.12 crore at RE 2004-05 stage. The actual expenditure was Rs. 119.49 crore.
 
11.       The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are accepted and have been brought to the notice of all
 concerned offices/PSUs under the Shipping Wing. Allocations for various projects under the Annual Plan are made
 after carrying out an assessment of the requirements on year to year basis. The Annual Plan proposals are formulated
 about five to six months in advance before the commencement of the annual Plan period after factoring in the
 anticipated expenditure during the current year and the assessed requirements in the ensuing Annual Plan year for on-
going projects and taking into account the assessed requirement of funds for the new projects to be taken up during the

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 ensuring Annual Plan year. Requirement of funds at the Revised Estimates stage is projected after carrying out a review
 of the progress in the expenditure during the year till that time and after taking into account the anticipated expenditure
 during the remaining part of the year. This does not necessarily follow a uniform or standard pattern every year.
12.       The reasons for not utilizing the funds during the year 2004-05 are enclosed in respect of DG(Shipping),
 DG(Lighthouses & Lightships) and IWAI.  (Annexure I, II and III).  However, the recommendations of the Committee
 will be kept in view while finalizing the allocations for the Annual Plan in future also.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13.       The Committee desires that the Department of Shipping adheres to its recommendations and would efficiently
 maintain its fiscal management in future.
PORT SECTOR
(Recommendation at Para No. 16)
14.       The Committee is unhappy with the poor performance of Department of Shipping with regard to under
 utilization of approved outlays over the years for the port sector.  During the Financial year 2004-05, an outlay of
 Rs.1066.55 crore was allocated for the port sector but the ports could utilize only Rs.440.51 crore. The Committee is
 dismayed by this repeated failure of Department of Shipping and is surprised as to why the Ministry asks for so much
 of allocation if it is not in position to spend the approved outlay. The Committee desires that the Department of
 Shipping should take all corrective measures based upon actual requirements for maximum utilization of budgeted
 amount during 2005-06.  In this regard, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation contained in 81
st report of
 Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Shipping which reads as under:-
"The Committee fails to understand as to how the physical targets will be achieved with this low utilization pattern.  In
 fact, the Committee feels that this raises doubts about the mismatch in the projections for physical and financial
 targets.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Shipping has full responsibility to ensure proper utilization
 of the approved outlay.  The Committee feels that strict monitoring is crucial for timely completion of any project. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommends that the monitoring agency should play rather proactive role and do away with
 the procedural hurdles for timely completion of the projects so that the budgeted allocation is utilized optimally.  The
 Committee also recommends the Ministry to keep informed about the progress in the matter."
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
15.       The Annual Plan outlay during the year 2004-05 for the Port Sector was Rs.1066.95 crores. Actual expenditure
 was Rs.341.62 crores (Provisional).
 
16.       The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are accepted and have been brought to the notice of Chairmen
 of Major Ports and heads of other organizations. The Department has impressed upon the Port Chairmen etc., the
 imperative for formulation of Plan schemes based on a critical review of requirements and close monitoring of the pace
 of expenditure. They have been advised to strengthen the institutional mechanisms and ensure concerted and focused
 participation from top down to ensure timely utilization of plan funds and also to facilitate a meaningful discussion on
 plan expenditure in the Board meetings. Secretary (Shipping) held two meetings during 2004-05 specially to review the
 pace of expenditure. Close monitoring continues to be carried out on utilization of the plan funds during 2005-06 and
 will continue to be carried out with a view to ensure optimal utilization of funds. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17.       The Committee notes the reply and expects that the mechanism evolved by the Department of Shipping remains
 fool-proof and problems of fiscal management would not be encountered in future.
CAPACITY AND TRAFFIC IN MAJOR PORT
(Recommendation at Para No. 26 & 27
18.The Committee expresses its appreciation for achievement of the capacity of major ports which has either exceeded
 the target or likely to achieve target fixed for cargo handling of all commodities except container.  The containerization
 is the emerging global trend in the mode of cargo trade in which the country is lagging behind which is a matter of
 concern.
           
19.The Committee feels that a proper environment with transparent procedures and decision making process can give
 boost to private sector participation in the port sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of
 Shipping to review the existing guidelines on Private Sector Participation in the port sector with emphasis on
 overcoming capital constraints, technology upgradation and value addition.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
20.       The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are accepted. Department of Shipping is in the process of
 revising the existing guidelines on private sector participation in major ports with a view to making them investor
 friendly and more transparent. The Hon’ble Committee will be kept apprised of the progress in the matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21.     The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry.
TONNAGE TAX
(Recommendation at Para 31)
22.The Committee notes that the Government has since introduced the tonnage tax regime to the dredgers also as per its
 recommendation.  The Committee feels that  introduction of tonnage tax  in lieu of corporate tax  will not only facilitate
 investment in Shipping Sector but also provide a level playing field to the Indian Shipping Industry vis-à-vis its foreign 
 counterparts and the Indian Shipping companies will be able to acquire more tonnage.  Howeveer, the Committee is
  unable  to comprehend the reasons for excluding  the  vessels registered under the Indian Vessels Act, 1917 and Indian
 Coastal Vessel Act 1838.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matter for  extending the benefit of tonnage
 tax to vessels registered under Indian Vessels Act, 1917 and Indian Coastal Vessels Act 1838 may be pursued further
 with the Ministry of Finance as this also vitally linked to the viability of the Inland Water Transport sector
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
23.       The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech of 2005-06 have announced that the ‘Dredgers’ would also come
 under tonnage tax regime. However, The vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act 1917 and Coastal Vessels Act,
 1838 are left out and tonnage tax benefit has not been extended  to the vessels covered under these two Act.
24.       This Ministry had already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance for inclusion of vessels registered under
 Indian Vessel Act and Coasting Vessel Act, which were enjoying the benefits of Section 33 AC but now lost that
 benefits. Simultaneously these have been kept out of tonnage tax benefits also.   As directed by the Committee,
 Ministry of Finance was requested to consider the matter and include the vessels under the above Acts in the tonnage
 tax regime.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25.    The Committee suggests the Department of  Shipping to pursue the matter persistently with the Department of
 Finance .
SETHUSAMUDRAM SHIP CHANNEL PROJECT
(Recommendation at Para 36)
 26.      The Committee notes the Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project is of great economic and strategic importance
 which will connect the Gulf of Mannar to Bay of Bengal so that the ship moving between East and West coast of India
 could have a continuous navigable sea route within their own territorial waters and the proposed channel save upto 424
 nautical miles of travel and about 30 hours of sailing time for ships.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that
 Ministry of Environment & Forests has also given environmental clearance to the project and a special purpose vehicle
 has been incorporated to raise finance to create and operate navigable channel.  The Committee expects that the project
 once completed will serve the strategic and national security interests besides spuring the overall economic
 development of coastal districts of southern states.  The Committee however, recommends that while taking up the
 implementation of the project, the Department of Shipping must give due attention to the likely effect of natural
 calamities particularly one like as Tsunami which hit southern states during December 2004 and safety measures may
 be incorporated accordingly.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
27.       The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are accepted.The Government sanction for implementing
 Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project at a cost of Rs.2427.40 crores has been issued on 1
st June, 2005. The animation
 models of the Tsunami of 26th December, 2004 available with the Tuticorin Port Trust indicates that the project area
 was the least affected on the east coast by the Tsunami. Hydrodynamic modeling studies recently carried out have
 confirmed the earlier findings that increase in magnitude of the current in the post-channel era will be only along the
 channel in Adam’s Bridge with no change in current status alongside the channel. The issues relating to Tsunami and
 impact of cyclonic storms over the channel were also duly examined by the Ministry of Environment & Forests before
 according environmental clearance. However, during the execution phase, suggestions of the experts will be duly taken
 into consideration by the project authorities to ensure that the impact of natural calamities on the channel is
 insignificant. An Environmental Monitoring Committee comprising experts/officials has been set up by the
 Government for monitoring of various environmental issues connected with the implementation of the project which
 will meet at least once a month and submit its report to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways.

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28.The Committee notes with appreciation the initiatives taken by the Government in the matter.
CRUISE SHIPPING
(Recommendation at Para 40)
 
29.       The Committee is of the view that sea travel is becoming increasingly popular and there is enormous potential
 for its growth and expansion in India. The Committee notes that six major ports- Mumbai, Mormugao, New Mangalore,
 Kochi, Tuticorin and Chennai have been identified for the development of infrastructure and other facilities with a view
 to make India an attractive cruise destination. The Committee notes that a High Power Steering Group has been set up
 with a view to catalyze the growth and development of cruise shipping and to remove bottlenecks and a policy is being
 formulated in this regard. The Committee hopes that the group will submit its report expeditiously and the policy is
 framed at the earliest so that the benefit of opportunity available to cruise tourism sector is exploited. The Committee
 recommends that pending finalization of policy, the Department of Shipping must take steps to attract investments from
 private sector with a view to create infrastructure and other facilities for development of cruise shipping especially in
 ports on the Eastern parts of  the country including Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshdweep Islands having great potential
 in that area.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
30.       The suggestions/recommendations of the Committee have been noted for taking necessary action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
  31.    The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Department of Shipping in this regard.
 
CALCUTTA  DOCK LABOUR BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 49-51)
 
32.       The Committee is distressed to note that the employees of the Calcutta Dock Labour Board are not being treated
 as Government employees so far as payment of pension and pensionary benefits are concerned, though, the Calcutta
 Dock Labour Board, a body corporate, was constituted in terms of section 5(A) of the Dock Workers (Regulation of
 Employment) Act, 1948 in September 1952.  The Committee expresses its concern that inspite of specific provisions
 under the Act, the rules and regulations concerning pension for employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board have not
 been approved by Department of Expenditure and the employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board are being made
 victims under the cover that Calcutta Dock Labour Board constitutes an autonomous body and therefore, denied of the
 benefits for long.
 
33.       The Committee is of the firm opinion that liabilities on account of payment of arrears of pensions and
 pensionary dues of Calcutta Dock Labour Board entirely lies on the Government and the Government cannot be
 absolved of its liability and withhold pension and post retirement benefits to the employees of Calcutta Dock Labour
 Board on one pretext or other.  The Committee, strongly recommends, the Department of Shipping to vigorously pursue
 the matter with Ministry of Finance for release of enhanced grant to Calcutta Dock Labour Board for meeting its
 pensionary liabilities and implement comprehensive restructuring of Calcutta Dock Labour Board for introduction of
 Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
 
34.       The Committee is of the view that problem for payment of pension and pensionary dues can be resolved once
 and for all, if the Government approves self-sustaining proposal for Calcutta Dock Labour Board's pensioners with
 provisions for an initial corpus and an appropriate policy and methodology for payment of pension worked out for the
 future.  The Committee, therefore reiterates, that the Government should build a corpus of pension fund for discharging
 the future pensionary liabilities of the Board, as the bulk of its employees will retire in another two years.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
35.       The proposal for release of enhanced grant of Rs.59.59 crores to Calcutta Dock Labour Board to meet its
 pensionery liabilities on account of revision of pensionery benefits as per wage settlement and for liberalization of post
 retirement benefits to pensioners who retired before 1.1.1998 was taken up with Ministry of Finance, who have not
 accepted the proposal.

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 
36.       On the advise of the Department of Shipping, Calcutta Dock Labour Board has submitted a self-sustaining
 proposal seeking one time tax free grant of Rs.537.41 crores from Government of India for payment of unpaid arrears
 of Rs.80.37 crores to CDLB pensioners and workers/employees and Rs.457.04 crores for building a corpus of Pension
 Fund, out of which the future pensionary liabilities of the Board can be discharged. This is an alternative to the earlier
 proposal for release of enhanced grant of Rs.59.59 crores which has not been accepted by the Ministry of Finance. The
 proposal has been circulated to the Appraising Agencies for their views/comments before it is placed before the
 Competent Authority for approval.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37.       The Committee is constrained to note that till date Government have not decided to settle the retirement dues of
 the employees of CDLB.  Regarding introduction of Voluntary Retirements Scheme, the Committee is of the view that
 the Department of Shipping should strongly pursue the matter with the Cabinet and in the meanwhile, the advice of the
 Ministry of Law and Justice may be sought to resolve the issue. 
MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
(Recommendation at Para 55)
38.       The Committee is deeply concerned that the shortage to the tune of Rs. 92.78 crore in Seamen’s Provident Fund,
 which lost due to security scam, has not yet been recouped by the Department of Shipping. The Committee is unable to
 comprehend the reasons for delay in recouping the fund, which is entirely managed by the Government and feels that
 any further delay may cause adverse impact in protection of interests of the seamen’s whose life long savings stands
 jeopardized in the scam. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to approach the Ministry
 of Finance for grants-in-aid to recoup the shortage in the Seamen’s Provident Fund.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
39.       Government is very much concerned about protection of the interests of seafarers. The Cabinet Note is being
 finalized in this regard and the advice of Ministry of Law & Justice has been sought. After the advice of Ministry of
 Law & Justice is received, a Cabinet Note will be finalized and sent to Cabinet for consideration.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
40.       The Committee is perturbed to note that previously also the Department of Shipping has submitted that the
 Cabinet Note is under finalization and no progress seems to be made in this context thereafter.  The Committee has not
 been apprised of the status of its recommendation about approaching the Ministry of Finance for grants-in-aid to recoup
 the shortage in the Seamen's Provident Fund.
 
MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
(Recommendation at Para 56)
 
 41.      The Committee further recommends that in order to ensure that such happenings are not repeated in future,
 sufficient legislative and administrative safeguards have to be built in the system. At the same time, those responsible
 for such scam should not be spared and suitable action including criminal action ought to be taken against them so that
 such actions provide deterrence to other as well. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action in this regard.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
42.        In order to prevent such happenings in future the following measures have been taken: -
 
(i)         Resolution of 28.11.1996, authorizing the commissioner as a sole authority to do the investment has been
 rescinded.
(ii)        A reputed company (Chartered Accountants) has been appointed as Internal Auditors who submit quarterly
 report which is placed before the Board in its subsequent meetings.
(iii)       All physical securities required to be converted into demat form have been converted.  State Bank of Indore has
 been appointed as Depository Participants for the purpose.

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
(iv)       A Finance Sub-Committee has been constituted for considering investment proposals and place the
 recommendations before the Board of Trustees for final approval.
(v)        IDBI Capital Market Services Ltd. has been appointed as Portfolio Manager of the funds of Seamen Provident
 Fund Organization.
 
The CBI has completed its enquiry on 10.11.2003 and the charge sheet has been filed in the Court against 15 persons
 involved.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 44.  The Committee notes the measures being taken by the Government to avert future swindling of funds.  However, it
 suggests that the amount recovered from the persons involved should be directly deposited in the Seamen's Provident
 Fund.
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES (IIMS)
(Recommendation at Para 62)
 
45.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department of Shipping is in the process of drafting Indian
 Maritime University Bill for the establishment of Indian Maritime University under and Act of Parliament and a token
 provision has been made by the Government for development of Indian Maritime University. The Committee feels that
 the move will certainly give boost to quality education in the field of marine training. However, the Committee is
 unhappy to note that no definite time limit has been fixed for establishment of Indian Maritime University and
 recommends, the Department of Shipping to fix definite time frame for the establishment of Indian Maritime University
 under a Central Act. The Committee further hopes that while finalizing the location of the Indian Maritime University,
 existing infrastructure and assets have to be taken into cognizance.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
46.       The Government has been making efforts to establish Indian Maritime University at the earliest. In this regard, a
 draft IMU Bill has been drafted. The draft Cabinet Note is likely to be circulated shortly. After approval of the Cabinet,
 the Bill will be introduced in the Parliament. It is expected that the University will be established within this financial
 year.
 
47.       The suggestion of the Committee to take the existing infrastructure and assets into cognizance while analyzing
 the location of Indian Maritime University has been noted.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
48.     The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department of Shipping.   
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES (IIMS)
(Recommendation at Para 63)
 
49.       The Committee hopes that the issues pertaining to creation of pension fund and finalization of terms &
 conditions for the absorption of employees of Indian Institute of Maritime Studies will be taken care of by the
 Department without any disadvantage to the employees in the draft bill itself and recommends the Department of
 Shipping to apprise the Committee of the development in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
50.       The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Government will ensure that adequate provisions are
 made in the proposed IMU Bill so as to safeguard the interests of employees.
 FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51.       The Committee notes the reply and expects that the assurance given to the Committee will be strictly observed
 after establishment of Indian Maritime University.    
 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 76)

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 
52.       The Committee takes note of the fact that Hindustan Shipyard Limited is changing its marketing strategy by
 engaging itself in utilization of installed capacity for increasing ship-repair turnover.  The vigorous marketing efforts
 are showing results and Hindustan Shipyard Limited has been able to secure the hi-tech, hi-value repair orders for
 betterment of the financial health of the yard.  The Committee appreciates the decision of the Government for
 rehabilitation of Hindustan Shipyard Limited by way of financial restructuring for improving the performance of the
 yard and recommends for expeditious clearance of the proposal for the capital restructuring of the Hindustan Shipyard
 Limited.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
53.       Rehabilitation-cum-revival package of Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL), Visakhapatnam is under active
 consideration of the Government.  The proposal to this effect has been sent to Board for Restructuring of Public Sector
 Enterprises (BRPSE) on 26.04.2005 for their consideration and concurrence.  On receipt of concurrence from BRPSE
 necessary action will be initiated to have the approval of appropriate authority for implementing the same.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
54.       The Committee notes the reply and desires that the initiative taken in the matter may be informed to the
 Committee.
 
HOOGHLY DOCK & PORT ENGINEERS LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 82)
 
55.       The Committee is happy to note that a rehabilitation-cum-revival package has been prepared for Hooghly Dock
 & Port Engineers Limited and a token provision has also been kept for the purpose as per its recommendation.  The
 Committee is of the opinion that Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers Limited with its infrastructure and a expertise can be
 a integral part for development and promotion of Inland Water Transport through NW-1 and NW-2 and contribute to
 the national economy as well.  The Committee, therefore recommends the Government to grant clearance for the
 revival of Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers Limited expeditiously.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
56.       Rehabilitation-cum-revival package of Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers Limited (HDPEL), Kolkata is under
 active consideration of the Government.  The proposal to this effect has been sent to Board for Restructuring of Public
 Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) on 20.04.2005 for their consideration and concurrence.  On receipt of concurrence from
 BRPSE necessary action will be initiated to have the approval of appropriate authority for implementing the same.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
57.       The Committee appreciates the progress made.
 
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
(Recommendation at Para 91)
           
58.       The Committee notes with distress that the matter for disinvestments of Central Inland Water Transport
 Corporation Ltd. has been referred to the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises. The Committee feels
 that the Government has not made much effort to improve the financial health of the company. The Committee is
 gravely concern by the fact that inspite of repeated recommendation in the past the Government has not yet been able to
 come out with a complete blueprint for making full use of the existing assets of the company in ensuring productive
 potential by exploring all possibilities like merger with similar entities and integration with Inland Water Transport.
 The Committee is firmly of the view that the future of Inland Water Transport operations including that of Central
 Water Transport Corporation Ltd.  holds immense possibilities for establishing a well-defined multimodal
 transportation network in the country and therefore recommends the Department of Shipping to take steps to improve
 the performance of the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. besides impressing upon the Ministry of

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 Finance for capital restructuring with its existing infrastructure, capacity and manpower.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
59.       CIWTC stands referred to the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). As such, further
 action will be taken after BRPSE’s recommendations are available.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
60.       The Committee emphasises that the future of Inland Water Transport Operations including that of Central Water
 Transport Corporation Ltd. is very bright in this country.  This area remains largely unexplored today.  Therefore, the
 Committee further recommends the Department of Shipping to take steps to augment the infrastructure and to improve
 the performance of the CIWTC and impress upon Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises to that effect.
 
(Recommendation at Para 98)
 
61.       The Committee is constrained to note that Inland Water Transport has been the most neglected sector and has
 not been developed with desired pace inspite of its economic potential and merely accounts for 0.15% of cargo
 movement in the country.  The Committee observes that though measures to boost the growth of cargo traffic have been
 put in place and department is committed to raise the share of Inland Water Transport to 2% over the next 8-20 years. 
 The Committee however, notes that with a view to compete with the other developed modes of transport, the
 Department of Shipping is working on declaration and development of three more waterways as National Waterways
 and a task force to monitor the progress of Inland Water Transport projects has also been formed.  The Committee,
 recommends the Department of Shipping to exploit the full potential of this efficient mode of transport, besides,
 addressing the issues of development of adequate infrastructure facilities namely fairways, terminal and navigational
 aids on the existing three NWs.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
62.       Ministry is in complete agreement with the recommendation and is committed to development of adequate
 infrastructure facilities on existing three NWs to make them fully functional by 2006-07.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63.       The Committee  notes the reply.
(Recommendation at Para 99)
64.       The Committee also recommends the Government to improve the modal mix of transport in the country and
 prepare a road map for integrated transport policy to include Inland Water Transport, Coastal Shipping, Civil Aviation,
 Road Transport & Highways & Railways.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
65.       The Ministry agrees with the recommendation. As far as road map for integrated transport policy is concerned,
 the Ministry is contemplating the following road map for improving the modal mix among road, rail, IWT and coastal
 shipping. Civil aviation does not figure in the scheme of things as transportation of bulk (high volume, low value) cargo
 takes place by air very rarely.
 
S.No. Action Plan Timeline
1. Development of infrastructural facilities on the existing National
 Waterways to make them fully functional.
 2006-07
2. To put in place a package of schemes/incentives for modal shifts
 from rail and road to IWT mode .
 2005-06
3. To encourage States to promote inland water transportation
 through Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
10
th and 11th Plan
4. Public-Private partnership for project development
 /implementation of IWT projects-formation of SPVs.
 2005-06
5. Increasing the number of vessels through (i) vessel leasing and
 (ii) vessel building subsidy scheme
10th and 11th  Plan

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66.      The Committee expresses its strong dissatisfaction over the fact that the Department in response to its
 recommendation has given only the time frame for various schemes/projects whereas the actual physical achievements
 and difficulties have not been given.  The Committee recommends that the Department should come back to the
 Committee with a detailed reply with regard to integrated transport policy and modal mix of transport in the country.
(Recommendation at Para 104)
67.       The Committee is perturbed to note the practice of under utilization of budgeted amount by the Department of
 Shipping over the years.  During 2004-05, the Department of Shipping has projected Rs. 133.50 cr plan outlays for
 Inland Water Transport sector, which was reduced to Rs. 121.03 at RE stage, and ultimately the Department of
 Shipping has spent only Rs. 80.00 cr. during 2004-05.  The Committee observes that actual expenditure incurred has
 always been low compared to the budget estimates for Inland Water Transport sector including North-East Pool of
 fund.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to intensify its monitoring mechanism to
 ensure that the budgeted amounts earmarked at the BE stage are fully utilized during 2005-06.  At the same time the
 Committee desires that the Department of Shipping should review all the on-going schemes and if required, re-allocate
 the funds budgeted during the financial year.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
68.       IWAI has already prepared action plan for utilization of approved budget allocation of Rs. 150 cr. during 2005-
06.  This action plan will be monitored by the IWAI Board and by the taskforce set up by the Department of Shipping as
 well.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69.       The Committee notes the reply.
(Recommendation at Para 106)
70.       The Committee notes that a comprehensive Inland Water Transport policy has been announced by the
 Government to encourage investment from the Private-Public participation for accelerated development of Inland
 Water Transport sector.  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department of Shipping for creating transparent,
 hospitable and conducive environment for ensuring both the Private and Public sector participation in the development
 of Inland Water Transport sector.  The Committee expects that primarily public investment in Inland Water Transport
 sector will definitely help to create infrastructure facilities and augment Inland Water Transport fleet.  The Committee
 recommends that all pending Inland Water Transport specific projects should be cleared expeditiously.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
71.       The recommendation has been noted for compliance. As recommended by the Committee, processing of these
 projects will be expedited and taken to logical conclusion during 2005-06.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 72.    The Committee desires that the Ministry will also intimate the Committee as soon as all pending Inland Water
 Transport specific projects are completed.
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
(Recommendation at Para 108)
73.       The Committee notes with dismay that Research & Development Studies facilities especially in design of vessels
 and night navigation facilities and identification of economically viable routes for development of Inland Water
 Transport sector has not been given due consideration.  The Committee is of the view that Research & Development
 activities is the backbone for success of any sector and recommends the Department of Shipping to strengthen the
 Research & Development facilities for development of Inland Water Transport Sector in the country.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
74.       IWAI proposes to collaborate with National Ship Design and Research Centre, (NSDRC) Visakhapatnam in this
 regard.
75.       As regards  night navigation facilities, some development has already taken place. A reliable method of LED
 lights provided on manned country boats is being practiced successfully on NW-1 and NW-2.  This method is not only
 reliable but also provides employment to the local inhabitants.
76.       Identification of economically viable routes actually is not a Research and Development activity.  It depends on
 several factors, the most important being the availability and quality of the infrastructure.  It is felt that with proper
 infrastructure namely fairway with assured depth of minimum 2 m, night navigation facilities for round the clock
 navigation and terminals with mechanical loading and un-loading facilities, many IWT routes will become viable.

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 IWAI has already identified some routes for Private Sector Participation and process of inviting/processing bids in this
 regard is underway. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77.      The Committee notes the reply. 
 (Recommendation at Para 110)
78.       The Committee is happy to note that Department of Shipping has appointed a consultant for working out a
 realistic target for cargo transportation vis-à-vis targeted investments for Inland Water Transport promotion for the 10
th
 Plan and beyond as per its recommendation.  The Committee hopes that the study for linking the investment in Inland
 Water Transport Sector with achievement of physical targets for cargo transportation will certainly enhance the
 prospects of Inland Water Transport and help to boost the growth of cargo traffic in Inland Water Transport sector.  The
 Committee directs the Department of Shipping to appraise it about the progress in the matter.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
79.       IIM, Calcutta was awarded this study in Nov. 2004.  During interim presentation given by the coordinator on
 3.5.2005 at IWAI, Noida, it was informed that most of field data has been collected by them and the report is expected
 by July 2005.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80.      The Committee notes that  the Department of Shipping has sent the Action Taken Replies on 29
th August 2005
 whereas the Report of the consultant on Inland Water Transport was expected by July, 2005.  If the Report has since
 been presented to the Government, the Committee may be informed accordingly.
Annexure-I
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SHIPPING, MUMBAI
 
            The BE in respect of DG(SHipping) was Rs. 12.82 crore for the year 2004-05 and the total expenditure was Rs.
 6.28 crore.  The saving of Rs. 6.54 crore as such was due to implementation of E-Governance Scheme in the phased
 manner.  Moreover, at the time of finalization of BE 2004-05, certain amount was earmarked for land and building in
 respect of four new MMDs.  As the land could not be acquired, entire amount could not be utilized.  However, the
 suggestions of the Committee will be kept in mind, while makeing projects of funds in future.
Annexure-II
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES & LIGHTSHIPS
 
(Rupees in Crore)
BE 2004-05 RE 2004-05 Actual Expdr. Saving 204-05
25.00 17.50 11.25 13.75
 
Against the projected expenditure of Rs. 25 crore at BE 2004-05, a sum of Rs. 12.50 crore was envisaged
 towards the scheme of Vessel TRaffic Service for the Gulf of Kuchchh (VTS in GOK).  However, on account
 of certain clarifications, the revised expenditure projections at RE stage for VTS in GOK was projected at Rs.
 6 crore only and thereby , total RE was reduced to Rs. 17.50 crore against BE of Rs. 2.5 crore.  The
 expenditure of Rs. 6 crore could have been made, but for the restriction of 33% ceiling limit expendutre
 during last quarter by Ministry of Finance.  The approval of LI was received in the last quarter itself and,
 therefore, entire provision of Rs. 6 crore could not be utilized and an expenditure of Rs. 2.64 crore could only
 be made.
 
            Except for the project of VTS, provision for other schemes during BE and RE was envisaged as Rs.
 12.5 crore and Rs. 11.5 crore respectively.  Out of this, an expenditure of Rs. 8.61 crore has been made
 during the FY 2004-05, resulting in 75% utilization of RF fund for other schemes except VTS.
Annexure-III
 
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE ON
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2--5-06) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING FOR PARAS RELATED TO

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 INLAND WATER TRANSPORT.
 
Para - 10&11
 
            The Committee expresses its concern over the failure of Department of Shipping to spend the approved outlay. 
 During the year 2004-05, out of the budgeted amount of Rs. 2419.66 crore the Department could spent only Rs.
 1400.99 crore which clearly indicates the poor fiscal management in the department of Shipping.  The committee
 observes that even while revising allocations, little consideration has been paid to the actual expenditure incurred in the
 past.  This shows that budgetary and revised estimates have always been made without taking into account the actual
 requirements as experienced in the previous years.
 
            The Committee feels that Department of SHipping has not evolved effective system or planning to
 systematically anticipate, assess and project its actual requirments of funds otherwise the investments could
 have yielded commensurate returns.  The Committee recommneds that in future, the Department of
 Shipping should be transparent and realistic while making projections of required funds so that resources
 may not remain unused and are allocated more judiciously.
 
Reply
 
            Funds are allocated to Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) by the Ministry under budget Heads "Grant
 to IWAI", "Technical studies and R&D", "Subsidy", and "Grant for Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme (CSS)".  During
 2004-05 an amount of Rs. 133.50 crore was allocated to IWAI at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 121.03 crore at
 RE stage.  Expenditure during 2004-05 was Rs. 72.92 crore.  Broad headswise break up of these is given below:
(Rs. in crore)
 
                                                             BE                 RE                  Expenditure**
Grant to IWAI*                                    102.50            90.03              47.49
Technical studies & R&D                     1.00              1.00                1.00
Subsidy                                                10.00            10.00                8.45
CSS                                                      20.00            20.00              15.98
 
            TOTAL                                   133.5              121.03            72.92
 
*   - Includes Lump sum provision for North East region
** - Expenditure shown above is funds released by the Ministry to IWAI.
 
            Funds received under "Grant to IWAI" are utilized primarily for development of national waterways,
 "Technical studies and Research & Development" for taking up various technical studies and R&D activities
 related to IWT sector, "Subsidy" for encouraging the entrepreneurs for acquiring inland vessels, while "CSS"
 is primarily for developing waterwasys other than national waterways by the respective State Governments.
 
            From the above it may be seen that in totality, 55% of BE / 60% of RE has been utilized in 2004-05. 
 While expenditure for Technical Studies R&D was 100% of BE/RE, it was 80% of BJE/RE in case of CSS
 and 85% in case of Subsidy but only 46% of BE and 53% of RE in case of Grant to IWAI.
 
            Thus it may be seen that major shortfall in achieving financial progress was in case of the Head. 
 "Grant to IWAI".  The main reasons for this shortfall were slow progress of works by CPWD, and HDPE and
 also due to hesitation on the part of private sector to participate in the high capital intensive IWT Sector.
 
            Under public-Private Partnership scheme, IWAI and IFCI could hold seminars and other marketing
 activities for identified projects of terminals and barges.  however, the expenditure could not be incurred as

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 the bids could not be finalized.
 
            for 2005-06 IWT Sector has been allocated Rs. 150 crore under different Heads to IWAI.  To achieve
 better financial progress in this year, annual action plan with month wise physical and financial targets has
 been prepared and all efforts are being made to adhere to it.  IWAI has also been directed to advice the
 mechanism for assigning contract of work through competitive biding mentioning the stage-wise time-frame
 for completion of work under the contract so that delay in implementation of the scheme can be avoided in
 future.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
           
            The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.(Para 3)
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2005-06
 
            The Committee desires that the Department of Shipping adheres to its recommendations and would efficiently
 maintain its fiscal management in future. (Para 13)
PORT SECTOR
 
            The Committee notes the reply and expects that the mechanism evolved by the Department of Shipping remains
 fool-proof and problems of fiscal management would not be encountered in future. (Para 17)
CAPACITY AND TRAFFIC IN MAJOR PORT
 
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 21)
 
TONNAGE TAX
 
The Committee suggests the Department of  Shipping to pursue the matter persistently with the Department of Finance .
(Para 25)
 
SETHUSAMUDRAM SHIP CHANNEL PROJECT
 
       The Committee notes with appreciation the initiatives taken by the Government in the matter. (Para 28)
 
CRUISE SHIPPING
 
      The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Department of Shipping in this regard. (Para 31)
 
CALCUTTA  DOCK LABOUR BOARD
 
       The Committee is constrained to note that till date Government have not decided to settle the retirement dues of the
 employees of CDLB.  Regarding introduction of Voluntary Retirements Scheme, the Committee is of the view that the
 Department of Shipping should strongly pursue the matter with the Cabinet and in the meanwhile, the advice of the
 Ministry of Law and Justice may be sought to resolve the issue.  (Para 37)
 
MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
 
            The Committee is perturbed to note that previously also the Department of Shipping has submitted that the
 Cabinet Note is under finalization and no progress seems to be made in this context thereafter.  The Committee has not
 been apprised of the status of its recommendation about approaching the Ministry of Finance for grants-in-aid to recoup
 the shortage in the Seamen's Provident Fund. (Para 40)
 
MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
 

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
The Committee notes the measures being taken by the Government to avert future swindling of funds.  However, it
 suggests that the amount recovered from the persons involved should be directly deposited in the Seamen's Provident
 Fund.  (Para 44)
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES (IIMS)
 
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department of Shipping. 
(Para 48)
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES (IIMS)
 
            The Committee notes the reply and expects that the assurance given to the Committee will be strictly observed
 after establishment of Indian Maritime University.     (Para 51)
 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LIMITED
 
            The Committee notes the reply and desires that the initiative taken in the matter may be informed to the
 Committee. (Para 54)
 
HOOGHLY DOCK & PORT ENGINEERS LIMITED
 
            The Committee appreciates the progress made. (Para 57)
 
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
            The Committee emphasises that the future of Inland Water Transport Operations including that of Central Water
 Transport Corporation Ltd. is very bright in this country.  This area remains largely unexplored today.  Therefore, the
 Committee further recommends the Department of Shipping to take steps to augment the infrastructure and to improve
 the performance of the CIWTC and impress upon Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises to that effect.
 (Para 60)
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
 
            The Committee  notes the reply.
(Para 63)
 
            The Committee expresses its strong dissatisfaction over the fact that the Department in response to its
 recommendation has given only the time frame for various schemes/projects whereas the actual physical achievements
 and difficulties have not been given.  The Committee recommends that the Department should come back to the
 Committee with a detailed reply with regard to integrated transport policy and modal mix of transport in the country.
(Para 66)
            The Committee notes the reply.
     (Para 69)
The Committee desires that the Ministry will also intimate the Committee as soon as all pending Inland Water Transport
 specific projects are completed. (Para 72)
         The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 77)
         The Committee notes that  the Department of Shipping has sent the Action Taken Replies on 29
th August 2005
 whereas the Report of the consultant on Inland Water Transport was expected by July, 2005.  If the Report has since
 been presented to the Government, the Committee may be informed accordingly. (Para 80)
M I N U T E S
XIV
FORTEENTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 4.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 22nd February 2006 in Committee Room '074’, Ground

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Kamal Akhtar
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Shri Adhir Chowdhury
Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Manabendra Shah
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Road Transport and Highways;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
 Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Culture;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
 Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Shipping;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Tourism;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; and
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Ninetieth
 Report on the ‘Development of Airport Sector with special emphasis on new modern airports’.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Report with minor modifications.    The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the
 current session.
 
3.The Committee also decided to meet on 21
st, 22nd, 23rd, March, 2006 to examine the Demands for Grants (2006-07)
 of the concerned Ministries/Departments and on 27th and 28th March 2006 to adopt the draft reports thereon. .
 
4.The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.
 

94thReport of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/94threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:21]
 
 
 
 