 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
293 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT  
Status of Aviation Connectivity in the country  
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd July, 2021) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT  
 
Status of Aviation Connectivity in the country  
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd July, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS                (v)-(vii) 
4. REPORT                                 1 - 39 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   40 - 55 
    6. MINUTES         56 - 67  
7. ANNEXURES        68 - 71 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
9. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
12.  Shri Anto Antony 
13.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
14.  Shri Tapir Gao  
15.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
17.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
18.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
19.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
20.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
21.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
22.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
23.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
24.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
26.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
29.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
_________________________________________________________  
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020  
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd  July, 
2020  
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
_______________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020  
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
(ii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Third Report on 'Status of Aviation Connectivity in the 
country'.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director 
General, DGCA; Director General, BCAS; Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation 
Bureau; Chairman, Airports Authority of India; CMD, Air  India Limited; and CEO, Airline 
Allied Services Ltd. on the subject  on 23rd December, 2019. The Committee heard the views of 
the officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation, BCAS, Airports Authority of India, Air India Limited 
and State Government of Andhra P radesh on the subject at Visakhapatnam on 8th January, 2020. 
The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation, BCAS, Airports 
Authority of India, Air India Limited and State Government of Maharashtra on the subject at 
Mumbai on 10th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, BCAS, Airports Authority of India, Air India Limited and State Government of 
Goa on the subject  at Goa  on 11th January, 2020 . The Committee heard the views of  the 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director General, DGCA; Director General, BCAS; 
Chairman, Airports Authority of India; CMD, Air India Limited; CMD, Pawan Hans Ltd., and 
Director, IGRUA and CMDs /Senior officials of IndiGo, Air Asia, Vistara and SpiceJet airlines, 
on the subject on 21st October, 2020. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
DGCA; BCAS;  Airports Authority of India; Air India Limited; Pawan Hans Ltd.;  Aircrafts 
Accident Investiga tion Bureau;  Airline Allied Services Ltd.; IGRUA; State Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Goa; and other stakeholders for placing before the Committee, 
the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points 
raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th June, 
2021.   
 
 
 (T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                                   Chairman, 
June 25, 2021                                                                      Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Ashadha, 1943 (Saka)                                                      Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                         Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
Acronyms 
AAI  - Airports Authority of India 
ACI  - Aero Club of India 
AEP  - Aerodrome Entry Permit 
AIC  - Aeronautical Information Circular 
AIESL  - Air India Engineering Services Limited  
ATC - Air Traffic Control 
ATF - Aviation Turbine Fuel 
ATS  - Air Traffic Service 
AVSEC  - Aviation Security 
BBJ   - Boeing Business Jet 
BCAS  - Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BVLOS - Beyond Visual Line Of Sight 
CAGR  - Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAR - Civil Aviation Requirements 
CAT  - Category or Clear Air Turbulence 
CEO - Chief Executive Officer 
CMD  - Chairman and Managing Director 
CORSIA - Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
COVID - Corona Virus Disease 
DAN - Drone Acknowledgement Number 
DCS - Departure Control System 
DG  - Directorate General 
DGCA - Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DPR - Detailed Project Report 
DSP - Digital Sky Platform 
FAQs - Frequently Asked Questions 
FICCI - Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
FTOs  - Flying Training Organizations 
FY - Financial Year 
GDP  - Gross Domestic Product 
GST  - Goods and Service Tax 
             (v) 

 
 
IAF - Indian Air Force               
IATA  - International Airport Transport Association 
ICAO  - International Civil Aviation Organization 
IFSC - International Financial Services Centres 
IGRUA - Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
IGST - Integrated Goods and Service Tax 
ILS - Instrument Landing System 
INR - Indian Rupee 
iOS - iPhone Operating System 
IT - Information Technology 
IWAI - Inland Waterways Authority of India 
JVC - Joint Venture Company 
LTC  - Leave Travel Concession 
MAFI  - Modernization of Military Airfields 
MHA - Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIS - Management Information Systems  
MMT - Million Metric Tonne 
MoCA  - Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoPR - Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MoU - Memoranda of Understanding 
MRO - Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
MT - Metric Tonne 
MTOs - Maintenance Training Organizations 
NAMC - National Airspace Management Cell 
NCASP  - National Civil Aviation Security Programme 
NSOPs - Non-Scheduled Operators Permit holders 
PAPI  - Precision Approach Path Indicator 
PPP - Public Private Partnership 
RCS - Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RT-PCR - Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SAOs  - Selected Airline Operators 
SARPs  - Standard And Recommended Practices 
                     (vi) 

 
 
SOPs - Scheduled Operators Permit holders 
STP  - Standardized Training  Package                                         
SVAMITVA - Survey of villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in 
Village Areas   
T-RCS  - Tourism Regional Connectivity Scheme 
UAE  - United Arab Emirates 
UAS - Unmanned Aircraft System 
UDAN  - Ude Desh Ka Aam Naagrik 
UK - United Kingdom 
USA - United States of America 
USAP-CMA - Universal Security Audit Programme-Continuous Monitoring 
Approach 
UTM - Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management 
VAT - Value Added Tax 
VGF - Viability Gap Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 The Indian aviation sector is one of the fastest growing sectors in the world.  India‟s 
domestic traffic has more than doubled from around 61 million in FY 2013 -14 to around 137  
million in 2019 -20, a growth of over 14% per annum.  International traffic has grown  from 47 
million in FY 2013 -14 to around 67 million in FY 2019 -20. India is current ly the third largest 
domestic aviation market and  is expected to become the third largest overall (including 
domestic and international traffic) by the year 2024. 
2. In the past two decades, expanding incomes, an aspirational middle-class, influx of low-
cost carriers, better connectivity to far -flung cities and rise in regional air travel have 
transformed the face of Indian aviation. While India remains one of the fastest growing aviation 
markets in the world, the fact remains that minority of its population uses air transport. This 
offers a great opportunity to bring more  people on board and make the country an aviation 
superpower. India‟s aviation industry is largely untapped with huge growth opportunities, 
considering that air transport is still expensive for majority of the country‟s population. There is 
a need for industry stakeholders to engage and collaborate with policy makers to implement 
efficient and rational decisions that would boost India‟s civil aviation industry. With the right 
policies and relentless focus on quality, cost and passenger interest, India would be well placed 
to achieve its vision.  
3. As per ICAO study, the output and employment multipliers of aviation are 3.25 and 
6.10 respectively. This implies that every 100 rupees worth of output produced in air transport 
industry creates a demand of Rs. 325 in other industrie s, and every 100 jobs in air transport 
result in 610 jobs in the economy as a whole. As per a report of IATA of January 2019, the air 
transport sector comprising of airlines, airport operators, airport on -site enterprises (restaurants 
and retail), aircraft  manufacturers, and air navigation service providers, and its supply chains 
are estimated to support US $ 13 billion of GDP in India. Foreign tourists arriving by air 
support a further US $ 22 billion of the country‟s GDP, thus totaling to US $ 35 billion or 1.5 
percent of the GDP. 
4. It is in this backdrop that the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject “Status of Aviation Connectivity 
in the country” for examination and report thereon.  
5. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director 
General, DGCA; Director General, BCAS; Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation 
Bureau; Chairman, Airports Authority of India; CMD, Air India Limited; and CEO, Airline 
Allied Services Ltd. on 23rd December, 2019. The Committee heard the views of the officials of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, BCAS, Airports Authority of India, Air India Limited and State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh on the subject at Visakhapatnam on 8 th January, 2020. The 

2 
 
Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation, BCAS, Airports 
Authority of India, Air India Limited and State Government of Maharashtra on the subject at 
Mumbai on 10 th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, BCAS, Airports Authority of India, Air India Limited and State Government of 
Goa on the subject at Goa on 11 th January, 2020 . The Committee heard the views of the 
Secretary, Minist ry of Civil Aviation; Director General, DGCA; Director General, BCAS; 
Chairman, Airports Authority of India; CMD, Air India Limited; CMD, Pawan Hans  Ltd., 
Director, IGRUA and CMD/Senior officials  of IndiGo, Air Asia,  Vistara and SpiceJet airlines 
on 21 st October, 2020. A Questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to all the five private 
airlines and written replies were obtained.  
6.   Some of the major points discussed during the deliberations of the Committee and the 
recommendations of the Committee thereon, are as follows: 
Airport infrastructure 
7.1. The civil aviation industry in India has emerged as one of the fastest growing indus tries 
in the country. The Committee understands that rising working group and widening middle 
class demography has given rise to a huge boost in demand for air travel. This, in turn, has 
resulted in air traffic congestion. The Committee understands that the rapid growth in passenger 
traffic has put enormous pressure on the airport infrastructure. The Committee recognizes the 
urgent need to provide adequate airport infrastructure in the country since at present, large 
airports are becoming slot constrained a nd smaller airports are facing terminal congestion 
issues. 
7.2. In the background note furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that historically, the 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) has been the only major player involved in developing and 
upgrading airports in the country. Now several private  sector airport players have emerged and 
have created world class infrastructure  under the PPP model.  The number of PPP airports is 
likely to increase from five in  2014 to 24 in 2024. The Committee takes note of the fact that in 
order to cater to the rising air traffic, the Government of India has been working towards 
increasing the number of airports.  
7.3. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that the following  
infrastructural constraints are affecting the growth of Civil Aviation sector:- 
• The top 15 airports including Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru account for almost 83% of 
the total passenger throughput in the country. Because of the increase in passenger 
traffic, these airports are close to the saturation limit. This brings forth the necessity of 
adding more tier 2 and tier 3 cities to the aviation network.  

3 
 
• The rapid growth in passenger traffic has put enormous pressure on airport 
infrastructure causing congestio n at major airports operating at 85% to 120% of their 
handling capacity. 
• The availability of slots at a given airport primarily depends upon terminal capacity, 
airspace and runway capacity and due to tremendous air traffi c growth during the last 
decade, capacity at some of the Indian airports became constrained due to sub -optimal 
infrastructure. The airports are being upgraded continu ously to meet the rising demand.  
Traffic at few airports such as Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai grew at a very high 
rate. 
• Inadequate physical infrastructure at airports, costly land prices, inadequate digital 
process etc. have led to high dwell time of cargo. Inefficiencies and impediments add to 
Indian aviation logistics costs. 
 7.4. The Ministry has stated that by the year  2025, India is likely to become the third largest 
aviation market in the world. This would be possible only by making flying affordable to the 
masses and increasing supply side infrastructure. The Vision and plan for 5 years includes the 
following: 
• Airports Authority of India and private airport operators have drawn up a firm plan for 
investment of Rs. 89,000 crores by 2024 for modernisation and upgradation of terminal 
buildings, construction of new runways and constru ction of new airports; both in S tate 
as well as in the private sector 
• Greater private sector participation in Indian Aviation 
• Operationalize 100 more Airports in the next 5 yrs 
• Expand UDAN - 1000 routes and 100 Airports 
• Provide congenial environment for Indian Carriers to double fleet from 600  to 1200 by 
2025 
• Double share of Indian carriers in Long Haul Flights (beyond 5000 kms range) to above 
30 % 
• Provide an Ecosystem for Drones with regulatory framework for going from 0 to 10 
lakh legal drones 
• Make DGCA systems and procedures fully IT based 
• Make India an aircraft maintenance hub 
• Double pilots trained in India from 350 to 700 annually 
 
7.5. The Committee notes that the aviation industry in India has witnessed tremendous 
amount of growth over the last decade as is evident from the fact that India‟s domestic 
passenger throughput has reached around 137 million in FY 2019 -20 from 61 million in 

4 
 
FY 2013-14 and international passenger traffic has reached 67 million in FY 2019-20 from 
47 million in FY 2013 -14. Prior to the outbreak of C OVID-19 pandemic, the Indian civil 
aviation sector was growing at a CAGR of 14% and was among the fastest growing civ il 
aviation sector in the world. Despite India being the world‟s fastest growing aviation 
market, its airports are grappling with serious capacity constraints because such a pace of 
growth has resulted in a strain on the aviation infrastructure, resulting in traffic 
congestions and delays at majority of the airports. If a high growth in civil aviation sector 
is to be sustained, it is imperative to augment and modernize India‟s aviation 
infrastructure. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the AAI and p rivate airport 
operators have envisaged a modernization and development plan with an estimated cost 
of Rs. 89,000 crore by 2024. The Committee urges the Ministry to make privacy a focus of 
the regulatory framework for the Ecosystem of Drones. 
7.6.  The Committee urges upon the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and 
futuristic Master Plan for implementation of projects to provide world class airport 
infrastructure, by bringing in cutting edge technology and the global best practices of the 
aviation industry, so as to encourage growth in passenger and cargo traffic and catapult 
India into the league of top aviation markets within a period of 5 years. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to address not only the existing capacity constraints in vari ous 
airports , but also address infrastructural requirements in the context of growth scenario 
forecast for the coming years.  It should be strictly ensured that the 
development/upgradation of airport projects are completed as per the prescribed 
timelines.  
7.7. The Committee also urges the Ministry to ensure that adequate parking space and 
slots are available at the airports. The Committee notes that potential growth in the 
passenger and cargo traffic would require enormous investments in terms of construction 
of new airports and expansion and modernization of existing airport s. Given the risks, 
lenders are cautious about issuing long -term debt to airport operators. The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, 
to attract much needed investment for airport projects  so that the way for raising 
resources towards funding the development, modernization and upgradation plans of 
airports could be paved and multiple funding option including extern al commercial 
borrowing, capital markets long-term borrowing etc. could be explored. 
7.8.  The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that basic amenities are 
available at all the airports and that periodic maintenance is carried out efficiently . The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure sufficient space for commercial 
shops, while granting approval for new airports. Further, 5 Star/3 Star hotels and 

5 
 
multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should consider mandatorily earmarking minimum 100 acres of land, 
while making plans for future airports. The Committee also desires that extra land, if any, 
should not be sold and should be kept for future aviation developmental activities. 
8. The Committee has been given to understand  that there is a need to look at the 
entire structure of airports and the way the airport concessions are given. At present, the 
rights to operate airports are given to individuals or entities who bid the highest with the 
Airports Authority of India. When those services are given to the highest bidder, the 
highest bidder charges the highest amount of money from the airlines, which has little or 
no bearing on the actual cost of the service. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should look i nto these issues and take urgent steps to ensure that such 
anomalies and structural problems are rectified in the interest of the aviation sector. 
8.1. The Committee has been given to understand that large numbers of institutional 
clearances are required for airport projects, which lead to delays and cost escalation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should set up a single -window 
clearance mechanism to facilitate institutional clearances for airport projects and ensure 
timely completion of such projects. 
Regional Connectivity Scheme 
9.1. It has been stated in the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, that 
the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - Ude Desh Ka Aam Naagrik (UDAN) was launched   
on 21.10.2016. The first RCS-UDAN flight was inaugurated by Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 27th 
April, 2017. 303 routes connecting airports across the length and breadth of the country have 
commenced. Within  3 years, 53 airports including 5  heliports and 2 water aerodromes have 
been developed and operationalized under UDAN as compared to 76 airports that have been 
developed in 70  years since independence. Over  five million passengers have travelled on 
UDAN flights, as of the end of November 2020. Newer modes of air transportation have  been 
introduced under UDAN including seaplanes, helicopters and flights via smaller aircrafts. 
9.2. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation during the course of his deposition,  informed 
the Committee that under the UDAN scheme, 125 airports are operational and that by the end 
of 2024, 200 airports are expected to be operational. He stated that under this scheme, the 
Ministry d oes not give only one incentive.  There are several in centives given by both the 
Central Government as well as the State Governments, so that their operations become viable 
and at the same time, people are able to get tickets at affordable rates. He further stated that 
there will be two types of seats in an a ircraft, one is UDAN seats for which they cannot charge 
more than the fixed fare, and other is non -UDAN seats which are left for market forces. The 
airlines are given subsidy for the UDAN seats which is determined through a bidding process. 

6 
 
Moreover, the excise duty on ATF for UDAN routes is 2% only and AAI gives concessions on 
terminal and landing charges, parking charges and route navigation charges in the UDAN 
routes. The VGF is shared between Centre and the State in the ratio of 80:20. The State 
Government provides State police and fire services free of cost and water and electricity at 
concessional rates.  
Under the RCS, the airline operators are supported through: (i) concessions by the 
Central Government, State Governments and airport operators to reduce the cost of airline 
operations on regional routes; and (ii) financial support (Viability Gap Funding – VGF) to meet 
the gap, if any, between th e cost of operations and expected revenues on such routes. Regional 
Connectivity Fund is maintained by Regional Air Connectivity Fund Trust through collection 
of a levy @ INR 5000 per departure of domestic flight on Category -I & III routes except on 
specified small aircrafts. Further, State Government s/UT administration s contribute their 
specified share of VGF @20% or 10%, wherever applicable. VGF is disbursed to the Selected 
Airline Operators out of this fund. 
9.3. In its written reply, Ministry has stated  that to ensure the benefit of air connectivity to 
small cities/ towns, following modalities have been finalized for limited operation of RCS - 
UDAN flights:- 
(i) All the Operational Routes in Priority Areas (North East Region, Hilly States 
and Islands) are permitted to resume operations. 
(ii) All Operational Helicopter Routes are permitted to resume operations. 
(iii) All Operational Routes with Zero VGF are permitted to resume operations. 
(iv) All Operational Routes up to 500 km Stage Length are permitted to resume 
operations. 
(v) Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) are allowed to operationalize awarded routes 
under UDAN (including Seaplanes) covered under above categories. 
(vi) lf willing to operate without VGF support, SAOs may operate Tourism RCS 
routes (T-RCS) or RCS routes with stage length more than 500 km in areas other 
than Priority Areas. However, other incentives for the respective routes as per the 
scheme document would continue to be available for the contract period. 
(vii) SAOs have also been allowed to operate RCS routes with stage length more than 
500 km as per the respective SAO agreements in cases where: 
a. Operation of such route(s) is necessary for repositioning of aircraft for a 
network which consists of all other RCS routes belonging to the above categories. 
b. Non operation of such RCS routes would lead to the airport(s) being connected 
by such routes to become unserved as per   the Scheme document. 

7 
 
9.4. The Committee takes note that RCS has enabled the common man to fly at affordable 
prices; resulted in increased air traffic ; has given boost to the regional economy ; and led to job 
creation. The Committee feels that while the RCS is a novel idea to promote regional 
connectivity, its success will depend entirely on buy -in from various stakeholders including 
Governments, local bo dies and airport operators. The Committee recognizes that RCS has 
generated huge demand for helicopters and small aircrafts for operations in hilly regions and 
other parts of the country.  The Committee hopes that increased connectivity will lead to the 
development of remote areas, enhance trade and commerce and expand tourism.  
9.5. The Committee appreciates the positive impact that the RCS Scheme has had, on the 
growth of the civil aviation sector in the country. The Scheme has not only made air travel 
affordable and extensive, it has given a massive boost to the development of airpo rts and 
infrastructure development in the civil aviation arena. The Committee notes that UDAN has 
helped airline operators in developing sustainable business models and in providing start -up 
and scale-up opportunities to small regional airlines. UDAN has also provided the much needed 
impetus to the economic development of remote regions and has contributed to a more 
inclusive growth in the economic activity across the country. It has also contributed majorly to 
job growth and economic development in the country.  
9.6. The Committee notes that although the airlines industry got a huge fillip with the 
launch of RCS, which is aimed at making flying affordable for the masses and facilitating/ 
stimulating regional air connectivity and the passenger traffic has sh own a rising trend 
due to low cost aviation, air connectivity is largely confined to routes connecting State 
capitals and large towns and some parts of the country still remain unconnected by air 
services. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Minis try of Civil Aviation 
should take urgent effective steps to ensure  balanced growth of connectivity in different 
parts of the country under  RCS. The Committee also desires that the benefits under the 
Regional Connectivity Scheme, currently restricted to thr ee years, should be extended by 
another two years, to give airlines an opportunity to transform a fledgling route into a 
strong and revenue-generating one. 
9.7. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the UDAN Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of 
the Scheme.  
9.8. The Committee observes that direct air connections to tourist destinations and 
cultural sites can massively promote the tourism industry which will lead to employment 
opportunities and faster economic growth. There is, therefore,  an imperati ve need for 
close co-ordination between the Ministry of Civil Aviation, and the Ministries of Tourism 

8 
 
and Culture, in matters regarding air connectivity to important tourist destinations and 
cultural sites in the country. Hence, the Committee recommends th e Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, to work in tandem with the Ministries of Culture and Tourism, in order to open 
up India‟s vast tourism potential and ensure greater harmony among the concerned 
Ministries, who are vital stakeholders in this regard. 
10. The Committee has been given to understand that out of the 778 valid routes awarded 
under the UDAN Scheme, only 315 routes have been commenced so far, which is less than 
40% of what were awarded. 
10.1. The Committee takes note of the fact that  out of the 778 routes awarded under 
RCS, only 315 have been operationalised so far. The Committee desires that the Ministry 
should examine the reasons for non -commencement of routes that have already been 
awarded under the UDAN Scheme; identify the bottle necks in this regard; and chalk out 
strategic steps to address the issues involved.  
10.2. The Committee notes that there are a number of non -operational airstrips/airports 
owned by AAI and State Governments. Since provision of airport infrastructure is 
Capital intensive, the Minist ry should focus on optimally utilizing  existing airport 
infrastructure and operationalizing unused airstrips and dormant airports for promoting 
regional/remote area air connectivity under RCS. The Committee is of the view that 
operationalizing these inactive AAI and State Government airstrips will not only release 
significant untapped infrastructure capacity in the aviation industry , but also contribute 
to reducing the airport charge airline cost structure. 
11. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that challenges faced in 
implementation of the UDAN Scheme include:- 
i) Lack of infrastructure of civil airports due to non -availability of land, delay related to 
compliance of the regulations by the airport operators, lack of road connectivity to the airports. 
ii) Non-completion of the process involved in obtaining Scheduled Commuter Operators Permit 
by the Airlines.  
11.1. The Ministry has further stated that regular follow -up meeting and monitoring  of 
progress of RCS -UDAN is conducted with stakeholders viz., DGCA, AAI, Airlines,  State 
Govts. etc. for operationalization of RCS routes. 
11.2. The Committee feels that at this juncture, the issues that need to be addressed are 
lack of infrastructure of civil airports due to non -availability of land, delay related to 
compliance of the regulations by the airport operators , lack of road connectivity to the 
airports etc.  The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to address the 
issues faced under  RCS. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take 
urgent remedial steps to address these concerns.  The Committee also notes that the 

9 
 
promotion of regional air connectivity under RCS critically hinges on the support from 
the State Governments in the shape of multimodal connectivity, utilities, land availability, 
security etc. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
impress upon the State Governments to form a dedicated mechanism mandated to offer 
one-stop solutions t o airline and airport operators with the objective of promoting 
regional air connectivity under RCS. 
Air Cargo 
12.1. Air cargo is vital to the growth of international trade and economy of the country.  High 
value commodities or perishable commodities rely significantly on air cargo. The air cargo 
industry in India needs much faster movement of goods and better delivery mechanism. The 
Committee understands that local players in air cargo operations in In dia are very few  despite 
the huge potential available in this sector . There is an urgent need to build our national air 
cargo capacity. Having Indian players in this field would ensure reduction in flight costs. The 
COVID-19 crisis has revealed the importa nce of air cargo operations in keeping critical supply 
chains open. 
12.2. The representatives of private airlines, while deposing before the Committee, stated that 
there are barriers in various countries with respect to the airlines of India , going in and coming 
out with the cargo, whereas India has not placed such restrictions. 
12.3. In January 2019, Government of India released its National Air Cargo Policy Outline 
2019, which envisaged making Indian air cargo and logistics the most efficient, seamless an d 
cost and time effective glob ally, by the end of next decade. The National Civil Aviation Policy 
2016 has targeted to increase air cargo volumes to 10 million metric tonnes by 2027.  
12.4. In the background note fu rnished by the Ministry , it has been stated that  air 
cargo traffic is not commensurate with the market size.  Air cargo at Indian airports was 
3.56 million metric to nnes in 2018-19 which dipped to 3.33 million  metric tonnes during 
2019-20 as a result of economic downturn due to COVID-19. Out of 3.33 MMT, the 
share of international air cargo was 2 MMT. As per data published by Airports Council 
International , the top three busiest airports for cargo movement during 2019  were Hong 
Kong (4.81 MMT), Memphis (4.32 MMT) and Shanghai  (3.63 MMT).   Air freight is  
about seven times more expensive as compared to road and rail transport in the domestic 
sector and it is estimated that the Indian carriers account for only about 5-10% of the movement 
of international cargo through freighters. 
12.5. The Ministry has informed the Committee that following steps  have been taken/are 
proposed to be taken in  the air cargo sector: 
 Focus on creating new International & Domestic cargo facilities as well as augmentation 
of existing cargo infrastructure with emphasis at North Eastern Region. 
 

10 
 
 Engage in the creation of Centre for Perishable cargo/Cold storages to ensure enhanced 
perishable cargo facilities at its airports. 
 
 UDAN for medical cargo 
 
Post lockdown due to Covid -19 situation, the Ministry announced “Lifeline Udan” initiative 
to transport essential medical supplies to various parts of the country with a special focus on 
North East and hill States and islands. 
 
Majority of medical cargo was carried by Air India, Alliance Air and IAF. Private carriers 
also pitched in whenever required. Pawan Hans Ltd also carried essential medical supplies to 
the remote areas of J&K and Ladakh. 
 
 Krishi UDAAN:- 
 
Under Krishi Udaan, smooth movement of the commodities for agricultural & marine 
products movements for both Domestic & International sectors has been ensured. 
 
A total of about 28,000 MT handled through this scheme so far. 
 
Also, relief measures have been provided to various Stakeholders during COVID19 
Pandemic. 
12.6. The Committee notes that besides geographical location, India‟s cargo industry 
has the advantage of a growing economy along with a population of 1.3 billion plus 
India‟s impressive growth in international and domestic trade in the last decade. 
However, despite tremendous potential, India‟s total annual freight volumes stood at 3.33 
MMT in fiscal 2019 -20 and has not reached close to a ny one of the top three world -class 
airports, viz., Hong Kong, Memphis and Shanghai. The Committee is constrained to note 
that the total air cargo throughput handled by all Indian airports put together is less than 
that handled by individual airports like Hong Kong, Memphis and Shanghai. It is, 
therefore, evidently clear that de spite having all t he ingredients to be one of the world‟s 
air cargo hubs, India has not fully realized its potential in terms of air cargo. The 
Committee is of the view that inadequate infrastructure is a major bottleneck in 
developing the country‟s air cargo sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should take effective steps to address the crippling infrastructure constraints 
by way of establishing dedicated cargo airports in the country and developing new 
airports with a focus on making them cargo hubs so that the Min istry‟s ambitious cargo 
throughput target  of 10 MMT by 2027 could be realized. 
12.7. The Committee is aware that the air cargo industry is hamstrung by paper -driven 
legacy systems and procedures. Since automation is critical for air freight to maintain its 
competitiveness, the Committee recommends that  the Ministry, in tandem with the 
stakeholders, should take effective measures to automate information systems as well as 

11 
 
streamline or simplify redundant processes and regulations for faster, transparent and 
seamless movement of air cargo. 
12.8. The Committee has been given to understand that due to the Open Sky Policy for 
cargo in India, foreign carriers carry 90 to 95 percent of the total international cargo to 
and from India, while Indian air cargo operators face all sorts of barriers when they go 
into other countries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that for providing a level 
playing field for Indian air cargo operators, the Ministry should make appropriate 
changes in the Open Sky Policy for cargo. The Committee also recommends that 
Ministry/DGCA s hould take note of Indian cargo operators facing discriminatory and 
restrictive practices or regulatory impediments in operating international cargo flights in 
any of the foreign countries and take urgent steps to address/resolve them. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken and the outcome achieved in 
this regard.  
12.9. The Committee is aware that in September, 2020, the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
restricted non-scheduled freighter flights by international carrier s to six Indian airp orts, 
viz., Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad, with the objective of 
providing a level playing field for Indian air cargo operators. The Committee desires to 
know, as to what extent this action has been able to ensure equal opportunities for Indian 
carriers. 
12.10. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take timely action to address 
the issues of congestion at the entry of terminal, inadequate screening, inadequate storage 
space, lack of temperature facility etc. a t the cargo terminals. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should take steps to ensure that attractive and uniform 
transit handling costs and procedures are implemented across all airports in the country.  
Helicopter operations 
13.1. Helicopters are involved in air travel, rescue operations, emergency operations and 
medical evacuation operations. There exists an immense potential for helicopter operations in 
India. The major roadblock in increasing the number of helicopter operations in India is that the 
regulations governing civil helicopters in India are very restrictive, making the operation of 
helicopters unviable. A vital concern in this area is building of heliports, for which the support 
of State Governments is crucial.  
13.2. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that under RCS-UDAN, 
31 heliports have been identified in 2
nd round of bidding. Pawan Hans, the designated 
Technical Advisor for development of Heliports , has submitt ed DPRs to concerned State 

12 
 
Governments  for upgradation. Operations under RCS has  commenced from three heliports in 
Uttarakhand. 
13.3. The Committee is of the considered view that much more attention needs to be 
given to helicopter operations in the countr y. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should address the issues of  proper maintenance of helicopters, replacement of 
aged helicopters and training of the crew, on priority basis. The Committee emphasizes 
the need for simulator module training for h elicopter pilots for offshore landing. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent steps to ensure a network of 
heliports, in order to give necessary boost to the helicopter operations in the country.  The 
Committee underlines the need for  greater co-operation between the Ministry and State 
Governments for building heliports in the country. 
Seaplanes 
14.1. The Committee notes that s eaplanes boost regional air connectivity, without the high 
cost of constructing airports and runways. The fact  that there are numerous water bodies such 
as rivers and inland waterways in India, presents a huge potential which is yet to be exploited to 
the fullest. 
14.2. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation deposed before the Committee that India has 
huge potential in terms of Water aerodromes which has not been exploited so far. He stated that 
the Ministry will be targeting remote areas and tourist destinations for the purpose. He stated 
that MoUs have been signed with 30 States/UTs.  
14.3.   In its written re ply, the Ministry has stated that to provide air connectivity to remote 
areas at affordable cost, Ministry of Civil Aviation has included seaplane operations from water 
aerodromes, a novel means of transport, in the third round of bidding under RCS -UDAN. 
Airports Authority of India, the implementing agency has awarded routes connecting 12 water 
aerodromes, viz., Neil Island, Havelock Island,   Long Island, Statue of Unity, Shatrunjay Dam, 
Sabarmati River Front,  Parkasam Barrage, Guwahati River Front, Nagarj una Sagar, Umrangso 
Reservoir, Minicoy, Kavaratti for seaplane operations across the country so far. On 31 st 
October 2020, Hon‟ble Prime Minister inaugurated 2 water aerodromes at Sabarmati Riverfront 
and Statue of Unity, Kevadia, in Gujarat and seaplane o perations from these water aerodromes 
have commenced from 31.10.2020.  To enable development of infrastructure for water 
aerodrome, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has been holding regular meetings with IWAI 
(Inland Waterways Authority of India) for development of waterside infrastructure. The Airport 
Operator will develop the City  side infrastructure for Seaplane Operations. Ministry of Civil 
Aviation is planning to sign a MoU for development of waterside infrastructure. 

13 
 
14.4. There is immense potential for seaplanes operations in the country.  However, such 
potential has not yet been exploited fully. The seaplane services will revolutionize the 
nation‟s regional connectivity. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the 
Ministry to encourage seaplane operations. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should put in place, requisite policies and infrastructure to enable seaplane 
operations in India. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the 
necessary amenities matching up to international standards for seaplane operations, such 
as terminal buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters, modern ticketing methods, 
food counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, for the smooth operati on of 
seaplanes. The Committee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a „Seaplane 
Policy‟.  
Intra State connectivity 
15.1. Intra-State aviation services can make movement of people between cities faster and 
more efficient. This is one aspect of air connectivity which needs more attention. The growth in 
the tourism sector in the country and the increasing demand for quicker means of travel have 
resulted in increased air travel opportunities within the States. This has given rise to more 
demand for Intra-State air connectivity. 
15.2. The Committee feels that much more needs to be done to improve intra -State air 
connectivity and to cater to the ever increasing demand.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should chalk out a strategy, after due consultation with the State 
Governments, in order to give significant boost to intra -State air connectivity. The 
Ministry should also engage with the tourism and industry stakeholders, in this regard. 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) prices and aviation taxes 
16.1. Members of the Committee have, repeatedly, been raising serious concerns about the 
high cost of ATF prevailing in the country and the resultant exorbitant ticket prices existing in 
various sectors of air travel. 
16.2. The representatives of private airlines deposed before the Committee that Indian 
aviation fuel is taxed in the highest possible slab. No country in the world of equivalent size or 
equivalent aviation market taxes fuel at our rates. On an average, our fuel taxes range between 
35 per cent and 40 per cent of the total cost of operation of an airline, inclusive of excise duty 
and sales tax. Besides, certain States have very high sales tax rates. The representatives of 
private airlines also suggested that ATF may be brought under the ambit of GST. 
16.3. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation apprised the Committee that the major 
component of ATF price is the State tax that is levied on it. He stated that the Ministry has 
taken up the proposal with the Ministry of Finance to bring ATF under GST and that the matter 
is pending with the GST Council. 

14 
 
16.4. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that cost of ATF is a 
formidable challenge for the financial health of airlines and that the fo llowing measures are 
being taken/are proposed to be taken to resolve this long standing issue:- 
• M/o Civil Aviation has requested M/o Finance to bring ATF under the ambit of GST 
with the following proposals for coherence and simplicity in the tax regime: 
 Applicable GST rate on ATF may be no higher than 12% with full input tax credit. 
 Output tax on sale of tickets both on business and economy air passenger transport 
services may be levied at a uniform rate of 12%. 
 Output tax on other services, namely air cargo transport, and ancillary services such 
as Catering, Premium Services and Services on Add-ons may be levied at 12%. 
 Airlines may be allowed full input tax credit for GST paid on all goods and services. 
• The Ministry has also requested various State Gov ernments to provide full support for 
bringing ATF within the GST‟s ambit at the earliest during the deliberations on the 
matter in the GST Council, and in the interregnum to reduce the VAT/Sales Tax on 
ATF at the airports in their State. VAT/Sales Tax appl icable on ATF on non -RCS-
UDAN flights have been reduced/ kept low to within 5% by States/UT such as Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat (at some airports), Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Punj ab, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh (at some airports), and West Bengal. 
• Excise Duty on ATF was reduced from 14% to 11% in October, 2018. 
• Fuel Throughput (Airport Operator) Charge levied by Airport Operators on ATF has 
been eliminated vide MoCA‟s Order dated 8 January 2020 at all airports, airstrips and 
heliports across India. 
16.5. The Committee takes serious note of the high ATF p rices prevailing in the country 
which is further aggravated by high taxes such as customs duty, excise duty, sa le/State 
tax, Value Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon.  The Committee has been given to 
understand that the cost of ATF nearly forms 40% of the total operating cost of airlines 
and impacts the financial viability of their operations and hurts their competitiv eness 
because Indian carriers are unable to compete against their global counterparts on 
account of the exorbitantly higher prices of ATF.  The Committee is constrained to note 
that ATF prices in the country are distorted because it is subjected to multipl e taxes by 
different Government entities. The airline industry is capital -intensive and works on very 
thin profit margins. This is why most Indian carriers are reeling under losses despite 
tremendous growth in air traffic. Therefore, relief on ATF  is crucial for the viability of 
airline industry and would be a major incentive for airlines to augment their operations.  

15 
 
16.6. The Committee is happy to note the steps taken by State Governments in reducing 
the VAT on ATF for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The Committee observes 
that ATF prices in India are currently under VAT regime which is u nder the purview of 
individual States and the variation in the taxes ranges from 1% to 30%. Since fuel cost 
accounts for nearly 40% of the operating cost of the airlines industry, even a small relief 
in the pricing will be a boon for the industry. However, the Committee is concerned to 
note that the State Governments have shown reluctance to reduce the VAT on ATF for 
flights other than those operated under UDAN scheme. The Committee is of the view that 
reduction in VAT on ATF would be a notional revenue loss for the States, which can be 
offset by enhanced economic activities, which would be the result of increased air 
connectivity to the region. The Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue this issue 
with the State Governments, in order to rationalize and minimize the State level 
taxes/surcharges on ATF and bring much needed relief and help, to the airline sector.  
16.7. The Committee is of the opinion that ATF is a small component of overall 
petroleum products and hence, deserves to be treated separately . The Committee notes 
that despite ATF being an input fuel (similar to coal and gas), the issue of inclusion of 
ATF under GST has been a long standing i ssue and requires final resolution by the GST 
Council.  
16.8. As regards high aviation taxes, the Committee feels that the Indian aviation 
industry is laden with very high operating and fixed costs, in view of which there is a need 
for considering aviation  sector for priority sector lending, so that the industry could get 
access to funds at cheaper rates. The Committee also underlines the need for unbundling 
of products and pricing to the customer. 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) 
17.1. The Committee  feels that MRO facilities available in the country is another area of 
concern. The country has the necessary manpower and resources for undertaking MRO 
activities. We can easily set up facilities here and be self -reliant in that area and then compete 
with MRO hubs around the world. The Committee notes that e xpenditure in MRO accounts for 
12-15 per cent of the total revenues i.e., it is the second-highest expense after fuel cost. 
17.2. The representatives of private airlines deposed before the Committee tha t due to the 
taxation structure in India, our aircrafts are sent overseas for repairs. They opined that since 
India has the necessary manpower, technology and skills for aircrafts repairing, it is high time 
that India emerged as a major player in the MRO sector.  
17.3. One of the private airlines, in its written reply, has stated that there are two Airframe 
MROs in private sector, but they cater largely to domestic market and very little work for 

16 
 
foreign airlines. There is no worthwhile Component Maintenanc e Facility, no Landing Gear 
Overhaul Facility or Jet Engine Overhaul Shop in India. 
17.4. In the background note furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated  that GST on direct 
MRO contracts has been  reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax Credit from 1 April 
2020. Transactions sub-contracted by foreign manufacturers/ MROs to Indian MROs are treated 
as “exports” with zero -rated GST from 1 April 2020.  Collaboration with the Indian armed 
forces is on to open up more opportunities for civilian MROs. 
17.5. In its written reply, the Ministry has stated that for the development of MRO Sector, the 
following actions were taken by the Ministry:  
 
(a) Tax regime for MRO ecosystem has been rationalized: 
 
Status: The tax regime for MROs has now been substantially rationalized as below: 
i. Import Duty has been exempted on Special Tools and Equipment for MRO 
ii. Customs duty waived that applied to spares only for Airlines extended to MRO 
iii. Aircraft brought into country for  MRO allowed to stay from 1 month to 6 months 
without penalties 
iv. Spares purchased for MRO can be consumed upto 36 months (up from 12 months) 
from time of landing in India 
v. GST on Domestic MRO reduced from 18% to 5% w.e.f. 01.04.2020 
vi. Sub-contracted transactions to domestic MRO by foreign MRO now treated as 
“exports” with zero-rated GST w.e.f. 01.04.2020 
 
 
(b) Aircraft component repairs and airframe maintenance to increase from Rs. 800 crore to Rs. 
2,000 crore in three years: 
 
Status: Private sector, including Collins Aerospace, has taken up setting up of Componen t 
MROs. 
 
(c) Major engine manufacturers in the world would set up engine repair facilities in India in 
the coming year: 
 
Status: SAFRAN is expected to start  engine repairs in India by 2021 entailing  investment of 
about ~US$ 150 Million. Towards finalizing the location of the Engine Shop, they  have 
identified some locations and held talks with airport operators and State Governments 
concerned. Status report conveyed by SAFRAN on 3 July 2020 was as follows: “Due to 
COVID19 pandemic, the aviation industry suddenly got a huge blow 
not only in India but worldwide and therefore, SAFRAN  is  assessing  the  impact  of  such 
pandemic and more particularly on project timelines.” 
 
Pratt & Whitney has started engine repair in association with AIESL. 
 
(d) Convergence  between defence sector and the civil MROs will be established to create 
economies of scale: 
 
Status: A Joint Working Group has been formed to undertake facility mapping and draw up 
areas and resources that can be shared for achieving convergence. 

17 
 
 
Civil MROs in the meetings held have indicated their intention to take up following defence 
MRO works: 
(i) MI-17: Interior refurbishment/upgrade; 
(ii) Airframe checks on P8I, including avionics; 
(iii) Avionics upgrades/ painting jobs on BBJ aircraft; 
(iv) Heavy maintenance on defence VVIP aircraft; 
(v) Maintenance of Embraer Platforms of CABS; 
(vi) IL76 avionics; 
(vii) Avionics modifications and maintenance on Avro, Mig-1, MI-17. 
 
(e) Maintenance cost for airlines will come down. 
  In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that regarding the MRO 
policy, the Ministry is going to reduce the taxes on equipment coming into our country. 
            The tax regime for MROs has now been substantially rationalized as below: 
• Import Duty has been exempted on Special Tools and Equipment for MRO (2016 -
17). 
• Customs duty waived that applied to spares only for Airlines extended to MRO 
(2016-17). 
• Aircraft brought into country for MRO allowed to stay from 1 month to 6 months 
without penalties (2017-18). 
• Spares purchased for MRO ca n be consumed upto 36 months (up from 12 months) 
from time of landing in India (2017-18) 
• GST on Domestic MRO reduced from 18% to 5% w.e.f. 1st April, 2020. 
• Sub-contracted transactions to domestic MRO by foreign MRO now treated as 
“exports” with zero-rated GST w.e.f. 1st April, 2020. 
• Input Tax Credit permitted for discharging GST on inter -state stock transfers of 
aircraft engines, parts and spares, including for MRO, against economy class fares. 
• Proposal for uniform IGST of 5% on all parts, including engine parts, taken up with 
Ministry of Finance. 
  
Other changes made include the following: 
• Customs duty waived on tools and tool-kits for MRO 
• Custom duty waiver on imported spares applicable to airlines extended to MROs 
• Restriction to consume spares/parts purchased duty-free for MRO within 12 months 
eased out to 36 months from time of import into India 
• Period of stay for foreign aircraft brought to India for MRO work extended from 
one month to cover the entire period of maintenance or up to 6 months, whichever is 
lesser, without attracting Customs‟ penalties. For stay beyond 6 months, DGCA‟s 
permission is required. 
  
 MRO facilities co -located at an airport covered under „Harmonized List of 
Infrastructure‟ for attracting fiscal support of infrastructure sector. 
17.6. The Committee observes that India has the potential to be an MRO hub due to 
locational advantage, growing aircraft fleet, low labour costs and the natural talent to 
drive innovation. However, the country has not yet been able to fully exploit the 
opportunities available in this sector and a major deterrent for growth of the MRO 
industry is high taxation of MRO components. Aircraft MRO services are critical in 
aviation value chain and i t would be of a huge loss for the country, if we do not tap the 
vast technical and skill base available in the country. The Committee takes note of the 

18 
 
various steps taken by the Ministry to rationalize the tax regime for MROs and promote 
MRO activities in the country. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
should give requisite focus on the issues presently faced in the MRO sector and remove 
the remaining policy distortions and address regulatory limitations to ensure that India 
evolves into a key international player in offering MRO facilities. The Committee  
recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure that MRO 
workshops are set up in all the metro cities in the country , in order to attract 
international business. The Committee also emphasizes the need for enhanced 
collaboration between defence and civil MROs. 
17.7 The Committee could understand that whenever any airline enters into an agreement 
with the airline manufacturers for procurement of new aeroplanes, the manufacturing company 
insists upon the purchasing company to enter into a contract for maintenance of the aircraft also 
in their country, even though that facility may be available in the country of the purchasing 
company. The Committee is of the considered view that this contract clause hampers the 
growth of local MRO industry i n our country.  The Committee, therefore, desires that in 
order to give much desired fillip to the local MRO industry, the Ministry should devise a 
suitable MRO policy which will help the growth of local MRO industry, whereby, 
employment opportunities can be created for the local youth. 
Global Hubs 
18.1. The Committee is of the view that India can evolve to be an aviation hub offering transit 
and trans-shipment for international movement in passengers and cargo. India urgently needs to 
create its own global hubs so that people can transit from there to different parts of the world. 
18.2. The representatives of private airlines underscored the huge potential for India to be a 
global aviation hub, keeping in view its strong market and superb geographical locat ion. They 
highlighted the need to take measures that prioritize the interests of regional airlines over 
foreign counterparts, much like other countries do. 
18.3. The Committee takes note of the immense possibilities which exist in the country, 
which if pro perly explored, will enable India to rise up as a global aviation hub. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should give proper thought and deliberation to 
this aspect and take necessary concrete action to tackle the hurdles posed in this regard. 
The Committee highlights the need for change in the policies of traffic flow in such a way 
that India captures the air space for hub and spoke mechanism. 
Encouraging aviation leasing and financing activities in India 
 
19.1. In the background note furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that e ven though 
the share of leased aircraft in India is about 70% of the total fleet, Indian carriers rely solely on  
overseas leasing companies due to various regulatory and taxation related  issues. Aircraft and 

19 
 
engine leasing and financing have been recognized as financial activities  in the International 
Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (IFSC Authority  Act, 2019). Releasing of 
aircraft and engines on expiry or termination of existing lease has been enabled.  A number of 
tax concessions in terms of Corporate Tax, GST and Stamp Duty etc. have been provided. 
 
19.2. The Ministry has stated that there is a need to: - 
 
a. Engage with the global aviation leasing and financing companies and 
encourage them to use the various incentives provided under IFSC 
Authority Act, 2019. 
b. Encourage Indian financial institutions to enter into the aircraft leasing 
business. 
c. Encourage Indian carriers to gradually shift to leasing players located in 
India. 
d. Engage with tax authorities to ensure seamless operation of aircraft leasing 
companies in India. 
 
19.3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to 
encourage Indian financial institutions to enter into the aircraft leasing and financing 
business. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to examine the regulations existing in 
the country in this field, identify the bottlenecks and modify the regulations, as per the 
present and future requirements. 
Role of State Governments 
20.1. Civil Aviation, being a Central subject, gets little attention from the State Governments. 
It is evident from the fact that very few States in India have active Civil Aviation Departments. 
The co -operation of States is a major factor in the growth of the civil aviation sector. The 
Regional Connectivity Scheme, Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik (UDAN), has become a game 
changer, since this flagship programme provides a mechanism to develop the stakes of State 
Governments in the growth of the aviation sector. The Union and State Governments also  
provide Viability Gap Funding, which is shared between Ministry of Civil Aviation and the 
State Government in the ratio of 80:20, whereas for the State in North Eastern region/Union 
Territories the ratio is 90:10. The airlines are required to commit aroun d 50 percent of the seats 
as RCS seats (limited to 40 seats) on RCS flights. 
20.2. The Committee is of the view that incentives by State Governments in the form of 
financial support such as  VAT reduction, sharing of viability gap funding with airlines 
and non-financial incentives such as  providing security and fire services free of cost to 
airport operators, are required. The Committee feels that States which are apprehensive 
of revenue loss, need to think about the enhancement of economic activities which would 
result due to increased air connectivity to the region, in the long run.  States may adapt 

20 
 
their re levant schemes  relating to tourism, health and insurance , for supporting air 
connectivity, in order to supplement the objectives of regional connectivity. 
20.3. Land acquisition  is a major problem due to land scarcity and huge capital 
requirement. The Comm ittee feels that t here are many regional airports which can be 
developed by States on their own or in collaboration with the Airports Authority of 
India (AAI) and that  the State Governments should explore the setting up of „no -frill 
airports‟. 
20.4. The Committee understands that major airports find it difficult to allocate slots to 
regional airlines, which mostly fly turboprop aircraft s that take longer to land and take 
off. This forces some of the regional airlines to depend on larger aircraft, which do not 
have adequate demand. The Committee is of the view that if the States  tie up with the 
tourism boards and other tourism stakeholders and formulate packages in order to 
market potential tourist destinations under the RCS scheme, it would attract more 
passengers, thereby, enhancing the demand for air travel. 
Krishi Udan 
21.1. The Krishi Udan Scheme was approved on 10th September, 2020 to grow domestic and 
international air freight of agri -produce and to enhance share of Indian carriers in international 
movement of all types of cargo. It would  help improve value realization, especially in North-
East and tribal  districts through better integration and optimization of agri-harvesting and air 
transportation and contributing to agri-value chain sustainability and resilience under 
different and dynamic conditions. 
21.2. The Committee recognizes the fact that Krishi  Udan has benefitted the local 
farmers and villagers whose products have higher value outside the region. This would 
boost the connectivity and thereby, economy in the region.  The Committee appreciates 
this Scheme and hopes that it would contribute to the welfare of the people in remote 
regions of the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take 
proactive steps to remove the existing bottlenecks at airports and in the supply chain.  The 
Committee hopes that this Scheme would provide the much needed quick cargo services 
to cater to the huge demand in the domestic and international markets, for the farm 
products of the North -Eastern region and other remote areas of the country. The 
Committee is happy to  note that the Scheme would ensure that perishable products find 
good markets and market value, in and outside the country, which would otherwise have 
gone wasted, owing to lack of storage and connectivity.  
Connectivity to North East and other remote areas 
22.1. The Committee notes that air connectivity would not only bring down travel time, but 
also is a boon in emergencies. This is true for North East India, the islands and also hilly States. 

21 
 
The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that improved air connectivity has changed the 
economic landscape of remote areas in the country, in a positive way. 
22.2. The Committee  notes that most of the places in the North Eastern Region are 
inaccessible d ue to inadequate road and rail facilities and the only viable means of 
transportation is by air. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Ministry should 
give due attention to air connectivity to North East and other remote areas of the country. 
The Ministry should engage with State Governments, regulators and air carriers to 
increase air connectivity to such regions. 
Need for greater co-ordination among various stakeholders 
23.1. The growth of the civil aviation sector depends on the growth of other sectors such as 
tourism in the country. Therefore, there is a need for synergy between the aviation sector and 
other related sectors. 
23.2. The Committee recognizes the need for the airlines to work closely with the State 
Tourism Departments and other stak eholders to ensure that sufficient passengers are 
available in all the sectors wherein the air carriers are operating.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure greater co -ordination among the various 
stakeholders in this regard. 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
24.1. The Committee has, on many occasions, been pointing towards poor connectivity of 
airports with roads and railways. This inadequacy has proved to be a stumbling block in the 
connectivity domain of the logistics, created for hassle free and seamless movement of man and 
materials, across the length and breadth of the country.  
24.2. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that requisite synergy is 
achieved between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, so that airports are 
well connected with other means of transport and tourists/flyers reach their destinations, 
from the airports in a smooth and safe manner. The Ministry should collaborate with the 
State Governments and other stak eholders to ensure that better road and rail 
connectivity is available from the airports. 
Necessary Navigation Aids at all Airports 
25.1. The Committee takes note of the issues related to landing/take off of flights during 
foggy weather and when runway visibility is poor. The Committee recognizes the need for the 
upgradation of air navigation infrastructure in India and to provide modern tec hnology, to keep 
pace with the international standards.  
25.2. The Committee is dismayed to note that regular delay in flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occur at various airports, due to non -availability of CAT -II or 
CAT-III facility. The Commi ttee fails to understand the reason s behind non-installation 

22 
 
of CAT II/ CAT facilities in such airports, in the present age of technology.  The 
Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and delays faced by the flyers and 
international & domestic tourists, due to such deficiencies at the airports. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the upgration of air navigation 
infrastructure in the country is kept in line with international standards. 
25.3. The Committee hopes that Moder nization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project 
which is a turn key project, would enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air 
operations of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, 
while enhancing aerospace saf ety. The Committee observes that  MAFI project of the 
Indian Air Force should decide and cull  out those activities which are primarily 
navigational equipment including approach landing systems, PAPI runway lights, 
threshold lights, instruments and equipment  etc., where AAI/ATS have a unique 
advantage, since they have been handling these systems across the country, for over seven  
decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is the primary  responsibility of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The utilizat ion of these navigational aids/approach 
landing systems/equipment etc., which have  been installed across the country,  is 
primarily done by the AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also  familiar with the 
quality procurement processes, maintenance and  operational requirements of these 
instruments which they  have been using for Civil operations for over fifty years. The  
Committee recommends that a  High Level Committee may  be created with the Indian 
Air Force to cull out those activities  related to navigation and landing facilities which are, 
primarily, in the domain  knowledge, with the AAI for Civil operations. The Committee 
recommends that apart from  this, the development of the rest of the infrastructure 
planned under the MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, for  a greater synergy 
between civil aviation requirements and operational requirements of Indian Air Force.  
25.4. The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically 
advanced navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should 
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed 
time bound period. 
Shortage of availability of slots for turboprop aircrafts 
26.1. The Committee could understand that at many times, shortage of availability of slots for 
smaller turboprop aircrafts operations from metros like Delhi and Mumbai  has been 
experienced. The Committee expresses its concern on this issue and desires that the 
Ministry should take urgent timely action to address this concern. 
Shortage of pilots 

23 
 
27.1. The Committee notes that it is a matter of grave concern that the country needs about 
1000 pilots a year and that only around 200 to 300 pilots are trained, which leads to shortage of 
type rated commanders in the country.  
27.2. The Committee strongly feels that with the huge manpower potential and skilled 
workforce available in the country, it is important that these resources are tapped into. 
The Committee recognizes the fact that the Indian aviation industry is one of the fastest 
growing markets in the world  which has witnessed exponential growth of airline fleets. 
Though India has a vast talent pool of skilled manpower, it has not been able to match the 
requirement of pilots. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need for proactive action 
for skill development/training in the country, to augment the skills of available 
manpower. The Committee recommends the Ministry to formulate futuristic plans for 
devising tailor -made technical courses for skill development, training and research, in 
consultation with the private sector  also. The Committee is of the considered opinion that 
the Ministry should incorporate international best practices, in the area of skill 
development. 
 
Pilot Training Institutes 
28.1. In the written reply of the Ministry, it has been stated that:- 
• India has sub -optimal capacity/availability (in terms of simulators), to train required 
number of pilots. 
• Indian FTOs are facing several challenges like sub -optimal fleet size, high rent, old 
fleet, lack of adequate no of trainers,  sub-optimal facilities and weather issues are some 
of the reasons why students prefer to train outside India. Efforts are being made to 
address the issues at the earliest. 
• CPLs issued during the last 5 years are as under: 
  
Year No. of CPL issued based on 
training in Indian FTO 
Conversion of foreign 
CPL to Indian CPL 
Total 
2016 376 161 537 
2017 358 194 552 
2018 415 225 640 
2019 430 314. 744 
(Upto 
1 Dec 2020) 
303 219 522 
Total 1882 1113 2995 
  
• With a view to utilising optimally  the infrastructure at AAI airports and also to provide 
CPL training in the country, to begin with, 6 AAI airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, 
Belagavi, Kalaburgi, Jalgaon and Salem) have been permitted to allow the FTOs to 
operate at their premises. 
• The payment  of license fee and concession fee by the FTOs has been rationalised to 
enable them to operate. This initiative will provide the necessary training facilities for 
commercial pilot licensing within the country. 

24 
 
28.2. Keeping in view the growth in the Indian aviation industry and shortage of pilots 
faced in India, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should give serious thought 
to setting up of new Institutes for Pilot Training and to revamp the existing ones by 
providing modern simulators and also augment the capacity intake of students in the 
existing Institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should envisage setting 
up of Pilot Training Institute adjacent to the airport, at least in one airport, in each State. 
The Ministry should also take necessary steps to ensure that sufficient number of trainers 
are made available, by offering incentives which would attract them to this field.  
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
29.1. The Government set up the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi at Fursatganj in Rai 
Bareilly District of Uttar Pradesh in 1986 in order to standardize and improve facilities for 
flying training in the country. Till February, 2015 the Akademi had trained 10 63 commercial 
pilots and 701 pilots for Multi -Engine endorsement and refresher course etc. It is a well 
equipped school for training for commercial pilots' license. It is managed by a Governing 
Council. Initially, the Akademi was set up to train 40 pilots a year; but with the rapid growth of 
the Civil Aviation Sector, there is tremendous demand for trained and qualified pilots. 
29.2. The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated that induction 
of additional trainer aircraft is un der process to meet the increased demand of training and that 
the airspace area at base in Fusatganj airfield has also been expanded in the past to 
accommodate more aircraft at a time, undergoing training flight. 
29.3.   In its written reply, the Ministry has stated that IGRUA proposes to cater to the huge 
demand for pilots in India and abroad, in the following manner:- 
• The existing immovable infrastructure of IGRUA has the capacity to accommodate and 
train over 250 pilots in a year, which is an advantage to IGRUA for catering to huge 
demands. 
• Induction of additional trainer aircraft is under process to meet the increased demand of 
training. 
• In order to avail more airspace for training operation, IGRUA has already ventured out 
to utilize a satellite airspac e i.e., Gondia. Proposal is also underway to explore more 
vacant airspace wherever air traffic is less. The airspace area at base in Fursatganj 
airfield has also been expanded in the past to accommodate more aircraft at a time , 
undergoing training flight. 
• IGRUA‟s Air Traffic Control (ATC) tower has two operating channels, one for Tower 
and the other for Approach like other busy ATCs of the country handling civil aircraft 
traffic. Fully equipped Ground Navigation Aids like VOR ILS & DME makes the 
airfield suitable for carrying out instrument flying. 

25 
 
• The hostel and other infrastructure of Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University, which 
is established on IGRUA land adjacent to the airfield, is available for use, in case any 
such necessity may arise, so that th e infrastructure is utilized to its optimum to cater for 
increased demands. 
29.4. The  Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent  steps to ensure 
that the facilities available at IGRUA are optimally utilized and that more facilities may 
be added to cater to the increasing demand. 
Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) 
30.1. As per the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry, the following steps have been 
taken, as part of fiscal, monetary and procedural reforms, with a view to leverage the idl e 
capacity in Indian airports and create a congenial atmosphere for Flying Training Organizations 
(FTOs):- 
• To begin with, 6 airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, Kalaburgi, Jalgaon and Salem)  
have been permitted to allow the FTOs to operate at their pre mises on the basis of  
payment of substantially rationalised concession fee by the FTOs. 
• India‟s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start pilot 
training    in Gondia and Gulbarga. 
• IGRUA‟s operation and management is proposed to be handed over to a private operator 
on a PPP basis for 30 years. 
30.2. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry and urges upon the 
Ministry to take necessary action to ensure that world class facilities are available at the 
FTOs. 
Aero Club of India 
31.1. Aero Club of India (ACI), established in 1927 is registered under the Companies Act, 
1956. The objectives of Aero Club of India are to encourage, protect and develop the study and 
practice of Aeronautics and Aviation in India and to provide a Centre of Information and advice 
on all matters pertaining to Aerospace and flying training. It also provides an all India authority 
to organize all competitions and  sporting events in connection with Aero sports in India. ACI 
has 22 member flying c lubs which are primarily non -profit and non -commercial organizations 
engaged in the task of basic/ab-initio training of Pilots and Aircraft Maintenance Engineers. 
31.2. The Committee is given to understand  that training aircrafts and adventure sports 
equipment which were provided by the Aero Club of India to several  State Governments 
including the State of Rajasthan, Bangalore Flying Club and IIT Kanpur, have been lying 
unutilized for several years, while the Aero Club of India has  been making efforts to retrieve 
such aircrafts that are under-utilized or un-utilized by the State Governments. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 291 st Report, that ACI should be 

26 
 
supported by  the Government in retrieval of all such  underutilized or  unutilized aero 
sports assets provided by it for FTOs and development of aero sports, since they are 
Government property. 
31.3. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Aero Club of India has been functioning 
as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, figuring in O utcome Budget as 
well as the Annual Report of the Ministry. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the 
Aero Club of India (ACI) is audited by the CAG and also the Annual R eport of the Aero Club 
of India is tabled in Par liament. The Committee takes into account the contribution of ACI in 
Flying Training across the country, producing thousands of Commercial Pilots over the years. It 
is pertinent to note that the b uilding in the land of Aero Club of India  was allotted by th e 
Ministry of Tourism in the past and the building was constructed with the funds raised by Aero 
Club of India. However , it seems that  recovery petition for unauthorized stay was moved 
against ACI and penalty was imposed by AAI and thereafter , the ACI buil ding was evicted. It 
seems that the Government did not take note of the fact that the Aero Club of India is an arm of 
the Government like Pawan Hans, Airport s Authority of India, DGCA, IGRUA etc. The 
Committee feels that h aving instituted a rent recovery p enalty and thereafter , moving to the 
Court for eviction was an uncalled initiative by the AAI.    
31.4. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the  building of Aero Club of India 
which was used administratively by ACI for promoting Aero Sports and coordinating for 
Flying Training organizations , including giving infrastruct ure support to FTOs thr ough 
the grants by Government of India , should be restored to the Aero Club of India at the 
earliest for its smooth functioning. The Board of AAI should rest ore the building through 
an appropriate resolution, restoring its original status. 
Maintenance Engineering Training School 
32. The Committee recommends in this regard that the Ministry should undertake 
suitable policy initiatives for Pilot Training Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and 
Maintenance Engineering Training Schools in the country. The Committee desires that 
these initiatives should positively address the noticeable shortage of pilots and type rated 
commanders; and other technical p ersonnel, for the civil aviation sector in the country. 
The Committee exhorts the Ministry to facilitate the Pilot Training Institutes, Flying 
Training Organizations and Maintenance Engineering Training Schools, in tapping the 
manpower potential and skilled workforce available in the country. 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
33.1. The Committee feels that this scheme is likely to pose a huge challenge to the airlines in 
countries like India where the aviation market is still growing and the resources as well as 
options for national actions are limited. In view of  serious implications of CORSIA for the 

27 
 
Indian airlines in the long term, it is useful to  evaluate the impact of the scheme and analyse 
possible options, including administrative and economic measures, that the Indian aviation 
industry and the Indian airline authorities  should adopt to cope with the challenge of CORSIA. 
33.2. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 291st Report that urgent, 
substantive steps should be taken to allay the widespread concern/fear regarding serious 
adverse implications of CORSIA on the airlines in India. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that India‟s interests are protected at any cost,  keeping in view the 
vital role played by the civil aviation sector in the development and growth of our 
economy. The Committee desires that the concerns of India in this regard, should be 
raised at the diplomatic level, effectively. 
Biojet fuel 
34.1. The Committee understands that using Biojet fuel in aviation would reduce carbon 
emissions and reduce oil imports. This would also increase the income of farmers who grow the 
feedstock for this fuel.  
34.2. The Committee recommends that the Government shou ld encourage the use of 
Biojet fuel and envisage a policy in this regard. The Ministry should also engage 
necessary technological innovations to ensure that the use of Biojet fuel in aviation sector 
is promoted, wherever possible.  
Optimal utilization of the Indian airspace 
35.1. As per the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry, in the past, about 40% of the 
airspace was not available for civilian use. This resulted in aircraft s taking circuitous routes to 
reach their destinations. As per the background note furnished by the Ministry, route 
rationalization is now being carried out in collaboration with the Indian Air Force (IAF) and 
parts of the defence airspace are being released for civilian use. The potential savings to the 
airlines will be to the tune  of INR 1000 crores per annum. The overall benefit to the aviation 
ecosystem will be potentially much higher.  
35.2.  In its written reply , Ministry has stated that the possible solutions to losing the air 
space are as follows:- 
• Airspace in India has been traditionally having large areas reserved for military use, 
which resulted in civilian aircraft taking circuitous and longer routes resulting in more 
fuel burn and carbon emissions. 
• Upon directive of Govt. of India, MoCA, IAF and AAI had a series of meetings which 
resulted in IAF/Navy releasing airspace for civilian use above 33,000 feet in the 
Northern part of the country and above 25,000 feet in the Southern part of the country. 
• This released airspace is managed jointly by IAF/Navy and AAI with the establishment 
of National Airspace Management Cell (NAMC) w.e.f 1st August, 2020, wherein 

28 
 
special conditional routes through these parts of released airspace are authorized 24 
hours in advance to enable the civil flights to plan accordingly. 
• These shortene d routes have resulted in good savings for airlines arriving out of less 
fuel usage, also reduced carbon emissions. 
• One of the domestic airlines (Indigo) has indicated a saving of 6.52 crores and a 
cumulative reduction of  CO2 [carbon-di-oxide] emissions of  3532.06 tonnes since the 
National Airspace Management Cell (NAMC) commenced issuance of airspace use 
plan for the period 1st August to 15th December, 2020. 
• International Airport Transport Association (IATA) has also indicated the usage of a 
particular conditional route by upto 70 international flights a day significantly reducing 
the flying time and thereby costs. 
• Other domestic airlines and IATA have been requested to quantify the benefits for 
compilation. 
• In near future more such conditional routes are planned for use by civilian aircraft. 
35.3. The Committee hopes that the optimal utilization of Indian airspace will lead to 
reduction in flight time, fuel consumption and carbon emission.  The Committee desires 
that the Ministry should explore more steps in this direction and implement the same. 
Air Sewa 
36.1. Air Sewa is an initiative of Ministry of Civil Aviation, launched in 2016, to offer 
passengers a convenient and hassle-free air travel experience. Air Sewa platform brings various 
aviation stakeholders, like airports, airlines, DGCA, BCAS etc.,   on a common platform for 
redressal of air traveller‟s grievances. It  works through an interactive web portal 
(airsewa.gov.in) and mobile app for both Android and   iOS platforms that include a mechanism 
for grievance redressal, checking flight status/schedule information, airport Information  and 
FAQs. Air Sewa is planned to have additional features like escalation of the grievances, transfer 
of the  grievances amongst stakeholders, mobile app for the nodal officer, maps for select airports 
and  dashboards in future release. 
36.2. The Committee recommends that the grievances of passengers should be 
addressed effectively in a time -bound manner. The Committee desires that the Air Sewa 
Platform should be upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the dynamic requirements of 
the air passengers.  
Air Travel Safety Concerns 
37.1. A number of incidents were reported in the media , raising serious concerns about flight 
safety. The incidents related to landing without deploying gear, aircraft veering off runways, 
tail strikes etc. 

29 
 
37.2. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should accord due priority to the 
safety and security of air travelers, in the light of such incidents and examine the reasons 
behind such incidents and take necessary remedial action. 
Exorbitant air fares 
38.1. The Committee takes serious note of  high air fares, especially during festive season and 
calamities, and high charges levied by airlines and airports operators , making it very expensive 
for the air travelers. 
38.2. The Committee desires that the Ministry should consider fixing an upper limit for 
every sector, especially in the economy class of  air fares. The Committee also notes that 
even after reduction of the ATF prices over a period of time, the airlines have not passed 
on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the consumers. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should take effectiv e steps to ensure that the airlines pass on the benefit 
to the travelers by reducing the air fares and inform the Committee about the specific 
steps taken in this regard and the outcome thereof. 
Cancellation charges  
39.1. The Committee takes serious note of the high cancellation charges levied by the airlines 
operating in the country.  
39.2. The Committee expresses its deep concern that there is no uniformity in the 
cancellation charges levied by the airlines. The Committee emphasizes the need for 
rationalizing the cancellation charges and prescribing an upper limit of cancellation 
charges that can be collected from the passengers. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation in this regard, made in its 276 th and 291st Reports, requiring the airlines 
to restrict not more than 50% of the base fare as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel 
surcharge collected should be refunded to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to pe rsuade the airlines for such 
rationalization in the interest of the passengers. 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
40.1. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that Directorate General 
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has issued Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) Section 3, Series M, 
Part IV  on “Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due to denied boarding, 
cancellation of flights and delays in flights”.  Copy of the CAR is enclosed herewith. However, 
in view of the observati on of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism And Culture, a meeting was held on 04.12.2020 with airlines and airport 
operators, wherein airlines were sensitized to adequately facilitate the passengers in case of 
cancellation or delaying of flights and they should have pre -planned arrangements to assist 
passengers in such eventualities. All the participating airlines stated that they are strictly 

30 
 
following the provisions of above -mentioned CAR and even go beyond it to a ssist passenger, 
wherever required. Airport operators also assured to extend necessary support to airlines in 
taking adequate care of the passengers. 
Moreover, a meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary (Civil Aviation) on 
04.12.2020, where Cha irman, Airports Authority of India, Director General, DGCA and other 
senior officers were present. DGCA has been directed to communicate to all the 
airlines/airports for extending necessary fa cilitation as per CAR. In cases  where airlines are 
unable to provide such facilities, the airports should extend the necessary facilities as per CAR 
and collect the expenditure incurred in this regard from the airlines.  
40.2. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that designated 
holding area should be made available at all airports to accommodate passengers who are 
stranded at the airport due to cancellation or rescheduling of flights. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministry to urge upon the airlines to make sure that facilities such as 
food, water, medical help and accommodation are available to stranded passengers. 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the „Accessible India Campaign‟  
41.1. According to the Ministry, the general guidelines, formulated by Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowermen t, on the 10  features of accessibility, have been shared with all AAI 
airports for making the airports accessible, which include:- 
1. Accessible Route/Approach 
2. Accessible Parking 
3. Accessible Entrance to the Building 
4. Accessible Reception (Helpdesk) 
5. Accessible Corridor/Tactile Flooring 
6. Accessible lift 
7. Staircase with Handrails (Main passenger movement zone) 
8. Accessible toilets 
9. Accessible Drinking Water Facility 
10. Signage 
 Accessibility features are being incorporated in all the AAI airports 
 Data for 54 airports has already been uploaded on the MIS portal of AIC and data of 
other airports is being uploaded. 
 Presently 07 AAI Airports namely Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Calicut, Kolkata, 
Trivandrum, Trichy  and Chennai are having Ambulift facility through Ground 
Handling agencies.35 Airports of AAI already have aerobridge facility. 
 AAI has initiated the procurement process of Ambulifts at 20 Airports having Code 

31 
 
C or  above Aircraft Operation and doesn‟t have aerobridge facility to ensure 
seamless transfer of Divyang passengers. Ten der has been invited for procurement 
of 20 Nos Ambulift and  the technical bid was opened on 10 th Nov, 2020. Tender 
shall be finalized by January, 2021  and expected date of completion of project in  
December 2021. 
 AAI is conducting regular sensitization workshops with Airport Directors and other 
staff of AAI explaining the 10 points guidelines and standards requirements. 
 AAI also trains employees at Indian Aviation Academy on the special standardized 
training         package created under ICAO Trainair Plus program on ICAO STP: 
Passengers with         reduced mobility. 
 Personnel on help desk are being given training to communicate efficiently with all 
Divyangjans including training on sign language for hearing impaired and mute 
(deaf and dumb) persons. 
 As per RPwD act 2016, accessibility standards/guidelines are required to be notified 
by Ministry of Civil Aviation. In this regard, „Guidelines for Accessible Airports in 
India‟ containing all the details on Accessible Airport Infrastructure including the 
above 10 features of accessibility has been prepared by AAI and forwarded to 
MoCA. Further, MoCA advised   that the points related to airlines and BCAS to also 
be incorporated to make comprehensive  guidelines of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 This comprehensive handbook incorporating all the accessibility features of 
infrastructure, security services and airlines would be forwarded by MOCA to 
DEPwD for vetting, post which it will be published. 
 41.2. The Committee appreciates the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, 
towards the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry will be able to fulfill the objective of the campaign to ensure a 
barrier free and conducive travel environment for differently abled people. 
Challenges being faced by AAI         
 42.1. In its written reply, the Ministry has stated that AAI is providing Air Navigation 
Services throughout the entire Indian Air Space and adjoining oceanic areas except Defence 
airspace as per the regulations of ICAO & DGCA. With Regional Connectivity Scheme , many 
unserved/underserved airports have been operationalised , boosting air connectivity within the 
country. 
            AAI has been providing uninterrupted a ir traffic services with safety and efficiency 
even during these critical times despite certain constraints which include: 

32 
 
• Only 60% (approx.) airspace is available for civilian operations. The Government 
constituted an Airspace Review Committee for optimiz ing the use of defence airspace. 
AAI together with IAF is working towards optimization of airspace. 
• Land is a major issue for infrastructure development at airports. Being the State Subject, 
land is provided by the State Government to AAI free of all encumbrances for 
development of an airport. The process often is very time consuming. 
• The severe load on the drainage systems around airports due to unauthorized 
inhabitation has been a hindrance in development of airports in some cities. 
42.2. The Committ ee desires that the Ministry should carefully examine the above 
mentioned challenges faced by AAI. AAI, being a very vital organization in the civil 
aviation sector, should be provided all support and avenues to function effectively as per 
its mandate. The refore, the Committee emphasizes the urgent need for removal of 
bottlenecks which exist in the functioning of AAI. 
 Role of BCAS in ensuring that international security standards are adhered to 
43.1.   In its written reply, the Ministry has stated that Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
(BCAS) adopted the following measures in order to ensure international security standards in 
the aviation industry in the country: 
• BCAS follows the guiding principles and documents in the matter of aviation security at 
the airports in line with Annex 17 (Security) of Chicago Convention on International 
Civil Aviation. ICAO‟s Standard and Recommended Practices (SARPs) prescribed in 
Annex-17 (Security) are the foundation of a written national document on aviation 
security termed as “National Civil Aviation Security Programme (NCASP)”. 
• As a Contracting State to the ICAO Convention and being the National Aviation 
Security Regulator and Appropriate Authority, Director General, BCAS ensures 
promulgation of aviation security measur es under the National Civil Aviation Security 
Programme and Annex-17 of the ICAO Convention. 
• The threat and risk assessment in aviation sector is carried out in accordance with 
Methodology provided in Appendix 37 to ICAO's - Aviation Security Manual, Doc. 
8973 in respect to which, the IB (MHA) recommends the categorization of Airports, 
into Normal/Sensitive/Hyper Sensitive airports. Based on the categorization of Airports, 
appropriate aviation security measures are developed and implemented by BCAS, by 
promulgating suitable instructions to all stakeholders. 
• BCAS conducts regular Security Audit /Inspection/ Surprise Checks on Aviation 
Security (AVSEC) stakeholders responsible for applying appropriate security controls, 
as per ICAO norms and procedures prescrib ed through Quality Control Programmes. 
This pertains to security measures by airport operators, cargo operators and Aviation 

33 
 
Security Group which have an impact on aircraft security. Further, being a signatory of 
ICAO, India presents itself for aviation se curity audit under Universal Security Audit 
Programme - Continuous Monitoring Approach (USAP-CMA) to the auditors of ICAO, 
on a regular interval. 
• Regulations are enforced through AVSEC orders and AVSEC circulars pertaining to 
different aspects of aviation security. 
• Also, for strengthening e -governance in aviation security, following two proposals for 
simplifying access to airports are in advanced stages of implementation: 
 Biometric Access Control System (BACS)  has been launched for issuance of 
biometric enabled smart card based Aerodrome Entry Permit (AEP) for secured and 
regulated access by employees/staff to restricted areas at all aerodromes across the 
country. 
 DigiYatra policy  has been launched for providing seamless and hassle -free 
passenger experience at Indian airports during entry, without the need for 
verification of ticket and ID at multiple touch points. The objective of the policy is 
to digitize current manual processes and to bring better efficiencies, enhance 
security standards and achieve bette r throughput through existing infrastructure 
using “Digital Framework". Passengers are to enrol themselves in this programme 
for a seamless travel experience. Identification & validation of his/her ticket is to be 
done by a biometric system. DigiYatra aims  to simplify the passenger processes at 
various check points in the airport right from the terminal entry gate, check -in/bag 
drop, security check upto boarding gates. In the first phase , the project is being 
implemented at 4 airports of AAI namely Kolkata,  Varanasi, Pune, Vijayawada and 
2 JVC Airports namely Bangalore International Airport and Hyderabad International 
Airport. 
43.2. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by BCAS to ensure that international 
security standards are adopted in the country.  The Committee recommends that BCAS 
should take periodic steps to ensure that the international best practices with respect to 
air safety standards, are followed in the country.  The Committee recommends that 
proper mechanisms to ensure individual‟s privacy  be laid down in the DigiYatri Policy 
and such measures should be disclosed to the public at large. 
New Normal -Public Health Safety Measures in Aviation Sector 
44.1. In the background note furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that Air  
operations have recommenced, after the COVID pandemic scare,  with adoption of 
following procedures/SoPs/guidelines like:- 
 Contactless, seamless and paperless movement of passengers- 

34 
 
• 100% web-check in 
• contactless baggage deposition 
• Minimum contact security check 
 Frequent Sanitization 
 
 Wide publicity of new normal for safest mode of 
transportation to boost public confidence 
 Ensuring following of social distancing norms 
 Thermal screening of passengers at entry 
 Passengers wearing masks with green status on Aarogya Setu 
app allowed to enter the terminal building 
 RT-PCR Testing facilities at airports for international arriving passengers 
44.2. The Committee appreciates the public safety measures adopted in the civil aviation 
sector. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that such measures are 
periodically updated in tune with international best practices in this regard. 
Post-COVID scenario 
45.1. The aviation industry, primarily being the major driver of connectivity, is one of the 
worst affected industries in the COVID crisis. The air transport industry, including airlines and 
its supply chain, contributes directly or indirectly, to the GDP of India. The lockdown has 
eroded the capital of most airlines. The cost of maintaining Aircraft on Ground is e xtremely 
high and with nil revenues, the revenue of airlines has been badly hit.  
45.2. In April 2020, the Government introduced „Lifeline Udan‟ flights to transport essential 
medical cargo to remote parts of the country to support India‟s war against COVID-19. Under 
this scheme, 465 flights were operated by Air India, Alliance Air, IAF and private carriers as of 
May 05, 2020. 
45.3. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation while deposing before the Committee, stated 
that Indian Aviation sector was grow ing at 14% cumulative growth rate per year and that the 
impact of COVID has been very severe on the aviation sector. He stated that during the COVID 
pandemic, the revenue streams of airlines dried up because they could not fly and that airport 
revenues became zero.  
45.4.   In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that  in pursuance of 
Covid-19 pandemic, the following effect on aviation sector have been noted: 
• There have been regulatory restrictions on flight operations in domestic and 
international sectors leading to a severe curtailment in operations and sub -optimal 
aircraft utilization. 
• The domestic traffic reduced from 9,40,55,089 during March -October 2019 to 
2,41,21,817 during March-October 2020. 
• The international traffic reduce d from 1,51,94,651 during March -October in 2019 to 
15,00,148 during March-October 2020. 

35 
 
• The revenue of Indian carriers reduced from INR 25,517 crore during April -June 2019 
to INR 3,651 crore during April-June 2020. 
• The revenue of airport operators reduced from INR 5,745 crore during April -June 2019 
to INR 894 crore during April-June 2020. 
• In respect of Air India, the total revenue reduced from INR 7,066 crore during April -
June 2019 to INR 1,531 crore during April-June 2020. 
• The employment at airlines reduced from 74,667 as on 31 st March 2020 to 67,906 as on 
30th  Sep 2020. 
• The employment at airports reduced from 67,760 as on 31 st March 2020 to 64,514 as on 
31st  July 2020. 
• The employment at ground handling agencies has reduced from 37,720 as on 31 st  
March 2020 to 29,254 as on 31st  July, 2020. 
• The employment at cargo operators reduced from 9,555 as on 31 st March, 2020 to 8,538 
as on 31st July, 2020. 
 
All efforts have been made to reduce the impact of the pandemic on the aviation sector. Some 
of the measures taken to support the aviation sector includes: 
• Domestic air services have been restarted in a calibrated manner. Initially only one third 
(33%) of the summer schedule 2020 was allowed to be operated which was 
subsequently increased to 45% on 26 Jun 2020 and then to 80% on 30 Nov 2020. 
• Operation of Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN (UdeDeshKaAamNagrik) 
flights were allowed without the above-mentioned restrictions. 
• As on 15 Dec 2020, exclusive air -links or Air Bubbles have been established with 23 
countries (Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Canada, Ethiopia, France, 
Germany, Iraq, Japan, Kenya, Maldives, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, 
Rwanda, Tanzania, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates (UAE), United Kingdom (UK), and 
United States of America (USA). These are temporary arrangements aimed at restarting 
international passenger services while regular international flights remain suspended 
due to COVID-19. 
• Promoted private investments in existing and new airports through the PPP route. 
• Adequate care taken to ensure that cargo terminals at all major airports were 
operational, whenever required. 
• GST rate reduced to 5% for domestic Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) 
services. 
• Encouraging Indian carriers to increase their share in international air cargo traffic. 

36 
 
• Route rationalization in the Indian airspace in coordination with Indian Air Force (IAF) 
for efficient airspace management, shorter routes and reduced fuel consumption.  
45.5.  In its written reply, the Ministry has stated that i n the wake of the pandemic and its 
adverse fall-out on the airline industry, proposed relief plans suggested by the airlines are as 
follows: 
• Credit vouchers should be given to customers as a valid means of compensating 
customers for flight cancellation/charges. 
• Govt. sector LTC to be opened for private airlines. 
• All aviation stakeholders including airports, DCS operators, ground handling 
companies, catering companies, etc. do not hold up the resumption of airline 
operations on account of past dues of any airlines. 
• All statutory dues be deferred for 6 months post the suspension of flights being 
lifted. 
• Integrated Goods and Service Tax (IGST) should not be charged on re -import of 
repaired engine and parts. 
• ATF should be placed under GST, until then VAT should be capped at 5% and 
the 11% excise should be eliminated. 
• Tax relief should be given to the airlines 
 45.6. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that the employment at 
airlines has reduced from 74,667 as on 31 st March, 2020 to 67,906 as on 30 th September, 2020. 
Total retrenchment of the airline employees is 6,761. 
45.7. The Committee is aware of the grim fact that the aviation sector has been hit hard 
by global economic slowdown and the COVID -19 pandemic. The Committee understands 
that the adverse effect of the COVID -19 pandemic, on the airlines operating in the 
country, which were already reeling under heavy losses, was unprecedented. The 
Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to tackle the pandemic. While 
acknowledging the resilience shown by the civil aviation sector in the country during such 
trying times, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should envisage immediate 
and long term measures, to strengthen the civil aviation sector in the country and to 
enable its resurgence. 
46.1. In the reply furnished by private airlines, it has been stated that the aviation sector is 
non-priority sector for the banks in India and that even though Reserve Bank of India issued 
circular providing guidelines to banks to relax the norms for landing and restructuring the debt 
of airlines, no support was provided by the banks to airlines even during post COVID period.  
46.2. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure 
short term waiver or short term put off, in terms of aviation charges, for sustaining a 

37 
 
viable aviation industry. The Committee is of the view that all airlines and aviation -
related business must be treated as  priority sector lending. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should provide a sectoral fund, which is professionally managed and 
which can provide structured debt to the airlines industry.  
 „WINGS 2017‟ “Sab Uden, Sab Juden” 
47.1. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry  (FICCI) had jointly 
organized the first edition of the event WINGS 2017- Sab Uden Sab Juden in the month of July 
2017 in Delhi. Second edition WINGS 2018 was organized at Hyderabad at large scale wherein 
almost all stakeholders were taken on board. The third edition WINGS 2019 was organized 
again in the  month of February 2019 at Delhi.  The fourth edition of WINGS 2020 was 
organized in the month of March 2020 at Hyderabad. 
47.2. In its written reply, the Ministry has stated that WINGS is a unique platform for Indian 
Industry, States and other stakeholders. The Ministry and FICCI has jointly organized the four 
editions of event WINGS for expanding Regional Connectivity and received tremendous &  
achievable responses from Airlines, States and other industry players. The event drew 
hundreds of delegates from Government and Industry including many State s/Union Territories 
(UTs). Numerous meetings were organized between the States/UTs and Airlines operators. 
This event has been the stage for  the State officials, leading industry from International 
& domestic Airlines, MROs, Aircraft & engine Manufacturers, Airport infrastructures and 
other industry representatives and entire value chain to share their  thoughts and ideas on how 
the Aviation industry can collaborate for partnership, Investment, Policies formation and to 
forge new connections for new business initiatives. 
47.3. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. The Committee hopes  
that this will encourage collaboration among the various stakeholders of the civil aviation 
sector and that the aviation industry will reap the benefits of this initiative in the future. 
Insufficiency of hangars  
48. The Committee could understand that  sufficient hangars are not available in the country, 
especially in non-metro cities.  
48.1. The Committee is of the considered view that since the Ministry is taking 
commendable steps to ensure air connectivity to remote areas also, it is an essential 
corollary that well equipped hangars are also built in such places, in order to ensure 
proper and time efficient maintenance of aircrafts and helicopters. 
Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone) 

38 
 
49. In the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry, it has been stated that to regulate the 
operations of Drones and to facilitate training of Drone operators , following steps have been 
taken by Ministry of Civil Aviation: 
a) Draft Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Rules prepared. 
b) Draft Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management (UTM) Policy prepared. 
c) Digital Sky Platform (DSP) initiated to cover the entire range of activities like 
online registration, approval of flight path, post flight analysis etc 
d) With a view to broadbase the training structure, permissions granted to various 
organisations such as Central/ State Governments, Universities, manufacturers, 
FTOs, Non- Scheduled Operators Permit holders (NSOPs), Scheduled Operators 
Permit holders (SOPs), Maintenance Training Organisations (M TOs) to 
undertake drone training. 
e) 15 DGCA approved FTOs have been permitted to undertake drone training. 
f) Online enlisting of Drone s operating in India started in Jan uary, 2020. Till 31 st 
December, 2020, 22,863 Drone Acknowledgement Number (DAN) have been 
issued. 
49.1. The Committee takes note of the steps taken to establish an UTM Ecosystem in 
India and hopes that the formulation of UTM Policy would facilitate Drone Traffic 
Management Services for operation of Drones within the air traffic environment, in our 
air space, and that the UAS Rules would provide the requisite regulatory framework 
Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) operations, in the country.  
Drone Directorate 
50. According to the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
SVAMITVA Scheme, a Central Sector Scheme has been launched by Hon‟ble Prime Minister 
of India on National Panchayat Day, i.e., 24th April, 2020 with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
(MoPR) as the nodal Ministry for implementation of the scheme. In the States, the Revenue 
Department/ Land Records Department will be the Nodal Department and shall carry out the 
scheme with the support of State Panchayati Raj Department. Survey of India s hall work as the 
technology partner for implementation of SOI-Survey of India (Technology Partner of 
SVAMITVA Scheme) and is responsible for mapping using Drone Technology. Joint 
Inspection team of DGCA headed by Drone Directorate submitted its report on 2 5.11.2020 to 
remove roadblock in the SVAMITVA Sche me, using drone Technology for mapping land 
records (Village abadi) and issuing property card under SVAMITVA Scheme of Government 
of India.  
50.1. The Committee feels that the setting up of Drone Directorat e is a step forward in 
strengthening the Drone ecosystem of India, by way of addressing the delays in rolling out 

39 
 
permission, managing Drone Training Schools and fast tracking Drone certifications. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take requisite steps for the proper 
functioning of the Drone Directorate. 
*** 
  

40 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
Airport infrastructure 
The Committee notes that the aviation industry in India has witnessed tremendous 
amount of growth over the last decade as is evident from the fact that India‟s domestic 
passenger throughput has reached around 137 million in FY 2019 -20 from 61 million in 
FY 2013-14 and international passenger traffic has reached 67 million in FY 2019-20 from 
47 million in FY 2013 -14. Prior to the outbreak of COVID -19 pandemic, the Indian civil 
aviation sector was growing at a CAGR of 14% and was among the fastest growing civil 
aviation sector in the world. Despite India being the world‟s fastest growing aviation 
market, its airports are grappling with serious capacity constraints because such a pace of 
growth has resulted in a strain on the aviation infrastructure, resulting in traffic 
congestions and delays at majority of the airports. If a high growth in civil aviation sector 
is to b e sustained, it is imperative to augment and modernize India‟s aviation 
infrastructure. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the AAI and private airport 
operators have envisaged a modernization and development plan with an estimated cost 
of Rs. 89,000 crore by 2024. The Committee urges the Ministry to make privacy a focus of 
the regulatory framework for the Ecosystem of Drones. 
(Para 7.5) 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and 
futuristic Master Plan for implementation of projects to provide world class airport 
infrastructure, by bringing in cutting edge technology and the global best practices of the  
aviation industry, so as to encourage growth in passenger and cargo traffic and catapult 
India into the league of top aviation markets within a period of 5 years. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to address not only the existing capacity constraints in various 
airports, but also address infrastructural requirements in the context of growth scenario 
forecast for the coming years. It should be strictly ensured that the 
development/upgradation of airport projects are completed as per the prescribed 
timelines.  
(Para 7.6) 
The Committee also urges the Ministry to ensure that adequate parking space and slots 
are available at the airports. The Committee notes that potential growth in the passenger 
and cargo traffic would require enormous investments in terms of construction of new 
airports and expansion and modernization of existing airports. Given the risks, lenders 

41 
 
are cautious about issuing long-term debt to airport operators. The Committee, therefore, 
would like the Ministry to formulate necessary policies , schemes and guidelines, to attract 
much needed investment for airport projects so that the way for raising resources 
towards funding the development, modernization and upgradation plans of airports could 
be paved and multiple funding option including ext ernal commercial borrowing, capital 
markets long-term borrowing etc. could be explored. 
(Para 7.7) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that basic amenities are available 
at all the airports and that periodic maintenance is carried out eff iciently. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure sufficient space for commercial shops, while 
granting approval for new airports. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
consider mandatorily earmarking minimum 100 acres of land,  while making plans for 
future airports. Further, 5 Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near 
the new airports. The Committee also desires that extra land, if any, should not be sold 
and should be kept for future aviation developmental activities. 
(Para 7.8) 
The Committee has been given to understand that there is a need to look at the entire 
structure of airports and the way the airport concessions are given. At present, the rights 
to operate airports are given to individuals or entitie s who bid the highest with the 
Airports Authority of India. When those services are given to the highest bidder, the 
highest bidder charges the highest amount of money from the airlines, which has little or 
no bearing on the actual cost of the service. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should look into these issues and take urgent steps to ensure that such 
anomalies and structural problems are rectified in the interest of the aviation sector. 
(Para 8) 
The Committee has been given to und erstand that large numbers of institutional 
clearances are required for airport projects, which lead to delays and cost escalation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should set up a single -window 
clearance mechanism to facilitate insti tutional clearances for airport projects and ensure 
timely completion of such projects. 
(Para 8.1) 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme 
The Committee notes that although the airlines industry got a huge fillip with the launch 
of RCS, which is aimed at making flyi ng affordable for the masses and facilitating/ 
stimulating regional air connectivity and the passenger traffic has shown a rising trend 

42 
 
due to low cost aviation, air connectivity is largely confined to routes connecting State 
capitals and large towns and s ome parts of the country still remain unconnected by air 
services. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
should take urgent effective steps to ensure balanced growth of connectivity in different 
parts of the country under RCS. The Committee also desires that the benefits under the 
Regional Connectivity Scheme, currently restricted to three years, should be extended by 
another two years, to give airlines an opportunity to transform a fledgling route into a 
strong and revenue-generating one. 
(Para 9.6) 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the UDAN Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passenge rs, as per the spirit of 
the Scheme.  
(Para 9.7) 
The Committee observes that direct air connections to tourist destinations and cultural 
sites can massively promote the tourism industry which will lead to employment 
opportunities and faster economic growth . There is, therefore, an imperative need for 
close co-ordination between the Ministry of Civil Aviation, and the Ministries of Tourism 
and Culture, in matters regarding air connectivity to important tourist destinations and 
cultural sites in the country. Hence, the Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, to work in tandem with the Ministries of Culture and Tourism, in order to open 
up India‟s vast tourism potential and ensure greater harmony among the concerned 
Ministries, who are vital stakeholders in this regard. 
(Para 9.8) 
The Committee takes note of the fact that out of the 778 routes awarded under RCS, only 
315 have been operationalised so far. The Committee desires that the Ministry should 
examine the reasons for non -commencement of routes that have already been awarded 
under the UDAN Scheme; identify the bottlenecks in this regard; and chalk out strategic 
steps to address the issues involved.  
(Para 10.1) 
The Committee notes that there are a number of non-operational airstrips/airports owned 
by AAI and State Governments. Since provision of airport infrastructure is Capital 
intensive, the Ministry should focus on optimally utilizing existing airport infrastructure 
and operationalizing unused airstrips and dormant airports for promoting  
regional/remote area air connectivity under RCS. The Committee is of the view that 
operationalizing these inactive AAI and State Government airstrips will not only release 

43 
 
significant untapped infrastructure capacity in the aviation industry , but also con tribute 
to reducing the airport charge airline cost structure. 
(Para 10.2) 
The Committee feels that at this juncture, the issues that need to be addressed are lack of 
infrastructure of civil airports due to non -availability of land, delay related to compli ance 
of the regulations by the airport operators , lack of road connectivity to the airports etc.  
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to address the issues faced 
under RCS. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urge nt remedial 
steps to address these concerns. The Committee also notes that the promotion of regional 
air connectivity under RCS critically hinges on the support from the State Governments 
in the shape of multimodal connectivity, utilities, land availabilit y, security etc. The 
Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry of Civil Aviation to impress upon the State 
Governments to form a dedicated mechanism mandated to offer one -stop solutions to 
airline and airport operators with the objective of promoting r egional air connectivity 
under RCS. 
(Para 11.2) 
Air Cargo 
The Committee notes that besides geographical location, India‟s cargo industry has the 
advantage of a growing economy along with a population of 1.3 billion plus India‟s 
impressive growth in international and domestic trade in the last decade. However, 
despite tremendous potential, India‟s total annual freight volumes stood at 3.33 MMT in 
fiscal 2019-20 and has not reached close to any one of the top three world -class airports, 
viz., Hong Kong, Memphis and Shanghai. The Committee is constrained to note that  the 
total air cargo throughput handled by all Indian airports put together is less than that 
handled by individual airports like Hong Kong, Memphis and Shanghai. It is, therefore, 
evidently clear that despite having all the ingredients to be one of the wo rld‟s air cargo 
hubs, India has not fully realized its potential in terms of air cargo. The Committee is of 
the view that inadequate infrastructure is a major bottleneck in developing the country‟s 
air cargo sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t the Ministry should take 
effective steps to address the crippling infrastructure constraints by way of establishing 
dedicated cargo airports in the country and developing new airports with a focus on 
making them cargo hubs so that the Ministry‟s ambitiou s cargo throughput target  of 10 
MMT by 2027 could be realized. 
(Para 12.6) 
The Committee is aware that the air cargo industry is hamstrung by paper -driven legacy 
systems and procedures. Since automation is critical for air freight to maintain its 

44 
 
competitiveness, the Committee recommends that the Ministry, in tandem with the 
stakeholders, should take effective measures to automate information systems as well as 
streamline or simplify redundant processes and regulations for faster, transparent and 
seamless movement of air cargo. 
(Para 12.7) 
The Committee has been given to understand that due to the Open Sky Policy for cargo in 
India, foreign carriers carry 90 to 95 percent of the total international cargo to and from 
India, while Indian air cargo operators f ace all sorts of barriers when they go into other 
countries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that for providing a level playing field 
for Indian air cargo operators, the Ministry should make appropriate changes in the 
Open Sky Policy for cargo. The Committee also recommends that Ministry/DGCA should 
take note of Indian cargo operators facing discriminatory and restrictive practices or 
regulatory impediments in operating international cargo flights in any of the foreign 
countries and take urgent steps t o address/resolve them. The Committee desires to be 
kept apprised of the action taken and the outcome achieved in this regard.  
(Para 12.8) 
The Committee is aware that in September, 2020, the Ministry of Civil Aviation restricted 
non-scheduled freighter flights by international carriers to six Indian airports, viz., Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad, with the objective of providing a 
level playing field for Indian air cargo operators. The Committee desires to know, as to 
what extent this action has been able to ensure equal opportunities for Indian carriers. 
(Para 12.9) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take timely action to address the 
issues of congestion at the entry of terminal, inadequate screening, inadequate stor age 
space, lack of temperature facility etc. at the cargo terminals. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should take steps to ensure that attractive and uniform 
transit handling costs and procedures are implemented across all airports in the country.  
(Para 12.10) 
Helicopter operations 
The Committee is of the considered view that much more attention needs to be given to 
helicopter operations in the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should address the issues of proper maintenanc e of helicopters, replacement of aged 
helicopters and training of the crew, on priority basis. The Committee emphasizes the 
need for simulator module training for helicopter pilots for offshore landing. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent steps to ensure a network of 

45 
 
heliports, in order to give necessary boost to the helicopter operations in the country. The 
Committee underlines the need for greater co -operation between the Ministry and State 
Governments for building heliports in the country. 
(Para 13.3) 
Seaplanes 
There is immense potential for seaplanes operations in the country.  However, such 
potential has not yet been exploited fully. The seaplane services will revolutionize the 
nation‟s regional connectivity. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the 
Ministry to encourage seaplane operations. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should put in place, requisite policies and infrastructure to enable seaplane 
operations in India. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the 
necessary amenities matching up to international standards for seaplane operations, such 
as terminal buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters, modern ticketing methods, 
food counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, for the smooth operat ion of 
seaplanes. The Committee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a „Seaplane 
Policy‟.  
(Para 14.4) 
Intra State connectivity 
The Committee feels that much more needs to be done to improve intra -State air 
connectivity and to cater to the ever inc reasing demand.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should chalk out a strategy, after due consultation with the State 
Governments, in order to give significant boost to intra -State air connectivity. The 
Ministry should also engage with the tourism and industry stakeholders, in this regard. 
(Para 15.2) 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) prices and aviation taxes 
The Committee takes serious note of the high ATF prices prevailing in the country which 
is further aggravated by high taxes such as customs duty, excise duty, sale/State tax, 
Value Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon.  The Committee has been given to understand 
that the cost of ATF nearly forms 40% of the total operating cost of airlines and impacts 
the financial viability of their operations and hurts t heir competitiveness because Indian 
carriers are unable to compete against their global counterparts on account of the 
exorbitantly higher prices of ATF.  The Committee is constrained to note that ATF prices 
in the country are distorted because it is subje cted to multiple taxes by different 
Government entities. T he airline industry is capital -intensive and works on very thin 
profit margins. This is why most Indian carriers are reeling under losses despite 

46 
 
tremendous growth in air traffic. Therefore, relief on ATF is crucial for the viability of 
airline industry and would be a major incentive for airlines to augment their operations.  
(Para 16.5) 
The Committee is happy to note the steps taken by State Governments in reducing the 
VAT on ATF for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The Committee observes that 
ATF prices in India are currently under VAT regime which is under the purview of 
individual States and the variation in the taxes ranges from 1% to 30%. Since fuel cost 
accounts for nearly 40% of the ope rating cost of the airlines industry, even a small relief 
in the pricing will be a boon for the industry. However, the Committee is concerned to 
note that the State Governments have shown reluctance to reduce the VAT on ATF for 
flights other than those operated under UDAN scheme. The Committee is of the view that 
reduction in VAT on ATF would be a notional revenue loss for the States, which can be 
offset by enhanced economic activities, which would be the result of increased air 
connectivity to the region. The Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue this issue 
with the State Governments, in order to rationalize and minimize the State level 
taxes/surcharges on ATF and bring much needed relief and help, to the airline sector.  
(Para 16.6) 
The Committee is of the opinion that ATF is a small component of overall petroleum 
products and hence, deserves to be treated separately. The Committee notes that despite 
ATF being an input fuel (similar to coal and gas), the issue of inclusion of ATF under 
GST has been a long standing issue and requires final resolution by the GST Council. 
(Para 16.7) 
As regards high aviation taxes, the Committee feels that the Indian aviation industry is 
laden with very high operating and fixed costs, in view of which there is a need f or 
considering aviation sector for priority sector lending, so that the industry could get 
access to funds at cheaper rates. The Committee also underlines the need for unbundling 
of products and pricing to the customer. 
(Para 16.8) 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) 
The Committee observes that India has the potential to be an MRO hub due to locational 
advantage, growing aircraft fleet, low labour costs and the natural talent to drive 
innovation. However, the country has not yet been able to fully exploi t the opportunities 
available in this sector and a major deterrent for growth of the MRO industry is high 
taxation of MRO components. Aircraft MRO services are critical in aviation value chain 
and it would be of a huge loss for the country, if we do not ta p the vast technical and skill 
base available in the country. The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the 

47 
 
Ministry to rationalize the tax regime for MROs and promote MRO activities in the 
country. The Committee strongly recommends that the M inistry should give requisite 
focus on the issues presently faced in the MRO sector and remove the remaining policy 
distortions and address regulatory limitations to ensure that India evolves into a key 
international player in offering MRO facilities. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure that MRO workshops are set up in all the 
metro cities in the country, in order to attract international business. The Committee also 
emphasizes the need for enhanced collaboration between defence and civil MROs. 
(Para 17.6) 
The Committee is of the considered view that this contract clause hampers the growth of 
local MRO industry in our country.  The Committee, therefore, desires that in order to 
give much desired fillip to the local MRO industry, the Ministry should devise a suitable 
MRO policy which will help the growth of local MRO industry, whereby, employment 
opportunities can be created for the local youth. 
(Para 17.7) 
Global Hubs 
The Committee takes note of the immense possibilities which exist in the country, which if 
properly explored, will enable India to rise up as a global aviation hub. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should give proper thought and deliberation to this aspect 
and take necessary concrete acti on to tackle the hurdles posed in this regard. The 
Committee highlights the need for change in the policies of traffic flow in such a way that 
India captures the air space for hub and spoke mechanism. 
(Para 18.3) 
Encouraging aviation leasing and financing activities in India 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to encourage 
Indian financial institutions to enter into the aircraft leasing and financing business. The 
Committee urges upon the Ministry to examine the regulation s existing in the country in 
this field, identify the bottlenecks and modify the regulations, as per the present and 
future requirements. 
(Para 19.3) 
Role of State Governments 
The Committee is of the view that incentives by State Governments in the form of  
financial support such as  VAT reduction, sharing of viability gap funding with airlines 
and non-financial incentives such as  providing security and fire services free of cost to 
airport operators, are required. The Committee feels that States which are apprehensive 
of revenue loss, need to think about the enhancement of economic activities which would 

48 
 
result due to increased air connectivity to the region, in the long run.  States may adapt 
their relevant schemes  relating to tourism, health and insurance , for supporting air 
connectivity, in order to supplement the objectives of regional connectivity. 
(Para 20.2) 
Land acquisition is a major problem due to land scarcity and huge capital requirement. 
The Committee feels that t here are many regional airports whi ch can be developed by 
States on their own or in collaboration with the Airports Authority of India (AAI) and 
that  the State Governments should explore the setting up of „no-frill airports‟. 
(Para 20.3) 
The Committee understands that major airports find i t difficult to allocate slots to 
regional airlines, which mostly fly turboprop aircraft s that take longer to land and take 
off. This forces some of the regional airlines to depend on larger aircraft, which do not 
have adequate demand. The Committee is of the view that if the States  tie up with the 
tourism boards and other tourism stakeholders  and formulate packages in order to 
market potential tourist destinations under the RCS scheme, it would attract more 
passengers, thereby, enhancing the demand for air travel. 
(Para 20.4) 
Krishi Udan 
The Committee recognizes the fact that Krishi Udan has benefitted the local farmers and 
villagers whose products have higher value outside the region. This would boost the 
connectivity and thereby, economy in the region. The Committee appreciates this Scheme 
and hopes that it would contribute to the welfare of the people in remote regions of the 
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to 
remove the existing bottlenecks at airports and in the supply chain.  The Committee hopes 
that this Scheme would provide the much needed quick cargo services to cater to the huge 
demand in the domestic and international markets, for the farm products of the North -
Eastern region and other remote areas of the country. The Committee is hap py to note 
that the Scheme would ensure that perishable products find good markets and market 
value, in and outside the country, which would otherwise have gone wasted, owing to lack 
of storage and connectivity.  
(Para 21.2) 
Connectivity to North East and other remote areas 
The Committee notes that most of the places in the North Eastern Region are inaccessible 
due to inadequate road and rail facilities and the only viable means of transportation is by 
air. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should give due attention to 
air connectivity to North East and other remote areas of the country. The Ministry should 

49 
 
engage with State Governments, regulators and air carriers to increase air connectivity to 
such regions. 
(Para 22.2) 
Need for greater co-ordination among various stakeholders 
The Committee recognizes the need for the airlines to work closely with the State Tourism 
Departments and other stakeholders to ensure that sufficient passengers are available in 
all the sectors wherein the air carriers are operatin g. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should ensure greater co -ordination among the various stakeholders in this 
regard. 
(Para 23.2) 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that requ isite synergy is achieved 
between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, so that airports are well 
connected with other means of transport and tourists/flyers reach their destinations, from 
the airports in a smooth and safe manner. The Ministry shou ld collaborate with the State 
Governments and other stakeholders to ensure that better road and rail connectivity is 
available from the airports. 
(Para 24.2) 
Necessary Navigation Aids at all Airports 
The Committee is dismayed to note that regular delay in flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occur at various airports, due to non -availability of CAT -II or 
CAT-III facility. The Committee fails to understand the reason s behind non-installation 
of CAT II/ CAT facilities in such airports, in the present  age of technology. The 
Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience  and delays faced by the flyers  and 
international & domestic tourists, due to such deficiencies at the airports. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the upgr ation of air navigation 
infrastructure in the country is kept in line with international standards. 
(Para 25.2) 
 
The Committee hopes that Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project which is a 
turn key project, would enhance the operational capabili ty, by facilitating air operations 
of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, while 
enhancing aerospace safety. The Committee observes that MAFI project of the Indian Air 
Force should decide and cull  out those activities which are primarily navigational 
equipment including approach landing systems, PAPI runway lights, threshold lights, 
instruments and equipment  etc., where AAI/ATS have a unique advantage, since they 

50 
 
have been  handling these systems across the country, for  over seven  decades. Domestic 
civil aviation safety is the primary  responsibility of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA 
and AAI. The utilization  of these navigational aids/approach landing systems/equipment 
etc., which have  been installed across the country, is primarily done by the AAI, which 
has domain knowledge. They are also  familiar with the quality procurement processes, 
maintenance and  operational requirements of these instruments which they  have been 
using for Civil operations for over fifty y ears. The Committee recommends that a  High 
Level Committee may  be created with the Indian Air Force to cull out those activities  
related to navigation and landing facilities which are, primarily, in the domain  
knowledge, with the AAI for Civil operations. The Committee recommends that apart 
from this, the development of the rest of the infrastructure planned under the MAFI 
scheme may continue as envisaged, for a greater synergy between civil aviation 
requirements and operational requirements of Indian Air Force.  
(Para 25.3) 
The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically 
advanced navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should 
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed 
time bound period. 
(Para 25.4) 
Shortage of availability of slots for turboprop aircrafts 
The Committee expresses its concern on this issue and desires that the Ministry should 
take urgent timely action to address this concern. 
(Para 26.1) 
Shortage of pilots 
The Committee strongly feels that with the huge manpower potential and skilled 
workforce available in the country, it is important that these resources are tapped into. 
The Committee recognizes the fact that the Indian aviation i ndustry is one of the fastest 
growing markets in the world which has witnessed exponential growth of airline fleets. 
Though India has a vast talent pool of skilled manpower, it has not been able to match the 
requirement of pilots. The Committee, therefore,  underlines the need for proactive action 
for skill development/training in the country, to augment the skills of available 
manpower. The Committee recommends the Ministry to formulate futuristic plans for 
devising tailor -made technical courses for skill d evelopment, training and research, in 
consultation with the private sector also. The Committee is of the considered opinion that 
the Ministry should incorporate international best practices, in the area of skill 
development. 

51 
 
(Para 27.2) 
Pilot Training Institutes 
Keeping in view the growth in the Indian aviation industry and shortage of pilots faced in 
India, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should give serious thought to setting 
up of new Institutes for Pilot Training and to revamp the existing on es by providing 
modern simulators and also augment the capacity intake of students in the existing 
Institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should envisage setting up of 
Pilot Training Institute adjacent to the airport, at least in one airpor t, in each State. The 
Ministry should also take necessary steps to ensure that sufficient number of trainers are 
made available, by offering incentives which would attract them to this field.  
(Para 28.2) 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent  steps to ensure that 
the facilities available at IGRUA are optimally utilized and that more facilities may be 
added to cater to the increasing demand. 
(Para 29.4) 
Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry and urges upon the Ministry 
to take necessary action to ensure that world class facilities are available at the FTOs. 
(Para 30.2) 
Aero Club of India 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 291 st Report, that ACI should 
be supported by  the Government in retrieval of all such  underutilized or unutilized aero 
sports assets provided by it for FTOs and development of aero sports, since they are 
Government property. 
(Para 31.2) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the building of Aero Club of India which 
was used administratively by ACI for promoting Aero Sports and coordinating for Flying 
Training organizations, including giving infrastructure supp ort to FTOs through the 
grants by Government of India , should be restored to the Aero Club of India at the 
earliest for its smooth functioning. The Board of AAI should restore the building through 
an appropriate resolution, restoring its original status. 
(Para 31.4) 
Maintenance Engineering Training School 
The Committee recommends in this regard that the Ministry should undertake suitable 
policy initiatives for Pilot Training Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and 

52 
 
Maintenance Engineering Training Schools in the country. The  Committee desires that 
these initiatives should positively address the noticeable shortage of pilots and type rated 
commanders; and other technical personnel , for the civil aviation sector in the country. 
The Committee exhorts the Ministry to facilitate t he Pilot Training Institutes, Flying 
Training Organizations and Maintenance Engineering Training Schools, in tapping the 
manpower potential and skilled workforce available in the country. 
 (Para 32) 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 291 st Report that urgent, 
substantive steps should be taken to allay the widespread concern/fear regarding serious 
adverse implications of CORSIA on the airlines in India. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that India‟s interests are protected at a ny cost, keeping in view the 
vital role played by the civil aviation sector in the development and growth of our 
economy. The Committee desires that the concerns of India in this regard, should be 
raised at the diplomatic level, effectively. 
(Para 33.2) 
Biojet fuel 
The Committee recommends that the Government should encourage the use of Biojet fuel 
and envisage a policy in this regard. The Ministry should also engage necessary 
technological innovations to ensure that the use of Biojet fuel in aviation secto r is 
promoted, wherever possible.  
(Para 34.2) 
Optimal utilization of the Indian airspace 
The Committee hopes that the optimal utilization of Indian airspace will lead to reduction 
in flight time, fuel consumption and carbon emission. The Committee desires  that the 
Ministry should explore more steps in this direction and implement the same. 
(Para 35.3) 
Air Sewa 
The Committee recommends that the grievances of passengers should be addressed 
effectively in a time -bound manner. The Committee desires that the Air Sewa Platform 
should be upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the dynamic requirements of the air 
passengers.  
(Para 36.2) 
Air Travel Safety Concerns 

53 
 
The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should accord due priority to the safety 
and security of air travelers, in the light of such incidents and examine the reasons behind 
such incidents and take necessary remedial action. 
(Para 37.2) 
Exorbitant air fares 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should consider fixing an upper limit for every 
sector, especially in the economy class of air fares. The Committee also notes that even 
after reduction of the ATF prices over a period of time, the airlines have not passed on the 
benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the consumers. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take effective steps to ensure that the airlines pass on the benefit to the 
travelers by reducing the air fares and inform the Committee about the specific steps 
taken in this regard and the outcome thereof. 
(Para 38.2) 
Cancellation charges  
The Committee expresses its deep concern that there is no uniformity in the cancellation 
charges levied by the airlines. The Committee emphasizes the need for rationalizing the 
cancellation charges and prescribing an upper limit of cancellation charges that can be 
collected from the passengers. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in th is 
regard, made in its 276 th and 291 st Reports, requiring the airlines to restrict not more 
than 50% of the base fare as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected 
should be refunded to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee hopes that 
the Ministry would be able to persuade the airlines for such rationalization in the interest 
of the passengers. 
(Para 39.2) 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that designated holding area 
should be made available at all ai rports to accommodate passengers who are stranded at 
the airport due to cancellation or rescheduling of flights. The Committee impresses upon 
the Ministry to urge upon the airlines to make sure that facilities such as food, water, 
medical help and accommodation are available to stranded passengers. 
(Para 40.2) 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the „Accessible India Campaign‟  
The Committee appreciates the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, towards 
the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee hopes that 

54 
 
the Ministry will be able to fulfill the objective of the campaign to ensure a barrier free 
and conducive travel environment for differently abled people. 
(Para 41.2) 
Challenges being faced by AAI         
The Committee desires that the Ministry should carefully examine the above mentioned 
challenges faced by AAI. AAI, being a very vital organization in the civil aviation sector, 
should be provided all support and avenues to function effectively as per its manda te. 
Therefore, the Committee emphasizes the urgent need for removal of bottlenecks which 
exist in the functioning of AAI. 
(Para 42.2) 
 
 Role of BCAS in ensuring that international security standards are adhered to 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by BCAS to ensure that international 
security standards are adopted in the country. The Committee recommends that BCAS 
should take periodic steps to ensure that the international best practices with respect to 
air safety standards, are followed in th e country. The Committee recommends that 
proper mechanisms to ensure individual‟s privacy be laid down in the DigiYatri Policy 
and such measures should be disclosed to the public at large. 
(Para 43.2) 
New Normal -Public Health Safety Measures in Aviation Sector 
The Committee appreciates the public safety measures adopted in the civil aviation sector. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that such measures are 
periodically updated in tune with international best practices in this regard. 
(Para 44.2) 
Post-COVID scenario 
The Committee is aware of the grim fact that the aviation sector has been hit hard by 
global economic slowdown and the COVID -19 pandemic. The Committee understands 
that the adverse effect of the COVID -19 pandemic, on the airlines operating in the 
country, which were already reeling under heavy losses, was unprecedented. The 
Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to tackle the pandemic. While 
acknowledging the resilience shown by the civil aviation sector i n the country during such 
trying times, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should envisage immediate 
and long term measures, to strengthen the civil aviation sector in the country and to 
enable its resurgence. 
 (Para 45.7) 

55 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure short term 
waiver or short term put off, in terms of aviation charges, for sustaining a viable aviation 
industry. The Committee is of the view that all airlines and aviation-related business must 
be trea ted as  priority sector lending. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should provide a sectoral fund, which is professionally managed and which can provide 
structured debt to the airlines industry.  
(Para 46.2) 
 „WINGS 2017‟ “Sab Uden, Sab Juden” 
The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that this 
will encourage collaboration among the various stakeholders of the civil aviation sector 
and that the aviation industry will reap the benefits of this initiative in the future. 
(Para 47.3) 
Insufficiency of hangars  
48.1. The Committee is of the considered view that since the Ministry is taking 
commendable steps to ensure air connectivity to remote areas also, it is an essential 
corollary that well equipped hangars are also built in such places, in order to ensure 
proper and time efficient maintenance of aircrafts and helicopters. 
(Para 48.1) 
Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone) 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken to establish an UTM Ecosystem in India and 
hopes that  the formulation of UTM Policy would facilitate Drone Traffic Management 
Services for operation of Drones within the air traffic environment, in our air space, and 
that the UAS Rules would provide the requisite regulatory framework Beyond Visual 
Line of Sight (BVLOS) operations, in the country.  
(Para 49.1.) 
Drone Directorate 
The Committee feels that the setting up of Drone Directorate is a step forward in 
strengthening the Drone ecosystem of India, by way of addressing the delays in rolling out 
permission, managing Drone Training Schools and fast tracking Drone certifications. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take requisite steps for the proper 
functioning of the Drone Directorate. 
(Para 50.1.) 
 
****** 
  

56 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

57 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Monday, the 23 rd December, 2019 in Committee 
Room Number E, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shrimati Veena Devi 
      6.   Shri Rahul Kaswan 
      7.   Ms. Goddeti Madhavi 
      8.   Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
      9.   Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
    10.   Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
    11.   Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
    12.   Shri Dushyant Singh 
    13.   Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
    14.   Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
    15.   Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer 
 
Witnesses  
            I. MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary  
2. Ms. Vandana Aggarwal AS & EA 
3. Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Angshumali Rastogi Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Garima Singh Director 
7. Shri Pranjol Chandra Director 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION 

58 
 
8. Shri Arun Kumar Director General 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY 
9. Shri Rakesh Asthana Director General 
AIRCRAFTS ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BUREAU 
10. Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
11. Shri Arvind Singh Chairman 
12. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations) 
13. Shri A. K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
14. Shri Vineet Gulati Member (ANS) 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar GM (RCS) 
AIR INDIA LIMITED 
16. Shri Ashwani Lohani CMD 
17. Capt. Amitabh Singh Director Operations 
18. Ms. Meenakshi Mallik Director Commercial 
AIRLINE ALLIED SERVICES LIMITED 
19. Shri C.S Subbiah CEO 
 
       II.               *                                         *                                                   *. 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee 
and informed the Members that the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Secretary, 
Ministry of Shipping have been invited to apprise the Committee on the  subjects viz, „Status of 
Aviation Connectivity in the Country‟ and                   *                             *                              *. 
 Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
3. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviatio n and other senior 
officials from the Ministry to the meeting. He mentioned about the  tremendous growth in the 
Aviation industry in the last few years which has led to increased air traffic volumes. He then 
sought information on the future plan to revamp v iable air strips; problems being faced in the 
implementation of aviation programs; safety and quality aspects of air connectivity. The 
Chairman then requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the subject. 
4.     The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Avia tion started his presentation by enlightening  the 
Committee about the improvement in India‟s performance across various parameters in Global 
Competitiveness Index 2019. He then emphasized upon the scheduled flight operations in India 

59 
 
during the winter schedule of the year 2019. He also graphically presented the yearly passenger 
growth of scheduled carriers in the country. The Secretary, then elucidated upon the Route 
Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) alongwith its categorization and operations under each category. 
5. He then stated the features of Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN and 
achievements of RCS so far. He also threw light upon the reasons for delay in obtaining the 
Scheduled Commuter Operators Permit and in creating regional infrastructure. He con cluded 
his speech by apprising the Committee of the initiative - WINGS, an interactive international 
annual event having involvement of FICCI, Airports Authority of India, State Governments and 
Union Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
6. Members of the Committee raised various queries some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman  then directed that written replies to the  queries which remained  
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
II.   *             *           *. 
7. *             *           *. 
8. *             *           *. 
9. *             *           *. 
10. Members of the Committee raised various queries  some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman  then directed that written replies to the  queries which remained  
unanswered, may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12.    The meeting adjourned at 5:21 P.M. 
 New Delhi,                                                                                               P. Narayanan 
23rd December, 2019                                                                             Director 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture met at 2:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 21 st October, 2020 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Margani Bharat 
4. Shri Tapir Gao 
5. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
8. Shri Dushyant Singh 
9. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses   
 2:00 P.M. 
AIR ASIA LTD. 
1. Shri Ankur Garg Chief Commercial Officer 
2. Shri Tarun Sharma Manager, Corporate Affairs 
INDIGO AIRLINES 
3. Shri Rajat Kumar Vice President-Network Planning 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Chief Strategy Officer 
 
VISTARA AIRLINES 
5. Shri Vinod T. Kannan Chief Commercial Officer 
6. Shri Moinuddin Wasil Head-Regulatory Affairs 
SPICE JET  AIRLINES 

61 
 
7. Shri Ajay Singh Chairman & Managing Director 
8. Shri C.S. Palani Head of Corporate Affairs 
9. Shri Jitender Sharma Dy. General Manager, Sales 
4:00 P.M. 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary  
2. Smt. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Garima Singh Director 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) 
4. Shri Arun Kumar Director  General 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY (BCAS) 
5. Shri M.A. Ganapathy Director General 
AIR INDIA LTD. 
6. Shri Rajiv Bansal Chairman & Managing Director 
7. Shri Rohit Dubey Manager 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA(AAI) 
8. Shri Arvind Singh Chairman 
9. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations) 
10. Shri A.K. Pathak Member (P) 
11. Shri Pradeep Kumar  Executive Director (RCS) 
12. Shri V.A. Chourey   Executive Director  (Operations) 
13. Shri Arun Mehan General Manager (Operations) 
PAWAN HANS LTD. 
14. Shri Sanjeev Razdaan  Chairman & Managing Director 
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN ACADEMY (IGRUA) 
15. Shri Krishnendu Gupta Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of 
Private airlines and Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject „Status of Aviation 
connectivity in the country‟. 
I. Oral Evidence of the representatives of Private airlines 
3. Shri Ajay Singh, Chairman and Managing Director, Spicejet Airlines started his 
deposition by submitting that aviation is the most impacted sector due to the COVID -19 
pandemic and that despite getting severely impacted , airlines are playing their role in 
connecting the country. He apprised the Committee about the steps taken by SpiceJet to 

62 
 
enhance regional air connectivity and stated that SpiceJet flew about sixty flights e veryday 
under Regional Connectivity Scheme. He also pointed out that the taxes on airlines in India are 
among the highest in the world and that the price of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) in India is the 
highest in the world. He emphasized upon the need to cr eate global aviation hubs in India and 
the necessity to strengthen Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) industry in India by 
making changes in the taxation structure. He underscored the point that there should be 
reciprocity in the case of cargo transfer  for airlines of India and that ATF should be brought 
under the ambit of GST. He deplored the fact that when a passenger goes for check -in at the 
airport, one dollar for every check -in is paid to a foreign company called SITA whereas Indian 
players can provide the same facility in less than five cents.  
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Chief Strategy Officer, Indigo Airlines during his deposition made 
a pitch for cut in State taxes on ATF ( till such time ATF is brought under the ambit of the 
GST) to facilitate the faster growth of the India aviation sector . He also underlined the fact that 
there is a big gap between the lowest air fares and the costs involved which should be brought 
down to a manageable level. He highlighted the necessity of change in the policies of tr affic 
flow in such a way that India captures the air space for hub and spoke mechanism. He 
underlined the need for unbundling of product and pricing to the customer and the need for the 
airlines to work closely with the State Tourism Departments. 
5. Shri Anku r Garg, Chief Commercial Officer, Air Asia Ltd during his deposition 
highlighted the fact that UDAN is target ed to connect unserved or under served destinations. 
But there is a great potential to connect tier II cities with other tier II cities and for airl ines to be 
able to do that, the fuel cost burden has to come down substantially. While drawing attention of 
the Committee to the tremendous growth in the aviation sector, he further submitted that the 
key imperative for aviation growth and connectivity is the financial health of the aviation 
industry. He also submitted that the Indian aviation industry is laden with very high operating 
and fixed costs in view of which there is a need for considering aviation sector for priority 
sector lending so that the industry could get access to funds at cheaper rates. 
6. Shri Vinod T. Kannan, Chief Commercial Officer, Vistara Airlines, inter alia,  
submitted that the airlines are going through very tough times due to the COVID -19 pandemic 
and the Government may therefore consider short term waiver or short term put off in terms of 
aviation charges for sustaining a viable aviation industry. He also s ubmitted that developing 
MRO facilities in India is much needed.   
7. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
witnesses. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
II. Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
8. The Chairman then welcomed Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and other senior 
officials from the Ministry to the meeting . The Chairman placed on record the appreciation of 
the Committee for the constitution of a Core Group, having representations from all concerned 
Ministries, under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Civil Aviation for addressing safety 
concerns in composit e transport sector in coordination with line Ministries and desired that 
quarterly progress report on the Core Group may be furnished to the Committee. 

63 
 
9. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation during the course of his presentation apprised 
the Committee that till the onset of COVID -19 pandemic, aviation sector was growing at 14% 
cumulative growth rate per year and was among the fastest growing aviation sectors in the 
world. However, the impact of COVID -19 pandemic on the Indian carriers has been very 
severe and they have witnessed a drop of 80 per cent in their domestic traffic from March to 
July 2020. 86 per cent of the revenue has been lost by the airlines from April to June 2020. He 
further informed that about 7% jobs have been lost in the airlines and a bout 5 per cent jobs 
have been lost at the airports due to the pandemic. He enumerated the steps taken by the 
Ministry to tackle the challenges faced due to COVID -19 pandemic, stating, inter alia, that a 
scheme called Lifeline UDAN was launched during the pandemic, to distribute essential 
medicines to almost all parts of the country everyday. He also briefed the Committee about the 
installation of High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters in the aircraft to protect 
passengers from COVID -19 inside the a ircraft and touched upon the concept of fare -bands 
introduced during the pandemic crisis and the air bubble agreements entered with other 
countries. 
10. He endorsed the demand made by private airlines for reduction of tax on ATF. He 
explained about the huge po tential of water aerodromes in India. He informed the Committee 
that presently, 125 airports are operational under the UDAN Scheme and that the Ministry is 
working on amending the Airports Authority Act in order to enable the vacant lands at airports 
to be put to commercial use. He threw light on a new policy released by AAI for allotment of 
land to flight training schools. 
11. The Chairman, AAI apprised the Committee that six airports have been identified 
wherein facilities can be created in order to cater to the needs of flight training schools. With 
regard to the replacement of Pratt & Whitney engines in certain aircrafts, DGCA informed the 
Committee that all the defective engines in the Indigo fleet have been replaced and that GoAir 
will replace the faulty engines when their financial situation improves. 
12. CMD, Air India narrated the evacuation efforts made during the COVID -19 pandemic 
and stated that Air India flew to many new destinations during the pandemic. Director -General, 
BCAS apprised the Committee that during the pandemic, Standard Operating Procedures at the 
security hold areas at the airports were modified and that the concept of minimum touch was 
introduced.  
13. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
14.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
15.         The meeting adjourned at 5:27 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                         P. Narayanan 
21st October, 2020                                                                                        Director 
 
  

64 
 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 25 th June, 2021 in Committee Room 
„A‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
2. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
6. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
7. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
9. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
      8.   Shri Margani Bharat 
      9.   Shri Tapir Gao 
    10.   Shri Rahul Kaswan 
    11.   Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
    12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
    13.   Shri K. Muraleedharan 
    14.   Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
    15.   Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
    16.   Shrimati Mala Roy 
    17.   Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
    18.   Shri Dushyant Singh 
    19.   Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
    20. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
    21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary  
  
3. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very war m welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the   
following Reports:- 
(i) Draft Report on 'Status of Aviation Connectivity in the Country'; 
 
(ii) *                *    *; and 
 
(iii)  *      *     *. 

65 
 
 
4.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
5.  *     *     *. 
6.   The meeting adjourned at 12:05 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                  P. Narayanan 
25th June, 2021                                                                                           Director 
  

66 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST  MEETING 
The Committee met at 4:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20 th July, 2021 in Committee Room - 
3, First Floor, Block-B, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Manshingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Anto Antony 
9. Shri Margani Bharat 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Prince Raj 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 2.        *     *     *. 
3.      .  *     *     *. 
4.       . *     *     *. 

67 
 
5.        The Committee also decided to present/lay the Report of the Committee on the subject 
„Status of Aviation Connectivity in the country‟ to both the Houses of Parliament on 23rd July, 
2021. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his 
absence, Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. to present the Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri Tirath Singh 
Rawat, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Sunil  Kumar Pintu, M.P. was authorized to lay the above 
mentioned Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
 
6.        *     *     *. 
7.        *     *     *. 
8.        *     *     *. 
9.         The meeting adjourned at 4:50 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                               P. Narayanan 
20th July, 2021                                                                                             Director 
  
 
  

68 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
  

69 
 
23rd December, 2019 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
2:30 P.M. 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary  
2. Ms. Vandana Aggarwal AS & EA 
3. Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Angshumali Rastogi Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Garima Singh Director 
7. Shri Pranjol Chandra Director 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION 
8. Shri Arun Kumar Director General 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY 
9. Shri Rakesh Asthana Director General 
AIRCRAFTS ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BUREAU 
10. Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
11. Shri Arvind Singh Chairman 
12. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Ops.) 
13. Shri A. K. Pathak Member (Plg.) 
14. Shri Vineet Gulati Member (ANS) 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar GM (RCS) 
AIR INDIA LIMITED 
16. Shri Ashwani Lohani CMD 
17. Capt. Amitabh Singh Director Operations 
18. Ms. Meenakshi Mallik Director Commercial 
AIRLINE ALLIED SERVICES LIMITED 
19. Shri C.S Subbiah CEO 
**** 
 

70 
 
21st October, 2020 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 2:00 P.M. 
 
 
4:00 P.M. 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary  
2. Smt. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Garima Singh Director 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) 
4. Shri Arun Kumar Director  General 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY (BCAS) 
5. Shri M.A. Ganapathy Director General 
AIR INDIA LTD. 
6. Shri Rajiv Bansal Chairman & Managing Director 
7. Shri Rohit Dubey Manager 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
AIR ASIA LTD. 
1. Mr. Ankur Garg Chief Commercial Officer 
2. Mr. Tarun Sharma Manager, Corporate Affairs 
INDIGO AIRLINES 
3. Mr. Rajat Kumar Vice President-Network Planning 
4. Mr. Sanjay Kumar Chief Strategy Officer 
VISTARA AIRLINES 
5. Mr. Vinod T. Kannan Chief Commercial Officer 
6. Mr. Moinuddin Wasil Head-Regulatory Affairs 
SPICE JET  AIRLINES 
7. Mr. Ajay Singh Chairman & Managing Director 
8. Mr. C.S. Palani Head of Corporate Affairs 
9. Mr. Jitender Sharma Dy. General Manager, Sales 

71 
 
8. Shri Arvind Singh Chairman 
9. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations) 
10. Shri A.K. Pathak Member (P) 
11. Shri Pradeep Kumar  Executive Director (RCS) 
12. Shri V.A. Chourey   Executive Director  (Operations) 
13. Shri Arun Mehan General Manager (Operations) 
PAWAN HANS LTD. 
14. Shri Sanjeev Razdaan  Chairman & Managing Director 
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN ACADEMY (IGRUA) 
15. Shri Krishnendu Gupta Director 
 
 