PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
TWENTY TIIIRU REPORT 
ON 
DEMA NUS FOR GRANTS , 1996-97 
(DEMANO NO. 8) 
DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM 
(l'rc sentcd to the Raj) a Salllw un Aul(ust 27. I'J\11\J 
(Lai<l on the Table of the Lok S:1hhn un A u ~:u't 27. 11196 ) 
RAJYA SABH A St:CKETARIAT 
NEW I>ELJII 
August. 1996/ Shravana. 1918 (Sakal 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .. • . •. •. . . . . . . . . •• . . . . • • . . .. . . . • . . . • • • • . • . •• ••• • (i)-{ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION ..... .... ..... . . ... .... . . .. ..• ...•..•...••.• ••.••. ••.•••••..•••••.•. ••. •... • (iii) 
J. lt£roRT OF THil CoMMITTEE •• .•.....•...•.•. ••...•.• ...... •.•• ..•••. •••• .••.•.......• 1-10 
4. MINUTES . ....... . .............................. ....... ................................... 11-17 
I' 

COMMlTIEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
(1996-97) 
l. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri G. Prathapa Reddy 
3. Shri Sushil Barungpa 
4. Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi 
5. Shri Virendra Kat aria 
6. Shri J anardhana Poojary 
7. Shri Y. Hanumantha Rao 
8. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
9. Shri Raghavji 
10. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azami 
11. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
12. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
13 Shri V.P. Duraisamy 
14. Shri Ycrra Narayanaswamy 
15. Dr. D. Yen kateshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Pramod Ma hu j un 
17. Shri A. K. Patel 
18. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
19. Shri Devi Bux Singh 
20. Shri Ganga Charan Rajput 
21. Shri P.S. Gadhvai 
22. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
23. Shri Uttam Singh ['awar 
24. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh Rathour 
25. Shri K. Yijay Bhasl<ara Reddy 
26. Shri P.M. Sayeed 
27. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
28. Shri P.C. Chacko 
29. Dr. Y .S. Rajsekhar Reddy 
(i) 

30. Shri Sat Mahajan 
31. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
32. Shri Pradeep Kumar Dev 
33. Shri Parsa Ram Meghwal 
34. Shri A. Siddaraju 
3S. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
36. Shri Ratna Bahadu!' Rai 
37. Shri Baluy Rai 
38. Shri A.M. Yelu 
39. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
40. Shri Lgandula Ramana 
41. Shri Anant Mahadevgude 
42. Shri Bishambar Prasad Nishad 
43. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
44. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
45. Shri G.M. Banatwalla 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
(ii) 
Shrl Surinder Kumar. Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sc:kar.m, Committee Offic~r 

I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism, having been 
authori~ed by the Committee to present on their behalf, present this 23rd Report on the 
Demands for Grants 1996-97 of the Department of Tourism. 
2. The Committee at its meetings held on the 6th and 13th August, 1996 considered the 
Demands for Grants, 1996-97 of the Department of Tourism (Demand No. 8) and heard the 
Secretary, Department of Tourism on the subject. 
3. The Commmee expresses its thanks to tbe Otlicers of the Department for placing 
before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with examination 
of the Demands for Grants of the Department and for giving evidence before the 
Commiqee. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on the 21st 
August, 1996. 
New DeLtlli 
August 21. 1996 
• Shravana 30, 1918 {Saka) 
(iii) 
SUNDER SlNGH BHANDARi 
Chairman, 
Committee on Transport and Tourism 
• 

r 
REPORT 
The Department of Tourism is the nodal agency for the formulation of national policies 
and programme~ and for coord ination of activities of various Cen tral Government Agencies, 
State Governments and the private sector, for the development of tourism in the country. 
2. The Department of Tourism has under its administrative control a public sector 
undertaking. viz. India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC), and the following 
autonomous institutions: 
(i) The Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management (UTTM) 
(ii) National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology (NCHMCT) 
am.l tn" ln)UtUtc~ under tb control 
(iii) National Institute of Water Sports (NIWS) 
(iv) Indian Institute of Skiing and Mountaineering (IISM) 
:1. The Department of Tourism is assisted by an anached office headed by the Director 
Genera l in the rank of Additional Secretary to Government of India which provides executive 
direction~ for the implementation of various policies and programmes. The office of the 
Director General has a field formation of 18 offices abroad and 21 offices within the country. 
The over)eus office> are primarily responsib le for tourism promotion and marketing in their 
re)pecuve areas. while the field offices in India are responsible for providing information 
services to tourists and to monitor the progress of field projects . 
4. The tourism industry ts presently lndta's third largest foreign exchange earner, after 
readymad.: garments. and gems and Jewellery. The import component of the tourism industry 
b negligible and does not exceed 7% of the total earnings as compared to 72% in the case of 
gem) and jewellery industry. 
5. The tourism industry has emerged as one of the most important segments of the Indian 
economy with it~ capacity to generate large scale employment opportunities specially in 
remote and backward areas. The direct employment provided by this sector is almost 8 million 
rl'f"\0\. :tl't'Otllllilll! for 11h0ut 2.4% of the tota l labour force. The labour-capital ratiO in the 
~ector ts higher than in agriculture and manufactur ing industries. The sector has a high 
pott.:ntiul Cor employment for the widest possible cross sections of seciety, from urbun to the 
remotest and backward areas. rural artisans, women, etc. It has enormous ca_pacity for 
generating sustainable human development, including poverty alleviation and environmental 
preservation. The sector is also inducive to the growth of other sections of the economy like 
handicraft,, const ruction , agricu lture , horticulture, poultry, etc. 
6. Globally, tourism is presently the world's largest export industry, with tourism receipts 
totalling US $ 321 billion in 1994, 528 miHion international tourist visits, and direct 
employment to over 127 million people. 
7. The year 1995-96 saw the total number of tourist arrivals io lndia reaching over 2.12 
million, with estimated foreign exchange earnings of Rs. 9186 crores. The year registered an 
in crc~se or 12.6% in tourist arrivals. 

f 
2 
8. A comparison of international 10urist traffic to India and world tourist arrivals 
indicates that the share of Lndia during 1994 WIIS only 0.36%. In terms of tourism receipts, 
the share of India was 0. 7%. 
9. Although tourist arrivals in the country have been increasing with a significant growth 
last year compared to previous years, the overall picture in the sector remains dismal. 
Despite its enormous potential and the large number of tourist attractions in our country, 
the sector does not seem to be getting the necessary attention of our planners. This is clearly 
manifest in the low leyels of investment allocations in the sector. This low level or 
importa,nce is obvious from the fact that in the Economic Survey presented last year, the 
tourist industry did not even find a mention. Even In the latest Economic Survey, only one 
line was written about this sector. stating that' it should be given some importance . 
Unfortunately, there is a general feeling amon~ the policy makers that tourism is an elitist 
industry and a luxury which does not have much relevance for the weaker sections of the 
society and the under·d~veloped areas. This approach remains unchanged and shows itself in 
the budget outlay for 1996-97 which has been pegged at Rs. 109.12 crores. This allocation 
has to be seen in comparison with the B.E. and R.E. for 1995-96 which were 108.9 crorcs 
and 119.14 crores respectively. The representatives of the Department of Tourism in· thier 
deposition before the Committee stated that the Plan allocation had been restricted to Rs. 
90 crores only as against the proposed allocation of Rs. 155.73 crores. In the latest budget 
the Government has put a lot of thrust on infrastructure development, with increaS<!!d 
allocations for civil aviation, roads and ports, but the allocations for the Department of 
Tourism are stagnating. 
10. In its earlier reports, the Committee bas been repeatedly emphasising the need for a 
higher allocatloo for the tourism industry in view or Its VIIS! potential. Regrettably, however, 
our planners have not thou~! It fit to ejve a hi~er priority to the sector and to enhance l.be 
outlay suitably. With the small amount or money available to the Department, there is limited 
scope for undertaking any new schemes, or to expect any noticeable jump in the number of 
lourist arrivals. Th1s would mean that not only the Department or Tourism and the Centre 
but also the Stare Governments would be unable to fully tap the potentlal available in this 
Industry. The Committee, nevertheless, would again Uke to ~trongly urge the Government to 
take a closer look at the tourism sector, keeping in ml.od the vast amounts or foreign exchange 
earned by siJUIUer developina countries who have much less to offer by way or tourist 
attractions but who have glvm their tourist sedan the desired level of attention. 
MARKETING AND PUBLICITY 
11. The total Eighth Five Year Plan outlay for marketing and publicity was Rs. 90 
crores. The actual/anticipated expenditure during the first four years of the Plan was Rs. 
200.61 crore&. The Budget Estimat~ for the Department of Tourism Cor !996-97 provides for 
a plan outlay or Rs. 58.4 croros for 'overseas campaign'. This outlay , which is about 60% or 
the total Plan outlay of the Department, is aimed at meeting the expenditure on projection 
or India ·s image abroad through promotional activities of the Deparrment's 18 overseas 
offices. These promotional activities are said to include advertising campaigns in the 
electronic and print media, production of publicity material, sponsored visits of media teams 
and personnel. etc. • 
12. The Committee went into the question of the working oC overseas offices and their 
marketing strategy. The Secretary, Department of Tourism, in his deposition before the 
Committee, said that the amount allocated for the overseas promotion was small and in US S 
terms came to only about $ 15 million which did not compare favourably with the money 
spent by smaller countties like Thailand, Singapore and Malaysia. The Secretary added that 
advertising costs were extremely high in other countries, specially in the media, and at other 

r 
3 
prominent sites such as airports, hotels, etc. Other countries were spending large amounts of 
money on advertisements, but the Department or Tourism is not able to do so, because of 
financial const raints. 
13. As regards the working of the various offiees of the Department. the Secretary said 
that they have a system of internal evaluation, internal auditing, financial advisors and 
financial controllers who did performance budgeting. The Committee noted the views of the 
Department. 
14. Th~ Commit!.., is of the view that significant investments in overse&U publicity and 
marketing are required if we have to Increase the number of tourist arrivals In our country. 
The amount allocated for overseas tourism forms a substantial part of the Department's 
budget, but In absolute temts II Is not very large, specially It II bas to be spread over a 
number of countries. International tourism Is an extremely competitive industry and a foreign 
tourbt bas several alternatives to choose Crom. Herein lies lbe importance of publicity. The 
Committee, ther~fore, recommends to the Government lh2t if it hopes to attract greater 
numbers of tourists In coming years, It Is necessary to pay greater attention to tourist 
publicity abroad. 
15. The outlay for overseas campaign is about 60% of the total Plan outlay of the 
Department. The amount left over for domestic campaigns is grossly inadequate when, in 
fact, the number of domestic tourists is progressively increasing year after year. The 
Committee recommends that more funds should be made availllble for developing domestic 
tourism. It needs to be borne In mind that domestic tourism Is Important ror the all round 
growth of the tourism industry in the country liS weU as from the point of view or national 
and social Integration. 
MANPOWER AND INSTITUTIO NAL DEVELOPMENT 
16. The Budget Estimate for 1996-97 provides for an outlay of Rs. 7.85 crores for 
"Training". This provision is meant for Grants.in-Aid to the autonomous institutions under 
the control of the Depamnent of Tourism, •iz., Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel 
Management. Institutes of Hotel Management, Catering Technology and Ap'plied Nutriuon 
and Food·crafts Institutes, for meeting the manpower requirements of various segments of 
the travel industry . 
17. The Committee was informed that the present annual output of trained manpower 
from both the Government and private institutes was around 10,000 (5,000 from each), 
whereas the annual requirement of the Industry was estimated at around 40,000. The 
Committee was also told that while it would be difficult for the Government to set up a 
large number of institutes, around 120 private institutes had already come up. Some 
universities were also including these curricula in their courses. According to the Depart­
ment of Tourism, most of the private institutes were located only in urban areas. Titere was 
also need to standardise the quality of the education and training imparted by them. It was 
proposed to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the All lndia Council 
for Technical Education (AlCfE) and the National Council under which the latter wiU 
become the apex body for standardising the quality or education in Hotel Manugcmcnt and 
Catering Technology. · 
18. The Annual Plan of the Department also mentions that it is proposed to set up a 
National Culinary Institute for training of chefs. Five acres of land has been acquired in 
NOIDA for this purpose. 
19. The Committee notes tbat the gap between the demand and supply or trained manpower 
in the hotel and tourism industry is growing wider with each passing yenr. 

,-
4 
Judging from the growth in the numbu of hotels, rtslauranls and othtr tourist tstablish· 
ments, and that or the c~paclty of the training Institutes In the country, we could be faced 
with a serious shortage of tuined manpower in this sector. This could hamper the growth of 
the lndu~try. The Commiuee reiterates Its recoom1endallons made In the 14th Report on the 
Demands for Grants for the Department that the latter should take steps to set up more 
Institutes In collaboration wilh the State Governments and the private sector. 
20. The Commlllet has noted the Department's views about lhe need for stan dardisation of 
training in a large num~r of private institutes, and recommends that the MoU ~tween the 
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and lhe National Council (NC) for this 
purpose be signed at the earliesl. The Commillee recommends that the project for the 
National Culinary Jrutilute, for which land bas bun acquired should be taken up spudily in 
order to ensure that the lnstllute starts functionine. 
RESEARCH STUDJES AND COMPUTERISATION 
21. A provision for Rs. 60 lakhs has been made in the Budget Estimntc for the year 
1996-97 as ag-.tinst Department's proposal of Rs. 2 crores, for carrying out murkct research, 
database creation and computerisation. 
22. The Commiuee, 1n its 14th Report on the Demand> for Grants. 1995-96 of the 
Depanmc:nt of Touri~m hdd recommended that the work of Touri>m Information Network. 
where half of the allocation goes for running the computerised Network, should be separated 
from market research/survey activities and that the Government should accord high priority 
to market research and survey and make an effort to provide higher allocation for it by 
interna l adjustment of funds. The Department of Tourism, in their Action Taken replies 
have stated that the proposal for strengthening statistical database on tOurism and the 
cre:ot10n of additional po~ts for the same has been approved by the Planning Comm ission 
The Ministry of finance, however, wants to have a SIU study before the proposal is agreed 
to. The proposal envisages the following components:-
(i) Introduction of a registration system of tourism establishments . 
(ii) Annual Survey of tourism establishments 
(iii) Monthly Survey of operational stat1~tics. 
(iv) Continuing surveys of foreign and domestic tourists. 
(v) Household :.urvcys on Travel Habii>. 
(vi) Strengthening of statistical machinery, both at the Centrdl and State Government 
levels. 
23. The Committee hopes thai the Ministry of Finance ~ill romplett its S.I.U. study at the 
earliest so as to enable the Department o£ Tourism to implement its scheme or strengthening 
Its market research and database activities. The Commlllee would, howevu, li.ke to point out 
that the approved budget estimate of Rs. 60 lakbs for research studies and computerisalion is 
minuscule when compared with the task In hand. The amount allocated Is the same as last 
year, and therefore, smaller than bel ore In feal terms. It is also much below the nmounl 
sought by the Department. The Commiuee would like to reiterate that the Government should 
accor d high priority to market research and surveys, to enable the Department to have 
accurate figures for tht Industry. 
24. The Committee hopes that lbe Ministry or Finance would accomplish Its S.I.U. study or 
the proposal ~ilboul any delay so that lbe Department or Tourism is able to implement lbe 
same. 

I 
oRS3&41 ---- - -
5 
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT FUND 
25. The Committee in its 8th Report had recommended the creation of a Tourism 
Development F und to impl ement the Nationa l Act ion Plan Cor Tourism , and had reiterated 
the same in its 14th Report. In its Action Taken Report, the Department of Tourism had 
stated that the M inistry of Finance had only agreed to the schemes invo lving Heritage 
Hote ls, which involved provision of subsidy of Rs. 5 lakhs or lOo/. of the project cost, 
whichever is Jess. The nomenclature of the Scheme was changed to Assistance for Specified 
Tourism Areas, for providing capi tal subsidy for the promotion of heritage hotels. The 
scheme initia lly valid till December, 1994 was extended upto 31st March. 1996. The 
Department of Tourism is pursuing a proposal with Ministry of Finance for increasing the 
quantum of subsidy to Rs. 20.00 Jakhs or 20% of the capital investment , whichever is less, 
for conversion of any bu ilding over 75 yea rs old into a Heritage Hotel. But the same is still 
nOt approved and the amount allocated for the 8th Five Y car Plan could not be utilised. The 
representatives of the Department of Toursim informed the Commitree that the Ministry or 
Finance have >uggested the sett ing up of " Tourism Venture Fund which is under 
consideration of the Tounsrn Fimmce Corporation . But ccnarn problems have to be sorted 
out with the Unit Trust of India and the Secunties and Exchange Board of India . 
26. The Commili<>C rtgrets that Ministry of Finance did not approve the last two 
component~ of the scheme i.e. (i) creation of wayside amenities and (ii) setting up of large 
tourism projects like hotels. The Committee recommends !bat the Ministry of Finance be 
again persuaded to approve the above two important components of the scheme. 
27. The Committee finds that funds, which could be used for developmental activities, 
remain locked up on account of slow decision making. The Comrnillee, therefore, recom· 
mend$ th•t the Deparlment should expedite decision making :llld speedily sort out other 
problems to set up the Fund without further Joss of time, specialty in view of the fact that this 
is the terminal year of the 8th Five Year Plan. 
MONITORING AND EVALUATION CELL, INVESTMENT AND ASSISTANCE CELL , 
MARKET RESEARCH AND STATiSTICS CELL 
28. In its 8th Repon on the Demands for Grants for I 99-l-95. the Commiaee had stw.-sed 
the need for the crc~tiPn ui a Monitoring and Evaluation Cell to monitor implementation of 
the N~tional Action Plan for Tourism. The recommend;;tion wa~ reiterated by the 
Committee in its 14th Report on Demands for Grants for 1995-96. The Dcpartm<;;nt, in its 
Action Taken Replies. had said that the proposals in this regard had been sent to the 
Pl&nning Comrn i>sion. During their deposition before the Committee for the pre>ent 
Ocmand> for Grants. the Secretary, Dep;utment of Tourism. told the Comm ittee that except 
for the Investment Facilitation Cell, the Ministry has been slow in setting up other Cells. 
Tlle Commillee w~s also informed that the Ministry of Finance wished to have a SlU study. 
29. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the delay in implementation of such 
long pending proposals which are considered important even by the Department itself. The 
Committee wishes to draw the attention of the Department to its own Annual Plan in which it 
has spoken of the need for o normnl and effective monitoring system including regular field 
inspections of State Plan Projects. The Department has itself noted that its existing systems 
suffered from majo r drawbacks and did not allow for any cost benefit analysis of the projects. 
The Committee recommends to the Department that it pursue its proposal more vigorously 
with the Ministry of Finance and set up the cell at the earliest. 

r 
6 
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
30. The Chairman of India Tourism Development Corporation (!TDC) in his deposition 
before the Committee said that the organisation has improved its performance over the 
previous years. Its turnover has steadily increased from Rs. 1&7 crores in 1993-94 to Rs. 235 
crores in 1994-95 to Rs. 286 crores in 1995·96. The increase last year was around 21.6%. 
The increase in the pre and post tax profits this year has been over 50% as compared to last 
year. The organisation has been paying dividends and does not have any loan or liability. 
The organisation is sclf·sufficienl. · 
31. The Chairman mformed the Committee that the occupancy rate of ITDC hotels was 
around 60% which was roughly the same figure as private sector hotels. He added that it 
should be remembered that unlike the large hotels chains who only have five star hotels and 
who charge higher tariffs. the ITDC also operates smaller hotels and also in far away remote 
areas where the private sector was not ready to invest. In many of these areas the ITDC 
naturally could not show n higher return. 
32. Regarding a number of complaints received from customers about poor catering and 
other services in ITDC hotels, the Chairman satd that they arc attempting to improve their 
manpower development centre at Qutab Hotel and are giving traming to more people. 
According to the Chairman, ITDC is also fac1ng a problem of the ex1t of a number of its 
trained professionals to the pnvate sector where salary levels are much higher. The pay 
scales in ITDC were governed by the guidelines or Bureau or Public Enterprises. But these 
guidelines did not take into account the distinct'feutures of the tourism and hotel industry. 
The Chairman sought a level playing field for the ITDC vis·a-vis the private sector. 
33. The Commluee Is &>~are or a large number or complaints agalost cattrlo& and other 
services in the ITDC hotels. These romplaints relate mainly to indifferent behaviour, slow 
responses and a demollvated approacll on the part or ITDC personnel. Thl.s creates a bad 
impression for the organisation as a "bole, and orten leads to comparisons being made with 
the quality or similur services in private hotels. The Committee is of the view that ITDC oe•'tls 
to do more to effect improvements in this area. The existing salary structures in ITDC are not 
sufficient excuse for the degradation and deterioration in the quality of services. The 
Committee recommends that the ITDC should make necessary changes In Its manpower 
!ruining schemes, tone up discipline and initiate stricter monitoring and evaluation procedures 
In this regard. 
34. The Committee recommends that in view of shortage of hotels In Delhi, ITDC, which 
owns sucll prime properties as the Yatri Niwas, Lodbi Hotel and Jaopath Hotel, should invest 
lo their modernlsallon, as these would pay back handsome returns. 
FOLLOWUP OF NATIONAL ACTION PLAN 
35. The National Action Plan for Tourism (NAPT) announced in May 1992, contained a 
set of strategies for achieving a phenomenal growth in tourist arrivals, foreign exchange 
earnings and employment generation from tourism. The Plan visualised five million foreign 
tourists visiting India by the end of tbe century. In its 8th Report on Demands for Grants 
for the year 1994-95 for the Department of Tourism, the Committee had expressed its 
unhappiness over Government's apathetic attitude in fulfilling the objectives set out in tbe 
NA.PT. In their Action Taken Report, the Department of Tourism had said that the NAPT 
had not taken into account the cost of infrastructural requirements and the resources needed 
to create these facilities for attracting 1% of the world tourist arrivals. Subsequently, a 
Tourism Synergy Programme' was chalked oul, estimating investment or the order or 
Rs. 39100 crores for the implementation of the NAPT, with the involvement of the private 

7 
sector, including fore ign investors in a big way. In its 14th Report the Committee bad 
expressed its shoc k at the manner of implementation of the NAPT where the Department 
had clearly prepared !.he NAPT wilhout taking into account the financial requirements of the 
tourism sector, and as an afterthought, had brought In private sector participation. During 
the examination for the Demands for Grants for 1996-97, the Com miuee had asked the 
Departm ent tO identify area s of involvement of the private sector in the tourist sector and 
the extent of its contribution in the implementatio n of the NAPT . The reply given b y the 
Department is extreme ly general and bas talked of 141 foreign investment and technical 
collaboratio n proposals which have bee n approved during August 1991 to December L995, 
involving a tota l investment of Rs. 1896 crores. The Departmen t also indicated that 12 State 
Governmen ts have identified projects in the tourist sector for private sector investment 
although there is no men tion of how many proposals have actually been concretised. 
36. The Committee reiterates its view that the involvement of the private sector and the 
extent of its participation in NAPT was an aftertho ught. The various proposals said to be 
identified by the Department of Tourism under the NAPT, some of which even preda te the 
launching of the Action Plan, did not even amoun t to 5% of the total investment required 
under the Plan. The Committee is also surprised to know that out of 141 approved projects 
of foreign investment, only three could be implemented. Th is shows the apathy on the part 
of Department. and extremely slow working. 
37. The complete lack of success of the NAPT is also brought about clearly in the 
Department's latest strat egy paper which sta tes that with the exception of the Bckal Project 
111 Kera la, no progress has been made in the specia l rourism areas which were 10 be 
identified by the Government of India and the State Governments. As had been anticipated 
by the Commi ttee and as has now been admitted by the Department, the reason for the 
failure of this scheme was the heavy requir emen t of financial resources on the part of 
Government of £ndia as well as tbe Sta te Governments. Strangely, the Department has now 
decided to operationalise the concept of Special Tourism Areas with the launch of "Mega 
Projects". In a few States, this will involve the development of large areas of land in 
different locations as integrally planned tourist destinations. Each of these projects is to be 
financed by the Central Government and the financial institutions. A perusal of the 
investments required in the implementation of this strategy indicates that the cost of these 
" Mega Projects" will be Rs. 2500 crores. This is in addition to other investments for 
infrastructure including airports, railways, roads, etc. The total for all this comes to Rs. 
13,450 crores. A large part of this ·money is to be provided in the budgets of respective 
Ministries/Departments as tied up funds to be utilised on areas/projects identified by the 
Department of Tourism. The budget requirement for the specific activities of the 
Department of Tourism will be Rs. 4950 crores as against Rs. 450 crores provided during the 
8th Plan Period . According to the Deputment of Tourism , these projections do not include 
the allocations of State Governments for thei r own activities. The implement ation of the 
strategy would also require adeqate strengthening of Central Department of Tourism in 
human resources and operational facil.ities. 
38. The Committee fails to understand as to how the Department of Tourism has drawn up 
such ambitious plans. The above mentioned sequence starting from NAPT clearly shows that 
most of these plans involving heavy investm~ot r~maio on paper, as the funds actually 
allocated to the Department are a minuscule proportion or the projected requirements In these 
ambitious schemes. The Committee has not seen any attitudinal change on the part of the 
Government during last few years on the subject of Investing resources for the tourism 
industry, and the allocations to the Department of Toudsm itself ha~-e been stagnating during 
the last few years. The. Committee, therefore, recommends to '\lie- Department that it 

8 
should draw up more realistic plans which ba v ~ a great~r chance or success, taking Into 
account the ground realiti es, the potentiJJI investment flows from the pri vate ste tor , the 
r.naocial constraints on lbe Centre and State Governments and the generally poor state or 
Infra stru cture in the countr y. 
DEVELOPMENT OF ADVENTURE SPORTS TOURISM 
39. '!11e Committ ee notes that the total 8th Plan O utlay for Development of Adve nture 
Spo rts Tourism is Rs. 15 crores while o nly Rs. 6.50 crore s could be utilised during the first 
four ycur$ of the pla n. The requirement for 1996-97 is Rs. 2 cro rcs for the purpose . 
40. The Commi ttee has been informed that the scheme did not progrc~s well during the 
initial years as the State Governments dtd not have necessary awareness and technical know­
how for the development of these activities . However, the scheme has started picking up 
now . 
41. The Committee recomme nds that the Departme nt shoul d take neces.,ary steps for 
focussing on lhe developmen t of adventure tou rism In the country. There is no reason "h) 
this form of tourism C811110t develop more in India. 
42. The Committee is shocked at the neglect of tourist promouon and development 
including tourist infra~tructure in the Union Tcrrit~)rie~ of Andaman & Nicobar l~lund~ and 
Lakshadwcep . These islands have tremendou s potentia l for auracting a large number of 
tourist~, both Indian as well as foreign. The amount of touri~m generated by other similarly 
placed islan ds suc h as Ma uritius, Maldives and s~ychc ll e> . a nd in South-East Asia i~ evident. 
However, in the case of A ndamun & Nicobur !;,lands and Lakshadwccp, the roquircd 
infras t ructure facilities includ ing accommodatio n facilities and air and shipping ltnk~ -ve 
tota lly underdeveloped. 
43. The Com mitt ee r ecommends that the Ministry ~hould develop :1 suitable action plan for 
the de~dop meo t of tour ism a.od building up of infrastructu re in the unlllppl.'d areas of 
Andamon & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep. The Committee i~ or the view that it is 
possi ble for tourist iofr astruc tu.-., to be developed in these areas -..ithout dameging the 
ecological balance In these Islands. 
REGIONAL CIRCUITS 
44. The Committee has been infonned by the Department of Touri~m thut touri~t ~ 
normally visit various centres. suiting their tastes, requirements , accessib ility and distanc e. 
India being a country of continental proportions, it is difficult for tourists to satisfy 
themse lves in one trip . Tourists are often intt:rested in regional circuits, in ordef to get a 
more comp rehensive understa nding of a par t icul;~r regio n of India. In order to meet the 
needs of this feature of India Tou rism and the necessity to have a co-ortlinatetl approach for 
the deve lopme nt of regional circuits, the State Tourism Ministers in their meeting had 
decided unanimous ly to prepare regional circuits. Regional Committees were constituted for 
identifying such circuits. Some of the circuits already identified are: Gandhi Circuit, Krishn• 
Circuit. Oir Lion Circuit and Kutch Circuit 
45. The Commi ttee recommends to lhe Department of Tourism that more and more such 
circui ts shoul d be de,•eloped and popularise d abroad and at home. Special eiTorts should also 
be made to improve tra nsport and telecommunication facilities within these circuits. 
BUDDHIST CIRCUITS 
46. Our country has large potentiality to attract Buddhist tou rists from Japan , China und 
other countries. Presently, o nly two Circuits, one in u.r. and a nother in Bihar, have been 
ide ntified. The Committee recommn ed.s that att empts should be made to Identify more 
Buddhi st Circuits, like the Intern ationally faml.'d centre Sanchi with Satadhar a, Sanklsha In 

r 
9 
U.P., Helioder Pillar, Udaygiri caves in Madhya Pradesh and similar Circuit in Orissa, Sikkim, 
Laddakb and Labaul Spill. Adequat~ publicity should be given to them lo Buddhist countries 
and development or infrastructure at national level should be done by linking these Buddhist 
ar~as in U.P., Bihar and other States to national highways, and with air and rail links. 
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE 
47. The Budget Estimates for 1996-97 provide for a Plan outlay of Rs . 15.45 crores. This 
out lay is vastly lower than the proposed B.E. of the Department , which was Rs. 35.85 crores 
and also lower than the R.E. for 1995-96 which was Rs. 16.34 crores. The Secretary, 
Department of Tourism, while deposing before the Comrnillee, agreed that the amount 
allocated was inadcqu<ue and the Department would have to go slow and pick and choose 
between the various schemes under the individual heads and sub-beads. 
48. Perhaps the biggest problem facing the tourism sector today is in the area of 
infrastructure. The Committee notes with concern the low level of financial allocation here. 
The country is de1lpcratcly short of hotel rooms. The Department has plans to receive five 
million tourist arrivals by 2000 AD. In Cuba 28,()()() rooms were built in seven years. Thailand 
was able to increase hotel rooms by 40% in just two years . ln Maldives the increase in hotel 
rooms is about 15% per year. But in India the number of hotel rooms has not increased 
significantly over the years. The country has presently only 990 hotels on the approved Jist of 
Lhe Department of Tourism with a total of 58000 rooms. 
49. Availability of land is a major constraint in the development of tow·ism infrastructur e, 
especially in metropolitan cities. State Governments need to be motivated to provide land on 
easy lease to put up more hotels, Yatri Niwases, etc. TI1ere is also a need for economy hotels 
to cater to budget tourists, both rlomestic and foreign. The private sector has to be encouraged 
to invest in Lhe hotel industry. During the late sixties and early seventies, a lot of industrial 
development in the country was made possible only due to n number of concessions, 
incentives and tax exemptions offered by vari_ous States. The Committee pbserves that a 
similar approach needs to be adopted [or the development of tourism. 
50. The Committee in its 14th Report on lhe Demands for Grants (1995-96) pertaining to the 
Department of Tourism, had caUed upon the Ministry of Finance to support the demand or the 
Department of Tourism to extend concessions under sections 81(4)(Im and 81(4)(IV) of lhe 
Income Tax Act, for a period or S years, for a healthy growlh or the Tourism Industry. These 
concession had been withdrawn in the budget for 199S.96. The Department had also submitted 
certain suggestions for tax benefits for the Industry to that Ministry. But lhe same were not 
included in the Budget for 1996-97. 
51. The Committee , therefore, again calls upon the Ministry of Finance to eonsider tax 
exemptions Cor the tourism sector, for a healthy growth or the lodustry. 
52. The Comrniftee is of the view that the budget allocations in the infrastructure sector of 
tourism needs to be augmented. The amount allocated lo 1996-97 l.s too meagre to make ao 
impact, specially as the Department of Tourism bas to extend Central Financial Assistance to 
States from lhis for construction of Yatri Niwns!Yatrikas. These Yatri Ni..,.ases are located 
mostly at Pilgrim centres, which receive a large number of tourists. According to the 
Department or Tourism, in 1995-96, an amount of Rs. 8.4 crores was budgeted for these 
schemes. This amount was fully utilised. An additional amount of Rs. 4.96 crores was required 
to be released for 69 projects which were sanctioned during the year . However, lhe committed 
liability under these schemes for the projects sanctioned upto 1995-96 during the Eighth Plan is 
about Rs. 71.5 crores. 

10 
53. The Committee was told that the outlay on Development of Pilgrim Tourism was 
redUced from Rs. 2.00 crores in 1995-96 to Rs. 0.50 crore this year as the scheme was not 
found to be very attractive by private trusts/organisations, and only two proposals have so 
far been received. The Committee Is or the view that pUgrtms occupy a prominent place In 
domestic tourism, and facilities at these centres need to be upgraded and augmented. The 
Commlltee recommends to the Department to examine ways to make this scheme more 
attractive and acceptable to individual Trusts and to State Governments. 
TOURISM JN J&K 
54. Tourism development has suffered a setback in the Kashmir Valley. resulling in 
reduction into tourist arrivals over the years. But lakbs of people continue to visit the 
Vaishno Devi Shrine and other places in the Jammu and Laddakb regions. 
55. The Committee recommends that the Department should also focus on the Jammu and 
Laddakh regions or the State and develop programmes for providing proper infrastructure 
and other racilitles like accommodation, toilets, drinking water, air and raU links, transporta­
tion, etc. 
1 

MINUTES 

I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th August, 19% in Committee Room 
'B', Ground Floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi 
3. Sbri V. Hanumantba Rao 
4. Shri Raghavji 
5. Maulana Obaidullab Khan Azmi 
6. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
7. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
8. Shri V.P . Duraisamy 
9. Dr. D. Venkateshwar Rao 
LOK SABRA 
10. Sbri Pramod Mahajan 
11. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
12. Shri Devl Bux Singh 
13. Shri Ganga Chara .n Rajput 
14. Sbri P.S. Gadhavai 
15. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
16. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh Rathour 
18. Shri P.M. Sayeed 
19. Shri Y.S . Rajsekhar Reddy 
20. Sbri Basangouda R. Patil 
21. Shri A.M. Velu 
22. Shri Anant Mahadevgude 
23. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
24. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
Rtpresentatlves of the Department of Tourism 
1. Dr. G . Sundaram, Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Pahwa, Dire ctor-General 
3. Shri Chiranjiv Singh , Addl. D.G . 
4. Shrimati C. Tshering Misra , Joint Secretary . 
5. Shri R.M. Purl, Joint. D.G. 
6. Shri K.S. Menon, Financial Advisor 
7. Shri P.J . Vincent, Financial Controller 
8. Shri Ani! Bhandari, C.M.D ., ITDC 
9. Shri S.C. Chhatwal , Director (Fln.), ITDC 
13 

14 
SECRETARlA T 
Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shrimatl Sunita Sekaran, Commiuee Orriccr 
2. . • 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1996·97) of the 
Department of Tourism aod heard the Sccrewry of that Dcp:~rtment on the ~bovc 
mentioned subjec t. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. • • 
6. The Committee adjourned at 6.00 v.M . 
.. 'Relate to mailers: not ~ncluded in this repon . 

I 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met nt 9.30 "·"'· on Tuesd ay, the 13th August, 1996 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chainnan 
RAJYA SADHA 
2. Shri Sushil Barongpa 
3. Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi 
4. Shri Virendra Katuria 
5. Shri J anardhana Poojari 
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
7. Shri Maheshw ar Singh 
8. Shri Raghavji 
9. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
10. Shri V.P. Durnisamy 
11 . Shri Yerra Narayana swamy 
12. Dr. D. Venkatcshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
13. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
14. Shri Devi Bllll Singh 
15. Sbri P.S . Gadhvai 
16. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh Rathour 
17. Shri P.C. Chacko 
18. Shri K.D. Sultunpuri 
19. Shri Parsa Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri A.M. Velu 
21. Shri S.S . Palanimanickam 
22. Shri Bishamber Prasad Nishad 
23. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
Rrprese.ntaUves of the Depanment ot Tourism 
1. Dr. G. Sundaram , Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Pahwa, Director-General 
3. Shri Chi ranjiv Singh, Addl . D.G . 
4. Shrimatl C. Tshering Misra, Joint Secretary. 
5. Shri R.M. Puri , Joint. D.G. 
6. Shri K.S. Menon, Financial Advisor 
7. Shri P.J. Vincent, Financ\al Controller 
8. Shri Anil Bhandari, C.M.D., ITDC 
9. Shri S.C. Chhatwal, Director (Fin.), ITDC 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Toma r, Director 
15 

16 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer, 
2. The' Committee took up for further consideration the Demands for Grants (!996-97) or 
the Department of Tourism and heard the Secretary , of that Department on the above 
mentioned subject. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
4. • • 
5. The Committee adjourned at 11.15 A.M. 
·••Relate 10 maH~rs n01 incluth:.d in this report. 

r 
v 
FIFI'H MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 21st Auiust. 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annel(e, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
3. Shri Raghavji 
4. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
5. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
6. Shri V.P. Duraisamy 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
8. Shri Dcvi Bux Singh 
9. Shri Ganga Charan Rajput 
!0. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
11. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
12. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
13. Shri P.M. Sayeed 
14. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
15. Sbri K.D. Sultanpuri 
16. Shri Pradeep Kumar Dev 
17. Shri A. Siddaraju 
18. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
l9. Shri Anant Mahadevgude 
20. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
21. Shri G.M. Banatwalla 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Tomar. Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee took for consideration the draft Twenty·third Report on Demands for 
Grants, (1996-97) of the Department of Tourism. The Committee held discussions on the 
suggestions put forth by members and adopted the Report with slight modifications to 
present/lay the same on the Tables of both the Houses. The Committeer authorised the 
Chairman, and in his absence Shri Prem Chand Gupta to present the Repo11 to the Rajya 
Sabha. and Shri P.M. Sayeed and in his absence Shri Cbamanlal Gupta to lay the same in 
Lok Sabha. 
3. • 
4. The Committee adjourned at 12.30 P.M . 
'"Rcla1e 10 mailers nol Included in lhis repon. 
17 