ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
S.No. Organisation Approved
Outlay
Budgetary
Support
IEBR Total
1. Air India Limited 445.44 -- 445.44 445.44
2. Indian Airlines Ltd. 460.00 -- 460.00 460.00
3. Airports Authority of India 573.71 50.85* 522.87 573.71
4. Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited 127.00 -- 127.00 127.00
5. Hotel Corporation of India 23.00 -- 23.00 23.00
6. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya
Uran Academy
1.25 1.25 -- 1.25
7. Director General of Civil Aviation 5.50 5.50 -- 5.50
8. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 5.41 5.41 -- 5.41
 Total 1641.31 63.00 1578.31 1641.31
REPORT
 
 
            The Ministry of Civil Aviation is responsible for the formulation and implementation of national policies and
 programmes in the civil aviation sector.  The Ministry oversees the development and regulation of civil aviation in the
 country including inter-alia establishment of new aerodromes, maintenance and upgradation of the existing
 aerodromes, regulation of carriage of traffic by air and ensuring civil aviation security.  Railway Safety, including
 enquiries into serious railway accidents also constitutes one of the allied functions of the Ministry. 
2.         The civil aviation sector is monitored and regulated by two separate organisations under the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation i.e. Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security.  The functions pertaining to
 Railway Safety are entrusted to a Commission.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation has the following Public Sector
 Undertakings/Companies/Autonomous Bodies under its administrative control:- 
Air India Limited and its wholly owned subsidiaries viz. Hotel Corporation of India Limited and Air India Charters
 Limited.
Indian Airlines Limited and its wholly owned subsidiary viz. Airlines Allied Services Limited.
Airports Authority of India.
Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited.
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi. 
3.         The details of the budget allocations of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for the financial year 2001-2002 contained
 in the Demand No.7 were considered by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport &
 Tourism at its meeting held on the 4
th April 2001. 
4.         The Annual Plan outlay of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for the year 2001-2002 is Rs.1641.31 crores out of
 which Internal and External budgetary resources (IEBR) component is Rs.1578.31 crores and the gross budgetary
 support is Rs.63.00 crores.
 
5.         The organisation wise details of the approved outlays and their financing pattern are as under: -
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes Rs.39.15 crores for projects in North Eastern regions, Sikkim and other priority areas; Rs.10.79 crores for
 Amritsar Airport and Rs.0.90 crores as assistance from OECF for Aurangabad Airport.
 

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
AIR INDIA LIMITED
 
6.         During the year 2000-2001, as against the approved outlay of Rs.675.30, the actual expenditure is estimated at
 Rs.699.57 crores.  The increase of Rs.24.27 crores is mainly due to increase in aircraft project loan repayment
 consequent to weakening of the Indian rupees vis-à-vis US Dollar, increase in end of term purchase price of one B747-
300 Combi, leased in November 1998 due to exchange rate variation and contribution of Rs.1.00 crore to Indira Gandhi
 Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA).  The entire expenditure was incurred out of the Internal and Extra Budgetary
 Resources of Air India Limited. 
7.         The Annual Plan Outlay of Air India for the year 2001-2002 has been estimated at Rs.445.44 crores, which
 mainly comprises of Aircraft Loan Repayments of Rs.285.44 crores and Capital Expenditure of Rs.150.00 crores.  A
 token provision for advance payment of Rs.10.00 crores has been made for new aircraft (type yet to be identified) to be
 inducted by Air India Limited.
 
8.         Air India’s present fleet consists of the following aircraft: -
AIRCRAFT NUMBER
1.  Boeing B747-200 4
2.  Boeing B747-400 6
3.  Boeing B747-300 (Combi) 2
4.  Airbus A300-B4 3
5.  Airbus A310-300 10 (including two dry leased aircraft)
 
9.         In addition, two more A310-300 aircraft are likely to be inducted on dry lease basis by the end of April 2001 or
 the first week of May 2001.  
10.       The Committee observed that a token provision of Rs.10.00 crores has been made for advance payment for new
 aircraft to be inducted by Air India Ltd.  The Committee desired to know how many aircraft do Air India intend to
 procure and what is the current status with regard to the procurement of the aircraft. 
11.       In reply, the Committee was informed that since Air India is going to be disinvested shortly, they have decided
 not to purchase any new aircraft at present.  Air India had taken up an aircraft evaluation study on the understanding
 that Government would inject funds for aircraft acquisition.  Subsequently it was decided that the Government would
 not be in a position to infuse requisite funds and Air India, therefore, discontinued the aircraft evaluation study. 
12.            Meanwhile, Air India has drawn up a 10 year Business Plan (2001-2002 to 2010-2011) which proposes the
 induction of 18 Small Capacity Long Range (SCLR) and 28 Small Capacity Short Range (SCSR) aircraft.  Aircraft
 induction begins from 2003-2004, after the induction of the Strategic Partner. 
13.       The Government is presently processing the disinvestment of part of its stake in Air India.  The strategic partner
 proposed to be inducted would be expected to finance and support the aircraft acquisition process and for these reasons,
 the aircraft selection process and purchase decisions are being deferred till the completion of the disinvestment process.
14.       Only a token provision of Rs.10.00 crores has been made in Annual Plan 2001-2002 of Air India that is
 inadequate for actual aircraft induction.  As an interim measure, Air India is inducting A310-300 aircraft on dry lease
 for growth and fleet rationalisation.  Air India has signed an agreement with Singapore Airlines for the dry lease of two
 A310-300 aircraft and with M/s. General Electric Aviation Service (GECAS) of USA for the dry lease of two A310-
300 aircraft.  
15.       When asked whether non-procurement of aircraft would lead to under valuation of Air India since non-
availability of aircraft is resulting in non-utilisation of capacity of Air India, the Committee was informed that although
 Air India is not pursuing aircraft acquisition, it is adding capacity through dry leasing of aircraft and also through Code
 Share/Block Space Arrangements. Air India has been vigorously pursuing the conclusion of the Code Share/Block
 Space Arrangements with foreign airlines to supplement its own physical operations.  As on 31
st March 2000, Code
 Share/Block Space Arrangements implemented by Air India envisaged the deployment of 1128 seats per week in each
 direction.  Thereafter, Air India has finalised Code Share/Block Space Arrangements with the following airlines:-
 
AIRLINES SECTOR SEATS/WEEK IN EACH DIRECTION
Kuwait Airways* KWI/MAA/KWI 140
Virgin Atlantic LON/DEL/LON 130
Emirates DXB/MAA/DXB 172

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
Malaysian Airlines* BOM/BLR/HYD/KUL/LAXW 308
Thai Airways** BKK/BOM/BOM 200
Aeroflot MOW/DEL/MOW 75
 Total 1025
* To be operationalised.
** Arrangements still to be finalized.
 
Thus the capacity deployment by Air India under the Code Share/Block Space Arrangements will reflect an increase of
 91% from 1,128 to 2,153 seats per week, after all the above arrangements have been operationalised.
 
16.       The Committee has also been informed that Air India has taken several steps to overcome the losses incurred
 during the last few years.  Some of these are as under:-
Several posts of India based officers abroad have been abolished;
Two voluntary schemes have been notified, viz. shorter working scheme and leave without pay and allowance scheme
 for a period of two years extendable upto five years;
Redeployment of employees from non-operational to operational areas;
Freeze on external recruitment in non-operational categories;
10% cut in daily outstanding allowance payable at all foreign stations and 25% at Indian Stations; and
(vi)            Introduction of route rationalization programme to optimise revenue involving curtailment of flights on
 marginal and loss making routes and the redeployment of this capacity to profit making routes. 
17.       The Committee notes that in view of the disinvestment proceedings, Air India has decided not to procure any
 new aircraft.  Instead Air India would be adding five more aircraft to their fleet on account of dry lease.  The
 Committee disapproves the idea of the Government to defer the acquisition of the aircraft by Air India pending
 disinvestment.  Not a single aircraft has been added to the fleet of Air India since long.  The Committee is of the view
 that non-acquisition of the aircraft would have certainly affected the valuation of Air India.  The Committee also notes
 the steps taken by Air India to minimise the losses and return to profitability and hopes that these steps would help the
 company in making a turnaround.   
 
INDIAN AIRLINES
 
18.       The Annual Plan outlay of Indian Airlines Limited for the year 2000-2001 was approved as Rs.550.00 crores. 
 Against this, the expenditure for the year 2000-2001 is likely to be Rs.473.81 crores, to be met entirely from the
 Internal and Extra budgetary resources.  The plan outlays vis-à-vis anticipated expenditure for the year 2000-2001 is
 summarised as follows:
 
S.No. SCHEMES APPROVED
 OUTLAY
ANTICIPATED
 EXPENDITURE
I. Aircraft Projects
i.   Airbus A-320 project
ii.  50-seater Aircraft/any      other type of new aircraft.
 
361.48
135.00
 
375.31
45.00
 Total-I 496.48 420.31
II. Other supporting facilities 53.52 52.50
III. Grants-in-aid to IGRUA -- 1.00
 Total I+II+III 550.00 473.81
 
19.       One of the main reasons cited for underutilisation of funds in the Aircrafts Projects is that a provision of
 Rs.135.00 crores was made towards 50-seater aircraft project/any other type of new aircraft which was reduced to
 Rs.45.00 crores at the RE stage since the evaluation of the aircraft was still in progress. 
20.       The approved plan outlay of Indian Airlines Limited for the year 2001-2002 is Rs.460.00 crores consisting of
 Rs.400.60 crores under aircraft projects and Rs.59.40 crores under other supporting facilities.  In Aircraft Projects, the
 outgo of Rs.375.60 crores is towards the repayment of loans to various banks and financial institutions abroad towards
 A-320 aircraft.  A token provision of Rs.25.00 crores has been made towards purchase of 50-seater aircraft/any other
 type of new aircraft for induction in the fleet of the company.
 

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
21.       The internal resources position of Indian Airlines Limited from 1999-2000 onwards is as follows:-
 
Sl.
No.
Particulars 1999-2000 2000-2001
(RE)
2001-2002
(Budget)
1. Profit/Loss 45.27 177.25 251.50
2. Total Internal resources 372.82 178.75 124.50
3. Budgetary Support -- -- --
4. Plan Expenditure 492.27 473.81 460.00
 
 
22.       The operational fleet of Indian Airlines/Alliance Air at present is as under:-
 
 No. of Aircraft Average age as
on 31
st Dec. 2000
  YEAR MONTHS
Airbus A-300 10* 20 03
Airbus A-320 30 09 05
Boeing-737 11 19 03
Dornier 03 15 06
Total 54   
* Includes 2 A-300 taken on dry lease.
 
23.       The Committee had, in its 42nd report on Demands for Grants 2000-2001 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 observed that every year funds are provided for the acquisition of 50-seater aircraft, but no decision is being taken in
 this regard.  When asked about the progress made in the matter, the Committee has been informed that the Project
 Report submitted by Indian Airlines on acquisition of six ATR 42-500 aircraft was examined in pre-PIB meetings held
 under the chairmanship of the then JS&FA, Ministry of Civil Aviation on 16.6.1999 and 23.6.1999.  After detailed
 discussions, pre-PIB came to the following conclusions: 
Indian Airlines should work out ERR in respect of the project in consultation with Planning Commission.
The two aircraft proposed to be acquired for the North Eastern Region can be justified for social considerations. 
 However, remaining 4 aircraft would have to be justified based on commercial considerations.
The project as a whole would not be viable for Indian Airlines as negative IRR is expected assuming that Government
 funding to the extent of margin money alone would be available.  The Government have recently approved certain
 initiatives to make the operation by turbo-prop aircraft viable.  These include providing of ATF at international price to
 turbo-prop operations, notifying ATF as a ‘declared good’ under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 and exemption of
 IATT for northeast operations.  In view of these, Indian Airlines/DGCA were advised to reassess the project for
 purchase/operations of 50-seater aircraft. 
24.       The Board of Directors of Indian Airlines have considered the entire project proposal on the basis of the report
 of an in-house Committee set up by Indian Airlines.  The Board noted that the project still continues to show negative
 generation of funds, which, therefore, necessitates funding of the project by the Government of India.  The Board also
 noted that the in-house Committee has based its findings purely on commercial considerations and it did not take into
 account the social commitments/obligations of the PSU, including a need to ensure greater connectivity, specially on
 small/remote destinations. 
25.       The recommendations of the Board are under consideration of the Government. 
26.       The Committee feels that providing air connectivity to the people of North East region is a social obligation of
 the Government of India, which can be met only by acquiring the 50-seater aircraft.  The Committee notes that since
 the last 2-3 years, the Committee has been repeatedly recommending that an early decision may be taken with respect
 to the acquisition of the 50-seater aircraft, but the matter has still been hanging fire.  In absence of these smaller
 aircraft, the smaller airports in the country are also lying unused.  The Committee is extremely disappointed at the pace
 at which the Ministry of Civil Aviation has been processing the matter of acquiring the 50-seater aircraft.  Since the last
 2-3 years, the Committee has been receiving almost identical replies with respect to progress made in the acquisition of
 50-seater aircraft.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that all the formalities with respect to the procurement of the
 50-seater aircraft may be completed at the earliest so that there is no delay in the acquisition of these aircraft.  This will

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 not only result in greater use of small airports in the country but will also go a long way in solving the problems of
 growth of aviation sector in the NE region and other remote areas.
 
OVERBOOKING OF SEATING CAPACITY IN THE NATIONAL CARRIERS
 
27.       The attention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation was brought to the overbooking of seats by the Indian Airlines. 
 The Ministry of Civil Aviation was informed about the incident on the 3
rd April 2001 when there was an overbooking
 on 20 seats on the Lucknow-Delhi sector, which also led to the harassment to the passengers.  The Ministry of Civil
 Aviation admitted the existence of the practice of overbooking of seats in the airlines.  The Committee desired to know
 the criteria for overbooking of seats.  The Committee was informed that the airlines do not have cancellation charges
 and that leads to blocking of seats and overbooking.  The Committee was further informed that, in order to minimise
 off-loadings and over bookings, Air India has procured the Automated Revenue Management System (ARMS) and
 have installed the system for the testing phase.  Benefits are expected to accrue 10 to 12 months after installation of the
 system. 
28.       The Committee feels that the problem of overbooking of seating capacity exists in the national carriers and that
 it needs to be checked.  Such incidents adversely affect the image of the airlines.  Overbooking of seats not only lead to
 off-loadings but also result in harassment and inconvenience to the passengers.  The Committee hopes that with the
 introduction of the Automated Revenue Management System, the problem would be greatly reduced in Air India.  The
 Committee recommends that Indian Airlines may also explore the possibility of introducing similar system to avoid the
 recurrence of such incidents.
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
29.       The Airports Authority of India is responsible for management and development of civil airports and civil
 enclaves at Defence airports in the country.  Apart from this, the Authority is also responsible for providing
 navigational facilities to the aircraft operating in India. The approved Annual Plan Outlay of Airports Authority of India
 for the year 2000-2001 was Rs.835.53 crores, which included a provision of Rs.37.53 crores towards payment of
 budgetary support by the Government.  Against this, the anticipated expenditure during the year is likely to be
 Rs.506.15 crores.  The main reasons for shortfall in the International Airports Division are stated to be that the schemes
 relating to new International Terminal (Phase-II) at Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi and new Domestic
 Terminal complex (Phase-II), Mumbai Airport are yet to be sanctioned.  The scheme relating to the Integrated Cargo
 Complex at Kolkata airport has been sanctioned recently and that expenditure will be incurred in the next year. 
30.       The approved Annual Plan outlay of Airports Authority of India for the year 2001-2002 is Rs.573.71 crores,
 which includes a budgetary support of Rs.50.84 crores.  The provision earmarked for International Airports Division is
 Rs.155.91 crores and for National Airports Division is Rs.417.80 crores. 
31.       The internal resources position of the Airports Authority of India for the period from 1997-1998 to 2000-2001
 and the projection for 2001-2002 is as under:-
 
Particulars 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-2001 2001-2002
Profit after Tax 196.14 208.41 211.38 234.26 251.30
 
32.       The Committee notes that the profits of Airports Authority of India have not been rising to the desired level. 
 The Committee also notes that the Airports Authority of India has been making provisions of huge amount on certain
 airport schemes but these funds remain unutilised for want of sanction to these projects.  The Committee recommends
 that, while making allocation for its schemes, the Airports Authority of India should make a realistic assessment of the
 requirement of the funds and make token provision for its schemes till the schemes are duly sanctioned. 
33.       The Committee desired to know the revenue generated from the non-aviation resources at the airports and
 whether the Airports Authority of India have taken any steps to increase the revenue generated from non-aviation
 resources at the airports.  In response the Committee was informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation that the non-aviation revenue generated by the Airports Authority of India has shown an upper trend and that
 they expected to improve it.  The Committee was also informed that the Airports Authority of India has a plenty of
 unutilised land some of which had been encroached upon and that they were trying to get their land back.  The total
 revenue generated in 1999-2000 was Rs.1691.28 crores out of which Non-Traffic Revenue was Rs.356.23 crores and

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 Cargo Revenue was Rs.250.44 crores which comprise 21.06% and 14.81% of the total revenue respectively.  The Non-
Traffic Revenue was expected to go up to Rs.409.10 crores in 2000-2001 while the cargo revenue would be only
 Rs.247.55 crores. 
34.       The Committee was also informed that the efforts made by the Airports Authority of India to enhance the Non-
Traffic Revenues by 25% during the year 2000-2001 and by 35% during 2001-2002 are as under: 
Airports Authority of India has finalised tenders for setting up of money exchange counters at Indira Gandhi
 International Airport, Delhi and Chennai International Airports and are processing tenders for other airports.
Space for putting of Jewellery shops have been awarded at selected international airports.
Tenders have been issued for undertaking ground handling functions at some of the international and domestic airports.
Action is also on hand to develop other commercial facilities like hotels, super speciality hospitals and Golf course at
 Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International Airport, Kolkata and other
 airports. 
35.       The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Airports Authority of India to generate additional revenue
 through the non-aviation resources and hopes that it will help the Airports Authority of India augment its earnings.  The
 Committee hopes that the Airports Authority of India would make efforts in the direction of getting its land back from
 the encroachers.  The Committee further recommends that Airports Authority of India should make the best use of the
 vast land at its disposal and suggests that the land could be used a source of income to finance the Airports Authority of
 India’s infrastructure.
 
EXPANSION OF RUNWAY/INCREASED CONNECTIVITY TO THE KARGIL AND LEH AIRPORTS
 
36. The Committee invited the attention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the under utilisation of the airport
 infrastructure at Kargil and Leh. Work on the construction of the airport building at Kargil has been completed at the
 cost of nearly Rs.50.00 crores but the airport is lying unused since the runway of the airport is only 6000 feet and
 Indian Airlines does not have 50-seater aircraft, which can land there.  As regards Leh, it remains cut off from the rest
 of the country for six months in a year and Indian Airlines is the only source of connectivity from Leh to the rest of the
 country.  It was also mentioned that tourism is one of the main sources of income generation in Laddakh.  Although,
 since the last few years, the number of tourists intending to visit Laddakh has increased, yet the actual number of
 people visiting Laddakh has remained stagnant because of the lack of connectivity. 
37. In response, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the runway of Kargil Airport was
 kept at 6000 feet since it was meant for the 50-seater aircraft.  The Committee was assured that the Airports Authority
 of India would look into the matter of expansion of the Kargil Airport.  At regards the Leh airport, the Committee was
 informed that the air connectivity to Leh is highly subsidised and that it is not profitable to fly on the route. 
38.  The Committee recommends that in order to fully utilise the existing infrastructure at the Kargil Airport, the runway
 of the Kargil airport should be extended to a length of 8000-9000 feet so that the Boeing-737 available with the Indian
 Airlines can land there.  As regards the air connectivity to Leh, the Committee feels that air service to Leh may not be
 profitable, but keeping in view its unique geographical location, the Government has a social obligation to the people of
 the region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the air services to Leh may be increased to facilitate the easy
 flow of tourists in that region so that the tourism potential of the region could be utilised to the extent possible.
 
NEED FOR GRANTS-IN-AID TO THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
39.            Airports Authority of India is responsible for the development of the airport infrastructure in the country. 
 The resources for these activities are generally raised from internal resources.  As far as airport infrastructure is
 concerned, Airports Authority of India generally does not require budgetary support from the Central Government for
 economically viable projects, which may also boost tourism and trade.  Airports Authority of India finances such
 economically viable projects from its internal resources or from loans from financial institutions.  However, Airports
 Authority of India has to undertake projects in North East and in remote areas like Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
 Jammu and Kashmir etc. on socio-economic consideration.  As per existing arrangement for the development of
 airports in N.E. region, NEC is bearing 60% of the project cost in respect of certain selected projects as grant.  The
 balance 40% and the funds for the schemes not covered by the NEC under the grant are being provided by the
 Government as budgetary support comprising 50% as equity and 50% as loan.  But these schemes are economically
 unviable.  The operations at these airports do not generate adequate revenue not even to meet the operational
 expenditure of recurring nature.  The projects being unprofitable, Airports Authority of India not only makes
 operational losses on these projects but also has to pay dividend on the equity portion and interest on the loan portion of

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 the budgetary support. 
40.       The attention of the Committee has also been invited to Para 14.7 of Policy on Airport Infrastructure which
 states “wherever Government compels Airports Authority of India to invest in non-viable projects for fulfilment of
 social objectives, the initial capital cost of the project and the necessary annual loss sustained by the Airports Authority
 of India on this account will be reimbursed”. 
41.       The Committee is constrained to note that the Government of India is not adhering to the provisions of the
 Policy on Airport Infrastructure, which requires the Government to reimburse the initial capital cost of the project, and
 the necessary annual loss sustained by the Airports Authority of India in respect of the unviable projects. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that if the Airports Authority of India is deputed to undertake such airport projects,
 which are economically unviable but have to be undertaken on socio-economic consideration, the Airports Authority of
 India should be provided the entire budgetary support in the shape of 100% grant-in-aid for these projects.  The
 Committee also recommends that an annual lump sum grant may also be made to Airports Authority of India for
 making the operational losses incurred on these projects.
 
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
 
42.       The main function of Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited is to provide support services to the Oil sector.  Though
 the oil industry remains the major user of helicopters, the Company is providing helicopter services to other customers
 like State Governments and other Public Sector Undertakings as well as such joint venture companies as are
 commencing oil exploration and production in the offshore block allotted to them.  
43.       The approved plan outlay of Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited for the financial year 2001-2002 is Rs.127.00
 crores as per the following details:-
                                               (Rs. In Crores)
Sl.No. Schemes Plan Outlay
2001-2002
1. Acquisition of New fleet 106.80
2. Import of equipment 3.20
3. Building Project 17.00
 Total (1+2+3) 127.00
 
44.       The targets of the company include acquisition of one light helicopter and two medium helicopters.  After the
 augmentation of its fleet, the Company proposes to provide services in North East, tourist charters and selected pilgrim
 centres.  The Company has helicopters for charter purposes stationed at Delhi and Mumbai, which could also be used
 by tourists.  As regards helicopter services in the North-Eastern Region, the Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited is already
 running following three regular passenger services under the aegis of the respective State Government and has plans to
 deploy more helicopters in the area, subject to the approval of the concerned State Government/Government agencies. 
 The Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited had also deployed a helicopter in heli-skying operations in Himanchal Pradesh
 and had carried out the operations successfully for two years in a row.  
45.       The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited to diversify its costumer
 base in the field of heli-skying etc.   The Committee feels that the operations undertaken by the Pawan Hans
 Helicopters Limited should be given adequate publicity.  The Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited should also take up the
 matter relating to increasing its services in the North East region with the concerned agencies/State Governments.
 
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA
 
46.       For the year 2000-2001 the approved Annual Plan Outlay of Hotel Corporation of India was Rs.24.77 crores
 against which the anticipated expenditure is likely to be to the tune of Rs.21.77 crores.  The company has undertaken a
 complete renovation of about 100 rooms at Centaur-Delhi.  During the year, the work of renovation of 84 guest rooms
 at Centaur Hotel, Juhu Beach and 60 rooms at Centaur Hotel, Mumbai Airport was taken up.  In addition, telephone
 exchange was installed at Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport and Centaur Hotel Juhu beach.  Various outdated equipments
 like Cooling Towers, TVs, Hot Water Generators were replaced.  New facilities like Mini Bars, Hilifts and Effluent
 Treatment Plant etc. were added for improvement of services. 
47.       An outlay of Rs.23.00 crores has been approved for the Annual Plan 2001-2002 of Hotel Corporation of India as
 per the details as below:

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
(Rs. In crores)
Sl. No. Schemes Approved outlay 2001-2002
1. Repayment of term loan 3.00
2. Renovation/Upgradation of Hotel Rooms and
 normal Department capital expenditure
20.00
 Total 23.00
 
48.       The Committee had, in its 42nd report on Demands for Grants 2000-2001 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 stressed the need for immediate renovation/upgradation of the hotels of the Hotel Corporation of India to the desired
 level so that these hotels are well received by the airlines, travel agents and business travellers so that its occupancy rate
 increases.  The Committee notes that Rs.20.00 crores were utilised for the renovation/upgradation of the hotels during
 2000-2001 and during 2001-2002 also, a provision of Rs.20.00 crores has been made. The Committee is happy to note
 that the Hotel Corporation of India has taken various measures for the renovation/upgradation of the Hotel rooms.  The
 Committee feels that now there should be no objection to the crew of Air India/Indian Airlines in staying in these
 hotels.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the stay of Air India/Indian Airlines crew
 in the hotels of Hotel Corporation of India be made compulsory.  The Committee hopes that this will also help instil
 confidence among the common people to stay in these hotels.
ADVERSE IMPACT OF NEW BUDGETARY PROVISIONS ON THE CIVIL AVIATION SECTOR
 
49.       The Committee has been informed that the Union Budget 2001 contains the following two proposals in respect
 of the Civil Aviation sector:- 
Introduction of 3% customs duty on import of aircraft including leased in aircraft.
Withdrawal of the exemption from withholding on interest payable on foreign currency loans i.e. in respect of leasing of
 aircraft from abroad w.e.f. 1
st June 2001. 
50.       The Committee has been informed that the proposal regarding introduction of 3% customs duty on import of
 aircraft would result in an additional burden ranging from Rs.5.00 crores to Rs.8.00 crores per aircraft.  The proposal
 regarding withdrawal of the exemption from withholding on interest payable on foreign currency loans would also
 substantially add to the cost of the operations since induction of any new aircraft is financed through external
 commercial borrowings. 
51.       The Committee is of the view that the above budget proposals would be detrimental to the overall development
 of the Civil Aviation industry in India.  The above proposals will not only have an adverse affect on the induction of
 aircraft required for replacement of old fleet and for expansion of capacity by the airlines in India but also would have
 very serious financial implications on the airlines as induction of any new aircraft is financed through external
 commercial borrowings.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should make an assessment
 of the effect of these provisions on the civil aviation sector in the country.  Thereafter, the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 should impress upon the Ministry of Finance to reconsider the proposals regarding induction of 3% customs duty an
 import/leasing of aircraft and withdrawal of the exemption from withholding tax on interest payable on external
 borrowings. 
 
CREATION OF NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION DEVELOPMENT FUND   (NCADF)
 
52.       The Committee had, its 42nd report on the Demands for Grants 2000-2001 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation,
 observed that Civil Aviation sector is closely linked to the tourism and trade sectors and hence airport infrastructure and
 air service should not be allowed to suffer for want of budgetary support since degradation of Civil Aviation Sector
 would also affect the trade and tourism.   In their reply, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has submitted that the various
 organisations linked with civil aviation sector have to undertake certain projects/operations which are economically
 unviable but have to be undertaken an socio-economic considerations. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has, therefore,
 stressed the need for the creation of a National Civil Aviation Development Fund (NCADF).  The Committee enquired
 as to whether Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken any steps for the creation of the NCADF.  The Ministry of Civil
 Aviation have replied that the policy on Infrastructure, (December, 1997) states that taking into account the vast sums
 required for infrastructural development, there is a strong case for conversion of Inland Air Travel Tax (IATT) and
 Foreign Travel Tax (FTT) into a common Civil Aviation Cess, the proceeds of which should be credited to the NCADF
 to be operated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The Committee of Secretaries (COS) in its meeting on 17.11.1997

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 recommended creation of the fund out of 25% of the IATT/FTT collection.  The Task Force set up to recommend
 measures for improving airport infrastructure and air links in the North East Region, in its Report of April 1997, inter-
alia, also recommended creation of the NCADF out of 50% of the IATT/FTT collection which should be utilized to
 finance aviation infrastructure development and to subsidise the unviable but essential air services.  This proposal based
 on the recommendations of the Task Force was, inter-alia, placed before the Cabinet in January 2000.  However, the
 Cabinet deferred consideration of this proposal.  The Draft Civil Aviation Policy under finalisation also proposes to
 reiterate the creation of the NCADF. 
53.       The Committee was further informed that the issue was discussed by the Task Force on Infrastructure on
 20.4.2000 in which Ministry of Finance was not in favour of the proposal and therefore, the consideration of the issue
 was deferred.  Again in a meeting with the Ministry of Finance on the 26
th June 2000, the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 have been asked to make a presentation indicating requirement of fund with proper justification at a later date.
 
54.       The Committee feels that in view of the limited resources available with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
 pressure on the existing civil aviation infrastructure in the country, there is a need for the creation of a National Civil
 Aviation Development Fund (NCADF).  The proposed fund could be financed through contributions from airlines,
 collections from IATT and Foreign Travel Tax (FTT) etc. for undertaking its development and promoting air services
 in remote and unserved areas.  This will go a long way in making the airport operations and air services in such areas
 economically viable for the Airports Authority of India and airlines respectively.
 
NEED FOR THE SATELLITE BASED NAVIGATION SYSTEM
 
55.       The Committee has been informed that at present navigation of the aircraft is carried out with the help of signals
 received by the aircraft from ground based navigational aids and landing aids which can be installed at places where
 proper terrain conditions are available and as such cannot be installed in forests, sea and other mountainous regions. 
 The aircraft are, therefore, perforce required to follow the routes where these aids have been installed.  ICAO has
 adopted satellite based CNS/ATM system for global implementation.  Adoption of this system would facilitate
 seamless navigation of aircraft across diverse airspace regions, increase airspace capacity, permit direct routes saving
 time and fuel and above all enhance air safety. 
56.            Airports Authority of India has been taking up the implementation of various elements of the CNS/ATM
 system.  One of the key elements of this new system is satellite-based navigation using the core satellite constellations
 like GPS of the USA and the GLONASS of the Russian Federation.  These satellite constellations continuously
 broadcast signals, which could be used for signals for determination of their position while in flight and thus use these
 signals for navigation between origin and destination. 
57.       The accuracy, integrity and availability of the signals from these satellites, however, do not meet the stringent
 requirements of aircraft navigation particularly in the critical phases of flight like precision approach and landing. 
 Therefore, there is a need for augmentation to enhance the accuracy, integrity and availability of these signals to meet
 the requirements of aircraft navigation in all phases of flight.  Space Based Augmentation System (SBAS), which could
 cover a large geographical area, is being developed as Regional Augmentation Systems by individual as well as group
 of countries.  The US WAAS, the European EGNOS and the Japan’s MSAS are the three front-runners in the field of
 SBAS.  The coverage of MSAS in the East and of EGNOS in the West leave a large air space in between and
 particularly over South Asia, including Indian air space uncovered. 
58.            Airports Authority of India is, therefore, planning to bridge this gap and provide coverage over this air space
 by putting its own SBAS.  It has been discussing for quite some time with the Department of Space (DOS), which has
 the necessary technology and expertise in this area.  A project Report has been prepared by the DOS for joint
 implementation of a Technology Demonstration System (TDS) as a proof of concept and a precursor to the full
 operation capability system with the cost of the system equally shared by Airports Authority of India and DOS.  While
 DOS would be the lead player in the implementation of TDS, Airports Authority of India will take over from there
 onwards and implement a full operational capability system with DOS continuing as a Technical Adviser. 
59.       The system, when in place, would not only provide coverage over the Indian airspace but has the potential to
 provide coverage over vast airspace much beyond with marginal additional cost.  In coordination with other
 neighbouring countries in fora like SAARC, this could finally evolve into a regional system bridging a gap between the
 EGNOS in the West and MSAS in the East. 
60.       After the implementation of SBAS to full operational capability, the system would run in parallel to ground

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 based navigational system for about five years to enable aircraft operators to gain experience and confidence.  Only
 thereafter ground based navigational and landing aids would be withdrawn in a phased manner after year 2010 as
 envisaged in the ICAO global plan. 
61.       The Committee appreciates the proposal of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for installation of Space Based
 Augmentation System (SBAS), which will vastly improve the capacity of the air-traffic system, safety and surveillance
 in the Indian sky.  The Committee feels that the system will give India an opportunity not only to modernise its air
 navigation services infrastructure but leapfrog to the latest in the field.  The Committee recommends that the
 Government of India should consider the proposal favourably and give their approval at the earliest so that the Ministry
 of Civil Aviation can take further steps in the matter.  
 
* * * * * * * * * * 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
AIR INDIA LIMITED
The Committee notes that in view of the disinvestment proceedings, Air India has decided not to procure any new
 aircraft.  Instead Air India would be adding five more aircraft to their fleet on account of dry lease.  The Committee
 disapproves the idea of the Government to defer the acquisition of the aircraft by Air India pending disinvestment.  Not
 a single aircraft has been added to the fleet of Air India since long.  The Committee is of the view that non-acquisition
 of the aircraft would have certainly affected the valuation of Air India.  The Committee also notes the steps taken by
 Air India to minimise the losses and return to profitability and hopes that these steps would help the company in
 making a turnaround.   
(Para 17)
INDIAN AIRLINES
The Committee feels that providing air connectivity to the people of North East region is a social obligation of the
 Government of India, which can be met only by acquiring the 50-seater aircraft.  The Committee notes that since the
 last 2-3 years, the Committee has been repeatedly recommending that an early decision may be taken with respect to
 the acquisition of the 50-seater aircraft, but the matter has still been hanging fire.  In absence of these smaller aircraft,
 the smaller airports in the country are also lying unused.  The Committee is extremely disappointed at the pace at which
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation has been processing the matter of acquiring the 50-seater aircraft.  Since the last 2-3
 years, the Committee has been receiving almost identical replies with respect to progress made in the acquisition of 50-
seater aircraft.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that all the formalities with respect to the procurement of the 50-
seater aircraft may be completed at the earliest so that there is no delay in the acquisition of these aircraft.  This will not
 only result in greater use of small airports in the country but will also go a long way in solving the problems of growth
 of aviation sector in the NE region and other remote areas.
(Para 26)
 
OVERBOOKING OF SEATING CAPACITY IN THE NATIONAL CARRIERS
The Committee feels that the problem of overbooking of seating capacity exists in the national carriers and that it needs
 to be checked.  Such incidents adversely affect the image of the airlines.  Overbooking of seats not only lead to off-
loadings but also result in harassment and inconvenience to the passengers.  The Committee hopes that with the
 introduction of the Automated Revenue Management System, the problem would be greatly reduced in Air India.  The
 Committee recommends that Indian Airlines may also explore the possibility of introducing similar system to avoid the
 recurrence of such incidents.
(Para 28)
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee notes that the profits of Airports Authority of India have not been rising to the desired level.  The
 Committee also notes that the Airports Authority of India has been making provisions of huge amount on certain airport
 schemes but these funds remain unutilised for want of sanction to these projects.  The Committee recommends that,
 while making allocation for its schemes, the Airports Authority of India should make a realistic assessment of the
 requirement of the funds and make token provision for its schemes till the schemes are duly sanctioned.
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Airports Authority of India to generate additional revenue through the
 non-aviation resources and hopes that it will help the Airports Authority of India augment its earnings.  The Committee
 hopes that the Airports Authority of India would make efforts in the direction of getting its land back from the
 encroachers.  The Committee further recommends that Airports Authority of India should make the best use of the vast

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 land at its disposal and suggests that the land could be used a source of income to finance the Airports Authority of
 India’s infrastructure.
(Paras 32 & 35)
 
EXPANSION OF RUNWAY/INCREASED CONNECTIVITY TO THE KARGIL AND LEH AIRPORTS
The Committee recommends that in order to fully utilise the existing infrastructure at the Kargil Airport, the runway of
 the Kargil airport should be extended to a length of 8000-9000 feet so that the Boeing-737 available with the Indian
 Airlines can land there.  As regards the air connectivity to Leh, the Committee feels that air service to Leh may not be
 profitable, but keeping in view its unique geographical location, the Government has a social obligation to the people of
 the region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the air services to Leh may be increased to facilitate the easy
 flow of tourists in that region so that the tourism potential of the region could be utilised to the extent possible.
(Para 38)
NEED FOR GRANTS-IN-AID TO THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee is constrained to note that the Government of India is not adhering to the provisions of the Policy on
 Airport Infrastructure, which requires the Government to reimburse the initial capital cost of the project, and the
 necessary annual loss sustained by the Airports Authority of India in respect of the unviable projects. The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that if the Airports Authority of India is deputed to undertake such airport projects, which are
 economically unviable but have to be undertaken on socio-economic consideration, the Airports Authority of India
 should be provided the entire budgetary support in the shape of 100% grant-in-aid for these projects.  The Committee
 also recommends that an annual lump sum grant may also be made to Airports Authority of India for making the
 operational losses incurred on these projects.
(Para 41)
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited to diversify its costumer base in the
 field of heli-skying etc.   The Committee feels that the operations undertaken by the Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited
 should be given adequate publicity.  The Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited should also take up the matter relating to
 increasing its services in the North East region with the concerned agencies/State Governments.
(Para 45)
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA
The Committee had, in its 42
nd report on Demands for Grants 2000-2001 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation stressed the
 need for immediate renovation/upgradation of the hotels of the Hotel Corporation of India to the desired level so that
 these hotels are well received by the airlines, travel agents and business travellers so that its occupancy rate increases. 
 The Committee notes that Rs.20.00 crores were utilised for the renovation/upgradation of the hotels during 2000-2001
 and during 2001-2002 also, a provision of Rs.20.00 crores has been made. The Committee is happy to note that the
 Hotel Corporation of India has taken various measures for the renovation/upgradation of the Hotel rooms.  The
 Committee feels that now there should be no objection to the crew of Air India/Indian Airlines in staying in these
 hotels.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the stay of Air India/Indian Airlines crew
 in the hotels of Hotel Corporation of India be made compulsory.  The Committee hopes that this will also help instil
 confidence among the common people to stay in these hotels.
(Para 48)
 
ADVERSE IMPACT OF NEW BUDGETARY PROVISIONS ON THE CIVIL AVIATION SECTOR
The Committee is of the view that the above budget proposals would be detrimental to the overall development of the
 Civil Aviation industry in India.  The above proposals will not only have an adverse affect on the induction of aircraft
 required for replacement of old fleet and for expansion of capacity by the airlines in India but also would have very
 serious financial implications on the airlines as induction of any new aircraft is financed through external commercial
 borrowings.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should make an assessment of the effect
 of these provisions on the civil aviation sector in the country.  Thereafter, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should impress
 upon the Ministry of Finance to reconsider the proposals regarding induction of 3% customs duty an import/leasing of
 aircraft and withdrawal of the exemption from withholding tax on interest payable on external borrowings. 
(Para 51)
CREATION OF NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION DEVELOPMENT FUND   (NCADF)
The Committee feels that in view of the limited resources available with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and pressure on

ON NAMAH SHIVAY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/50threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:10]
 the existing civil aviation infrastructure in the country, there is a need for the creation of a National Civil Aviation
 Development Fund (NCADF).  The proposed fund could be financed through contributions from airlines, collections
 from IATT and Foreign Travel Tax (FTT) etc. for undertaking its development and promoting air services in remote
 and unserved areas.  This will go a long way in making the airport operations and air services in such areas
 economically viable for the Airports Authority of India and airlines respectively.
(Para 54)
NEED FOR THE SATELLITE BASED NAVIGATION SYSTEM
The Committee appreciates the proposal of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for installation of Space Based Augmentation
 System (SBAS), which will vastly improve the capacity of the air-traffic system, safety and surveillance in the Indian
 sky.  The Committee feels that the system will give India an opportunity not only to modernise its air navigation
 services infrastructure but leapfrog to the latest in the field.  The Committee recommends that the Government of India
 should consider the proposal favourably and give their approval at the earliest so that the Ministry of Civil Aviation can
 take further steps in the matter.
(Para 61)