 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
321 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: 
https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1- 28 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   29-36 
    6. MINUTES         37- 41 
 7. ANNEXURES        42 
 
         
        
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat 
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on 
its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty First Report on ‘Issues related 
to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
the subject on 21st December, 2021. 
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 30 th 
March, 2022. 
 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;              Chairman, 
March 30, 2022                                            Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Chaitra 9, 1944 (Saka)                           Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
      Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAIB Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
AIC Aeronautical Information Circular 
AMP Aircraft Maintenance Programme 
AOC Air Operator’s Certificate 
ATC Air Traffic Control/ Airport Tower Controller 
ATCO Air Traffic Controller 
ATPL Airline Transport Pilot License 
AXB Flight Code of Air India Express 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
C of A Certificate of Airworthiness 
CA Civil Aviation 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CMA Continuous Monitoring Approach 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPL Commercial Pilot License 
DG Director General 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DGR Directorate General Resettlement 
DIN Director Identification Number 
DPE Department of Public Enterprise 
EI Effective Implementation 
FAA Federal Aviation Administration 
FIDS Flight Information Display System 
GASP Global Aviation Safety Plan 
IASA Internal Aviation Safety Assessment 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
IPC Indian Penal Code 
ISO International Standard for Organization 
LoTA Letter of Type Acceptance 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
NOC No-Objection Certificate 
NPNT No Permission–No Takeoff 
OMR Optical Mark Recognition 
PAPI Precision Approach Path Indicator 
PF Pilot Flying 
PIC Pilot in Command 
PM Pilot Monitoring 
PPE Personal Protective Equipment 
PSC Parliamentary Standing Committee 
QCI Quality Council of India 
RESA Runway End Safety Area 
RT-PCR Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SARP Standards and Recommended Practice 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TC Type Certificate 
UAE United Arab Emirates 

iv 
 
UAS Unmanned Aircraft System 
UIN Unique Identification Number 
UNO United Nations Organization 
USA United States of America 
USOAP-CMA Universal Safety Oversight Audit Program- Continuous 
Monitoring Approach 
UT Union Territory 
VT Victorian Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
REPORT 
1. Barring the slowdown caused in the Civil Aviation sector by the Coronavirus pandemic, 
the aviation sector in India has witnessed tremendous growth in the last decade. Although flying 
is considered to be one of the safest modes of transportation, concerted efforts have to be put in 
to maintain and further improve the highest possible levels of safety in the aviation sector. The 
rapid pace of increase in air traffic across the world brings new challenges that must be resolved 
in order to ensure that the increased traffic can be handled safely and smoothly by minimizing 
chances for both human and mechanical failure to the extent possible. 
2. Given the crucial importance of ensuring topmost safety standards in the aviation sector 
in the country, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector’ for 
detailed examination and Report thereon. 
3. In this connection, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation; Director General (DG), Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA); DG, Aircraft 
Accident Information Bureau (AAIB); DG, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS); Member, 
Airport Authority of India (AAI); and other senior officials of the Ministry and its various 
organizations, on the subject in its meeting held on 21st December, 2021. 
4. In its written note on the subject, the Ministry informed the Committee that the provision 
of safe & secure air transport services is one of the primary responsibilities of the Ministr y of 
Civil Aviation. The following are the implementing agencies for achieving this objective:- 
 
(i) Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
 
The Directorate General of Civil Aviation is the principal regulatory body in the field of 
civil aviation. It is not only responsible for regulation of air transport services to/ from 
/within India, formulation and enforcement of civil air regulations, air safety and 
airworthiness standards, but also co-ordinates all regulatory functions with International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). 
 
(ii) Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
 

2 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) was established in 2012 as an 
independent organization from DGCA for investigation of Accidents and Serious 
Incidents. 
 
(iii) Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) is an attached office of the Ministry o f 
Civil Aviation. The aim of BCAS is to safeguard civil aviation operations against acts of 
unlawful interference. The Bureau is responsible for laying down the standards for 
security in respect of civil flights operating to / from India and ensuring their compliance 
through regular inspections and security audits.  
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
 
5. Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is the regulatory body in India governing 
safety aspects of civil aviation, which includes certification of airlines and aerodromes, 
airworthiness of aircraft, licensing of personnel, implementation of Safety Management System, 
investigation of incidents and surveillance of aircraft operations in India. Functions of DGCA 
have been derived from the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the Aircraft Rules, 1937. 
6. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding the existing mechanism in DGCA 
to prevent aircraft accidents and the bottlenecks and lacunaes in this regard. In its written reply, 
the Ministry informed the Committee that DGCA has taken the following steps to prevent 
aircraft accidents and enhance the level of safety: 
i. Regulatory Audit of Operators: 
Regulatory Audit teams of DGCA periodically carry out regulatory audit of 
operators and maintenance organizations. The deficiencies pointed out in the 
regulatory audit reports are immediately brought to the notice of the operators for 
taking necessary remedial measures. DGCA, in its effort to make the operators 
more responsible for quality control and safety, has stressed that operators should 
also conduct their internal audit apart from DGCA regulatory audit. 
ii. Periodic Spot Checks: 

3 
Periodic spot checks on the operations and maintenance activities of the operators 
have been intensified by DGCA officers to ensure observance of the laid down 
procedures. 
iii. Implementation of Recommendations Emanating from Investigation of Aircraft 
Accidents and Hazardous Incidents: 
Safety recommendations emanating from investigation of various aircraft 
accidents, Serious Accidents and incidents are followed up for implementation 
with the concerned agencies so as to prevent recurrence of similar 
accidents/incidents.  
iv. Issue of Air Safety Circular/Civil Aviation Requirements: 
Accidents/Incidents are regularly analyzed and based on these analyses, Air 
Safety Circulars are issued to bring important observations/findings to the notice 
of the operators to avoid the recurrence of the accidents. Safety precautions are 
also circulated through the Air Safety Circulars. Whenever a requirement is felt, 
regulatory changes are done by issuing Civil Aviation Requirements.  
v. Special Operating Precautions in Poor Weather Conditions: 
Operators and Airport authorities have been advised to take specific actions 
during periods of monsoon and fog. Airline pilots are subjected to special checks 
to ensure their proficiency in monsoon conditions. 
vi. Prevention of Bird Strike Incidents: 
Continuous efforts are being made in association with airport authorities and local 
civic authorities to take effective measures to reduce bird strike menace.  
vii. Action against defaulters: 
Whenever it is found that there is a gross violation of the laid down norms or 
compromise of safety, strict action is taken against the defaulters. 
7. The Committee notes the mechanism existing at present in order to prevent air craft 
accidents and thus ensure safety in civil aviation. The Committee recommends that the 
DGCA must regularly coordinate with AAI, various airport operators and airline 
operators and ensure the implementation of its specifications and guidelines regardin g 
aviation safety. State- of-art technology may be installed and utilized for prevention of 
aircraft accidents/ malfunctioning. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 

4 
may ensure that the budgetary allocation made to DGCA is sufficient to meet its 
requirements and it does not face any budgetary shortfall. Due focus may also be lai d on 
ensuring that the human resource requirements of DGCA are met at all times so that it can 
effectively carry out the important mandate of ensuring safety in the civil aviation sector in 
the country. 
8. The Committee desires to be apprised of the past aircraft/helicopter accidents in the 
country or involving Indian airlines. The Committee may also be informed about the 
guidelines issued by DGCA in view of aircraft/helicopter accidents in India and the 
monitoring mechanism in place for implementation of the same by the concerned 
organizations across the country. 
 
Safety of Air Transport Operations
 
9. The Ministry, in its written note, informed the Committee that in line with the standards 
laid down by ICAO, following processes are put in place for ensuring safety of air transport 
operations: 
(a)  Issuance of Air Operator’s Certificate: 
ICAO Annex 6 lays down the standards for the operation of aircraft. Accordingly, 
before carrying out air transport operations in India, a prospective operator is required to 
comply with this Annex. Schedule XI of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 lays down the 
requirements for grant of an Air Operator’s Certificate (AOC) for scheduled operations. 
The detailed requirements for the issuance of a permit are contained in the Civil Aviation 
Requirements and involve a number of steps leading to issuance of an Air Operator’s 
Certificate (AOC) by DGCA under Rule 134 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937. The steps 
involved in the process of the issuance of the AOC includes issuance of an initial No 
Objection Certificate (NOC) for starting an airline, setting up of the facilities and 
infrastructure by the proposed operator, grant of permission for import/acquisition of 
aircraft and the issuance of Air Operator's Certificate. Before the AOC is issued, DGCA 
ensures compliance with safety requirements (operational and airworthiness).  

5 
(b)  Airworthiness of an aircraft:  
(i)  ICAO Annex 8 lays down the standards for the airworthiness of aircraft. 
The Aircraft Rules, 1937 state that no civil aircraft shall be flown unless it is 
certified as airworthy and is maintained in an airworthy condition. DGCA issues 
Certificate of Airworthiness (C of A), under the provisions of rules, to an 
individual aircraft signifying that the aircraft conforms to its applicable type 
design and is in a condition for safe operation. The C of A is issued only after an 
inspection to ensure that the aircraft is of approved Type Design and has been 
maintained in accordance with periodic inspection schedules stipulated by the 
manufacturer of the aircraft.           
During the course of validity of Certificate of Airworthiness (C of A) of 
an aircraft, officers of DGCA monitor routine maintenance, major checks and 
significant defects through spot checks and surveillance.   
(ii)  The maintenance of aircraft is required to be carried out by an organisation 
specifically approved by DGCA for the purpose. For approval, an organisation 
requires proper infrastructure, appropriate tools including special tools, updated 
manufacturer’s documents and aircraft maintenance engineers holding appropriate 
licences for the maintenance work. Aircraft Maintenance Organisations are 
approved for specific ‘Scope of Work’ and approval is valid for five years. The 
approvals are renewed after an inspection to ensure that the capability of the 
organisation has not deteriorated. The organisation is required to show that they 
have carried out an internal audit and have rectified the deficiencies found during 
their internal audit. 
(c) Licensing of Personnel: 
ICAO Annex 1 stipulates International Standards and Recommended Practices for 
licensing various categories of Pilots, other Flight crew members, Aircraft Maintenance 
Engineers, Air Traffic Controllers etc. These standards have four features namely i) 
Minimum Age for a licence, ii) Knowledge, iii) Experience, and iv) Skill Test. In case of 

6 
licensing of Flight Crew members and Air Traffic Controllers, Medical Standards have 
also been stipulated. Indian regulations meet ICAO standards. In addition, Indian 
regulations stipulate minimum education qualifications in respect of pilots and aircraft 
maintenance engineers. DGCA conducts written examinations to test the knowledge of 
the applicant. Syllabus for these examinations is as prescribed by ICAO. Online/ OMR 
based computerised system is used for the examination. 
(d) Safety management system: 
ICAO Annex 19 requires that all approved maintenance organisations as well as 
commercial air operators are required to establish a safety management system for the 
identification of hazards and associated risks and take adequate mitigation actions. The 
ICAO SARPs are contained in Rule 29D of the Aircraft Rules 1937 and relevant Civil 
Aviation Requirements. Accordingly, during the course of day- to-day activities, these 
approved organisations identify hazards and take corrective/ mitigating measures. 
(e) Licencing of Aerodrome: 
 
ICAO Annex 14 lays down the Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) 
for developments of aerodromes. DGCA has issued requirements for licensing of 
aerodrome through Civil Aviation Requirement section 4 series F Part-I. Inspection of 
aerodromes to verify infrastructure, services, procedures and documentation are carried 
out periodically as per annual surveillance program. 
10. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the efficiency of the 
mechanism presently in place for implementation of the processes recommended by ICAO 
for safety of air transport operations, from time to time so that these processes are 
implemented by the concerned organizations in letter and spirit. DGCA may hold 
periodical meetings with the stakeholders involved in the implementation of such processes 
and iron out any difficulties/bottlenecks being faced in following the processes laid down 
under the various ICAO Annexes. Concrete timelines may be prescribed by DGCA for 
effectuating any changes made by ICAO in its Annexes so as to ensure that best possible 
safety practices are employed in the Indian civil aviation sector. 

7 
11. The Committee feels that the licensing of personnel including pilots, other Fli ght 
crew members, Aircraft Maintenance Engineers, Air Traffic Controllers etc. is a cru cial 
process with a direct effect on the safety of the air transport operations in the country and  
thus utmost care must be taken to ensure that the licensing process for all such personn el is 
carried out strictly as per the established norms. The licences thus issued should  be 
renewed periodically after carrying out necessary inspection and tests necessary for su ch 
approval. The Committee further recommends that training programmes may be arranged 
for different aviation sector personnel from time to time in order to keep them  updated 
regarding the best safety practices in the aviation sector. 
 
Safety of Workers/Employees including those operating the Aircraft
 
12. The Ministry apprised the Committee that the following measures based on the 
regulations are in place to ensure safety of workers/ employees including those operating the 
aircraft: 
(a) Safety of aircraft operations:  
The maintenance of aircraft is carried out by an approved organisation. For the 
maintenance of aircraft, the manufacturer of the aircraft provides detailed procedures 
including timelines for carrying out the maintenance which form part of the approved 
maintenance programme of the operator. On detection of a fault, the fault is corrected 
based on manufacturer’s recommendation and the aircraft thereby maintains continuous 
airworthiness for continuing operations. 
On completion of the maintenance, the aircraft is released by an appropriately licensed 
maintenance engineer to certify that all checks due on the aircraft have been carried out 
in accordance with the manufacturer’s maintenance manual and any faults/ malfunction s 
have been duly rectified. 
(b) Operation of aircraft by a pilot: 

8 
An aircraft is flown by a pilot who is licensed on the type of aircraft. The safety of a pilot 
operating the aircraft is ensured by a number of means. These include: 
(i) Maintenance of currency on the aircraft during the period of validity of the 
pilot licence as per the laid down regulatory requirements. 
(ii) Providing continuous training during the lifetime of the pilot. Various 
regulations on crew training and operations provide for detailed training 
curriculum to be followed, which ensure safety of both the individual concerned 
and the organization. Training is conducted in the following manner: 
1. Initial Training     
2. Recurrent Training        
3. Specialised Training 
4. Training on aviation security, the same is conducted by BCAS 
5. Training on handling & recognition of dangerous goods 
The goal of training is to ensure that all employees are safe in the area of 
operations dealt by them. 
(iii) Ensuring the pilot is physically and mentally alert before undertaking any 
flight by providing adequate opportunity for rest by way of Flight Duty Time 
Limitation: 
The same is ensured through regulations both for cockpit crew and for the cabin 
crew. The regulations address minimum rest post a flight, maximum allowable 
flight duty & duty periods on a weekly, monthly & annual basis. Through the 
implementation of regulation within the organization, safety of aircraft and its 
occupants is ensured by having well rested crew members on duty.        
(iv) Ensuring the pilot is not in an inebriated state before undertaking any flight 
by mandatorily conducting a breath analyser check:  
The regulations lay down the procedure to be followed for the breath-analyser 
examination of the crew members for consumption of alcohol and actions to be 

9 
taken by the operators. It also dwells on the procedure to be followed by the 
authorities concerned in the event of an accident. 
Through the regulations, it is ensured that no crew member operates the  flight in 
an intoxic ated state. With strict implementation of this regulation, individual’s 
and the organisation’s safety is ensured. 
(v) Monitoring the performance of the pilot through a system established by the 
operator in accordance with the requirements stipulated by the DGCA: 
Any adverse indications, which may affect safety of the aircraft operation are 
proactively detected and corrective action is taken. 
(c) The cabin crew onboard the aircraft undergoes training on safety and emergency 
procedures for ensuring the safety of aircraft operation. 
13. While the Committee feels that the mechanism presently in place to ensure safety of 
workers/ employees including those operating the aircraft, is satisfactory, steps may be 
taken to review the same from time to time to avoid any complacency. The curriculum of 
the training programme for the aviation sector workers/ employees may also be refreshed 
from time to time and best global safety practices may be incorporated in the same. 
 
Surveillance of Airlines and Approved Organisations
 
14. The Committee was informed that DGCA regularly carries out surveillance which may 
include inspections, audit, spot checks to ensure that airlines, maintenance organisations, 
aerodromes, Air Navigation service providers, flying training organizations, aircraft design and 
manufacturing organization are adhering to prescribed requirements, approved company 
documents. The deficiencies noted during such inspections are brought to the notice of the 
concerned organisation for taking corrective action in a time bound manner. 
15. The Committee recommends that the frequency of the inspections, audit, spot 
checks etc. carried out by DGCA may be looked into and if need be, the same m ay be 

10 
increased in order to ensure that the guidelines and instructions issued by DGCA are 
timely implemented by the concerned organizations. 
 
Punitive action in case of violations
 
16. The Ministry, in its written note, stated that during the course of surveillance, DGCA 
takes appropriate measures to ensure that the concerned organisation rectifies the deficiencies in 
a time bound manner. Punitive action is initiated by DGCA in case of serious lapses, which 
reveal indiscipline, complacency or negligent behaviour. Lapses on the part of an operator and 
personnel (Engineers, pilots and approved persons) result in stringent action by DGCA in the 
form of warnings, suspensions, cancellation of licences and approvals. 
17. The Committee recommends that best global safety standards may be adopted by 
DGCA and suitable action according to international standards may be initiated by DGCA 
to deter serious lapses, in order to further encourage compliance of safety provisi ons by 
concerned organizations. 
 
Accident Investigation
 
18. The Ministry, in its written note, stated that International Standards of ICAO stipulates 
that the purpose of investigation should be prevention of similar accident in future. Indian 
regulations regarding aircraft accident investigation are laid down in the Aircraft (Investigation 
of Accidents and Incidents) Rules, 2017 and are in accordance with the ICAO standards. An 
independent aircraft accident investigation organisation ‘Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau’ 
(AAIB) has been set-up for the investigation of serious incidents and accidents under the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. AAIB investigates all accidents and serious incidents involving 
aircraft with ‘All Up Weight’ more than 2250 Kgs and gives safety recommendations. AAIB 
also makes “Safety Recommendations” on the basis of safety studies conducted from time to 
time. For the investigation of major accidents of public importance, the Central Government has 
the power to set up Court of Inquiry for investigation. To fulfil its obligation under ICAO Annex 
19, DGCA investigates incidents and serious incidents to the aircraft with ‘All Up Weight’ up to 
2250 kg. 

11 
19. The Committee notes that Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) has been 
allocated a meager allocation of Rs. 1 crore, against its projected requirement of Rs. 4.40  
crore in B.E. 2022-23. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
request the Ministry of Finance to provide AAIB with higher allocation at the R.E. 2022-23 
stage so as to enable it to perform its functions in the desired manner and contribute 
towards improving the safety aspect of the civil aviation sector in India. 
20. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the 
methodologies adopted and technology used by AAIB for investigation of aircraft acciden ts 
is at par with the best global standards for the same, so that the actual reasons that caused 
an accident can be identified and necessary corrective measures can be taken to ensure that 
similar accidents do not recur in the country. 
 
Passenger Safety
 
21. The Ministry, in its written note, apprised the Committee that for safe aircraft operations, 
the infrastructure at AAI airports is established and upgraded regularly as per regulatory 
requirements and accordingly airports are licensed by DGCA. Also, high standards of cleanliness 
in Terminal Building and surrounding areas of airports are ensured. 
22. The Ministry informed the Committee that as per directives issued by Ministry of Civil 
Aviation (MoCA), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW) and Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA), AAI made all arrangements for the safe and smooth movement of passengers 
through its airports. MoCA has issued guidelines for Airport operators, Airlines, Ground 
Handling   agencies etc. for the safe movement of   domestic passengers.   Accordingly, Airports 
Authority of India has provided   following facilities at its airports for the safe and smooth 
movements of passengers: 
(i)  Contactless movement of passengers:  AAI has ensured contactless 
movement of passengers right from entry gate till the boarding gate at its 
airports.   Glass shields have been provided at the entry gate and check- in-
counters to avoid contact between passengers and Security/Airlines staff. 
Passengers are encouraged to web check-in and bring a printout of their boarding 
card. Also, self-drop baggage system has been provided. Security staff practices 

12 
minimum touch concept during frisking. At boarding gates, passengers self-scan 
their boarding card. 
(ii)  Proper cleanliness, hygiene and sanitization in and around Terminal 
building: Cleanliness of every nook and corner of Terminal building and 
surrounding areas (including washrooms, lifts, escalators, X-Ray machines, 
Chairs, counters, railings, Security trays, doors, handles etc.) is ensured at all AAI 
airports. Also, Terminal building is sanitised on regular basis. Baggage and shoes 
of Passengers is sanitized at the entry gate. Sanitizer is being provided at strategic 
locations for passengers and airport staff. Proper ventilation is being ensured at 
Airports wherever it is possible. 
(iii)  Social distancing norms:  Social distancing norms as per directives of 
MoH&FW are being followed at every meeting point and in the queue at entry 
point, Checkin, security and boarding gates etc. Seating arrangement has been 
done in such a manner so as to maintain sufficient distance among passengers. 
Also stickers/markings have been provided at the appropriate locations. Kerb 
Area/ City side traffic / Car parking area is being strictly monitored in 
coordination with traffic police/ DGR Staff to prevent congestion. Specific 
Identified Aerobridge is being provided to arriving International Passengers. 
Minimum passengers are permitted in Smoking lounge, Child care rooms to 
maintain social distancing norms. 
(iv)  Other safety measures:  All airport staff handling flights have been 
provided with required protective gears for the safety. Use of baggage trolleys is 
minimized. Dedicated triage Area/ Isolation room has been provided for the 
passengers suspected of Covid. If any passenger suspected of Covid is detected, 
health officials shift him to hospitals as per guidelines. Health information and 
Do's and Don’ts as issued by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have been 
displayed at Flight Information Display System (FIDS) and at other prominent 
places. Also announcements are being made for the information of passengers. 
De-gowning area for medical personnel /crew to divest and dispose of Personal 
Protective Equipment has been provided at airports. Separate bins have been 

13 
provided to collect Bio hazardous garbage. Bio hazardous waste is being disposed 
of as per norms. 
(v)  Thermal screening  of departing and arriving passengers. 
(vi)  Information displayed  through Flight Information Display System 
(FIDS), boards, standees for awareness of passengers. 
23. The Ministry stated that the following steps have been taken for CISF, Airport staff & 
Medical staff personnels at major airports: 
(i) Special drive for Staff Vaccination has been undertaken at AAI Airports. As a result, 
most staff are double vaccinated. Regular sanitization is being done in the Terminal 
building. Sanitizer is being provided at strategic locations for passengers and airport 
staff. All airport staff handling flights have been provided with required protective 
gears for safety. 
(ii) Regular awareness training for all staff in the Airport community regarding prevention 
of COVID-19 and Covid appropriate behavior is being carried out. Information is also 
disseminated through stickers/boards at specific points and by way of announcements 
at regular intervals regarding the same. 
(iii) Measures are put in place as per health protocols from time to time. Medical supplies 
including PPE kits and protective gears are provided to staffs for protection.  
24. The Committee commends the extensive measures taken by the Ministry for the 
safety of flight passengers, airport staff, CISF and medical personnel, against the 
spread of the Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that best possible measures may continue to be employed across the 
airports in the country to keep a check on the rapid spread of any new Coronavirus 
variants in the future. 
25. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding the reasons behind cost of RT-PCR 
test for COVID at airports being very high. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed 
the Committee that there are two types of tests i.e. Standard RT-PCR test and Rapid RT-
PCR (Molecular Test Systems) at the airport. The rates for standard RT-PCR are 
generally decided and notified by the respective State/UT Governments, which are 
followed by the laboratories operating at the airports. Rapid RT-PCR test is the quicker 
option available to the passengers. States like Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra have 

14 
notified the rates for the rapid RT-PCR and Airports are following the same. Some of the 
State Governments like Punjab at Amritsar airport, Tamil Nadu at Madurai & 
Coimbatore airports, Uttar Pradesh at Varanasi airport, Andhra Pradesh at Vijayawada 
airport have been conducting Standard RT-PCR test free of cost for arrival and departure 
passengers. The Ministry further informed that the Airports have been extending the 
Covid testing facilities at the airport depending upon the mandatory guidelines which 
vary from country to country for international travel. The departing passengers have to 
comply with the same and accordingly opt for the service as per the guidelines. The 
airlines check the rules and guidelines for the destination country for the departing 
passengers and if they do not comply with RT-PCR testing requirements for those 
countries, passengers have to take the RT-PCR test at the airport. Some countries in the 
Middle East, like UAE, had mandated RT-PCR test requirements 6 hours prior to 
departure. Further, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) has issued the 
revised Guidelines on 30th November, 2021 in view of Omicron, classified as a Variant of 
Concern. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in coordination with MoHFW and Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA) is implementing these guidelines at international Airports. MoCA 
continuously monitors the implementation of the revised guidelines of MoHFW and takes 
appropriate actions based on the evolving situation. The charges collected from 
passengers goes to the respective labs conducting the test at the airports. Further, since 
06.12.2021, AAI has reduced the royalty to zero and now AAI just charges a rental fee 
for the space given to the lab. Airports other than those managed by AAI also charge the 
respective labs for providing requisite space, infrastructure and facilities in this regard. 
26. The Committee feels that the cost of RT-PCR is prohibitively high in some of the 
States. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, in coordination with the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare and respective State Governments, may work on lowering the 
price for mandatory RT-PCR tests carried out at airports and to bring a parity in  
the pricing of the tests at the airports across the country.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may bring out guidelines to provide space at airports 
to test labs for free and the labs may accordingly reduce the price of the RT-P CR 
tests to the extent possible. 
 

15 
Airworthiness of Aircraft Engines 
27. The Ministry, in its written note, informed the Committee that before an aircraft/ engine 
is imported, DGCA ensures that the aircraft / engine is type certified by the State o f 
Design and its Type Certificate (TC) is accepted by DGCA.  For continued operation, the 
owner/ operator ensures the continuing airworthiness of the aircraft and its engine and 
carries out maintenance activities as per manufacturer instructions in accordance with the 
approved Aircraft Maintenance Programme (AMP).  
28. DGCA ensures the safety of operators through surveillance and spot checks that the 
aircraft and engines are maintained in airworthy condition and actions are taken in 
accordance with manufacturer ’s instructions when any fault / malfunction are 
experienced. Any prospective Indian operator can import an aeronautical product i.e., 
civil aircraft, aircraft engine or propeller after obtaining Letter of Type Acceptance 
(LoTA) from Aircraft Engineering Directorate of DGCA. The procedure to get LoTA has 
been specified in Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) Section-6, Series A, Part II which 
is available on DGCA website 
www.dgca.gov.in. 
29. The Committee feels that ensuring that all regulations are followed in the import as 
well as maintenance of aircrafts/ aircraft engines, is absolutely critical from a safety 
point of view. The Committee hopes that the surveillance and spot checks to ensur e 
that the aircraft and engines are maintained in airworthy condition, are carried out 
at regular intervals so as to ensure the safety of aircraft flights at all times. The 
stipulated guidelines for quality maintenance of engines may be followed and 
provisions may be made to impose heavy penalty on any airline operators found 
breaking the rules in this regard. The Committee recommends that DGCA may hire 
expert technical personnel with the required know-how for carrying out su ch 
surveillance and spot checks of maintenance of aircraft and aircraft engines in 
airworthy condition. 
 
Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs)
 
30. The Ministry informed the Committee that although Airport Tower Controllers or 
terminal controllers watch the overall movement of aircraft travelling through the 
airport’s airspace, their main responsibility is to organize the flow of aircraft into and out 

16 
of the airport. The controller in the radar room, just beneath the control tower, has a copy 
of the plane’s flight plan and has the plane on radar. After each plane departs, airport 
tower controllers notify enroute controllers who will take charge next. If two planes are 
scheduled to enter the team’s airspace at nearly the same time, location, and altitude, this 
controller may arrange with the preceding control unit for one plane to change its flight 
path. As a plane approaches a team’s airspace, the radar controller accepts responsibility 
for the plane from the previous controlling unit. The controller also delegates 
responsibility for the plane to the next controlling unit when the plane leaves the team’s 
airspace. 
31. The Committee feels that Airport Traffic Controllers play an indispensable role in 
the safe operations of aircrafts. The Committee notes that there is a backlog of 
vacancies in the post of ATCOs. The Committee is of the opinion that the demand 
for ATCOs will rise exponentially with the growth of the aviation sector in the 
country and feels that the Ministry should have anticipated the requirement of more 
number of ATCOs well in advance and inducted ATCOs continuously over the 
years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that procedural issues regarding 
manpower requirements of ATCOs should be addressed in a proactive way to 
ensure operationalization of new airports that are being constructed in near future 
do not suffer due to lack of ATCOs. 
 
Night Landing
 
32. The Ministry apprised the Committee that Runway lighting system is one of the critical 
part of airport lighting system for night landing. The types of lights used include the 
following:  
a) Approach lights are the first that pilot will reach during landing and are of white colour, 
unidirectional, blinking or steady type of lights. 
b) The threshold lights of green colour of unidirectional type, installed at the beginning of 
the runway. 
c) Runway end lights which identify the end of a runway. Runway end lights are 
unidirectional red colour aviation lights. 

17 
d) Runway edge lights which are located on the left and right sides of a runway (edges) and 
illuminate the part of the runway for safe landings. 
e) Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI): These lights are normally located on the left 
side of the runway. Each PAPI light usually consists of four lighting fixtures (4 x Li ght 
Assemblies). 
f) Obstruction aviation lights are red colour omni-directional lights that illuminate airport 
buildings, observations, closed areas, temporarily unavailable area on the airfield. 
33. The Ministry further informed that airports with non-precision runways usually install a 
simple runway lighting system that includes runway edge lights, PAPI lights, runway 
threshold end lights, aerodrome beacon, Apron floodlighting and taxiway lights. 
34. In view of the significant safety that Instrument Landing System offers in landing of 
aircrafts at night time or in bad weather conditions, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may make arrangements for installation of Instrument Landing 
Systems at all functional airports across the country at the earliest and a strict 
timeline may be devised for the same. The Ministry of Civil Aviation may work 
closely with the Ministry of Defence to ensure that approvals, if any, that might be 
needed for installation of ILS at civil enclaves, are processed in a time-bound, 
streamlined manner so as to avoid undue delays. 
 
 
Air India Express Crash at Kozhikode Airport
 
35. The Ministry informed the Committee that Air India Express operated a flight AXB 
1343/1344 on Kozhikode-Dubai-Kozhikode sector on 07 August, 2020 using a Boeing 
737-800 type of aircraft with registration VT-AXH. The flight was operated under 
‘Vande Bharat Mission’ by an ATPL holder PIC and a CPL holder Co -Pilot, to repatriate 
passengers from Dubai who were stranded due to the closure of airspace and international 
flight operations. The aircraft during final approach, landing and landing roll overshot the 
runway at Calicut. The aircraft could not stop on the runway and went down the slope 
beyond the runway end safety area (RESA). There were 184 passengers, 2 Pilots and 4 
Cabin Crew onboard. The 02 pilots and 19 passengers (17 adults and 02 Infants) 

18 
succumbed to injuries. 165 passengers and 4 cabin crew members sustained injuries. The 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) had ordered an investigation on 
13th August, 2020  to inquire into the circumstances of the Air India Express crash at 
Kozhikode Airport for determining the probable cause and contributory factors leading 
to the accident. The Final Investigation Report was submitted on 17 Aug 2021 and was 
accepted by DG, AAIB on 20 th August, 2021. As per findings in the report, the direct 
cause of the accident is as under:- 
“The probable cause of the accident was the non-adherence to SOP by the PF, wherein, 
he continued an unstabilized approach and landed beyond the touchdown zone, half way 
down the runway, in spite of ‘Go Around’ call by PM which warranted a mandatory ‘Go 
Around’ and the failure of the PM to take over controls and execute a ‘Go Around’.” 
36. The Ministry further informed that a committee has been constituted by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation co-opting aviation experts to oversee the implementation of the recommendations 
made in the report of the investigation conducted by AAIB in the accident at Kozhikode Airport 
and the execution of the steps required for implementation of the recommendations. One of the 
mandates of the committee is to study the feasibility of operation of wide-body aircraft at 
Kozhikode airport and to give its recommendations thereof. The committee is yet to submit its 
final report. 
37. The Committee would like to emphasize upon the need to ensure that runway 
accidents such as the ones that happened in Mangalore (May, 2020) and Calicut (August, 
2020) do not recur. The Committee recommends that the latest advanced technological 
instruments should be installed at all the airports in the country so that there is smooth and 
safe landing during thick fog conditions, when there is near zero visibility. It has come to 
the notice of the Committee that the Report on the aircraft accidents sometimes take too 
long to be finalized. The Committee feels that a strict timeline should be pre scribed for 
submission of final report after an accident has occurred since laxity in the same can  cause 
accidents happening because of similar reasons, which could otherwise be avoid ed if the 
actual reason is known at the earliest and steps are taken timely to ensure that similar 
instances do not recur. 
 
 

19 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
38. The Ministry informed the Committee that  Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), 
commonly known as drones, offer tremendous benefits to almost all sectors of the 
economy like – agriculture, mining, infrastructure, surveillance, emergency response, 
transportation, geo-spatial mapping, defence, and law enforcement etc.  Drones can be 
significant creators of employment and economic growth due to their reach, versatility, 
and ease of use, especially in India’s remote and inaccessible areas. In view of its 
traditional strengths in innovation, information technology, frugal engineering and huge 
domestic demand, India has the potential to be a global drone hub. In order to encourage 
usage of drones while maintaining a safe and secure ecosystem for the same, the 
following steps have been taken:- 
(i)    Drone certification
 
The provisions for drone certification are as under: 
a)    The Director General or an entity authorised by the Director General, on the 
recommendation of Quality Council of India (QCI), may issue a type certificate for 
any particular type of unmanned aircraft system, on an application filed by a 
manufacturer or importer on the digital sky platform, if such type of unmanned 
aircraft system meets the specified certification standards. 
b)    Any standards and processes notified by the QCI for the certification of drones as 
well as all hardware and technical requirements prescribed shall be designed to 
further the ease of doing business and shall be commensurate to the purposes for 
which such drone can be utilised. 
c)    QCI or the authorised testing entity shall examine the proposal and submit the test 
report and its recommendations to the Director General within 60 days of the date of 
application. 

20 
d)    Based on the test report of QCI or the authorised testing entity, the Director General, 
shall issue a type certificate for the specific type of unmanned aircraft system, to the 
applicant, within 15 days of receiving the test report. 
e)    A six-month lead time for installing mandatory safety features on drones may be 
provided which shall include 'No Permission – No Takeoff' (NPNT) hardware and 
firmware; real-time tracking beacon; and geo-fencing capability. 
(ii)  Drone Registration
 
The provisions for drone registration are as under: 
a)    No person shall operate a drone without a Unique Identification Number (UIN). The 
Digital Sky Platform shall verify the details and issue UIN to the applicant. 
b)    In order to register a drone, an individual (or Director in case of a corporate entity) 
will only need to submit the Indian passport number, Aadhaar, DIN (for corporate 
entity), mobile number, the unique serial number provided by the manufacturer; 
unique serial numbers of its flight control module and remote pilot station and three 
photographs of the drone on the Digital Sky Platform.  No prior security clearance of 
the individual or entity shall be required. 
(iii) Airspace map
 
The Government has published an airspace map on the Digital Sky Platform for drone 
operations segregating the entire airspace of India into red zones, yellow zones and green  
zones.  
a)    Red zone means the airspace of defined dimensions, above the land areas or 
territorial waters of India, or any installation or notified port limits specified by the 
Central Government beyond the territorial waters of India, within which unmanned 
aircraft system operations shall be permitted only by the Central Government. 

21 
b)    Yellow zone means the airspace of defined dimensions above the land areas or 
territorial waters of India within which unmanned aircraft system operations are 
restricted and shall require permission from the concerned air traffic control authority. 
The airspace above 400 feet or 120 meter in the designated green zone and the 
airspace above 200 feet or 60 meter in the area located between the lateral distance of 
8 kilometer and 12 kilometer from the perimeter of an operational airport, shall be 
designated as yellow zone. 
c)    Green zone means the airspace of defined dimensions above the land areas or 
territorial waters of India, upto a vertical distance of 400 feet or 120 meter that has 
not been designated as a red zone or yellow zone in the airspace map for unmanned 
aircraft system operations and the airspace upto a vertical distance of 200 feet or 60 
meter above the area located between a lateral distance of 8 kilometer and 12 
kilometer from the perimeter of an operational airport. 
(iv)  Penalties
 
 a) Penalty shall not exceed Rs. 1 lakh  
b) Criminal prosecution for serious offences  
c) Violating zone restrictions and carrying arms, ammunition etc. shall be cognizable 
d) IPC and other applicable laws shall apply concurrently. 
39. The Ministry further submitted that airspace map for drone operations shall be designed 
to be programmatically accessible and interactive so that remote pilots will be able to plot 
their proposed flight plan and easily identify the zone(s) within which it falls so as to 
assess whether or not they need to make an application for prior approval. 
40. The Committee appreciates the introduction of liberalized Drone Rules by the 
Ministry and feels that the same will bring much-needed clarity and regulation for 
the drone industry which is rapidly gaining traction in India and across the world. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with policy provisions 
for the promotion of local manufacture of drones in the country, working in 
coordination with the concerned Ministries/Departments.  

22 
41. The Committee notes that the Drone Rules, 2021 1 state that the Central 
Government may, in future, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify safety 
features to be installed on an unmanned aircraft system by persons owning it. The 
Committee feels that drones pose a safety risk to the people in the area where these 
are being operated, especially in case the drones malfunction or are operated with 
malafide intentions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
notify the safety features that must be installed on drones, within a strict timeline so 
as to curb the safety risks posed by drones to the extent possible. 
 
Core Group on Safety
 
42. In its background note on the subject, the Ministry informed the Committee that a Core 
Group comprising officers of the level of Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, Road Transport & Highways, Shipping, Tourism, Railways, Petroleum and 
Commissioner of Railway Safety was formed under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil 
Aviation as directed by Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) on Transport, Tourism 
& Culture to work out the modalities for supplementing each other during various types 
of Accident investigations and suggesting preventive measures to improve safety & 
security in these sectors.  The Core Group under the chairmanship of Secretary, MoCA 
has held five meetings. The progress of the Core Group’s Meetings is being intimated 
from time to time to the Chairman, PSC.  In compliance with PSC directives, an Expert 
group having eminent members from respective fields, having expertise of Global Safety 
standards and well-established credentials, has also been formed. 
43. The Committee commends the collaborative efforts being made by the various 
Ministries to supplement each other in improving the safety and security in the 
respective sectors. The Committee recommends that the Core Group may ensure 
that ISO Safety Audits may be conducted periodically so that best safety standards 
are strictly followed across the various verticals of the transport sector in the 
country. The Committee further recommends that the Core Group on Safety may 
further devise a mechanism to ensure that damage caused by any sort of acciden t in 
                                                           
1 https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2021/229221.pdf 

23 
the transport sector is minimized by timely and effective coordination between the 
various Ministries and Departments. 
 
Safety of Helicopter Operations
 
44. The Committee notes that since decades, many lives are lost in helicopter ac cidents. 
The Committee feels that the Government should give paramount importance to the 
safety of helicopter operations in the country. The Committee may be apprised of 
the helicopter accident incidents in the country and furnish a comparison of the 
same with developed countries during the last few years. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly examine the safety provisions 
presently in place to ensure safe helicopter operations and further strengthen the 
safety features and airworthiness checks for helicopters. The Ministry may bring 
clear guidelines regarding the weather conditions in which helicopters can be 
permitted to be operated in a safe manner and work on issuing alerts/warn ings to 
dissuade helicopter operations in particular regions owing to inclement weather 
conditions. 
Audits by international agencies
 
45. With regard to audits by international agencies, the Ministry furnished the following 
information: 
(i) International Civil Aviation Organisation
 (ICAO): 
 
a) International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) is a specialized agency of 
UNO. It works to achieve its vision of safe, secure and sustainable development 
of civil aviation through the cooperation of its Member States. ICAO has been 
created to promote the safe and orderly development of international civil aviation 
throughout the world. It sets standards and regulations necessary for: 
● aviation safety,  
● security,  
● efficiency and regularity 
● aviation environmental protection 

24 
b) ICAO conducts regular, mandatory, systematic and harmonized safety audits of 
all the contracting States under its Universal Safety Oversight Audit Program- 
Continuous Monitoring Approach (USOAP-CMA) to ensure that the States are 
fulfilling their obligation of safety oversight under the Chicago Convention. 
 
c) Effective Implementation (EI) based on the last ICAO Audit conducted in 
November 2018 is 71.86%. The present EI score is 72.93%. 
 
d) ICAO will conduct an audit of India in 2022 in the areas of legislation, 
organization, personnel licensing, aircraft operations and airworthiness. 
 
(ii) Federal Aviation Administration
 (FAA): 
 
a) Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) of USA conducts audit under its Internal 
Aviation Safety Assessm ent (IASA) program. It determines whether another country’s 
oversight of its air carriers that operate, or seek to operate, into the U.S., or codeshare 
with a U.S. air carrier, complies with safety standards established by ICAO. 
 
b) Under ‘International Aviation Safety Assessment’ (IASA), FAA audited India in October 
2021 and raised 36 findings. 
 
c) DGCA is taking action to address the findings. 
d) Final Consultations are scheduled for January 2022, post which IASA rating will be 
determined by FAA. 
e) Currently, India’s IASA rating is Category 1. 
46. The Ministry informed the Committee that India, is a signatory to the Chicago 
Convention, 1944, and, as a Contracting State is required to adhere to International 
Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) of International Civil Aviation 
Organisation (ICAO). SARPs contained in the ICAO Annexes and other related ICAO 
documents have been adopted to lay down rules, regulations and requirements in the form 
of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the Aircraft Rules, 1937, The Aircraft (Demolition of 
obstructions caused by Buildings and Trees etc.) Rules, 1994, the Aircraft (Carriage of 
Dangerous Goods) Rules, 2003, Civil Aviation Requirements, Aeronautical Information 
Circulars (AIC), etc. India has adopted most of the International standards of ICAO. 

25 
47. The Committee takes note of the aviation safety and security audits periodically 
carried out in India by ICAO and FAA. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that the findings of such audits may be worked upon on a priority basis so as to 
ensure that India maintains the highest possible ratings as per these audits. Internal audits 
may be carried out on a regular basis to track the progress made in addressing the issue s 
identified by the international audits and necessary corrective measures may be taken from 
time to time to stay on course for addressing such issues timely.  
48. The Committee notes that the India’s Effective Implementation (EI) score measured 
by the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) Continuous Monitoring 
Approach (CMA), presently is 72.93%. The Committee further notes that as per the 2020-
22 edition of Global Aviation Safety Plan (GASP), all States are expected to reach  the 
target EI score of 75% by 2022. In light of this, the Committee desires that the Ministry/ 
DGCA may work on improving India’s EI score and ensure that the target EI score of 75% 
is reached by 2022. DGCA has all the technical knowhow and trained manpower in  
comparison to any other country in the world. The Committee desires that DGCA should 
rise to such a level of efficiency that it should become a model to be followed by  other 
major countries of the world in implementing the ICAO guidelines for safety. 
 
Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate
 
49. The Ministry, in its PowerPoint presentation on the subject, furnished the following 
information regarding the Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate (above 5700 kgs): 

26 
 
50. The Committee appreciates that India’s Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate is much 
below the world average rate and congratulates the Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
DGCA for ensuring such high safety standards. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may continue to give ample focus to ensure best global standards of 
aviation safety in the civil aviation sector in India. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may have similar focussed approach towards the 
safety of helicopter operations as well. 
Miscellaneous Recommendations
 
Hotels and Ancillary Facilities at Airports 
51. The Committee enquired from the Ministry whether a policy decision has been taken in 
light of the emphasis laid by the Committee on setting aside a minimum of 100 acres of 
land in upcoming airports for building hotels and creation of ancillary facilities, which 
will help in generating revenue. In its written reply, the Ministry informed that the 
Airports Authority of India(AAI) Act, 1994 provides AAI to establish and maintain 
hotels, restaurants and restrooms at or near the airports and AAI establishes such facilities 
at its airports from time to time on business principles. AAI always tries to keep certain 
area for commercial purpose in its Master Plan depending upon availability of land and 


27 
also requests the concerned State Governments to provide land as and when required. 
However, it is difficult to formulate a standard policy applicable for all the airports alike, 
as availability of land at various airports vary. 
52. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. In light of the 
huge revenue generation opportunities through building of hotels and ancillary 
facilities, the Committee recommends that AAI may mandatorily carry out 
feasibility exercises for including provisions for hotels and other ancillary facilities 
and wherever feasible, it may be incorporated at the DPR stage itself. The feasibility 
of acquisition of land for such purposes near existing airports may also be explored 
by AAI. 
Pilot Training 
53. The Committee, in its earlier Reports, had recommended earmarking of a separate place 
in the airports for training of pilots and for the trainees to keep their training materials 
and sought the opinion of the Ministry on the issue. 
54. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed that at all airports that have Flying Training 
Organisations (FTOs), adequate hangar space and office space is provided for 
operational, administrative, storage and personal purposes. 
55. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may strive to have pilot training 
facilities and runways at all the existing small airports and the new airports being 
constructed under the UDAN scheme, to fulfil th e aspirations of Hon’ble Prime 
Minister’s vision of skill development in civil aviation sector. Adequate space for the 
trainee pilots to keep their training materials may also be provided within the 
premises of Airport. Wherever feasible, provisions for creation of pilot training 
facilities with adequate space inside the airport may be incorporated at the DPR 
stage itself. 
Bird Hits 
56. The Committee takes note of the incidents of bird hits in many parts of India, 
especially in Thiruvananthapuram Airport. In view of the same, the Committee 

28 
recommends that all possible remedial measures may be taken at all airports across 
the country in order to minimize such incidents at all airports across the country 
and thus ensure aviation safety. The Ministry may reissue the guidelines for 
compliance by the appropriate authorities.  
 
***** 
  

29 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
The Committee notes the mechanism existing at present in order to prevent aircraft  
accidents and thus ensure safety in civil aviation. The Committee recommends that the 
DGCA must regularly coordinate with AAI, various airport operators and airline 
operators and ensure the implementation of its specifications and guidelines regardin g 
aviation safety. State- of-art technology may be installed and utilized for prevention of 
aircraft accidents/ malfunctioning. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that the budgetary allocation made to DGCA is sufficient to meet its 
requirements and it does not face any budgetary shortfall. Due focus may also be lai d on 
ensuring that the human resource requirements of DGCA are met at all times so that it can 
effectively carry out the important mandate of ensuring safety in the civil aviation sector in  
the country. 
(Para 7) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the past aircraft/helicopter accidents in the 
country or involving Indian airlines. The Committee may also be informed about the 
guidelines issued by DGCA in view of aircraft/helicopter accidents in India and the 
monitoring mechanism in place for implementation of the same by the concerned 
organizations across the country.  
(Para 8) 
Safety of Air Transport Operations
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the efficiency of the mechanism  
presently in place for implementation of the processes recommended by ICAO for safety of 
air transport operations, from time to time so that these processes are implemented by the 
concerned organizations in letter and spirit. DGCA may hold periodical meetings with the 
stakeholders involved in the implementation of such processes and iron out any 
difficulties/bottlenecks being faced in following the processes laid down under the various  
ICAO Annexes. Concrete timelines may be prescribed by DGCA for effectuating any  

30 
changes made by ICAO in its Annexes so as to ensure that best possible safety practices are 
employed in the Indian civil aviation sector.  
(Para 10) 
The Committee feels that the licensing of personnel including pilots, other F light crew 
members, Aircraft Maintenance Engineers, Air Traffic Controllers etc. is a cr ucial process 
with a direct effect on the safety of the air transport operations in the country and thu s 
utmost care must be taken to ensure that the licensing process for all such person nel is 
carried out strictly as per the established norms. The licences thus issued should  be 
renewed periodically after carrying out necessary inspection and tests necessary for such 
approval. The Committee further recommends that training programmes may be arranged 
for different aviation sector personnel from time to time in order to keep them  updated 
regarding the best safety practices in the aviation sector.  
(Para 11) 
Safety of Workers/Employees including those operating the Aircraft
 
While the Committee feels that the mechanism presently in place to ensure safety of 
workers/ employees including those operating the aircraft, is satisfactory, steps may be 
taken to review the same from time to time to avoid any complacency. The curriculum of 
the training programme for the aviation sector workers/ employees may also be refreshed 
from time to time and best global safety practices may be incorporated in the same.  
(Para 13) 
Surveillance of Airlines and Approved Organisations
 
The Committee recommends that the frequency of the inspections, audit, spot che cks etc. 
carried out by DGCA may be looked into and if need be, the same may be increased in 
order to ensure that the guidelines and instructions issued by DGCA are timely 
implemented by the concerned organizations.  
(Para 15) 
Punitive action in case of violations
 
The Committee recommends that best global safety standards may be adopted by DGCA 
and suitable action according to international standards may be initiated by DGCA to 

31 
deter serious lapses, in order to further encourage compliance of safety provisi ons by 
concerned organizations.  
(Para 17) 
Accident Investigation 
The Committee notes that Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) has been 
allocated a meager allocation of Rs. 1 crore, against its projected requirement of Rs. 4.40  
crore in B.E. 2022-23. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
request the Ministry of Finance to provide AAIB with higher allocation at the R.E. 2022-23 
stage so as to enable it to perform its functions in the desired manner and contribute 
towards improving the safety aspect of the civil aviation sector in India.  
(Para 19) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the methodologies 
adopted and technology used by AAIB for investigation of aircraft accidents is at par  with 
the best global standards for the same, so that the actual reasons that caused an accident 
can be identified and necessary corrective measures can be taken to ensure that simil ar 
accidents do not recur in the country.  
(Para 20) 
Passenger Safety
 
The Committee commends the extensive measures taken by the Ministry for the safety o f 
flight passengers, airport staff, CISF and medical personnel, against the spread of the 
Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
best possible measures may continue to be employed across the airports in the country to 
keep a check on the rapid spread of any new Coronavirus variants in the future.  
(Para 24) 
The Committee feels that the cost of RT-PCR is prohibitively high in some of the States. 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation, in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and respective State Governments, may work on lowering the price for mandatory 
RT-PCR tests carried out at airports and to bring a parity in the pricing of the tests at the 
airports across the country.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring out 
guidelines to provide space at airports to test labs for free and the labs may accordingly 
reduce the price of the RT-PCR tests to the extent possible.  

32 
(Para 26) 
Airworthiness of Aircraft Engines 
The Committee feels that ensuring that all regulations are followed in the import as well as 
maintenance of aircrafts/ aircraft engines, is absolutely critical from a safety point of view. 
The Committee hopes that the surveillance and spot checks to ensure that the aircraft and  
engines are maintained in airworthy condition, are carried out at regular intervals so as to 
ensure the safety of aircraft flights at all times. The stipulated guidelines for  quality 
maintenance of engines may be followed and provisions may be made to impose he avy 
penalty on any airline operators found breaking the rules in this regard. The Comm ittee 
recommends that DGCA may hire expert technical personnel with the required k now-how 
for carrying out such surveillance and spot checks of maintenance of aircraf t and aircraft 
engines in airworthy condition.  
(Para 29) 
Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs)
 
The Committee feels that Airport Traffic Controllers play an indispensable role in the safe 
operations of aircrafts. The Committee notes that there is a backlog of vacancies in the post 
of ATCOs. The Committee is of the opinion that the demand for ATCOs will rise 
exponentially with the growth of the aviation sector in the country and feels that the 
Ministry should have anticipated the requirement of more number of ATCOs well i n 
advance and inducted ATCOs continuously over the years. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that procedural issues regarding manpower requirements of ATCOs sh ould 
be addressed in a proactive way to ensure operationalization of new airports that are b eing 
constructed in near future do not suffer due to lack of ATCOs.  
(Para 31) 
Night Landing
 
In view of the significant safety that Instrument Landing System offers in landing of 
aircrafts at night time or in bad weather conditions, the Committee recommends th at the 
Ministry may make arrangements for installation of Instrument Landing Systems at all 
functional airports across the country at the earliest and a strict timeline may be devised 
for the same. The Ministry of Civil Aviation may work closely with the Ministry of Defence 

33 
to ensure that approvals, if any, that might be needed for installation of ILS at civil 
enclaves, are processed in a time-bound, streamlined manner so as to avoid undue delays.  
(Para 34) 
Air India Express Crash at Kozhikode Airport
 
The Committee would like to emphasize upon the need to ensure that runway acc idents 
such as the ones that happened in Mangalore (May, 2020) and Calicut (August, 2020) do 
not recur. The Committee recommends that the latest advanced technological instrum ents 
should be installed at all the airports in the country so that there is smooth and safe landing 
during thick fog conditions, when there is near zero visibility. It has come to the notice of 
the Committee that the Report on the aircraft accidents sometimes take too long to be 
finalized. The Committee feels that a strict timeline should be prescrib ed for submission of 
final report after an accident has occurred since laxity in the same can cau se accidents 
happening because of similar reasons, which could otherwise be avoided if the ac tual 
reason is known at the earliest and steps are taken timely to ensure that similar instances 
do not recur.  
(Para 37) 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems
 
The Committee appreciates the introduction of liberalized Drone Rules by the Ministry  
and feels that the same will bring much-needed clarity and regulation for the drone 
industry which is rapidly gaining traction in India and across the world. The Committe e 
recommends that the Ministry may come up with policy provisions for the promotion of  
local manufacture of drones in the country, working in coordination with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments.  
(Para 40) 
 
The Committee notes that the Drone Rules, 2021  state that the Central Government may, 
in future, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify safety features to be installed on an 
unmanned aircraft system by persons owning it. The Committee feels that drones p ose a 
safety risk to the people in the area where these are being operated, especially in case the 
drones malfunction or are operated with malafide intentions. The Committee, theref ore, 
recommends that the Ministry may notify the safety features that must be installed on 

34 
drones, within a strict timeline so as to curb the safety risks posed by drones to the exten t 
possible.  
(Para 41) 
Core Group on Safety 
The Committee commends the collaborative efforts being made by the various Ministries to 
supplement each other in improving the safety and security in the respective sectors. Th e 
Committee recommends that the Core Group may ensure that ISO Safety Audits may be 
conducted periodically so that best safety standards are strictly followed across the various 
verticals of the transport sector in the country. The Committee further recommen ds that 
the Core Group on Safety may further devise a mechanism to ensure that damage caused 
by any sort of accident in the transport sector is minimized by timely and effective  
coordination between the various Ministries and Departments.  
(Para 43) 
Safety of Helicopter Operations
 
The Committee notes that since decades, many lives are lost in helicopter ac cidents. The 
Committee feels that the Government should give paramount importance to the safety of 
helicopter operations in the country. The Committee may be apprised of the he licopter 
accident incidents in the country and furnish a comparison of the same with d eveloped 
countries during the last few years. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
may thoroughly examine the safety provisions presently in place to ensure safe helicopter  
operations and further strengthen the safety features and airworthiness checks for 
helicopters. The Ministry may bring clear guidelines regarding the weather condition s in 
which helicopters can be permitted to be operated in a safe manner and work on issuing 
alerts/warnings to dissuade helicopter operations in particular regions owing to inclement 
weather conditions.  
(Para 44) 
Audits by international agencies
 
The Committee takes note of the aviation safety and security audits periodically carried out 
in India by ICAO and FAA. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure 
that the findings of such audits may be worked upon on a priority basis so as to ensure  that 
India maintains the highest possible ratings as per these audits. Internal audits may be 

35 
carried out on a regular basis to track the progress made in addressing the issues identif ied 
by the international audits and necessary corrective measures may be taken from time to 
time to stay on course for addressing such issues timely.  
(Para 47) 
The Committee notes that the India’s Effective Implementation (EI) score measured  by the 
Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) Continuous Monitoring Approach 
(CMA), presently is 72.93%. The Committee further notes that as per the 2020-22 edition 
of Global Aviation Safety Plan (GASP), all States are expected to reach the target EI score  
of 75% by 2022. In light of this, the Committee desires that the Ministry/ DGCA may work 
on improving India’s EI score and ensure that the target EI score of 75%  is reached by 
2022. DGCA has all the technical knowhow and trained manpower in comparison to any 
other country in the world. The Committee desires that DGCA should rise to such a level of 
efficiency that it should become a model to be followed by other major coun tries of the 
world in implementing the ICAO guidelines for safety.  
(Para 48) 
Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate
 
The Committee appreciates that India’s Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate is much be low 
the world average rate and congratulates the Ministry of Civil Aviation and DGCA for 
ensuring such high safety standards. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
continue to give ample focus to ensure best global standards of aviation safety in the civil 
aviation sector in India. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may have  
similar focussed approach towards the safety of helicopter operations as well.  
(Para 50) 
Miscellaneous Recommendations
 
Hotels and Ancillary Facilities at Airports 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. In light of the huge  
revenue generation opportunities through building of hotels and ancillary facilities, the 
Committee recommends that AAI may mandatorily carry out feasibility exercises fo r 
including provisions for hotels and other ancillary facilities and wherever feasib le, it may 

36 
be incorporated at the DPR stage itself. The feasibility of acquisition of land for  such 
purposes near existing airports may also be explored by AAI.  
(Para 52) 
Pilot Training 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may strive to have pilot training facilities 
and runways at all the existing small airports and the new airports being constructed 
under the UDAN scheme, to fulfil the aspirations of Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of skill 
development in civil aviation sector. Adequate space for the trainee pilots to keep their 
training materials may also be provided within the premises of Airport. Wherever feasible,  
provisions for creation of pilot training facilities with adequate space inside the airport 
may be incorporated at the DPR stage itself.  
(Para 55) 
Bird Hits 
 
The Committee takes note of the incidents of bird hits in many parts of India, espec ially in 
Thiruvananthapuram Airport. In view of the same, the Committee recommends that all 
possible remedial measures may be taken at all airports across the country in order to 
minimize such incidents at all airports across the country and thus ensure aviation safety. 
The Ministry may reissue the guidelines for compliance by the appropriate authorities.  
(Para 56) 
 
***** 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37  
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Prince Raj 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses: -
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(i) Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary 
(iii) Ms. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary 
(iv) Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
(v) Shri Amber Dubey, Joint Secretary 
(vi) Shri Arun Kumar, Director General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
(vii) Shri Nasir Kamal, Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 

38  
(viii) Shri S.K. Pathak, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, Commission of Railway 
Safety (CCS) 
(ix) Shri Rajmal Khoiwal, Chief Signal & Telecom Engineer, Commission of Railway 
Safety 
(x) Shri Rajiv Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Railway Safety, (General), Commission 
of Railway Safety. 
(xi) Shri B.S. Bhullar, Chairperson, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
(AERA) 
(xii) Shri Sanjeev Razdan, Chairman and Managing Director, Pawan Hans Limited 
(xiii) Shri Aurobindo Handa, Director General, Aircraft Accident Information Bureau 
(AAIB) 
(xiv) Shri Shri M. Suresh, Member (ANS), Airport Authority of India (AAI) 
(xv) Shri Sunil Dutt, Executive Director (Security), Airport Authority of India (AAI) 
 
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
 
(i) Shri Pramod Shripad Phalnikar, IPS/ Additional Director General, Airport Sector 
 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Central 
Industrial Security Force, and others to the meeting and informed them of the agenda for the 
meetings i.e. ‘Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector’ and *           *            * 
2. *     *   *    *   *  
3. *     *   *     *   * 
4. *     *   *    *   *  
5. *     *   *    *   *  
6. *     *   *    *   *  
7. Expressing remorse over the demise of several high-ranking personalities over the last 
few years due to airplane/ helicopter disasters and faults in safety measures, the Chairman 
remarked that security should never be compromised and asked the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the safety guidelines regarding flying and landing of helicopters (single/double 
engine), as well as flying hours and landing restriction issues arising at the Defence airports. 
The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the 
Committee. The Chairman directed them to furnish written replies to queries/points/issues 
raised by him and the Members of the Committee. 
8. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members 
of the Committee. The Chairman directed them to furnish written replies to 
queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee. 
*Relates to other matters

39  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 4:45 P.M. 
 
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                            P. Narayanan 
21st December, 2021                   Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
*Relates to other matter 

40  
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 30 th March, 2022 in Committee 
Room – ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shrimati Mala Roy 
14. Shri Dushyant singh 
15. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Draft Reports on:- 
 

41  
(i) Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector; and 
(ii) *   *   *. 
 
2. The Committee suggested some minor changes in the abovementioned draft Reports. 
The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out the changes. The Committee, thereafter, 
adopted the draft Reports alongwith some minor modifications/additions. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports to the Rajya Sabha in Parliament 
on 31st March, 2022. The Committee also authorized the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri 
Prasanna Acharya, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Dushyant Singh, M.P.  
and in his absence, Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi, M.P. was authorized to lay the 
abovementioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2022. 
4.         The meeting adjourned at 11:00 A.M. 
 
 
NewDelhi,                                                                                                               Swarabji B. 
30th March, 2022                                                                                                 Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
42  
ANNEXURE A 
21st December, 2021 
LIST OF WITNESS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
1 Shri Rajiv Bansal Secretary 
2 Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary 
3 Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
5 Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
6 Shri Arun Kumar Director General, DGCA 
7 Shri Nasir Kamal Director General, BCAS 
8 Shri S. K. Pathak Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, CRS 
9 Shri Rajmal Khoiwal CSTE, CRS 
10 Shri Rajiv Kumar Deputy CRS (G), CRS 
11 Shri B. S. Bhullar Chairperson, AERA 
12 Shri Sanjeev Razdan CMD, Pawan Hans Limited 
13 Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General, AAIB 
14 Shri M. Suresh Member (ANS), AAI 
15 Shri Sunil Dutt Executive Director (Security), AAI 
 
Ministry of External Affairs
 
 
16. Shri Pramod Shripad Phalnikar, IPS Additional DG/ Airport Sector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* * * *  
 