Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
254
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December )20 2017
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )20 2017th December
Action Taken by the Government on the /
of the Committee contained in its
Hundred Forty th Report on the Demands
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of
Recommendations
Observations Two
Fif for
Culture
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

34
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
Action  Taken  by  the  Government  on  the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two
Hundred Forty Fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Culture
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December  2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(vi)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-24
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  – A T A G LANCE ..................................... 25-27
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 29-32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
1. Shri Derek O’ Brien    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajeev Shukla
3. Shri Praful Patel
4. Kumari Selja
5. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
6. LA. Ganeshan
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
8. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
9. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
10. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Shri Ram Charitra
14. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
15. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
16. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
17. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
18. Shri Rahul Kaswan
19. Shri Ramcharan Bohara
20. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Prathap Simha
23. Shri Vinod Chavda
24. Km. Arpita Ghosh
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
29. Shri P . Kumar
30. Shri K. C. Venugopal
31. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred and Fifty Fourth Report on “Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Culture on the observations/
recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Forty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18)
of the Ministry of Culture”.
2. The Two Hundred and Fifty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 17
th March, 2017 to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
and Forty Fifth Report was received from the Ministry of Culture on 27 th July, 2017.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th December, 2017.
DEREK O’ BRIEN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
18 December , 2017 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 27, 1939 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AB Cell : Autonomous Bodies Cell
ACC : Appointment Committee of the Cabinet
AMASR : Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Site and Remains
AnSI : Anthropological Survey of India
ASI : Archaeological Survey of India
ASK : Asiatic Society, Kolkata
A TNs : Action Taken Notes
A TR : Action Taken Report
B E : Budget Estimates
BHEL : Bharat Heavy Electronics Limited
BoT : Board of Trustees
CAG : Comptroller and Auditor General
CEO : Chief Executive Officer
CPC : Central Pay Commission
CSMVS : Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya
DBT : Direct Benefit Transfer
DG : Director General
DIB : Delegated Investment Board
DoPT : Department of Personnel Training
EZCC : East Zonal Cultural Centre
GNIDA : Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority
GFR : General Financial Rules
HCM : Human Capital Management
H E : His Excellency
HPC : High Powered Committee
HUDCO : Housing and Urban Development Corporation
IGNCA : Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts
IIFCL : Indian Infrastructure Finance Company Limited
KBOPL : Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library
(iv)

(v)
LIC : Life Insurance Corporation
MACPS : Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme
MoA : Memorandum of Associations
MoC : Ministry of Culture
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MTS : Multi Tasking Staff
NBCC : National Buildings Construction Corporation
NCF : National Culture Fund
NCSM : National Council of Science Museum
NCZCC : North Central Zonal Cultural Centre
NEZCC : North East Zonal Culture Centre
NGMA : National Gallery of Modern Art
NMM : National Mission for Manuscripts
NNM : Nava Nalanda Mahavihara
NOC : No Objection Certificate
NITI : National Institution for Transforming India
NSD : National School of Drama
NTPC : National Thermal Power Corporation
NVLI : National Virtual Library of India
NZCC : North Zonal Cultural Centre
PH : Physically Handicapped
RE : Revised Estimates
REC : Rural Electrification Corporation
RRC : Regional Resource Centre
RRs : Recruitment Rules
SCZCC : South Central Zonal Cultural Centre
SEW A : Self Employed Women’s Association
SSC : Staff Selection Commission
STC : State Trading Corporation
TCIL : T elecommunications Consultants India Limited

UGC : University Grants Commission
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
VC : Vice-Chancellor
W APCOS : W ater and Power Consultancy Services
(vi)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred and Forty Fifth Report on
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Culture which was presented to both the Houses
of Parliament on 17 th March, 2017.
2. Action Taken Replies were received from the Government on 27 th July, 2017, in respect of all the
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. The replies have been categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 16, 38 , 57, 92, 95, 98, 106, and 113 Total: 9
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government replies:
Paragraph Nos.: 28 and 31 Total: 2
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos. : 22, 25, 34, 42, 51, 77, 86, 89, 110, 117 and 121 T otal: 11
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited.
Paragraph Nos: 10, 19, 45, 48, 65, 68, 80 and 101 Total: 8
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of Action
Taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Two
Hundred and Forty Fifth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and recommendations/observations of
the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs:
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation for 2017-18 is about 10.04% more than the budgetary
provisions at RE 2016-17. The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry had to face a budgetary
reduction at RE stage in the previous financial year. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the
same.
(Para 10)
Reply of the Government
6. As against total budgetary provision of  ` 2500.00 crore at Budget Estimates (BE) 2016-17 which was
reduced to ` 2488.63 crore at Revised Estimates (RE) stage 2016-17, the budget for 2017-18 for Ministry
of Culture has been pegged at  ` 2738.47 crore. Ministry of Finance has not intimated any reason for the
reduction in Annual Plan allocation at RE stage during 2016-17. However, the Ministry will make efforts to
seek an additional allocation at RE stage during the current financial year 2017-18.

2
Further Recommendations/Observations
7. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee notes that the shortfall in budgetary allocation for 2017-18 is to the tune of
 ` 828.24
crore and that the Ministry of Finance has not intimated any reason for this reduction. Keeping in view the
crucial role played by culture in the Nation’s overall development and growth, the Committee is of the
considered view that with the present allocation, especially on the Capital side, it would be difficult to run
the existing schemes and other activities undertaken by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry should actively pursue the matter of increasing the allocation at the RE stage in the current
financial year 2017-18, with the Ministry of Finance.
(Para 13)
Reply of the Government
9. The Ministry will take up the issue for providing additional funds with Ministry of Finance at RE stage
in the current financial year 2017-18.
Further Recommendations/Observations
10. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee takes note of the expenditure made by the Ministry of Culture under the Plan and Non
Plan heads. At the same time, the Committee observes that under the Plan head for the financial years
2015-16 and 2016-17, better planning and supervision could have definitely improved the pace of utilization
and for achievement of set target. The Committee hopes that optimum pace of expenditure would be maintained
in future.
(Para 17)
Reply of the Government
12. The Ministry will continue to make all out efforts for optimizing the utilization of allocated funds
during the year 2017-18.
Further Recommendations/Observations
13. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
14. In this regard, the Committee impresses upon the Ministry that every possible step should be taken to
ensure that the stipulated outputs are achieved on time.
(Para 19)
Reply of the Government
15. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Ministry has prepared the output/outcome
targets under all schemes which are being monitored by the Ministry as well as NITI Aayog. Moreover,
Ministry signs Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) with its organizations in which specific targets of

3
work are assigned. The achievements against the targets are monitored on regular basis at the appropriate
level.
Further Recommendations/Observations
16. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee recommends that an Inquiry Committee may be constituted to look into the facts and
circumstances which led to the delay in construction of the Institute of Archaeology. Based on the findings,
action may be taken against those officials found guilty and a report in this regard may be submitted to the
Committee. The Committee strongly recommends that effective and periodic monitoring of the various
Organizations under the Ministry should be done in order to avoid such delays.
(Para 22)
Reply of the Government
18. Ministry of Culture had in November, 2013 called for a thorough inquiry into the cancellation of plot
allotted by Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority (GNIDA) to Archaeological Survey of India
(ASI) for setting up of Institute of Archaeology and to fix responsibility of the officers responsible for the
same. Accordingly, a thorough examination of the progression of this proposal was conducted and a detailed
factual report was submitted chronologically by ASI to the Ministry of Culture for consideration and further
directions. The factual report in this regard was considered in the Ministry at the level of Hon’ble Culture
Minister. Thereafter, the matter with regard to restoration of the plot was taken up at the level of Secretary
(Culture) with the Govt. of U.P. and CEO, GNIDA. After vigorously pursuing the case, the plot has been
restored to ASI after fulfilling the conditions laid down by GNIDA. Further action for construction of the
building for Institute of Archaeology has been initiated after obtaining the approval of the Delegated Investment
Board (DIB). The work is being executed by National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) and as
per the schedule of construction, the work is likely to be completed by July, 2019. The Project Monitoring
Committee is also constituted to monitor the progress of the projects. Further, periodic review meetings are
taken by the higher authorities in the Ministry to monitor the various organizations and MoUs signed by the
Ministry with them.
Further Recommendations/Observations
19. The Committee may be apprised about the progress of construction of the Institute of
Archaeology along with the names of the officers responsible for monitoring the construction. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that target is achieved within the
stipulated time.
Recommendation/Observation
20. The Committee welcomes the initiative taken to construct boundary walls for ASI protected monuments.
The Committee hopes that this will go a long way in preventing encroachment of monuments. The Committee
desires that a roadmap may be drawn for the construction of boundary walls for all the ASI protected
monuments and that existing timelines may be strictly adhered to. The Committee may be informed of the
progress made in the matter.
(Para 27)

4
Reply of the Government
21. The work for construction of boundary walls and toilet blocks at ASI protected monuments has been
assigned to Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL) and Water and Power Consultancy Services
(WAPCOS), the Government of India undertakings. Most of the estimates for construction of boundary
walls have been approved for which tenders have been initiated by the concerned agencies and the work is
in progress at some sites. The work order for some of the sites have been issued. M/s. TCIL & W APCOS
shall be instructed to ensure the time line of work orders.
Further Recommendations/Observations
22. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should take necessary measures to
expedite the work and ensure that progress of work is not stalled at any stage. The Committee may
be apprised of the achievements in physical terms.
Recommendation/Observation
23. The Committee is unhappy to note the non-implementation of e-Governance in ASI. The Committee is
of the view that in this era of rapid advancement in technology, it is essential that e-Governance is adopted
in a vital Organization like ASI. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to
ensure that e-Governance is implemented in ASI. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
(Para 29)
Reply of the Government
24. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) has given all necessary approval with regard to development/
design of necessary software for implementation of e-governance in ASI.
Further Recommendations/Observations
25. The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Culture and ASI has not given any
details of the e-governance projects they are planning to implement. The Committee notes that the
authorities have taken some initiatives only after this Committee has come down heavily on the
inaction of the ASI to implement e-governance initiatives. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should follow up the progress of development of necessary software for implementation of
e-governance in ASI and ensure that the implementation of e-governance in ASI is expedited. The
Committee may be apprised about the details and progress of implementation of e-governance
projects.
Recommendation/Observation
26. The Committee observes that e-ticketing enables the visitors to plan their visit to the monuments in
advance and help them to avoid the hassle of waiting at the ticket counters. Therefore, the Committee
desires that the facility of e-ticketing may be introduced in all ASI protected monuments.
(Para 31)
Reply of the Government
27. The online e-ticketing facility has already been introduced in all centrally protected ticketed monuments
of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).

5
Further Recommendations/Observations
28. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
29. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Department and hopes that the App would not
only ensure greater accountability of the concerned agencies but also ensure a clean environment around the
Centrally Protected Monuments.
(Para 33)
Reply of the Government
30. With regard to ‘Swatchh Paryatan Mobile App’, the responsibility of ASI is to redress the issue raised
on the above App. As and when any complaint is received, the same is being immediately addressed by the
respective nodal officers of ASI designated for this purpose.
Further Recommendations/Observations
31. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
32. The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken under Adarsh Smarak and desires that such improved
facilities may be provided in all the ASI monuments in a phased manner.
(Para 35)
Reply of the Government
33. With regard to the recommendation of the Committee contained in para 35, the suggestion and
observations suggested by the Committee are welcome. In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that in
spite of 25 Adarsh Monuments, ASI has already identified 75 monuments and Sites as Adarsh Monument
in second phase where tourist amenities such as drinking water, cafeteria, wi-fi, souvenir shop, Audio
Video centre and facilities for disabled may be provided. Out of the 100 Adarsh monuments 56 monuments
are ticketed while 44 monuments are not-ticketed. With regard to suggestions made by the Committee, it
is to mention that all ASI protected monuments and sites are not frequently visited by the tourists. Most
of the protected monuments in ASI are not being visited even by a single tourist. Therefore, the extension
of the facilities for all monuments in phased manner as suggested by the Committee does not seem
feasible as well as economical. In this regard it is proposed that the Circle Offices of ASI may be directed
to identify at least 5 monuments under their jurisdiction for upgrading amenities as suggested by the
Committee.
Further Recommendations/Observations
34. The Committee recommends that a feasibility study may be conducted by ASI on identifying
the Monuments which have the potential to be declared as Adarsh Monuments and the results of
the study may be communicated to the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
35. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, in 2016-17 ASI created two new Circles at Aizawl and
Telangana.
(Para 36)

6
36. The Committee desires to know the budgetary allocation earmarked for the purpose.
(Para 37)
Reply of the Government
37. The budgetary allocation in respect of Aizawl Circle and Telangana / Hyderabad Circle during the year
2016-17 was ` 162.64 lakhs and ` 2092.00 lakhs respectively.
Further Recommendations/Observations
38. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
39. The Ministry, in its written reply, has stated that nine and twenty-eight Demolition Orders have been
issued by the Archaeological Survey of India so far for the removal of unauthorized construction within the
prohibited/regulated areas of Zaffar Mahal and Qutub complex respectively.
(Para 38)
40. The Committee desires that ASI should ensure that the demolition orders are executed timely and that
the encroachments are removed.
(Para 39)
Reply of the Government
41. Demolition orders are being issued properly as and when cases of encroachments are reported. However,
the field officers of ASI may please be directed to keep regular visit and take appropriate response/ action
against the person as per provisions of The Ancient Monument and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(AMASR) Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 and the eviction of unauthorized property for Public Premises (Eviction
of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971.
Further Recommendations/Observations
42. The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Ministry. The Committee desires that the
Ministry should ensure that the field officers of ASI take appropriate action against the encroachers.
The Committee would like to know the number of encroachment eviction orders issued during the
last three years and the results thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
43. In response to a pointed query as to whether legal opinion has been received from the Ministry of Law
on the powers of ASI for demolition with regard to action on District Authorities in case of laxity or non-co-
operation on their part in executing the demolition order, the Ministry has replied that legal opinion is being
sought. The Committee recommends that this process of seeking legal opinion may be expedited so that
further course of action can be taken with regard to District Authorities.
(Para 41)
Reply of the Government
44. The suggestion of the Committee has been considered and engagement of Legal Consultant at the
Circle level is being considered to expedite the cases with regard to encroachment and illegal/unauthorized
construction.

7
Further Recommendations/Observations
45. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
46. The Committee emphasizes the need for greater co-ordination between ASI and the State Governments
in the matter of prevention and removal of encroachments at the monuments. The Committee impresses
upon the Ministry to persuade the State Governments to form State level Co-ordination Committees for
prevention and removal of encroachments at the monuments. The Committee also recommends that a
separate wing may be created within the Ministry of Culture and ASI to oversee the removal of encroachments
in an effective way.
(Para 42)
Reply of the Government
47. It is proposed that the SA’s/Dy. SA’s of Circles/Mini Circles would be directed to co-ordinate with
State Authorities responsible for removal of encroachments from protected monuments. Formulation
of a Co-ordination Committee is under consideration in every State at higher level for addressing the
issues.
Further Recommendations/Observations
48. The Committee may be informed of the outcome thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
49. The Committee notes that the Ministry and ASI, New Delhi has stock of information on removal of
encroachment of only three circles. This shows the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry and ASI towards
removal of encroachments. The Committee is aware of the fact that a large number of monuments are
encroached and many of them are with active connivance of anti-social elements. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that they should obtain quarterly report of the progress made from each of the circles regarding
removal of encroachments. The Committee may be apprised about the status of removal of encroachment
from all the circles of ASI in the Action taken Report.
(Para 44)
Reply of the Government
50. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) has prepared a data bank with regard to encroachment
already taken place inside the protected monuments/sites. The data with regard to removal of encroachment
during the last three years is being prepared and to be submitted in a Parliament Assurance reply. The
suggestion of the Committee with regard to obtaining quarterly report of the progress from each circle is
welcomed and all SA’s/Dy. SA’s of Circles/Mini circle would be directed to submit the Action Taken Report
as desired by the Committee.
Further Recommendations/Observations
51. The Committee notes with utter dismay that even after six months the Government has not
submitted any quarterly report on encroachment to the Committee. It seems that the
recommendations of the Committee are taken lightly. No concrete action has been taken on a very

8
important issue. The Committee would like to know the names of the officers of the Ministry
responsible for supply of the information as recommended by the Committee and the action taken
against them for non supply of information as recommended by the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
52. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take up with the Ministry of Finance, the need for
enhancement under the Capital head at the RE stage.
(Para 46)
Reply of the Government
53. The Delegated Investment Board (DIB) meeting held on 28.3.2017 under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Ministry of Culture has approved the proposal for construction of Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya Institute of
Archaeology at Greater Noida out of the commemoration budget subject to relaxation of GFR provisions by
the Ministry of Finance. It was also decided that up to 30% of the cost of the project may be considered for
release to National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) during the financial year 2016-17 after
adjusting the 10 crores already released by ASI. During the above meeting, the participants were informed
that the project is likely to be completed in 24 months from the date of its start.
54. The likely date of start is 1st June 2017 and the project is likely to be completed by 31st May, 2019.
The period of 24 months will fall in three financial years viz. 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20.
55. Accordingly, the Ministry of Culture (Special Cell) sanctioned ` 289.37 crores and released
` 69,87,88,000/-to NBCC (India) Ltd. vide their sanction letter No.F.19-16/2016-Spl. Cell, dated 31.03.2017.
NBCC (India) Ltd. vide letter dated 13.04.2017 has furnished the detailed construction schedule for
construction of building for “Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya Institute of Archaeology” at Plot No.2, Sector
Knowledge Park-II, Greater Noida (25 Acres) as per details given as under:-
1. Total Cost off the Project ` 289.17 crores
2. Date of Calling Tender 30.04.2017 to 28.05.2017
3. Date of calling of tender/approvals, etc. 1 month (28.05.2017 to 27.06.2017)
4. Likely Date of Award of Work 07.07.2017
5. Likely Date of Completion 06.07.2019
56. The requirement of fund is given as under:-
1. During 07.07.2017 to 31.03.2018 (9 months ` 110.00 crores)
2. During financial year 2018-19 (12 months ` 144.00 crores)
3. During 01.04.2019 to 06.07.2019 (3 months) ` 35.37 crores Advance Received ` 79.88 crores
Further Recommendations/Observations
57. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be apprised through quarterly report
about the progress about the construction.

9
Recommendation/Observation
58. The Committee observes that if its own organizations are unable to provide space for regional centre
of NSD at Kolkata, the Ministry should explore other possibilities such as requesting the State Government
to provide land/accommodation. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take necessary steps to
ensure that the regional centres of National School of Drama are set up at each of the places at the earliest
by doing the needful in this regard.
(Para 51)
Reply of the Government
59. It had been decided to open five Regional Centres of the National School of Drama (NSD) across the
country, viz. one each at Kolkata, Mumbai/ Goa, J&K and North-East Region besides upgrading the existing
Regional Resource Centre (RRC), Bengaluru to a full-fledged Centre. The land / accommodation for the
purpose was to be provided by the concerned State Governments. Accordingly all State Governments were
requested to provide land.
60. Only Karnataka Government has, however, provided accommodation as well as land for the purpose
where one year Diploma Course is already in operation.
In so far as Centre at Mumbai is concerned, NSD is in search of accommodation that may be suitable
for operationalizing the Centre. For this purpose, an advertisement has been published in the leading
Newspapers. As soon as suitable accommodation is found, steps will be taken to open the NSD’s Centre
there expeditiously.
61. NSD is following up the proposal with the State of Jammu &Kashmir and NE States to take a decision
at the earliest to provide a land / accommodation for the purpose of opening Regional Centre.
62. In so far as opening of Centre at Kolkata is concerned, as per the observations made by the Committee,
all Cultural Institutions under Ministry of Culture at Kolkata were requested to explore the possibilities for
providing accommodation to National School of Drama for starting a Regional Centre at Kolkata until suitable
land is made available to NSD by the State Government. However, the said organizations have indicated their
inability to provide accommodation for the purpose of opening of the NSD at Kolkata.
63. As per the observation of the Committee, matter is also being taken up with the State Government of
West Bengal for providing a land for opening of NSD at Kolkata.
64. Further, a meeting of Committee on Government Assurances, Lok Sabha was held on 08.05.2017 at
Leh to discuss the matter pertaining to assurance given to the Parliament on the subject. NSD has apprised
the Committee that a proposal to grant status of National Importance to the National School of Drama is
under consideration. Once the proposal to confer the status of National Importance is approved, the NSD
will be able to grant degrees / diplomas to the students who undertake the studies in the NSD and its regional
centres.
Further Recommendations/Observations
65. The Committee may be apprised in detail about the steps taken and the communication
undertaken between the Government of India and Government of West Bengal on providing land
for NSD at Kolkata. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.

10
Recommendation/Observation
66. The Committee has observed that the outreach of the Central Akademis are not upto the mark to
preserve and promote a variety of culture and cultural activities existing at State level. Only the State level
Akademis can grapple with the issue and find solutions at the local level. The Committee is happy to note
that the Ministry of Culture is focusing some attention to the State Akademies which are in a poor financial
condition. The Committee desires that the proposals may be approved in a time bound manner so that the
Ministry of Finance may be requested to provide the requisite funds in time.
(Para 53)
Reply of the Government
67. Matter has been taken up with all three Akademies i.e. Sahitya Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
Lalit Kala Akademi of this Ministry. These Akademies have been requested to provide their comments along
with the proposal for providing the financial assistance to the State Akademies. A concrete proposal /
Scheme on the basis of the comments of these Akademies would be prepared and approved from the
concerned authorities and only thereafter a proposal will be moved to Ministry of Finance for providing the
requisite funds to be given to State Akademies. Reminders have also been issued to these Akademies on
16.05.2017 and 01.06.2017. Further vide this Ministry’s letter dated 13.07.2017, alongwith the information
already called for, all the three Akademies are again requested to furnish the details of the existing State
Akademies, their activities as also to apprise the Ministry as to how plan assistance could be provided to the
State Akademies by the Central Akademies.
Further Recommendations/Observations
68. The Committee notes that the Akademis are not responding to the communication of the
Ministry of Culture for a submission of proposals to provide financial assistance to State Akademis.
It is not clear why the Ministry needs the approval of Akademis to provide financial assistance to
the State Akademis. It seems that the Government is taking umbrage in the inaction of the Central
Akademis to provide assistance to State Akademis. The Committee, therefore, further recommends
that the Ministry should take initiative to assist the State Akademis. The Committee may be apprised
about the steps taken in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
69. The Committee notes that the functioning of Asiatic Society has been deteriorated to a greater extent
and the society is embroiled in so many controversies including cases of sexual harassment. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should take up a stronger measure to clean up the organization. The Committee
notes that the Asiatic Society, Kolkata is not responding to settle the audit paras. The Committee takes
serious note of the fact and observes that strict and effective monitoring should be done by the Ministry of
the Organizations coming under its control and that accountability should be ensured of the loss of public
money. The Committee desires that the audit paras in respect of the Asiatic Society, Kolkata should be settled
without any further delay.
(Para 61)
Reply of the Government
70. In respect of one complaint about the sexual harassment, the employment of the guilty has been
terminated and an Internal Complaints Committee, in accordance with the law was constituted, which has

11
submitted its recommendations. Further actions in this regard are being taken by the Asiatic Society, Kolkata
(ASK) expeditiously.
71. The Asiatic Society has informed that the Society has started the recovery of salary of its employees
on account of wrongly granted additional increment in its letter No. 3131 dated 28.04.2017. Out of the total
recoverable amount ` 34, 72, 013/-, a sum of  ` 33, 54, 433/-has been recovered upto 31 st  March, 2017 by
the Asiatic Society, Kolkata and the remaining amount is ` 1, 17, 580/-, which will be recovered in installments.
72. As regards implementation of 6 th Central Pay Commission recommendations by the ASK without the
approval of the Government, ASK has been asked lastly on 04.05.2017 to take appropriate action and send
the requisite information along with the complete proposal with justifications for implementation of 6 th
Central Pay Commission in their Society immediately within 10 days of the receipt of this letter. Prior to this,
several letters have already been written to them.
73. As regards wrong fixation of Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) Scheme has been
considered seriously, the Ministry had recently asked the Asiatic Society on 18th April, 2017 to submit the
requisite information within 10 days. However, no corrective steps has been taken by the ASK.
74. Extension of Service after superannuation: The ASK in its letter No. 3131 dated 28.04.2017 stated that
the Asiatic Society is strictly adhering to the Service Regulations approved by the Government of India and
no relaxation is being given.
75. The Ministry had requested the Asiatic Society, Kolkata lastly on 9th March, 2017 to send the required
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on Audit Para No. 3.1 (Under benefits to employees) and 3.1.1 Pay fixation,
Implementation of Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme and grant of special increments and 3.1.2
(Extension of service after superannuation), including ‘extension of service after superannuation’ and reply
to the query raised by Ministry of Culture and recommendation of 6
th CPC in the Asiatic Society, Kolkata, as
per the directions of the CAG . However, no concrete reply has been received from ASK so far.
76. A five member team of Autonomous Bodies Cell (AB Cell) of the Ministry of Culture visited the ASK
for inspection of the Asiatic Society from 27.02.2017 to 10.03.2017. The Asiatic Society, Kolkata was
asked on 02.05.2017 to furnish the Action Taken Report (ATR) on each observations and recommendations
of the AB Cell Inspection Report. Response is awaited.
Further Recommendations/Observations
77. The Committee notes that the Ministry has taken so many initiatives but without any results.
The Committee recommends that the Asiatic Society should be made a functional institution and
the problems afflicting it may be resolved without delay. The Committee further recommends that
the Ministry should ensure that there is no delay in furnishing the ATR on the observations and
recommendations of the AB Cell Inspection Report. And once it is reminded the details may be
shared with the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
78. The Committee notes that the High Powered Committee constituted to look into various issues related
to Akademies submitted its report in May, 2014. The Committee desires that the recommendations of the
HPC are implemented so that greater transparency and accountability are ensured in these cultural institutions.
The Committee is aware that the High Powered Committee made a large number of recommendations to

12
revamp many of the cultural institutions which are lurking under traditions and age old rules and regulations
which are perpetuating status quo. The institutions need a generational change, a change according to the
needs of the time. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should not be passive spectator
to the functioning of various institutions under it. While maintaining the autonomy of the institutions, they
may be told in unequivocal terms to implement the recommendations of the High Powered Committee in a
time bound manner.
(Para 63)
Reply of the Government
79. The recommendations of the High Powered Committee (HPC) were examined taking into account the
comments/views of the concerned organizations. The decision of the Ministry accepting the views/comments
or otherwise has been conveyed to the concerned organizations. It may be relevant to point out that
implementation of the recommendations is a continuous and long drawn process. These recommendations
will have to be implemented by the way of amendment of Memorandum of Association/ Constitution of the
concerned organization. Accordingly, as per the recommendations of HPC, this Ministry is in the process of
finalizing the existing Memorandum of Associations (MoAs) of concerned autonomous organizations. The
amendment of MoA of National School of Drama has also been finalized with the approval of HCM. The
amended MoA of Lalit Kala Akademi is under submission for approval.
Further Recommendations/Observations
80. A consolidated Action Taken Note by all the cultural institutions and the Ministry of Culture
as a follow up action to the recommendations of High Powered Committee may be submitted to the
Committee within a month of submission of this Report. The Committee desires that the Ministry
may take suitable action for the implementation of the recommendations of HPC.
Recommendation/Observation
81. The Committee desires that in view of the importance of the Cellular Jail in the history of India, the
Ministry of Culture should take initiative to include the Cellular Jail in Port Blair in the World Heritage List of
UNESCO.
(Para 65)
Reply of the Government
82. “The Cellular Jail in Port Blair is under administrative control of the Andaman and Nicobar administration
which is being requested to prepare the nomination dossier on Cellular Jail for submission to the World
Heritage Centre for its inclusion in the World Heritage List of UNESCO.”
Further Recommendations/Observations
83. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
84. The Committee takes cognizance of the unfilled vacancies existing in various Organizations of the
Ministry of Culture. The Committee is constrained to note that many of the vacancies which exist are at the
level of Heads of the Organizations. The Committee is of the considered view that this would adversely
affect the functioning of these Organizations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take

13
proactive steps to ensure that these vacancies are filled up at the earliest. The Committee urges upon the
Ministry that it should co-ordinate with UPSC and other concerned authorities to ensure that the bottlenecks
in this regard are cleared. The Committee desires that the process of finalizing Recruitment Rules should be
completed soon.
(Para 67)
Reply of the Government
85. The number of senior level vacancies and steps being taken to fill them up in the various organizations
of the Ministry are as under:-
S. No. Name of the Status
Organization &
Name of the post
1. Archaeological The details of sanctioned and filled up posts in ASI as on 15.2.2017 and
Survey of India the number of vacancies filled up in the last 2 years through concerted
efforts taken in this regard is indicated below:
S. No. Classification Sanctioned Filled V acant
of posts Strength Post
1 Group ‘A’ 233 183 50
2 Group ‘B’ 875 609 266
3 Group ‘C’ 1164 819 345
4 Multi Tasking 6152 3899 2253
Staff (MTS)
Total 8424 5510 2914
Cadre-wise number of posts filled in the last 2 years: (All Groups,
excluding MTS)
Archaeology 93
Conservation 63
Others 208
Total 364
The Department has continued its efforts to get the vacancies filled up as
expeditiously as possible. In addition to the details of vacancies filled up
given as above, the Staff Selection Committee (SSC) has further
recommended names of 8 candidates for the post of Assistant Archaeologist,
15 candidates for the post of Stenographer for appointment in ASI on Direct
Recruitment basis. The SSC has also recommended the names of 33 No.
of candidates against the vacant post of MTS under the Physically
Handicapped (PH) category. The SSC is also in the advanced stage for

14
conducting examination for the remaining 1314 no. of vacant post of MTS
on Direct Recruitment basis. ASI is constantly pursuing the matter with the
UPSC/SSC for filling up the vacancies.
2. National Library Preparation of Recruitment Rules (RRs) for Director General, National
(Kolkata), Director Library is under process in consultation with UPSC/DoPT. DoPT has also
General been requested to allow this Ministry to fill up the post as per existing RRs.
Later on, a letter has been sent to DoPT on 27.04.2017 with the request to
fill up the post from the available panel of officers, keeping RRs in abeyance
for a specified time period.
3. Delhi Public Library The post of Director General, Delhi Public Library has been revived. On
(Delhi), Director the basis of applications received in response to the advertisement for the
General post, the Selection Committee has selected one candidate for appointment
as DG .
4. Khuda Bakhsh The proposal of selection of Director, KBOPL is under consideration of
Oriental Public Appointment Committee of the Cabinet.
Library (Patna),
Director
5. Rampur Raza Library The vacancy of Director, Rampur Raza Library has been filled up and the
(Rampur), Director incumbent joined on 21.02.2017.
6. Anthropological Approval of the Appointment Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) regarding
Survey of India, appointment of Prof. Vinay Kumar Srivastava as Director Anthropological
Director (AnSI) Survey of India (AnSI), Kolkata has been obtained. Necessary order has
been issued on 18.04.2017.
Administrative Division of the Ministry has taken step to fill up vacancies at
the level of head of the organization. Selection of the post of Director, AnSI
has been made by the Search-Cum-Selection Committee.
7. National Mission for NMM is a project under the Ministry of Culture. Post of Director was filled
Manuscripts, Director up by the Ministry/IGNCA on 24.08.2016. Out of 51 contractual posts
sanctioned for implementation of the scheme, only 29 posts are filled up
and 22 posts are lying vacant. The matter relating to its extension for the
period 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2020 is under consideration of the Ministry. As
an extension is accorded, necessary action will be taken to fill up the vacant
posts.
8. Indian Museum The Selection Committee in its 3rd meeting held on 10.02.2017 under the
(Kolkata), Director Chairmanship of HE Governor of West Bengal, Chairman of Board of
Trustees (BoT), Indian Museum, recommended the name of Shri Rajesh
Purohit, Director, Allahabad Museum.
The recommendation of the Selection Committee has been approved by
Board of Trustees by circulation. A proposal with the approval of Hon’ble

15
Governor and Chairman of the BoT, Indian Museum has been received on
08.05.2017 from Indian Museum for approval of the appointment from
ACC, which is under process.
9. National Council of In r/o filling up the post on regular basis it is submitted that the advertisement
Science Museum inviting applications for regular appointment to the post of DG, NCSM was
(Kolkata), Director released in leading newspapers on 01.08.2015. File is under submission for
General nomination of members for constitution of Search-cum-Selection
Committee.
10. National Gallery of The vacancies at Salar Jung Museum and National Gallery of Modern Art,
Modern Art at Delhi, Mumbai and Bangaluru. Advertisement for one post of Director,
11. Salar Jung Museum NGMA, New Delhi has been issued on 19.01.2017. For filling up the post
of the Director, NGMA, Mumbai and Bangaluru, DoPT has been requested
to fill these posts through Central Staffing for a specific period keeping
RRs in abeyance. With regard to “Recruitment Rules” as per advice of
UPSC, amendment in the RRs is under consideration. As far as filling up
the post of the Director in Salar Jung Museum is concerned the long drawn
Court Case has been settled and stay in the matter has been vacated. The
process of appointment has already been initiated and is likely to be completed
in a time bound manner.
12. Vice-Chancellor, As per UGC (Institution to be University) (Third Amendment) Regulation,
Nava Nalanda 2016 vide Notification dated 8th February, 2016, the Recruitment Rules
Mahavihara (RRs) for the appointment of Vice Chancellor of Nava Nalanda Mahavihara
(NNM), Nalanda, Bihar have been revised with the approval of Hon’ble
Culture Minister accordingly. The process of appointment of VC, NNM is
being carried out at accelerated pace.
13. Zonal Cultural The posts of Directors of NEZCC, NZCC, SCZCC, NCZCC and EZCC are
Centres vacant. The process to fill up these vacancies is in progress.
14. Director, Kalakshetra The process of filling the post of Director in Kalakshetra Foundation which
Foundation has fallen vacant since 19.06.2017 is being initiated.
Further Recommendations/Observations
86. The Committee notes that many of the cultural institutes such as Salar Jung Museum, Five
Zonal Cultural Centres, Kala Khetra Foundation, Nava Nalanda Mahavihara, National Gallery of
Modern Art, National Council of Science Museum, National Library, Delhi Public Library etc. are
functioning without any Heads of the Organization. Moreover, a large number of vacancies are
existing in ASI also. This shows that the Government is not serious in the proper functioning of the
cultural institutions. The Committee is disappointed by the lack of commitment in filling up the
vacancies existing at various levels in various Organizations of the Ministry of Culture. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should be proactive and diligently pursue the
matter to ensure that the vacancies are filled without further delay.

16
Recommendation/Observation
87. Regarding the Director of Salarjung Museum, the Committee was informed that the post has been
lying vacant for the last eight years due to court cases and other reasons. The Committee urges upon the
Ministry of Culture to approach the High Court and Supreme Court to ensure that vexatious litigation is not
preventing the appointment of Heads of various organizations. From the large number of vacancies at the
level of Heads of organizations, the Committee gets an overall feeling that the Ministry is not taking
proactive steps to fill the vacancies. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take advance
action anticipating the vacancies in the various organizations.
(Para 68)
Reply of the Government
88. The vacancies at Salar Jung Museum and National Gallery of Modern Art, at Delhi, Mumbai and
Bangaluru. Advertisement for one post of Director, NGMA, New Delhi has been issued on 19.01.2017. For
filling up the post of the Director, NGMA, Mumbai and Bangaluru, DoPT has been requested to fill these
posts through Central Staffing for a specific period keeping RRs in abeyance. With regard to “Recruitment
Rules” as per advice of UPSC, amendment in the RRs is under consideration. As far as filling up the post of
the Director in Salar Jung Museum is concerned the long drawn Court Case has been settled and stay in the
matter has been vacated. The process of appointment has already been initiated and is likely to be completed
in a time bound manner.
Further Recommendations/Observations
89. The Committee further recommends that the finalization of Recruitment Rules should be
taken up with UPSC in a concerted manner so that hindrances in the recruitment process at various
levels in various organizations can be minimized.
Recommendation/Observation
90. The Committee is happy to note that the initiative taken at the behest of the Committee is getting
shape. The Committee desires that the Ministry should monitor the construction of the Komagata Maru
Memorial and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this regard.
(Para 72)
Reply of the Government
91. The Ministry is thankful to the Committee for its observations regarding the construction of Komagata
Maru Memorial at Budge Budge, Kolkata under the commemoration of centenary of Komagata Maru Incident.
The Ministry is regularly monitoring the progress made in this regard by calling regular physical and financial
reports from Kolkata Port Trust which is the executing agency for the project. The Ministry also assures the
Committee that it will be kept apprised of the status of the memorial from time to time.
Further Recommendations/Observations
92. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
93. Field offices of ASI are working in close coordination with Regional Centres of ISRO for preparing
these site plans. So far, site maps indicating protected, prohibited and 27 regulated boundaries of 1430

17
centrally protected monuments/sites have already been uploaded on nrsc-bhuvan portal for public browsing.
The Committee notes the initiative taken by ASI and hopes that this Portal would ultimately benefit the
public in getting the NOC for construction in nearby areas of the protected monuments.
(Para 74)
Reply of the Government
94. Bhuvan Portal is made available for the convenience of the public for getting the approval for No
Objection Certificate (NOC). However, the more number of monuments/sites are being added to the Portal
in a phased manner.
Further Recommendations/Observations
95. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
96. Cultural Mapping of India is one of the major initiatives being taken by the Ministry of Culture in
recent times. Once it is fructified, it will be one of the best data bases on Indian arts and artists of our
country. No doubt it can revive many of the cultural activities and art forms which are prevailing even in
remotest corners of our country. The Cultural Mapping can definitely bring all those forms of culture which
are near extinct, to the public realm. Every governmental agency, Central, State and Panchayat level
institution should support the initiative taken by the Ministry of Culture. the Committee appreciates this
initiative for talent hunting and hopes that when it materializes, it would enable the Ministry to create a
data base of artists of varied forms of art and culture in the country. However, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry may seek the active involvement of village Panchayats and State Governments also for
these activities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance may be approached to allot adequate
funding for the project.
(Para 76)
Reply of the Government
97. Subsequent to in-principle approval of Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, the Scheme
“National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap” with proposed objectives/outcomes as outlined in the
mission document has been approved by the Competent Authority on 29
th March, 2017 with an outlay of
` 469.404 crore spread over a period from 2017-18 to 2019-20. It is informed that as envisaged in the
Mission Document, in order to carry out the activities under the Schemes, Village Panchayats (Panchayati Raj
Institutions), local administration of State Governments, V olunteers of Nehru Yuva Kendra, Govt. agencies,
V olunteer members of Cultural Mapping of India etc. are to be involved actively.
Further Recommendations/Observations
98. The Committee further recommends that the role played by women in cultural set up of the
nation along with their contributions in nourishing and preserving the culture at personal space
which adds up at the national level should be highlighted.
Recommendation/Observation
99. The Committee recognizes the importance of creation of the National Virtual Library which would
bring together all information generated in India and about India and make such information accessible to

18
the citizens through user friendly federated search interfaces. The Committee desires that the National
Virtual Library should be set up at the earliest.
(Para 82)
Reply of the Government
100. Action is on for early launch / setting up of National Virtual Library of India (NVLI).
Further Recommendations/Observations
101. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be supplied with full details of the action
taken in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
102. The Committee feels that the National Culture Fund should be given more visibility and publicity so
that it may attract the participation of more corporate and other organizations in restoration, conservation,
protection and development of India’s rich, natural, tangible and intangible heritage. The Committee desires
that it may be apprised of the extent of participation of various Organizations to this Fund during the last
5 years.
(Para 84)
Reply of the Government
103. The National Culture Fund (NCF) was established by the Government of India (Ministry of Culture)
as a Trust vide notification published in the Gazette of India of 28th November, 1996.
104. NCF’s primary mandate is to establish and nurture partnerships in the field of Culture and Heritage
between private and public sectors, government, non-government agencies, private institutions and
foundations and mobilize resources for the restoration, conservation, protection and development of India’s
rich, natural, tangible and intangible heritage. NCF provides donors with 100% tax benefit under section
80G (2) of the Income Tax Act.
105. The NCF receives funds from corporate/PSUs/companies and institutions. The details of the extent of
participation of various organizations to NCF during the last five years are as under:-
Sl. No. Name of Project Name of Donor MoU signed ( ` in lakhs) Status
1. Conservation of National M/s NTPC Ltd. 22.12.2009 500.00 Ongoing
Monuments addendum
(a) Conservation of Hoshang signed on
Shah Tomb 23.03.2017
(b) Interpretation Centre at
Taveli Mahal
(c) Signage 1. Excavated site
at Vikramshila, Bihar
2. Group of Monument in
Mandu , M.P
3. Excavated site at Lalitgiri,
Orissa

19
2. Visitor amenities at Shore Shipping 19.04. 2011 38.67 Completed
Temple, Mahabalipuram Corporation of
India
3. Leadership Training Respective 8.1.2012 The total fee Completed
Programme-I Museums 298086
Great Britain
Pound (GBP)
was recouped
from the
participating
museums
4. Restoration of Shiv T emple, Nagarik Sewa 2012 22.30 Completed
Ambernath (Maharashtra) Mandal
5. Wonders of Nature: Ustad NCF/Marg December, 10 .00 Completed
Mansur at the Mughal Court Foundation 2012
by Ashok Kumar Das
6. Crafts and sustainable skill Rural 14.2.2013 158.00 Completed
development in Gujarat (Self Electrification
employed women’s association- Corporation
(SEWA) (REC)
7. Restoration of Shri Bhuleshwar Smt. Uttradevi 26.3.2013 54.00 Ongoing
Temple, Pune Charitable &
Research
Foundation
8. Conservation of Sunderwala HUDCO 31.07.2013 38.51 Completed
Mahal, New Delhi
9. Publication series titled ‘Treasures Chhatrapati 2013 3.80 each Ongoing
of Indian Museums’, showcasing Shivaji Maharaj museum
their extraordinary collections. V astu
Sangrahalaya
(CSMVS),
Mumbai,
Salarjung,
National
museum,
Allahabad
museum &
Indian Museum
Sl. No. Name of Project Name of Donor MoU signed ( ` in lakhs) Status

20
10. Leadership Training Programme Respec tive 2013 The total Completed
II (organized by British Museum) Organizations fee for the
(National Level, training
State level and programme
private Museums was 230000
across GBP which
the Country) was recouped
from the
museums
11. Getty Capacity Building J. Paul Getty 25.09.2013 Getty Completed
programme for professionals Trust, United agreed to
from ASI, NCF, J Paul Getty States of pay for all
Trust &The British Museum America costs related
to organize three workshops to the project
12. Two Training Programmes for HUDCO 24.10.2013 20.00 Completed
craftsmen engaged in restoration
of tangible components-at Jaipur
& Makrana, Rajasthan
13. Conservation of Jaiprakash State Trading 28.1 1.2013 32.00 Completed
Yantra, Jantar Mantar Corporation
(STC)
14. Kochi Muziris Biennale 2012 Nirlon 20.12.2013 16.90 Completed
Catalogue, Kerela Foundation
Trust
15. Conservation and Reuse of the State 28.12.2013 100.00 Ongoing
Former British Residency Department of
Hyderabad Archaeology,
Hyderabad
16. Leadership Training Programme -Respective 18.03.2014 The total Completed
III (organized by British Museum) organizations fee for the
National Level, State level and and -John training
private Museums across the Eskenazi programme
Country Limited, The was paid by
Pritzker respective
Organization organisation
-Neil Kreitman and Donors
Foundation &
Anish Kapoor
Sl. No. Name of Project Name of Donor MoU signed ( ` in lakhs) Status

21
17. Preparation of DPR for Temple trust 14.10.2014 5.00 Ongoing
conservation of Old Rangji and NCF
Temple, Pushkar
18. Upgradation of Swantrata BHEL 30.10.2014 200.00 Ongoing
Sangram Sangrahalaya Red
Fort, New Delhi
19. DPR for Up-gradation of ASI NCF 16.3.15 22.00 Ongoing
Site Museum Nalanda, Bihar
20. Erection of Solar Powered Street Indian 9.03.2016 500.00 Funds
lamps, Solar Powered Plant, Bio Infrastructure (Umbrella received.
Toilets and Battery Operated Finance MoA) (initiated)
Vehicles at Chittaurgarh Fort Company
Rajasthan Limited (IIFCL)
21. Up gradation of Sarnath Site & Sony India Pvt. 30.03. 2016 190.00 Funds
Museum under ASI , Uttar Ltd (Umbrella received
Pradesh MoA) (initiated)
22. Providing one battery operated NBCC Services March 2017 7.60 Completed
vehicle for ASI Monument Limited,
23. Providing one battery operated Fullerton India March 2017 7.60 Completed
vehicle for Chittaurgarh Fort Credit Co. Ltd.
24. Development, Conservation and National 30.03.2017 1435.00 Ongoing
upkeep of Purana Qila, New Buildings
Delhi Construction
Corporation Ltd.
(NBCC)
Further Recommendations/Observations
106. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
107. For the year 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17,
 ` 19 crores, ` 18.45 crores and ` 18 crores were allotted
respectively. However, ` 17.64 crores, ` 17.78 crores and ` 13.68 crores were released for the respective
years. Further, only ` 15.63 crores, ` 13.86 crores and ` 13.17 crores (upto Feb 2017) were utilized. The
Committee notes that the funds released and utilized for the last three years as mentioned above, are less
than the funds allocated under this head. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for the same.
(Para 89)
Reply of the Government
108. With reference to the observations of the Committee it is submitted that in respect of Artistes Pension
Scheme and Welfare Fund LIC has been appointed as service provider since 2009 for disbursement of
Sl. No. Name of Project Name of Donor MoU signed ( ` in lakhs) Status

22
pension to the beneficiaries. In respect of the financial years 2014-15 & 2015-16 it is stated that the grant
was released to LIC by the Ministry equal to the amount demanded by them. LIC disburses the pension to
those beneficiaries only who furnish to their office the required documents i.e. Life and Income Certificates
in the prescribed performa duly issued by the competent authority. Since the required documents are not
received by LIC from all the beneficiaries for various reasons (including death cases) it results into less
expenditure. It is further mentioned that no fresh beneficiaries were added to the list of beneficiaries as the
meeting of the Expert Committee could not be held in 2015-16. It was because of the two exhaustive
exercises undertaken by the Ministry in respect of physical verification of each beneficiary by sending an
officer at their residence in eight States where beneficiaries are more concentrated with a view to ensure
that Pension amount is going to the deserving and eligible Artists only and there is no misuse of Govt.
exchequer. The second exercise is regarding updation of details of each of the existing beneficiaries and
implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). This exercise is very lengthy started in Nov. 2016 and it
is still going on.
109. As regards the financial year 2016-17 the saving is higher because from this financial year the Ministry
has taken the initiative to release of funds to LIC only once a year for administrative convenience and also to
ensure effective disbursal of pension amount to the beneficiaries. It is pertinent to submit that from the date
the LIC took the responsibility to disburse the pension, all the beneficiaries were segregated in three groups
with three vesting dates i.e. 1
st April, 1st Oct. and 1st Jan. i.e. the dates from which Expert Committee, which
met on three occasions, recommended the pension to certain number of beneficiaries. However, for easier
administration/monitoring and efficient disbursal of pension to the beneficiaries, it was felt appropriate that
instead of piecemeal disbursement, pension to all the beneficiaries will be disbursed till March, 2017 and
then clubbed together from 1
st April, 2017 onwards. The Ministry held meetings with the LIC in which it has
been mutually decided that from 2017-18 the vesting date will be one only i.e. 1 st April. Accordingly, funds
will be demanded by LIC only once in the beginning of the financial year and the Ministry will release whole
of the demanded funds in one installment and LIC will disburse the pension to the beneficiaries uninterruptedly
during the year 2017-18. Therefore, the reason of higher savings in 2016-17 is that LIC called for funds for
6 months instead of 12 months in respect of about 218 beneficiaries (whose vesting date is October)
resulting into the saving of rupees half a crore. Further, in respect of about 927 beneficiaries (whose vesting
date is January) LIC called for the funds for 3 months only in place of 12 months resulting into the saving
of about ` 3.75 crore. It is further mentioned that no fresh beneficiaries were added to the list of beneficiaries
as the meeting of the Expert Committee could not be held in 2016-17 also.
Further Recommendations/Observations
110. The Committee notes that the Government has not added any new beneficiary during the last
couple of years in respect of Artistes Pension Scheme on the excuse that the Expert Committee
could not meet. The Committee observes it is most unfortunate that the deserving Artist who needs
financial assistance have been totally neglected by the Government. The Committee would like to
know what action the Government is going to take to ensure that the Expert committee is meeting
to add new beneficiaries to the Pension Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
111. The Committee may be informed about the progress made in the number of web channels as well as
its popularity.
(Para 91)

23
Reply of the Government
112. Number of Cultural programmes are being regularly organized by various organizations under this
Ministry including Cultural festivals, seminars, film screenings, stage & street plays, classical and traditional
dance & music presentations, literary festivals, etc. The A/V content of such programmes, after processing
and packaging is being broadcast through Sanskriti Web Channels for the promotion of rich Indian heritage
and culture and with this the same content is also preserved in digital mode. The web channels are being
regularly promoted through the social media handles of the Ministry. We will also endow with visitors
counter for the channels with a view to get optimum popularity. Ministry of Culture has also planned to set
up state of the art National Media Centre to streamline Sanskriti Channels in current year.
Further Recommendations/Observations
113. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
114. The Secretary apprised the Committee that one of the initiatives proposed in 2017-18 are Virtual
Experiential Museums. The Committee may be informed about the progress made/action taken in the matter
in the Action taken Report.
(Para 93)
Reply of the Government
115. City Heritage Museum, Varanasi: -NCSM has floated tender for concept design, planning, development,
supply, installation, commissioning and operation maintenance of the City Heritage Museum, Varanasi. The
technical presentation by the bidders has been held. Matter is under Process.
116. City Heritage Museum, IGNCA: -NCSM has recently floated tender for selection of capable agency
for development of concept design and development of replica of the City Heritage Museum, Varanasi at
IGNCA, New Delhi. The technical presentation by the bidders has been held. Matter is under Process.
Further Recommendations/Observations
117. The Committee notes that no substantial progress has been made the Committee further
recommends that the Ministry should monitor the progress so as to avoid delays at all levels.
Recommendation/Observation
118. The Committee feels that an effective co-ordination mechanism among the Ministry of Culture, Ministries
of Tourism, Civil Aviation and Road Transport & Highways is needed in order to ensure that the places of
tourist and cultural importance are integrated seamlessly with well connected roads and airports and are
provided with required facilities like budget hotels, taxis, souvenir shops, restaurants etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture may co-ordinate in formulating an action plan with the
above said Ministries in this regard and that the Ministry of Tourism may be made the nodal Ministry for
this purpose.
(Para 96)
Reply of the Government
119. As per the submission in the 226
th Report, a Steering Committee has been constituted for Coordination

24
on Development of Buddhist Circuit. M/o Culture, M/o Tourism, M/o Road Transport & Highways, ASI,
M/o Railways along with Government of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar are the members of the Committee.
120. The First Meeting of the Steering Committee was held on 28 th August, 2015. The Second Meeting of
the Steering Committee was held on 17 th December, 2015. The minutes of the meeting was circulated to all
the stakeholders for taking necessary action on the actionable points and progress reports /comments were
sought from time to time. However, progress report is still awaited on the actionable points from the
concerned. With regard to the recommendations of the Committee in the 245th Report, a communication has
been issued to the Ministry of Tourism for nomination of a nodal officer and call a meeting of the Ministries
referred to in the para to proceed further to formulate an action plan in the matter as per the recommendations
of the Committee.
Further Recommendations/Observations
121. The Committee is deeply concerned that progress report is still awaited on the actionable
points raised by the Steering Committee since 2015. The Committee notes that the Government
has not done much to implement the recommendation of the Committee except by writing a letter
to the Ministry of Tourism. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter
vigorously to implement the recommendations of the Committee.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS — A T A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 7)
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome thereof. (Para 10)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 13)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 16)
The Committee may be apprised about the progress of construction of the Institute of
Archaeology along with the names of the officers responsible for monitoring the construction. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that target is achieved within the
stipulated time. (Para 19)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should take necessary measures to
expedite the work and ensure that progress of work is not stalled at any stage. The Committee may
be apprised of the achievements in physical terms. (Para 22)
The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Culture and ASI has not given any
details of the e-governance projects they are planning to implement. The Committee notes that the
authorities have taken some initiatives only after this Committee has come down heavily on the
inaction of the ASI to implement e-governance initiatives. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should follow up the progress of development of necessary software for implementation of
e-governance in ASI and ensure that the implementation of e-governance in ASI is expedited. The
Committee may be apprised about the details and progress of implementation of e-governance
projects. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 28)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 31)
The Committee recommends that a feasibility study may be conducted by ASI on identifying
the Monuments which have the potential to be declared as Adarsh Monuments and the results of
the study may be communicated to the Committee. (Para 34)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 38)
The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Ministry. The Committee desires that the
Ministry should ensure that the field officers of ASI take appropriate action against the encroachers.
The Committee would like to know the number of encroachment eviction orders issued during the
last three years and the results thereof. (Para 42)
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome thereof. (Para 45)
The Committee may be informed of the outcome thereof. (Para 48)
The Committee notes with utter dismay that even after six months the Government has not
submitted any quarterly report on encroachment to the Committee. It seems that the
recommendations of the Committee are taken lightly. No concrete action has been taken on a very
important issue. The Committee would like to know the names of the officers of the Ministry
25

26
responsible for supply of the information as recommended by the Committee and the action taken
against them for non supply of information as recommended by the Committee. (Para 51)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be apprised through quarterly report
about the progress about the construction. (Para 57)
The Committee may be apprised in detail about the steps taken and the communication
undertaken between the Government of India and Government of West Bengal on providing land
for NSD at Kolkata. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 65)
The Committee notes that the Akademis are not responding to the communication of the
Ministry of Culture for a submission of proposals to provide financial assistance to State Akademis.
It is not clear why the Ministry needs the approval of Akademis to provide financial assistance to
the State Akademis. It seems that the Government is taking umbrage in the inaction of the Central
Akademis to provide assistance to State Akademis. The Committee, therefore, further recommends
that the Ministry should take initiative to assist the State Akademis. The Committee may be apprised
about the steps taken in this regard. (Para 68)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has taken so many initiatives but without any results.
The Committee recommends that the Asiatic Society should be made a functional institution and
the problems afflicting it may be resolved without delay. The Committee further recommends that
the Ministry should ensure that there is no delay in furnishing the ATR on the observations and
recommendations of the AB Cell Inspection Report. And once it is reminded the details may be
shared with the Committee. (Para 77)
A consolidated Action Taken Note by all the cultural institutions and the Ministry of Culture
as a follow up action to the recommendations of High Powered Committee may be submitted to the
Committee within a month of submission of this Report. The Committee desires that the Ministry
may take suitable action for the implementation of the recommendations of HPC. (Para 80)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 83)
The Committee notes that many of the cultural institutes such as Salar Jung Museum, Five
Zonal Cultural Centres, Kala Khetra Foundation, Nava Nalanda Mahavihara, National Gallery of
Modern Art, National Council of Science Museum, National Library, Delhi Public Library etc. are
functioning without any Heads of the Organization. Moreover, a large number of vacancies are
existing in ASI also. This shows that the Government is not serious in the proper functioning of the
cultural institutions. The Committee is disappointed by the lack of commitment in filling up the
vacancies existing at various levels in various Organizations of the Ministry of Culture. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should be proactive and diligently pursue the
matter to ensure that the vacancies are filled without further delay. (Para 86)
The Committee further recommends that the finalization of Recruitment Rules should be
taken up with UPSC in a concerted manner so that hindrances in the recruitment process at various
levels in various organizations can be minimized. (Para 89)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 92)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 95)

27
The Committee further recommends that the role played by women in cultural set up of the
nation along with their contributions in nourishing and preserving the culture at personal space
which adds up at the national level should be highlighted. (Para 98)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be supplied with full details of the action
taken in this regard. (Para 101)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 106)
The Committee notes that the Government has not added any new beneficiary during the last
couple of years in respect of Artistes Pension Scheme on the excuse that the Expert Committee
could not meet. The Committee observes it is most unfortunate that the deserving Artist who needs
financial assistance have been totally neglected by the Government. The Committee would like to
know what action the Government is going to take to ensure that the Expert committee is meeting
to add new beneficiaries to the Pension Scheme. (Para 110)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 113)
The Committee notes that no substantial progress has been made the Committee further
recommends that the Ministry should monitor the progress so as to avoid delays at all
levels. (Para 117)
The Committee is deeply concerned that progress report is still awaited on the actionable
points raised by the Steering Committee since 2015. The Committee notes that the Government
has not done much to implement the recommendation of the Committee except by writing a letter
to the Ministry of Tourism. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter
vigorously to implement the recommendations of the Committee. (Para 121)

MINUTES

31
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 18th December, 2017 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri La. Ganesan
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
5. Km. Arpita Ghosh
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan
7. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
8. Shri Rajesh Pandey
9. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
10. Shri Rakesh Singh
11. Shri K.C. V enugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the agenda
for the meeting are (i) to consider the draft reports of the Committee and adopt them and (ii) * * *
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following draft Reports:
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Forty Fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of Ministry of Culture; and
(ii) * * *
4. The Committee decided to present/lay these Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 20
th December,
2017. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri La. Ganesan, M.P. and
*** Relate to other matters.

32
in his absence Kumari Selja, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P. and in his
absence Shri Harish Chandra Meena, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2017.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The meeting adjourned at 4:30 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.