PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 173
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 MARCH 2012)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 15 MARCH, 2012)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 MARCH 2012)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 15 MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL,  2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 15 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—5
4. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 7—11
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—19

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2011-2012)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Satish Sharma
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
6. Shri Vikram Verma
7. Shri Narendra Kashyap
8. Shri Thomas Sangma
9. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
10. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
14. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
15. Shri Hassan Khan
16. Dr. Kruparani Killi
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
19. Shrimati Jaya Prada Nahata
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Rajaram Pal
22. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
23. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
24. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shrimati Meena Singh
27. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
@31. Shri Subrata Bakshi
@ Nominated on 2 nd March, 2012 vice Shri Ajit Singh who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his
inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  18 th December, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Seventy Third Report of the Committee on the National Highways
Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2011*.
2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 19
th December, 2011. In pursuance of rules
relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’b1e Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on the 13
th January, 2012 for examination and report
on or before 15 th March, 2012.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and representatives of National Highways Authority of India at its meeting held on the
6th February, 2012.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same on 13
th
March, 2012.
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and National Highways Authority of India and Ministry
of Law and Justice for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the provisions
of the Bill.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
March 13, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Phalguna 23, 1933  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
* Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 19 th December, 2011.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.49210 dated 16.01.2012.

1
REPORT
The National Highways Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was introduced in the
Lok Sabha on the 19 th December, 2011. The Bill was referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for examination and report.
The Committee has examined the Bill and finalized the Report as per the mandate. The Bill seeks
to further amend the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988.
2. The reasons for introduction of the Bill, as informed by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways have been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
3. The National Highways Authority of India was established as a statutory body under the
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) Act, 1988.
4. Section 3 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 provides for constitution of
the National Highways Authority of India. As per sub-section (3) of the said section, the authority
shall consist of (i) a Chairman; (ii) not more than five full-time members; and (iii) not more than
four part-time members. The Ministry has stated that keeping in view the vastly increased mandate
for National Highways Authority of India and also the greatly enhanced participation envisaged for the
private sector, it is proposed to expand the strength of full-time Members from five to six and part-
time Members from four to six to allow induction of professionals of repute in the fields of financial
and project management. Induction of outside professionals will enhance the capacity of the Authority
to take strategic decisions, widen its perspective, bring in best management practices, and assist in
achieving the goal of higher private participation.
5. NHAI is mandated to implement National Highways Development Project (NHDP) in various
phases. About 54,000 kms length of highways has been included for development under NHDP.
The Government has adopted Public Private Partnership mode (PPP) as the preferred mode of
delivery of projects. As PPP is an emerging field and implementation of the NHDP programme on
PPP mode, called for creation of a specialized agency with unique and specific skills sets, the
Committee on Infrastructure (Col) in its meeting held on 13.1.2005 under the Chairmanship of the
Prime Minister took the following decision :–
“In order to provide autonomy and delegate more powers to NHAI for approval of
individual projects within the overall programme including the financing structure approved
by CCEA, it is necessary to build institutional capacity of NHAI by making it a
multidisciplinary professional body with high quality financial management and contract
management expertise.”
6. With a view to build the institutional capacity of the National Highways Authority of India,
the Ministry of Road Transport & Highway vide its Note dated 5
th July, 2007 sought the approval
of the Cabinet for the re-structuring of NHAI. The proposal inter-alia included increase in number
of full-time members from five to six and part-time members by two i.e., from four to six, who
would be from the non-Government sector, one from IITs/IIMs and the other from financial
institutions. The proposal was approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 20
th July, 2007. A
draft NHAI (Amendment) Bill was accordingly submitted to the Cabinet for  amending the NHAI
Act, 1988 to incorporate the provision for the proposed increase in the number of full-time and
part-time members of NHAI.
7. After various procedural delays, the National Highways Authority of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2008 was introduced on 22
nd December, 2008 in the Lok Sabha. The Amendment Bill was

2
referred to the Department-related Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism for examination
and report. The Committee examined the Amendment Bill and submitted its 148 th report on
16th February, 2009.
8. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has submitted that as the Ministry was
processing the comments and recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport and Tourism, the 14th Lok Sabha was dissolved and consequently the
NHAI (Amendment) Bill, 2008 has lapsed.
9. A Cabinet Note for reintroducing amendment of the National Highways Authority of India
Act, 1988 for increasing number of full-time members from 5 to 6 and part-time members from
4 to 6 was sent to the Cabinet for approval on 9.9.2011. The Cabinet in its meeting held on
30.9.2011 has approved the proposal. After vetting by the Legislative Department, the National
Highways Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
19.12.2011.
10. The Committee in its meeting held on the 06
th February, 2012 heard the views of the
Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highways
Authority of India and Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill. The Committee in its meeting held
on the 13
th March, 2012 examined the Bill in its entirety and adopted its report. The Committee’s
consideration/recommendations have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
11. The Committee noted that in order to equip the Authority to manage the enhanced mandate
and to handle the Public Private Partnership Projects effectively in future, the Central Government
has decided to amend sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act. The NHAI (Amendment) Bill,
2011 proposes to substitute sub-section (3) of Section 3 of NHAI Act 1988 as follows:
“(3) The Authority shall consist of:–
(a) a Chairman
(b) not more than six full-time Members; and
(c) not more than six part-time Members,
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing the part-time members, ensure
that at least two of them are non-government professionals having knowledge or experience
in the financial management, transportation planning or any other relevant discipline”.
12. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways while deposing before the
Committee stated that the increase in the mandate of National Highways Authority in recent past
had necessitated this amendment in the NHAI Act, 1988. The Committee wanted to know when
was the original mandate of NHAI was changed, it was informed that while the mandate of NHAI
(to develop, maintain and manage national highways in the country) remains unchanged, the scope
and quantum of its work has gone-up significantly, after the National Highways Authority of India
was set up in 1995. After launch of NHDP, the work profile of NHAI has changed substantially.
The NHAI added nearly 40,000 kms of national highways under various NHDPs from 2000 to 2007
and many of the projects are under implementation. Now more and more projects are being
implemented on Public-Private Partnership which entails issues of project structuring, financial
planning, bidding and contract management.
13. The Secretary further stated that change in funding pattern of road projects from public
funding to private funding requires the increase in full-time and part-time members of NHAI Board.
He added that as more road projects are awarded under PPP model, Government has decided to

3
ensure that while appointing the part-time members, at least two of them are non-Government
professionals having knowledge or experience in the financial management, transportation planning
or any other relevant discipline.
14. To a specific query on how increase in the number of full time and part-time members will
help in achieving the objectives for which the amendment is being sought, it was informed that
under the existing Act, there is provision of 5 full time members. Besides, there are 4 part-time
members who are government officials. However, keeping in view the increased work load and to
encourage private sector in development and financing of projects and the fact that earlier projects
were undertaken on EPC mode it was felt that now they have to be structured and steered on PPP
mode in which there is active private sector participation. There are many contractual, financial and
technical issues that constantly being thrown up including diverse issues of implementation and
execution, it was felt necessary to have another full time member on the board of NHAI. Further,
induction of outside professional in the Board, will enhance the capacity of the Authority to take
strategic decisions, widen its perspective, bring in best management practices and accordingly it
was decided to have two part-time members to represent outside experience of the financial and
project-management domain. As such, it has been proposed to have two non-governmental
members - one from a IITs/IIMs and other from the Financial services sector.
15. When the Committee asked the reason for appointing non-governmental professionals as
part-time members only and not as full time, the Secretary informed the Committee that the job
of full-time members is more on planning and core implementation side and, therefore, the benefit
of the non-government professional members who are expert in their field is taken by making them
as part-time Members in the Authority with a view to get their inputs to facilitate the framing of
policies and to take major decisions.
16. To a query by the Committee on the powers and duties of the Member and their role
in decision making, it was informed that Section 25 of the NHAI Act, 1988, prescribes that
the Authority may, by general or special order in writing delegate to the Chairman and any
other member or any other officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations,
if any, as may be specified in the order such of its powers (except its powers under Section
35) and functions, as it may deem necessary. The Authority has delegated from time to time
its power to the Chairman but not to the Members specifically. At present full time Members
are assigned work by Chairman. However, Section 34(b) of NHAI Act 1988 provides for power
of the Central Government to make rules with regard to the powers and duties of the Chairman
and Members.
17. Regarding the reasons for allowing persons from private companies to apply for the post
of Chairman, NHAI and the possible conflict of interest in such cases it was submitted to the
Committee that the persons from the private companies have been permitted to apply for the post
of the Chairman, NHAI so as to make the body more professional and to oversee management of
works and resources with modem management and professional expertise. Considering the wide
scope of the work available with NHAI, a person in the private sector may wish to get associated
with it to derive satisfaction from participating in a National programme. In order to deal with the
possible conflict of interest, two years cooling off has been made mandatory after he had resigned
from his job from the entity having dealings with the NHAI, before a person applies for the post
of Chairman, NHAI.
18. Regarding the qualification for appointment of Chairman of NHAI the Ministry submitted to
the Committee that in order to enlarge the candidature and to provide energetic and stable tenure
to the post of Chairman of NHAI, officers with 2 years of service as Additional Secretary were
permitted to apply for the post of the Chairman. The members are of Joint Secretary level who
are in the pay scale of Additional Secretary, generally on deputation.

4
Recommendations/observations of the Committee
19. The Committee notes that a similar legislation – the National Highways Authority of
India (Amendment) Bill 2008, was brought earlier also that was examined by this
Committee and the 148th Report thereon was submitted to the Parliament. The Committee
appreciates that some of its recommendations have been accepted by the Government and
incorporated in the present Bill.
20. The Committee, however, notes that some of its major recommendations regarding
the revamping of the NHAI, it appears have not been accepted by the Government as these
find no mention in the Bill. In the face of the enormous challenges before the NHAI of not
only completing the existing projects but also meeting uphill target of constructing 21 kms.
of highway everyday, the Committee feels, NHAI will not be able to live upto these simply
by having one more full-time and two part-time Members. While the Government may be
having its own arguments for doing so, but such a cosmetic face-lift will not be enough. The
need of the hour, in fact, is granting more financial-and administrative powers to NHAI. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation contained in its 148th Report
that simply adding of professionals as part time members in the NHAI will not strengthen
the organization in the required manner.
21. The Committee notes that the Bill proposes to take non-government professionals as
part time members, having knowledge or experience in certain areas. It reads as: “financial
management, transportation planning or any other relevant discipline”. The Committee
feels that the words “any other relevant discipline” is certainly vague and liable to be
interpreted differently at different occasions to suit certain vested interests. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in the interest of clarity and transparency, the
“any other relevant discipline” must be specified as it has been done for the “financial
management and transportation planning”.
22. The Committee notes that the argument given by the Government for not inducting
non-government professionals as full-time Members had been reversed in the case of that
given for allowing persons from private companies to apply for the post of Chairman, NHAI.
In other words, while Government does not want to induct non-government professionals as
full time Members, it has no problems in appointing such persons as Authority’s Chairman
- the most powerful position.
23. The Committee finds the argument against the possible conflict of interest in the
case of persons from private companies, unconvincing and the two years cooling off will not
be adequate for taking care of all the possible eventualities in this regard.
24. As regards making officers with two years of service as Additional Secretary eligible
for the post of Chairman, NHAI, the Committee found no justification for fixing “two
Years” for this. Besides, the Committee is of the opinion that in view of the Members of
the NHAI being in the pay scale of Additional Secretary, allowing officer of the same level
as Chairman will not be conducive for the smooth functioning of the NHAI. The Committee
also feels that condition of two years of service as an Additional Secretary shall prevent the
persons from the Public Sector Undertakings having relevant experience in the
infrastructure sectors-power, civil aviation, ports and other such sectors.
25. The Committee takes a strong exception to the Government’s inability to make
Rules under Section 34 (2) (b) of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 for
providing powers and duties of the Chairman and Members. Instead, the entire gamut of
powers has been delegated to the Chairman by the Authority and the rules defining the
duties and functions of the Members have not been framed till date. In such a situation,

5
the National Highways Authority of India, it appears is being run purely on the whims and
fancies of some persons. This is unacceptable to the Committee as it is certainly an
infringement of the legislative mandate given by the Parliament in the NHAI Act. By not
doing so, the Government has not only failed to follow the mandate of Parliament to frame
relevant Rules and Regulations given under Section 34(2)(b) but has also failed to place
them before the Parliament as provided under Section 37 of the NHAI, Act. The Committee
is of the considered opinion that the present Bill will not serve the purpose unless the
powers and duties, not only of the Members but also of the Chairman are defined, as
provided in Section 34(2)(b) of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988. The
Committee accordingly recommends that the Government should take up the exercise of
framing of Rules and Regulations defining the powers and duties of Members and Chairman
of the NHAI without any further delay.
26. The Committee also recommends that the Government should come up with a
comprehensive legislation incorporating all the suggestions/recommendations made for
restructuring and strengthening of NHAI at the earliest.
27. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
suggestions made by it.

ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
19 Dec. 2011
Bill No. 128 of 201 1
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Authority of India
Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the National Highways Authority of
India (Amendment) Act, 2011.
2. In section 3 of the National Highways Authority of India
Act, 1988, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(3) The Authority shall consist of —
(a) a Chairman;
(b) not more than six full-time members; and
(c) not more than six part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while
appointing the part-time members, ensure that at least two of
them are non-government professionals having knowledge or
experience in financial management, transportation planning or
any other relevant discipline.
9
Short title
68 of 1988.
Amendment of
section 3

10
10
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the National Highways Authority of
India Act, 1988 relating to the constitution of the National Highways Authority
of India. Sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act provides that the Authority
shall consist of a Chairman and not more than five full-time members and not
more than four part-time members to be appointed by the Central Government.
2. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend the said sub-section (3) so as to
increase the number of full-time members from five to six and that of the part-
time members from four to six. The salaries and allowances of the additional one
full-time member and two part-time members shall be paid by the National
Highways Authority of India from its funds.
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or non-
recurring nature.

11
11
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE N ATIONAL H IGHWAYS A UTHORITY OF I NDIA A CT, 1988
(68 OF 1988)
* *** *
CHAPTER II
THE N ATIONAL H IGHWAYS A UTHORITY OF I NDIA
3. ( 1)* * * * *
(3) The Authority shall consist of-—
(i) a Chairman;
(ii) not more than five full-time members; and
(iii) not more than four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in
the Official Gazette.
* *** *
Constitution of
the Authority.

MINUTES

14

15
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday the 6 th February, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
4. Shri Vikram Verma
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Hassan Khan
9. Dr. Kruparani Killi
10. Shri Jose K. Mani
11. Shri Rajaram Pal
12. Shrimati Meena Singh
13. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
14. Shri Rakesh Singh
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
15

16
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri A.K. Upadhyay, Secretary
2. Shri C. Kandasamy, DG(RD) & SS
3. Shri Vijay Chhibber, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Shri Arvind Kumar, Sr. Adviser
5. Shri Raghav Chandra, Joint Secretary (Highways)
6. Shri Nitin R. Gokarn, Joint Secretary (T)
7. Shri R.K. Pandey, Chief Engineer (Planning)
8. Shri A.K. Shrivastava, Chief Engineer (PIC)
9. Shri Puneet Kumar, Director (H)
10. Shri N.K. Sharma, Director
11. Shri Sudip Choudhary, Superintending Engineer
12. Shri V . Krishnaswamy, Deputy Secretary
National Highways  A uthority of India (NHAI)
13. Shri Rajiv Yadav, Member (A)
14. Dr. J.N. Singh, Member (F)
15. Shri V .L. Patankar, Member (T)
16. Shri R.P. Khandelwal, CGM(Road Safety)
Legislative Department
17. Shrimati Sharda Jain, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
18. Shri Chandarveer, Deputy Legislative Counsel
19. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and briefed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e taking oral evidence on the (i) * and (ii) National Highways
Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The Committee thereafter considered the National Highways Authority of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2011, referred to the Committee for examination and report. The Committee desired to know
*** Relate with other matters.

17
the reasons for inducting more Members (from professionals category) in the NHAI Board without
giving required autonomy to National Highways Authority of India. The Committee wanted to know
as to how the induction of additional Members in the Board was going to expedite the projects of
NHAI. The issue relating to filling the post of Chairman, National Highways Authority of India that
was lying vacant for more than one year, was also raised. Clarifications regarding the selection
procedure of Board members – part and full time, and their role in decision making were also
sought. Members expressed several apprehensions and raised queries regarding relaxation in the
qualification/experience for NHAI Chairman, particularly the inclusion of Additional Secretary level
officers and the persons from private sector.
9. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways while replying to the queries
raised by the Committee sought to justify the need for amendment in the NHAI Act. He argued
that the induction of professionals in NHAI Board was required mainly due to expansion of its core
activities manifold since its inception. He assured the Committee that appointment of Chairman
NHAI will be completed very shortly.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 6.05 
P.M.

18
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 13 th March, 2012 in Room No. 62, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Narendra Kashyap
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
5. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Hassan Khan
9. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
10. Shrimati Ranee Narah
11. Shri Rajaram Pal
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, he
introduced the newly nominated Member of the Committee, Shri Subrata Bakshi, Member of Lok
Sabha and Members of the Committee welcomed him.
18

19
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 173 rd Report on the “National Highways
Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2011”. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the
Report.
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report in the current budget session. The
Committee authorized its Chairman to nominate the Members of the Committee and fix the date for
presentation of the Report to the Parliament.
5. The meeting then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.