 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA       164 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 
 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1-19 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE ............................................ 20-22 
5. M INUTES ......................................................................................................................... 23-26 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2010-2011)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 4.  Shri Narendra Kashyap 
 5.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8.  Shri Satish Sharma 
 9.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12.  Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13.  Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo  
 14.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 15.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 16.  Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq 
 23.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25.  Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29.  Shri Kabir Suman 
 30.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31.  Shri K. C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 

 
INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultu re, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present on its behal f, do hereby present this One Hundred Sixty Fourth Report on “Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Obse rvations of the Committee contained in its One Hund red Fifty Sixth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Shipping”. 
2.   The One Hundred Fifty Sixth Report of the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 20th April, 2010. 
3.   The Action Taken Replies on the recommendation s of the Committee contained on its One Hundred Fif ty Sixth Report 
were received from the Ministry of Shipping on the 23rd November, 2010. 
4.   The Committee considered and adopted the Repor t at its meeting held on the 20th December, 2010. 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
December  20, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Agrahayana 29 , 1932 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendat ion as 
contained in its One Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report  on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of  Shipping, which was 
presented to the Parliament on 22nd April, 2010. 
2.  Action Taken replies were received from the Gov ernment on 23rd November, 2010, in respect of all t he 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The Replies have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations/observations that have been ac cepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos. 56 and 63 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies: 
 Para Nos. 8,44,88, 95 and 96 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not been accepte d by the 
Committee: 
 Para Nos. 15,16,28,29,30 and 36 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 Para Nos. 7,9,17,22,27,36,72,78, 79, 80, 83, 87, 8 9, 91 and 94  
Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012)  
3.  The Committee notes that the shipping sector pl ays an important role in India’s economy. Almost 90 % of the country’s 
trade by volume is conducted via  sea and the country boasts of having the largest merchant shipping fleet among the developing 
nations. The Indian shipping industry not only tran sports national and international cargos, but also provides various other 
facilities such as ship-building, ship-repairing, lighthouse facilities, freight forwarding, etc. however, certain core problems such 
as Port congestion and lack of depth in channels are plaguing the shipping industry. 
(Recommendations at Para 7 of the 156th Report) 
Reply of the Government  
4. Congestion is a major problem being faced by por ts due to various reasons like lack of capacity vis-a-vis  traffic, manual 
handling of cargo, slow evacuation, etc. To overcom e this problem ports have been asked to go for mech anization of cargo 
handling in big way. Almost all the ports have emba rked upon the mechanization projects at berths and terminals for handling 
dry bulk cargo, general cargo, etc. KoPT and Paradip have implemented mechanization at some of their berths during 2009. The 
Ports have also opted for PPP mode for mechanization to get latest technology. Further, Ports have been asked to implement the 
recommendation of Committee on Infrastructure that recommended four lane road connectivity and double lane rail 
connectivity from port to nearest National Highway and Railway grid. These projects are envisaged for Paradip, EPL, Chennai, 
JNPT, Mumbai, etc. 
5. Further, the ports have been implementing the El ectronic Data Interchange for Port Community System (EDIPCS) system 
and their web-enabled portal which will help in reducing the turnaround of vessels. 
6. As regard congestion at the Major Ports, with th e present trend of increase in the size of the vess el coupled with the need 
to have economy of scales, there is apparent need f or increasing the draft for the major ports at bert h, basin and approach 
channel. The National Maritime Development Programm e (NMDP) envisaged a draft of 13 to 14 mt or more f or 
accommodating large scale vessels especially when n eighbouring transshipment ports at Colombo and Sing apore have been 
maintaining 16m drafts. In NMDP 25 projects are mea nt for deepening the channel and berths envisaging total investment of 
Rs. 6304 crore. Keeping in view the importance of s uch projects, Govt. budgetary support was also prov ided for some of the 
important projects in Tuticorin Port and Cochin Por t. The latter is developing a deep draft Internatio nal Transshipment 
Container Terminal (ICTT) at Vallarpadam. The Minis try has asked all the ports to take up projects for  deepening of channels 
and the ports are implementing it as per their traf fic forecast and business plans. Several capital dr edging projects are being 

taken up at Cochin, Port Trust, Jawaharlal Nehru Po rt Trust, Mumbai Port Trust, Visakhapatnam Port Tru st, New Mangalore 
Port Trust, etc. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
7. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry . The Committee is also of the view that the lower draft, in-
sufficient cargo handling capacity, inadequate road  and rail connectivity, etc. are the major problems  faced by almost 
all of our Major Ports. As regards deepening of cha nnels, the Dredging Corporation of India some how h as not been 
able to deliver the works in time. All these factor s lead to higher operational costs thereby reducing  the competitiveness 
of the Major Ports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make efforts so that the targets set 
under NMDP are achieved.  
8. The Committee notes that the Working Group const ituted for Eleventh Plan had recommended an outlay of Rs.7689 
crores as GBS for Shipping and IWT Sector but the P lanning Commission restricted it to Rs.130 1 crore only. The Committee, 
in view of the increasing share of shipping sector in Indian trade, feels that the current level of al locations is highly inadequate 
and it will curtail the growth of shipping and IWT. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India should 
increase the allocation for both shipping a well as port sector for the remaining plan period. The Ministry of Shipping, therefore, 
should also come forward with proposals for develop ment and the Planning Commission should allocate th e funds for the 
purpose. 
      (Para 8 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
9. In the Revised Estimates for the year 2010-11, t he enhanced allocation for IWT sector has been proj ected and Planning 
Commission has separately been requested to allocate enhanced outlay for development of National Waterways 1 & 3. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
10.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry would be allocated the enhanced 
outlay for development of National Waterways 1 & 3. 
11.  The Committee emphasizes the need for strength ening the shipping sector to take up the demands gr anted by the 
globalization and liberalization. The Indian shippi ng industry must acquire new heights in terms of de mand and infrastructure 
development. 
      (Para 9 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
12.  The observations/recommendations of the Hon’bl e Committee have been noted. Ministry of Finance is  separately been 
asked to grant infrastructure status to Indian shipping & shipbuilding industry. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
13.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance wi ll look into granting the infrastructure status to Shipping 
Sector and it recommends that the Ministry of Shipp ing should pursue the matter to achieve the result in a time bound 
manner. The action taken in this regard and the results achieved may please be communicated to the Committee. 
Analysis of Annual Plan 2010-11  
14.  The Committee notes that one of the reasons fo r the under utilization of the allocation during 20 09-10 is a general cut in 
expenditure introduced as a result of fiscal restri ctions. The Committee strongly disapproves the across the board imposition of 
fiscal restrictions without taking into account the  relative merit and importance of the schemes/proje cts for our economy. The 
Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping may take up the matter with Planning Commission for a r eview and not 
apply such general restrictions on Shipping & Port Sectors that play major role in Indian trade. 
      (Para 15 ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
15.  The recommendations of the Committee have been  sent to Planning Commission for compliance. 
16.  The Committee notes that the Ministry of Shipp ing could not utilize even the reduced allocation made at RE stage. Out of 
Rs.1566.33 crore, only an amount of Rs.1110 crore i s likely to be utilized during 2009-10. The Committ ee finds no justifiable 
reason for this. In such a situation, the Ministry of Shipping may not justify any demand for higher a llocation. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry should be proactive and tak e steps in advance to ensure that allocated amount is utilized evenly and 
optimally. 
      (Para 16 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
Shipping Wing  
17.  The Ministry of Shipping (Ports Wing) monitors  the expenditure of funds of the Major Ports and ot her organizations 
under control of this Ministry on Monthly basis. 
18.  In the Annual Plan 2009-10, an outlay of Rs.21 4.50 crores as Plan Fund and Rs.794.40 crores as No n-Plan fund were 
provided for the Shipping/Shipbuilding and IWT Sect or. It will be seen from the statement given below that for the Plan fund 
we have utilized 96.75% of the Revised Estimates an d 107.54% of the Budget Estimates. In the Non Plan side we could, 
however, achieve about 48% of the projected expenditure. For the shipbuilding subsidy to private sector shipyards, we had kept 
the outlay of Rs.370.53 crores against which we cou ld release subsidy of Rs.77.06 crores only primaril y due to the reason that 
shipyards did not submit complete documents and in few other cases, the additional information/clarifi cation sought by the 
Ministry were not provided by them due to which a s ubstantial part of the subsidy could not be utilize d. The details of the 
allocation and utilization is as under: 
Plan Fund:     (Rs. in crores ) 
Sl.No. BE 2009-10 RE 2009-10 Expenditure during the  year  
1. 214.50 238.43 230.67  
Non Plan Fund: 
Sl. No. BE 2009-10 RE 2009-10 Expenditure during th e year  
1. 794.40 662.85 380.85 
  
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
19.  The Committee notes that Ministry of Shipping has s imply forwarded the reply of the Shipping & Port Wi ng as if 
they are separate entities. The Committee desires t hat details may be given separately for funds but t here should be 
coherence as the reply should be for shipping sector as a whole.  
20.  The Committee expresses dismay over non-utilis ation of funds under Ship Building Subsidy Scheme t ill date, though the 
Scheme was discontinued in August, 2007. The reason  given to the Committee was that it being a ‘well d efined’ Scheme with 
‘fairly rigid and detailed requirement’, none of th e applications pertaining to pre-2007 cases were fo und complete, where ‘in 
principle’ approval was given. It appears to the Co mmittee that the Scheme was not structured properly  and had inherent 
complications. It sounds very strange that the requ irement under the scheme were too unrealistic to be  met since 2007. In the 
view of this the Committee recommends the Government to revisit this scheme by taking a practical and holistic View. 
      (Para 17 ibid ) 
 

Reply of the Government  
21.  Government has been operating a shipbuilding s ubsidy scheme for Central Public Sector Shipyards i ntermittently since 
1971 with some gaps and modifications from time to time. Government of India had extended the Shipbuil ding Subsidy 
Scheme, for both export and domestic orders to all the Indian shipyards including private sector shipy ards with the approval of 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs on 25.10.2002. 
22.  In case of Public Sector shipyards, subsidy is  payable on stage payments received by the shipyard . In case of Private 
Sector Shipyards, subsidy is payable after the deli very of the vessel. This Scheme was applicable up t o 14th August 2007. 
However, in principle approval could not be granted to some of the shipyards due to want of requisite documents/clarifications. 
23.  Since the scheme expired on 14th August, 2007,  a decision was taken in the Ministry to await revi val of the shipbuilding 
subsidy scheme to process cases for in principle ap proval. Thereafter, the Cabinet Committee on Econom ic Affairs in the 
meeting held on 26th February, 2009 has decided to liquidate the liability for payment of subsidy for ongoing shipbuilding 
contracts entered upto 14th August, 2007, the date of expiry of the subsidy scheme. In principle appro vals and payment of 
subsidy has resumed after the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. 
24.  It may be mentioned that after the expiry of t he Scheme in 2007 and after the decision of the Cab inet Committee on 
Economic Affairs in February, 2009, this Ministry h as issued modified guidelines dated 25th March, 200 9 and thereafter 
revised guidelines on 29th September, 2009. In prin ciple approvals have been granted to the shipyards fulfilling the eligibility 
criteria as per the guidelines issued by the Ministry from time to time. 
25.  So far this Ministry has issued in principle a pproval in 42 cases from the date of issue of modif ied guidelines dated 25th 
March, 2009 after CCEA approval till date and has a lso released subsidy in cases where shipyards have submitted the requisite 
documents. 
26.  It may be mentioned that the requirement of th e documents as per the guidelines are in order to ensure the genuineness of 
the claims by the shipyards. However, in order to a ssist the shipyards in submission of the documents where the claims are 
genuine, the Ministry has been issuing further instructions from time to time. 
27.  The details of amount of subsidy released to C entral PSU Shipyards, Non-Central PSU and Private Sector Shipyards from 
2007-2008 to 2010-2011 (upto 30.4.2010) is as follows: 
110- Central PSU Shipyards 
Year Amount of Subsidy 
 (Rs. in crores) 
2007-08 162.23 
2008-09 131.71 
2009-10 103.02 
2010-11 (upto 30.4.2010) Nil 
Total 396.96 
 
 
 
 
 

110- Non-Central PSU and Private Sector Shipyards 
Year Amount of Subsidy 
 (Rs. in crores) 
2007-08 27.01 
2008-09 Nil 
2009-10 77.05 
2010-11 (upto 30.4.2010) 6.37 
Total 110.43 
  
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
28.  The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the grant of subsidy, unit-wise both for the PSU and for the 
non-PSU shipyards during the above period, and also  whether any further suggestions have been received  from the 
beneficiaries to the revised scheme. 
Port Sector  
29.  The Committee finds that the total allocation for ports sector during 2009-10 under both plan and non-plan was Rs.700.03 
crore. Out of this amount, Rs.279.l1 crore only the  Ministry was able to utilize up to February, 2010 which is close to 40 % of 
the total allocation. This slow pace of programme i mplementation is a matter of serious concern. Alrea dy our port carriage is 
negligible compared to the global capacity. Time bo und completion of projects not only controls cost e scalations but also the 
revenue earning directly and indirectly as a result  of increased imports and exports. The Committee th erefore recommends that 
the Ministry should have a clear picture of the pro grammes to be implemented during the financial year  with the allocated 
grants. 
      (Para 22 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
30.  In the year 2009-10, an expenditure of Rs. 275 .51 crore out of total allocation of Rs. 385.50 cro re as GBS has been 
utilized. The percentage of expenditure is 71.46. S imilarly, an amount of Rs. 325.23 crore out of tota l allocation of Rs. 529.21 
crore in the year 2009-10 (Non-Plan) has been utili zed. The percentage of expenditure is 61.45. For Se thusamudram Ship 
Channel Project, an outlay of Rs. 151.10 crore was kept in the year 2009-10. Due to non-approval of Revised Cost Estimates of 
the project and also order of Hon’ble Supreme Court  for suspension of Work not a single paisa was incu rred in the year. This 
was the main reason for incurring less expenditure in the year 2009-10. . 
31.  In the year 2010-11, an outlay of Rs. 388.48 c rore as GBS has been allocated for Port Sector. The  main allocation has 
been made for Capital Dredging Projects of Cochin a nd Tuticorin Ports. Besides this, allocation has al so been made for Post 
Tsunami Works, Various Studies, IT for Department o f Shipping and purchase of Survey Vessels etc. Simi larly, an amount of 
Rs. 535.58 crore has been kept in Non-Plan Budget f or the year 2010-11. The main allocation has been m ade for Maintenance 
Dredging Project in Haldia and Kolkata Port Trust, ALHW (Estt.), Major Works of ALHW and Tariff Regula tory Authority of 
Major Ports. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
32.  The Committee notes that despite the efforts made b y the Ministry, they have only 71.46% out of the to tal 
allocations which was to be spent. At the same time , various projects are lagging behind due to shorta ge of funds and 
such a situation is a matter of great concern. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all out effort be made for the 
maximum utilization of funds.  

Ports-Major and Minor  
33.  The Committee is of the view that the ports pl ay a major role in the economic development of the country. The 
Committee, however, notes that the major ports of the country are already facing stiff competition from the ports of neighboring 
countries particularly from Srilanka and Singapore. Now, development of private and minor ports are ta king away the business 
of Major ports. This according to the Committee is clear reflection of the manner in which the Governm ent are handling the 
affairs of the Major Ports, wherein the crore of ru pees of tax payers have been invested. The Committe e recommends that the 
Government should ensure level-playing field for the Major Ports so that they can perform and compete with private and minor 
ports, In this connection the Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendations contained in its 134 th  report which is 
reproduced as below:- 
“The Committee notes that the Department of Shippin g is in process of formulating a Maritime Policy fo r the maritime 
sector which seeks to ensure a coordinated developm ent of Ports, Shipping, Inland Water Transports, Sh ip building and 
Ship repairing with the objective to upgrade and mo dernize the port infrastructure in India to benchma rk its performance 
against global standards. The Committee also gather ed from the replies that the regulatory authority w ill be set up at an 
appropriate time. The Committee observes that since much of the activities in the port sector are taking place with private 
participation there is need to establish regulatory authority well in time and that too before coming across any problem for 
better control, coordination and monitoring for ach ieving excellence in the port and shipping sector b esides addressing 
serious security implications. The Department to ta ke steps for setting up of a regulatory on the patt ern of Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (ARDA) for creating a level 
playing field and foster healthy competition and to  encourage investments for the shipping and port se ctor besides 
monitoring performance standards and adjudication of disputes and disposal of appeal thereof.” 
      (Para 27 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
34.  This para makes the following recommendations:  (A) “Government should ensure level playing field for the Major Ports 
so that they can perform and compete with the private and minor ports...” 
35.  It may be mentioned that private ports are und er the jurisdiction of respective State Government and are beyond the 
jurisdiction of the Tariff Authority for Major Port s (TAMP). However, within the policy framework-atte mpts are made to 
encourage the ports for increasing the operational efficiencies and make use of economies of scale. The Ministry has also made 
efforts to simplify the procedures for approval of various projects of Ports on Public Private Partner ship (PPP) basis. Recently, 
the Ministry has removed the cap for short-listing the bidders at Request for Qualification (RFQ) stag e for increased 
participation. Further, the Ministry of Finance has  also delegated more powers to the Administrative M inistries for giving 
approvals for the project. Now, projects up to Rs.3 00 crores need not be sent to the Cabinet for appro val. All this will lead to 
speedier implementation of the projects in major po rts. Separately, a high level committee has made ce rtain recommendations 
for increasing the port efficiency and the policy reviewed for major ports. . 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
36.  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the opinion that in view of increasing number of pr ivate 
ports, the performance of the PSU ports needs to be looked into and necessary support be provided. The Committee may 
be informed about the recommendations of the high l evel committee for increasing port efficiency and t he action taken 
by the Government thereon.  
37.  The Committee appreciates the performance of m inor ports, whose cargo handling has grown up from mere 5 per cent in 
1999 to 35 per cent of total cargo handling in 2009 . This only implies that Government’s policy has no t allowed major ports to 
grow and therefore, is losing business. The Governm ent themselves admitted that minor ports offer bett er facilities, cargo 
clearance and other formalities in a hassle free manner. 
      (Para 28 ibid ) 
 

Reply of the Government  
38.  Since several Non-Major ports have come up alo ng the coastline with private investment, traffic h andled at these ports 
has also increased. These ports are under the jurisdiction of the respective State Governments, as per the Indian Ports Act 1908. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
39.  The Committee is of the view that the rate of cargo  handling capacity growth is far greater in the cas e of private 
ports than that of Major Ports. The Major Ports should get adequate attention and policy support from the Government 
to improve their efficiency and competency.  
40.  The Committee is of the view that this is high  time when the ports within the country both major & private should be 
developed in an integrated manner so that they can unitedly compete with the port of neighbouring countries. 
      (Para 29 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
41.  For a better understanding and coordinated dev elopment of Non-Major ports along with major ports,  Maritime State 
Development Council (MSDC) is functional. Ministry of Shipping holds meetings every year in which the representatives of 
Major Ports as well as State Governments participat e and exchange their views. Based on discussions he ld at various meetings 
of Maritime States Development Council (MSDC), several steps have been taken for integrated. development of port’s capacity. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
42.  The Committee desires to know the major decisions a rrived at and executed by the MSDC. Lack of adequat e and 
effective coordination between the State Sector Por ts and Major Ports is conspicuous. The Committee fe els that only 
through a co-ordinated and prompt action, the port sector could sustain in this era of globalization a nd privatization 
and efforts may be made in this direction.  
43.  It was brought to the notice of the Committee that some major countries give exclusive coastal sh ipping rights to their 
vessels. The committee, therefore, recommends that while considering the demand of the foreign vessels for cargo shipping the 
interests of the Indian vessels and Indian Shipping Industry should be fully protected. 
      (Para 30 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
44.  The observations/recommendations of the Hon’bl e Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
45.  The Committee is at dismay to note that the Ministr y has not given any concrete steps to protect the I ndian 
Shipping Industry. The Committee, therefore, reiter ates recommendation that while considering the dema nd of foreign 
vessels for cargo shipping, the interests of the Indian Shipping Industry should be fully protected. 
International Container Transhipment Terminal (ICTT)  
46.  The Committee is of the view that the Internat ional Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) Project is one of its kind in 
the world and it would not only boost the maritime position of India, the cargo handling capacity of t he country will also 
increase considerably, once the project was fully o perationalised. The Committee is, however, concerned to note the slow pace 
of work of the Vallarpadam transshipment terminal. The Committee notes that the commissioning of the ICTT has been delayed 
due to one reason or other. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping should prevail upon their own contractors 
and coordinate with concerned Government agencies like NHAI to ensure that all the necessary facilities are constructed in time 
for the operationalization of the ICTT, with utmost priority. 
      (Para 36 ibid ) 
 
 

Reply of the Government  
47.  The Ministry of Shipping has been vigorously m onitoring the Project regularly. With regard to sup porting infrastructure 
projects of the ICTT Project i.e.  Rail connectivity, road connectivity and capital d redging, the progress is being regularly being 
monitored by the Ministry. Secretary (Shipping) has reviewed the project with the Chairman of Cochin P ort and the officials of 
the various agencies concerned. The Ministry has ta ken up the matter w.r.t.  road connectivity with Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways under whose administrative control NHA I functions. NHAI has undertaken the work on deposi t basis. It is 
expected that two way lane connectivity would be fully operational by October, 2010. The work of rail connectivity project has 
been completed and it is ready for operationalization. For the project of Capital Dredging, sufficient funds are being provided to 
the port. In the current year also an outlay of Rs.  237.97 crore has been allocated. It is expected th at operation of ICTT would 
commence in October, 2010. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
48.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and likes to point out a discrepancy in the reply furnished by 
the Ministry about the operational Date of the ICTT  being October, 2010 while the reply was submitted to the 
Committee on 22nd November, 2010. It seems the Ministry is not aware of the ground realities and is not sure whether it 
is operationalised or not. The Committee may be inf ormed about the latest status of operationalisation  of various 
projects at ICTT. 
Shipping Corporation of India (SCI)  
49.  The Committee is happy to know that the impact  of global recession has started diminishing and the global economy is on 
revival path. The Committee recommends that SCI should review its planned activities and fix the targets accordingly to ensure 
that its profit is increased. The Committee notes that for the year 2010-2011, an amount of Rs. 2921.37 crore has been provided 
for vessels on firm order and an amount of Rs. 1064  crore has been provided for new projects of acquis ition of vessels and 
investment in joint ventures. The Committee hopes t hat the SCI would make all out efforts to utilize t he amount optimally and 
implement its programmes to acquire more vessels, without further loss of time.   
      (Para 46 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
50.  While SCI is already in the market for acquiri ng second hand resale vessels to get benefit of the  lower prices in view of 
recent stabilizing of the market. SCI has initiated  its new building vessels acquisition proposals als o. In this respect SCI has 
already floated separate tenders for acquisition of  2+2 very large crude carriers and 4 Nos. Karnsarma x Bulk Carriers. These 
tenders are in addition to the tenders floated for second hand/resale superamax bulk carriers and container vessels. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
51.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Min istry. 
Requirement of Cargo Ships and Oil Tankers  
52.  The Committee observes that there is a shortfa ll of 96.3% and 83.6% in the carriage of cargo capa city and carriage of 
POL/Liquid cargo capacity respectively. Presently, the foreign vessels are enjoying almost 90% of Indi an Cargo business. The 
Committee observes that quite a large number of cargo vessels are more than 25 years old and that dry cargo like iron ore which 
is a major component of die Indian export could not  be carried by these old vessels. The Committee is of the view that if the 
steps are not taken to augment the fleet capacity in general cargo/container segment and tanker tonnage, the carriage capacity of 
India may further diminish in the coming years. The  Committee, therefore recommends that the Ministry of Shipping should 
prepare concrete plans and arrange for resources to  build/procure more vessels. The Committee notes th at an amount of 
Rs.3985.37 crore has been provided in the budget es timates during 2010-11 for acquisition of vessels b y SCI. The Committee 
hopes that with the acquisition of above ships by the SCI, carriage capacity of Indian shipping sector will get a major boost. 
      (Para 54 ibid ) 
 

Reply of the Government  
53.  SCI is keen to achieve its targets of acquirin g 37 more vessels by the end of 11 th Five Year Pla n which will not only 
boost SCI’s tonnage and market share but will also improve the share of Indian lines in carriage of India’s Overseas trade. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
54.  The Committee notes the reply and would like t o emphasize the need for expediting the vessel acquisition.  
Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships (DGLL)  
55.  The Committee noted the activities carried out  by DGLL. The Committee observes that the pattern of spending during the 
previous years are not up to the mark. The Committe e hopes Ministry of Shipping will keep check to ens ure timely 
implementation of the plans by the Directorate General of Lighthouses & Lightships (DGLL). 
      (Para 56 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
56.  In the Annual Plan 2009-10 an outlay of Rs.40. 00 crores as GBS had been provided to DGLL out of w hich the 
Directorate has utilized Rs.37.52 crores. The remaining amount could not be utilized because environment clearance in some of 
the projects was not received. Similarly, in the An nual Plan 2010-11 an outlay of Rs.60 crores has bee n provided out of which 
the Directorate has utilized 6.89 crore in the firs t month of the Annual Plan itself. The observations  of Committee has however 
been noted and implementation schedule will henceforth be monitored periodically. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
57.  The Committee notes the reply and emphasizes the ne ed for obtaining whatever clearances are required f or a 
project before making budgetary provisions to such projects. 
Indian Maritime University  
58.  The Committee notes that the Indian Maritime U niversity was set up on 14th November, 2008 in Chen nai. IMU is the 
first and only Maritime University in the country. The Committee, however, notes an apparent lack of s incerity on the part of 
the Government in expediting the establishment of t he University. It is evident from the fact that for  want of approval and 
clearances from the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and Cabinet Committee on economic Affairs (CCEA), an amount of 
Rs.53 .80 crore allocated in BE 2009-10 was reduced  to Rs.5.53 crore at the RE stage. The Committee ho pes that the 
Government will accept the demand of a sum of Rs. 2 82 crore required for over a period of time for the  development of 
infrastructure. The university has the Headquarters  in Chennai and the headquarters building and the c ampus have to be 
developed. Another new campus is coming up in Cochi n apart from other campuses in Kolkata, Mumbai and Visakhapatnam. 
Additional classrooms and hostel facilities also need to be developed for implementing the OBC reservation in these campuses. 
Apart from that, the new courses are also being int roduced and so, the allocation demanded is for capi tal expenditure. The 
Committee is also aware of the fact that there is a  great shortage of trained and skilled manpower in maritime sector. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make all possible efforts to start new cou rses and augment the 
number of students intake in the premier marine institutes. The Committee strongly recommends that adequate additional grants 
may be given for the above programmes. 
      (Para 63 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
59. The Government has established Indian Maritime University (IMU) on 14/11/2008 in Chennai with campuses at Chennai, 
Kolkata, Mumbai and Visakhapatnam as a Central Univ ersity through IMU Act, 2008 (22 of 2008). The Expe nditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) has approved the proposal on 20/1/2 010 and Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA ) has also 
approved on 8/4/2010 to provide total financial sup port of Rs. 282.25 crore. This includes Rs. 275.33 crore for capital 
expenditure viz . New Capital works, maintenance and renovation, an d for implementing other backward Classes (OBC) 
reservations and Rs. 6.92 crore for meeting the recurring deficit. 

60.  Keeping in view statutory requirement for impl ementing OBC reservation and executing other Capita l Work, the 
Government have provided Plan support of Rs. 58.75 crore to lMU during the year 2009-2010. The year-wise position of funds 
released/to be released and planned for ensuing years is as under:- 
10th Five  11th Five     12th   Total 
Year Plan  Year Plan    Five Year Plan   
2006-07 2007 -08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 20 12-13 2013-14  
21.00 14.00 Nil 58.75 40.00 55.00 60.00 33.50 282.2 5 
    (to be 
released) 
    
  
61.  During the year 2009-10 the IMU has started B. Tech in Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering, B .E(Marine 
Engineering/Marine Technology), MBA in Port and Shipping Management, MBA in International Transportation and Logistics 
and P.G. Diploma in Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering. Plans for introducing more courses are under formulation. Due 
to introduction of more courses in phased manner the total intake of 143 new students in 2009-10 will become 746 in 2013-14. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
62.  The Committee is of the opinion that keeping in vie w the various deficiencies pointed out to the Commi ttee from 
time to time, further planning for expansion of the university need to be relooked and operationalized. 
Inland Waterways Authority of India  
63.  The Committee notes that an allocation of mere  Rs.115 crore has been made for the IWAI for the ye ar 2010-11. The 
Committee is of the view that the amount is inadequ ate even to meet the maintenance of the existing op erational waterways. 
Since this allocation was not sufficient even for o ngoing projects of National Waterways 1, 2 & 3, eff ectively no fund will be 
available for the new National Waterways, except token provision of Rs. 1 crore each for NW 4 & 5. The Committee also notes 
the facts presented by the Ministry that the total cost of development of National Waterway 4 is of th e order of Rs. 1500 crore 
and that of National Waterway 5 is of the order of Rs. 4200 crore. If both these projects were to be completed in a period of 5-8 
years, it is estimated that Rs.5700 crore would be required for taking up development of these two wat erways. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Planning Commission to pr ovide this amount during remaining two years of the  11th Plan and the 
12th Plan. It need to give required priority/import ance to the development of National Waterways. Dema nds and proposals 
made by the Ministry of Shipping for development of  waterways need to be taken more seriously and maki ng a drastic cut on 
the fund projected by the Ministry should be avoided. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping should take up 
the matter with the Ministry of Finance and the Pla nning Commission for increased allocation for the d evelopment of National 
Waterways. 
      (Para 72 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
64.  The observations and recommendations of the Ho n’ble Committee are noted for compliance. The matter has already been 
taken up with Planning Commission at the highest level in March, 2010 for allocation of Rs.500 crore for development of these 
two newly declared National waterways so that activities could be initiated during the 11th Plan period. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
65.  The Committee may be informed about the progre ss made in this regard. 
Central Inland Waterways Transport Corporation (CIWTC)  
66.  The Committee is constrained to note that desp ite being recommended a number of times, the Govern ment has not been 
able to come up with a package for the revival of C IWTC. In this connection, the Committee would like to invite the attention 

of the Government to the recommendations of the Committee contained in 117th Report on Demands for Grants, 2007-08 of the 
Ministry of Shipping which is reproduced below:- 
“The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of its recommendation in the past, the Government h as not come out 
with a complete blueprint for making full use of the existing assets of River Service Division (RSD). The Committee is of 
the opinion that CIWTC with its infrastructure and expertise can play an integral part for development  and promotion of 
inland water transport through NW-I and NW-II. The Committee recommends that possibility may also be e xplored to 
physically amalgamate the remaining CIWTC with Inla nd Water Transport Authority of India (IWAI) or Kol kata Port 
Trust (KoPT) or Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) , so that the infrastructure and expertise of CIWTC  can be utilized 
for development of waterways transport.” 
67. The Committee would like to reiterate its earli er recommendation contained in its 134th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Shipping which is reproduced below:- 
“The Committee is pained to note that the Governmen t has decided neither to consider revival of CIWTC nor to 
amalgamate this Corporation with various Organizati ons, such as Inland Waterways Authority of India (I WAI), Kolkata 
Port Trust (KoPT) or Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) that too, without getting conducted any scien tific study by an 
expert agency. The Committee is of the view that th e matter of revival and amalgamation of CIWTC shoul d be got 
examined by some high powered expert committee.” 
68.  The Committee recommends that in a democratic welfare State, interest of employees and their live lihood must find 
uppermost consideration, while taking a decision which is adversely affecting them. Before taking fina l decision with regard to 
the viability of CIWTC the Committee again recommen ds that the matter may be got examined by a high po wer expert 
Committee and job security and livelihood of the employees must be ensured.   
      (Paras 78, 79 & 80 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
69.  A Committee is being set up in the Ministry to  examine the matter. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
70.  The Committee may be informed about the composition  of the committee formulated for the purpose, its t erms of 
reference and the targeted date for its submission of recommendations. The recommendation of the committee may also 
be submitted to the Committee. 
Taxation and Tax Reliefs  
71.  The Committee feels that the port and shipping  sector of the country had not received the attenti on in the Union Budget 
2010-11 that it surely deserves. No incentives, con cessions, tax relief etc. to the Ports and Dredging  Sectors or to the Shipping 
Industry has been announced. The Committee is of th e view that extending the infrastructure status to the shipping sector will 
make them also accessible to some of the tax exempt ions and subsidies as enjoyed by other agencies which will give a boost to 
the shipping industry. The other demands raised by the Ministry are also hold ground and accepting them is necessary to attract 
investment in the shipping sector. Cruise shipping is a long pending demand in the tourism sector and tax exemptions really will 
be a welcome step. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends that the above demands may further be pursued with the Finance 
Ministry to get positive results. 
      (Para 83 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
72.  In the Budget Memorandum dated 4.12.2009 we ha d requested Finance Ministry that certain long pend ing tax related 
issues need to be addressed so that level playing f ield is available to Indian Shipping Industry. Thes e demands included (i) 
Exemption from payment of Minimum Alternative Tax ( MAT) on profit on Sale of Vessels (ii) Exemption fr om Corporate 
Income Tax on Interest Income on funds deployed out of tonnage tax reserve (iii) Exemption of Indian Seafarers from payment 

of Income Tax (iv) Exemption for Major Ports from p ayment of Income Tax (v) Exemption of Cruise Shippi ng from the net of 
service tax and custom duty on bunkering (vi) Exemption of Dredging activities from the net of service tax.  
73.  Further to above, an another letter dated 12.2 .2010 was sent to Finance Ministry with the request that certain issues which 
are adversely effecting the growth of Indian Shippi ng Industry may be considered for inclusion in the Union Budget. These 
were: (i) Removal of Service Tax on Dredging (ii) R ail Road connectivity for Ports (iii) Inclusion of profit on sale of vessels 
within tonnage tax regime (iv) Inclusion of interes t income on funds deployed out of tonnage tax reser ve within tonnage tax 
regime (v) Grant of infrastructure status to shippi ng and shipbuilding industry and (vi) providing dut y free bunkers for coastal 
shipping. 
74.  Although, none of the above demand of the ship ping industry has been addressed in the Union Budge t 2010-11 but this 
Ministry continues its efforts to convince Ministry  of Finance for redressal of above long pending dem and of the shipping 
industry. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
75.  The Committee would like to see response of the Min istry of Finance to these demands. Therefore, the c omments 
of the Ministry of Finance on the proposals of the Ministry of Shipping may be furnished to the Committee. 
Safety Measures for Ships  
76.  The Committee feels that safety and security o f the seafaring vessels need to be given paramount importance, especially 
in view of the increasing piracy and theft of cargo . This also has relevance in view of the increased threat from terrorists who 
are active in our neighbouring seas. The Committee,  is however constrained to note that an amount of R s. 48.96 crore which 
had to be reduced to Rs. 12 crore at RE stage for w ant of utilization of funds by the Ministry of Defe nce. The Committee also 
notes that no justification has been given for not accepting the demand of Ministry of Defence for Rs.  100 crore for the survey 
vessels. The Committee would like to have an explan ation in the matter. The Committee is of the view t hat the action of the 
Government to reduce allocation to Rs. 15 crore for  safety and security of the vessels is a retrograde  step. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Shipping may be pro vided with adequate fund at the RE stage to meet th e actual threat and 
challenges in this regard. 
      (Para 87 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
77.  The final allocation of Rs. 15 crore for BE 20 09-10 was made by the Ministry of Finance. However,  based on the 
recommendation of 156th Parliamentary Standing Committee to provide more fund at RE stage, a provision  of Rs. 10 crores of 
additional allocation was made in the RE of 2009-10 on the request of Ministry of Defence, but the entire additional fund of Rs. 
10 crores lapsed by the end of Financial Year 2009- 10 because Ministry of Defence did not send their request for release of the 
amount despite repeated intimation to them for sending their proposal for the same. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
78.  The Committee is surprised to know that Ministry of  Defence did not respond despite repeated requests from the 
Ministry of Shipping. As a result the amount lapsed . The Committee would like to know the reasons from  the Ministry 
of Defence.  
79.  The Committee also opines that in the recent t imes, the shipping industry is facing an increased challenge from piracy and 
sea robbery. This is great threat to maritime navig ation resulting in cargo loss, man power loss and i ncreased operational costs. 
There should be some strong measures to save the cargo ships and sea men from such anti pirates. Keeping in view of the above 
facts the Committee strongly is of the views that lack of funds should not be a problem in this regard the allocation may be kept 
with an open mind because the safety and security of the ships and the persons who are working in it are of utmost importance. 
      (Para 88 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  

80.  Indian Navy has deployed one warship since Oct ober, 2008 to patrol the Maritime Security Area in the Gulf of Aden. 
Indian ships along with foreign ships with Indian S eamen are informed to take advantage of the presenc e of the warship. India 
is also actively participating in the meetings of t he UN-supported Contact Group on piracy which consi sts of five international 
organization, viz . African Union, EU, NATO, UN Sectt. and IMO and 22  countries who have an interest in protecting the GOA 
Sea link. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
81. The committee appreciates the steps taken by the Go vernment and recommends that we should be contently  vigil 
against piracy. 
Dreding of the Hooghly River System  
82.  The Committee notes that the Kolkata Port was incurring revenue losses mainly due to drop in dept h of the navigation 
channel that prevents large ships from venturing in to the Haldia dock. Due to decline in traffic movem ent, the earnings of the 
dock have reduced significantly. Considering that t he Kolkata Port is one of the major ports of the co untry, the situation 
prevailing is not at all healthy for the sector. 
      (Para 89 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
83.  The depth in the Haldia channel has been deter iorating gradually for the last few years. Though l arger ships are regularly 
entering the Haldia Dock, parcel load of cargo has reduced due to reduction in the navigable depth. 
84.  It is a fact that due to decline in traffic mo vement, the earning of the dock has reduced signifi cantly. The Ministry has 
taken steps to improve the draft situation at KoPT/ HDC. DCI has already been directed to deploy adequa te number of dredgers 
at Kolkata Port Trust/HDC. KoPT has taken various d evelopment projects to overcome the problem caused due to declining of 
draft in Haldia Channel. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
85.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry . The Committee also wanted to know the progress ma de so 
far in the dredging activities and targeted date of completion of the deepening works.  
86.  The Committee notes that dredging of the Hoogh ly river system is very essential for the survival of the Kolkata Port 
system. The Committee also notes that the policy of reimbursement of 100% of the cost of dredging by the Central Government 
has been referred to the Cabinet for a fresh mandate. The Committee recommends that the Central Government should continue 
to reimburse the entire cost of the dredging at Hal dia River system and the related Channels as the Ko lkata Port is not in a 
position to bear the cost.  (Para 91 ibid ) 
 
Reply of the Government  
87.  Recommendation of the Committee accepted for c ompliance subject to Cabinet decision on continuati on of dredging 
subsidy to Kolkata Port Trust. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
88.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry . The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the 
Central Government should continue to reimburse the  entire cost of dredging at Haldia river system and  the related 
channels as the Kolkata port is not in a position to bear the cost. The recommendation of the Committee may be brought 
to the notice of Cabinet and it may be persuaded to  take a favourable decision to continue the 100% re imbursement of 
the dredging cost of Haldia river system and related channels.  
89.  The Committee notes that the warehousing infra structure in respect of Kolkata and Kandla ports is  not able to meet the 
current requirements. Even though other ports have sufficient capacity as on date, keeping in view the  Ministry’s plan to 

enhance the carriage capacity of ports and other measures of port development, once fully operationalised, the required capacity 
may be increased. Therefore, the warehousing infras tructure is also an important field where the Minis try should concentrate 
along with the other capacity augmentation methods. (Para 94 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
Kolkata Port Trust  
90.  The present warehousing facilities both at Kol kata Dock System (KDS) and Haldia Dock Complex (HDC ) are sufficient. 
At HDC, construction of a new warehouse of 5000 Sq.  mtrs. has been started and the same is going to pu t in use from April, 
2011. Continuous upgrading in respect of storage ar ea, roads and other infrastructure inside port acco rding to the trade 
requirement is being made both at KDS and HDC. 
Kandla Port Trust  
91.  Kandla Port is regularly constructing new godo wns and open plots to meet the cargo storage requirements. So far, the port 
has constructed 271 godowns in 121 lakh Sq. mtrs. ( open area). The port has also developed two C.W.C. operated Container 
Freight Stations for storage of cargoes. 
92.  Based on the present traffic levels and the ex pected growth in throughput, it is felt that Kandla  Port is geared to meet not 
only the present traffic levels, but also the additional traffic growth in the coming years. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
93.  The Committee notes the replies given by the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that the storage facilities 
in Major Ports need not only be increased but also to be made more clean and secure as much of the cargo should not be 
in the open for long time.  
94.  The Committee also noted that 25 PPP projects under the National Maritime Development Programme a re going to be 
started during 2010-11. The Committee would like to  know the status of 17 such projects sanctioned dur ing 2009-10 and the 
progress thereof. 
      (Para 95 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
95.  For the year 2010-11, 25 PPP projects are targ eted for award on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT)  basis and some of 
these projects are under NMDP also. Out of the 17 p rojects relating to construction of berths, termina ls etc. that were targeted 
for 2009-10, four projects have been awarded. In ad dition, four projects of mechanization have also be en awarded in 2009-10. 
The remaining projects are scheduled to be awarded in 2010-11. 
96.  The Status in respect of 17 PPP projects sched uled to be awarded in 2009-10 is given below: 
S.No. Project Name Port Name Status 
1 2 3 4 
1 Multi purpose berth at Port Paradip Port Trust Aw arded in July 
 Trust Project-l  2010 
2 Mechanization of Central Paradip Port Trust Award ed in 
 Quay-III Berth  March 2010 
 *Single stage bidding   
3 Installation of Mechanized Visakhapatnam Port Spi ll over to 
 handling facilities for Trust 2010-11 

 fertilizers at EQ 7 in the Inner Harbour   
4 Mechanized Coal handling Visakhapatnam Port Award ed in 
 facilities at General cum Trust March 2010 
 Cargo Berth(GCB) in the Outer 
Harbour 
  
5 Development of Container NMPT  Spill over to 
 Terminal  2010-11 
6 Creation of Mega Container Chennai Spill over to 
 Terminal  2010-11 
7 Installation of Mechanized Visakhapatnam Port Spi ll over to 
 handling facilities at WQ 8 at Trust 2010-11 
 Vizag   
8 Installation of Mechanized Visakhapatnam Port Spi ll over to 
 handling facilities at WQ 7 at Trust 2010-11 
 Vizag   
9 Development of standalone JNPT Spill over to 
 container handling facility  2010-11 
 with a quay length of 330 m   
 North of NSICT Terminal   
10 4 TH  Container Terminal JNPT Spill over to 
   2010-11 
11 Construction of North Cargo Tuticorin Awarded in  Aug. 
 Berth No-II at Tuticorin  2010. 
12 Development of EQ1 in East Visakhapatnam Port Sp ill over to 
 Dock Trust 2010-11 
13 Development of EQI-A in Visakhapatnam Port Spill  over to 
 East Dock at Vizag Trust 2010-11 
14 Development and operation of Mumbai Port Trust S pill over to 
 2 Berth at Indira Dock as dry  2010-11 
 bulk cargo terminal-at   
 Mumbai   

15 Development and operation of  Mumbai Port Trust Spill over to  
 a Berth at Indira Dock as  2010-11 
 conventional cargo terminal at Mumbai   
16 Creation of berthing and allied Kandla Port Trus t Spill over to  
 facilities of Tekkra near Tuna  2010-11 
 (outside Kandla Creek)-Phase-I   
17 Setting up of Single Point Kandla Port Trust Spi ll over to  
 Mooring (SPM) and allied  2010-11 
 facilities off Veera in Gulf of   
 Kutch - Kandla   
Mechanizations PPP projects awarded in 2009-10 
1 Mechanization at HDC berth Kolkata Port Trust Awa rded in April, 
 No.2  2009 
2 Mechanization at HDC berth Kolkata Port Trust Awa rded in April, 
 No.8  2009 
3 Mechanization of Cargo Paradip Port Trust Awarded  in April, 
 Handling Proiect-l  2009. 
4 Mechanization of Cargo Paradip Port Trust Awarded  in April, 
 Handling Project-2  2009 
  
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
97.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry . The Committee hopes that the projects already awa rded 
would be completed in time.  
98.  The Committee also feels that Indian ports nee d to be modernized at the earliest so that with the  arrival of modern 
equipments in the ports, the port capacity will con siderably increase along with increase in cargo mov ements. The Committee 
feels that consequently, the profitability increases and in a phased manner the cargo handling cost fa ctor and the capacity factor 
could be brought at par with the international levels. Thus the problem of poor infrastructure and high levels of manual handling 
of work could be managed in a better way.    
  (Para 96 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
99.  Up-gradation and modernization of port infrast ructure is essential to benchmark the performance o f Indian ports against 
global standards. The Government of India has given the top priority to the Modernization of ports, which is undertaken through 
various expansion/up-gradation projects for berths,  Construction of new berths/terminals, Installation  of new and modem 

equipment, Up-gradation/replacement through higher capacity of cargo handling equipment and Mechanizat ion of cargo 
handling operations.  
100.  Mechanization of cargo handling facilities is  of utmost importance for improving the efficiency of ports. Introduction of 
high capacity mechanized equipments in the form of mobile harbour cranes/floating cranes etc. through the private sector 
participation, with a view to utilizing the latent capacity, as well as for augmenting the cargo handl ing capacity of major ports 
would go a long way in reducing the handling cost o f cargo at the major ports and will also increase t hroughput substantially. 
All Major Ports have, accordingly, taken up and planned several projects for modernization for capacity augmentation. 
Further Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
101.  The Committee noted the reply given by the Ministry . The Committee observes that modernization measures may 
definitely enhance the cargo handling capacity of t he Indian ports however, the pace of the work need to be improved 
considerably.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS-AT  
A GLANCE  
11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012) 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. The Committee is also of the view that the lower  draft, in-
sufficient cargo handling capacity, inadequate road  and rail connectivity, etc. are the major problems  faced by almost 
all of our Major Ports. As regards deepening of cha nnels, the Dredging Corporation of India some how h as not been 
able to deliver the works in time. All these factor s lead to higher operational costs thereby reducing  the competitiveness 
of the Major Ports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make efforts so that the targets set 
under NMDP are achieved.  (Para: 7)  
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y and hopes that the Ministry would be allocated the enhanced 
outlay for development of National Waterways 1 & 3. (Para: 10)  
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance w ill look into granting the infrastructure status to  Shipping 
Sector and it recommends that the Ministry of Shipp ing should pursue the matter to achieve the result in a time bound 
manner. The action taken in this regard and the results achieved may please be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Analysis of Annual Plan 2010-11 
 The Committee notes that Ministry of Shipping has simply forwarded the reply of the Shipping & Port W ing as if 
they are separate entities. The Committee desires t hat details may be given separately for funds but t here should be 
coherence as the reply should be for shipping sector as a whole. (Para: 19)  
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to kn ow the grant of subsidy, unit-wise both for the PSU and for the 
non-PSU shipyards during the above period, and also  whether any further suggestions have been received  from the 
beneficiaries to the revised scheme. (Para: 28)  
Port Sector 
 The Committee notes that despite the efforts made by the Ministry, they have only 71.46% out of the t otal 
allocations which was be spent. At the same time, v arious projects are lagging behind due to shortage of funds and such 
a situation is a matter of great concern. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommends that all out effort be made for the 
maximum utilization of funds. (Para: 32)  
Ports-Major and Minor 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of  the opinion that in view of increasing number of p rivate 
ports, the performance of the PSU ports needs to be looked into and necessary support be provided. The Committee may 
be informed about the recommendations of the high l evel committee for increasing port efficiency and t he action taken 
by the Government thereon. 
      (Para:36)  
 The Committee is of the view that the rate of carg o handling capacity growth is far greater in the ca se of private 
ports than that of Major Ports. The Major Ports should get adequate attention and policy support from the Government 
to improve their efficiency and competency. (Para: 39)  
 The Committee desires to know the major decisions arrived at and executed by the MSDC. Lack of adequa te and 
effective coordination between the State Sector Por ts and Major Ports is conspicuous. The Committee fe els that only 
through a co-ordinated and prompt action, the port sector could sustain in this era of globalization a nd privatization 
and efforts may be made in this direction. (Para: 42)  

 The Committee is at dismay to note that the Minist ry has not given any concrete steps to protect the Indian 
Shipping Industry. The Committee, therefore, reiter ates recommendation that while considering the dema nd of foreign 
vessels for cargo shipping, the interests of the Indian Shipping Industry should be fully protected. (Para: 45)  
International Container Transhipment Terminal (ICTT) 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y and likes to point out a discrepancy in the reply furnished by 
the Ministry about the operational date of the ICTT  being October, 2010 while the reply was submitted to the 
Committee on 22nd November, 2010. It seems the Ministry is not aware of the ground realities and is not sure whether it 
is operationalised or not. The Committee may be inf ormed about the latest status of operationalisation  of various 
projects at ICTT.   (Para: 48)  
Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. (Para: 51)  
Requirement of Cargo Ships and Oil Tankers 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to em phasize the need for expediting the vessel acquisition.  
        (Para: 54)  
Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships (DGLL) 
 The Committee notes the reply and emphasizes the n eed for obtaining whatever clearances are required for a 
project before making budgetary provisions to such projects.  (Para: 57)  
Indian Maritime University 
 The Committee is of the opinion that keeping in vi ew the various deficiencies pointed out to the Comm ittee from 
time to time, further planning for expansion of the university need to be relooked and operationalized.     (Para: 62)  
Inland Waterways Authority of India 
 The Committee may be informed about the progress m ade in this regard.  (Para: 65)  
Central Inland Waterways Transport Corporation (CIWTC) 
 The Committee may be informed about the compositio n of the committee formulated for the purpose, its terms of 
reference and the targeted date for its submission of recommendations. The recommendation of the committee may also 
be submitted to the Committee.  (Para: 70)  
Taxation and Tax Reliefs 
 The Committee would like to see response of the Mi nistry of Finance to these demands. Therefore, the comments 
of the Ministry of Finance on the proposals of the Ministry of Shipping may be furnished to the Committee.  
       (Para: 75)  
Safety Measures for Ships 
 The Committee is surprised to know that Ministry o f Defence did not respond despite repeated requests  from the 
Ministry of Shipping. As a result the amount lapsed . The Committee would like to know the reasons from  the Ministry 
of Defence.      (Para: 78)  
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the G overnment and recommends that we should be contently vigil 
against piracy.     (Para: 81)  
 
 

Dredging of the Hooghly River System 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. The Committee also wanted to know the progress m ade so 
far in the dredging activities and targeted date of completion of the deepening works.    
       (Para: 85)  
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that  the 
Central Government should continue to reimburse the  entire cost of dredging at Haldia river system and  the related 
channels as the Kolkata port is not in a position to bear the cost. The recommendation of the Committee may be brought 
to the notice of Cabinet and it may be persuaded to  take a favourable decision to continue the 100% re imbursement of 
the dredging cost of Haldia river system and related channels.  (Para: 88)  
Kandla Port Trust 
 The Committee notes the replies given by the Minis try. The Committee also recommends that the storage facilities 
in Major Ports need not only be increased but also to be made more clean and secure as much of the cargo should not be 
in the open for long time.   (Para: 93)  
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. The Committee hopes that the projects already aw arded 
would be completed in time .  (Para: 97)  
 The Committee noted the reply given by the Ministr y. The Committee observes that modernization measur es 
may definitely enhance the cargo handling capacity of the Indian ports however, the pace of the work n eed to be 
improved considerably.           (Para: 101) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Monday the 20th  December, 2010 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor , 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury  ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 3.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
 4. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 5.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 6.  Yogi Aditya Nath 
 7.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 8.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 9.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 10.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 11.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 12.  Shri K. Sugumar 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 * * * 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee and informed them about the agen da of the  
meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
(i) 162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Fifty 
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism; 
(ii) 163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundre d Fifty 
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; 
(iii) 164th Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained in the One Hundr ed Fifty 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Shipping; 
(iv)  165th Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained in the One Hundr ed Fifty 
Seventh Report On Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture; and 
(v) 166th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Fifty 
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 

3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The meeting adjourned at 5:10 
PM . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 