 - 1 - 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  186 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM & CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13)  
OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.12.2012) 
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  04.12.2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2012/ AGRAHAYANA, 1934 ( SAKA ) 
 

 - 2 - 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM & CULTURE  
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13)  
OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.12.2012) 
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  04.12.2012) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2012/ AGRAHAYANA, 1934 ( SAKA ) 
 

 - 3 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 

 - 4 - 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)  
2. INTRODUCTION        (ii) 
3. TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS      (iii)  
4.  REPORT                                1- 21         
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-   22-24 
AT A GLANCE        
6. *MINUTES  
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at printing stage. 

 - 5 - 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shri Satish Sharma 
3.  Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya 
4.  Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
5.  Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood 
6.  Shri Aayanur Manjunatha 
7.  Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9.  Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh 
10.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Yogi Adityanath 
12.  Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
13.  Shri Subrata Bakshi 
14.  Shri Khagen Das 
15.  Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
16.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
17.  Dr. Kruparani Killi @ 
18.  Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
20.  Shrimati Ranee Narah @ 
21.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
22.  Shri Deoraj Singh Patel 
23.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
24.  Shri Nilesh N. Rane 
25.  Shri K.J. S.P. Reddy @ 
26.  Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy 
27.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
28.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
29.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
30.  Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31.  Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
 
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w .e.f. 28 th  October, 
2012. 
 
 

 - 6 - 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairman, Department- related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Commi ttee to present on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred Eighty Sixth Report on Act ion Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee conta ined in its One Hundred Seventy Fifth 
Report on the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Culture (2012-13).  
2.  One Hundred Seventy Fifth Report of the Department-  related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was pre sented to the Parliament on the 7 th  May, 2012 in 
Parliament.  
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One 
Hundred Seventy Fifth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture, on 16 
th  October, 2012. 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report as its meeting held on the 5 th  November, 
2012. 
 
 
 
SITARAM YECHURY 
NEW DELHI;                                            Chairman,  
November 5,,  2012                                            Department -related Parliamentary Standing  
Kartika 14,  1934 (Saka)                     Committee on  Transport,  Tourism and Culture. 
 
 

 - 7 - 
TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ASI Archeological Survey of India 
CABC Central Advisory Board on Culture 
CPR Conceptional  Project Report 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
NCSM National Council of Science Museum 
NML National Mission on Libraries 
NMML Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 
NSD National School of Drama 
RRs Recruitment Rules  
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
 

 - 8 - 
REPORT 
1.  The Report of the Committee deals with the Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its On e-Hundred and Seventy-fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry of Cultu re which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 7 th May, 2012. 
2.  Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Government on the 16 th  October,  2012 
in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been 
categorized as follows: 
3.  The Committee desires that final replies in respect  of those 
recommendations/observations which have been catego rized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.  
4.  On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Co mmittee has made observations on each 
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the co ncerned Ministries. The recommendations 
of the Committee contained in the One Hundred and F ifty-fourth Report, action taken thereon 
by the Ministry and recommendations/observations of  the Committee on each item of action 
taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
5. The Committee notes that out of Rs.3524.11 crore  earmarked for XIth Five Year Plan, 
an amount of Rs.3047.91 crore was spent leaving a s aving of Rs. 476.20 crores.  The 
Committee notes that the unspent amount was mainly in respect of the archives, museums, 
libraries and activities for NE region.  The Committee was informed that due to non-finalization 
of upgradation and modernization programmes and def erment of activities of Victoria 
Memorial and Salarjung Museums, funds could not be utilised under 'Museums '. Similarly, 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata also could not utilize the  grant for modernization of infrastructural 
facilities. The Committee views any kind of under-u tilization of allocations as a lapse, 
especially those due to avoidable reasons.  In this  case, most of the reasons given by the 
Ministry were avoidable ones.   
6. For example, the Committee has seen itself how t he affairs of the National Museum, 
Delhi were being (mis) managed. The Committee in it s 167 
th  Report has conveyed its 
impression about all these aspects and the Action T aken Notes furnished by the Ministry amply 
reflect that even the Committee’s recommendations do not evoke required response/ action. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that being concern ed with art and culture, the Ministry has 
to be pro-active and utilize the allocations judici ously provided for XII Plan. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry to ensure that the sch emes/ plans do not suffer on account of 
under-utilization of funds and shortcomings/ flaws are corrected during the XII Plan Period. 
(Recommendation at para 9 & 10 of 175th  Report) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
7. In the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) an amou nt of Rs.3047.91 crore was actually 
spent against the total allocation of Rs.3524.11 cr ore.  In the XII Five Year Plan (2012-17) the 
Ministry will make concerted efforts to utilize the  Plan funds to the maximum extent through 
regular monitoring in accordance with the recommend ations of the Committee and Finance 
Ministry’s guidelines. 
 

 - 9 - 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  
8. The Committee is of the view that with the utili zation of overall allocation in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan,  there is a need to monito r the expenditure in all the heads 
thereby utilizing the allocation judiciously and ca rrying out the activities which were 
actually planned. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
9. The Committee notes with concern that out of Rs. 805.00 crore provided at RE 2011-12, 
expenditure up to 29 
th  February, 2012 was Rs.570.72 crore. The Committee has a doubt if the 
Ministry of Culture would have been able to utilize  the remaining amount of Rs.234.28 crore in 
just one month i.e. March, 2012. If it is so, the s ame is against the established financial norms 
for spending. The Committee deplores the habit of i ncurring expenditure at the fag end of the 
year. The Committee recommends that proper monitori ng of the scheme / plans should be done 
with reviewing of progress in every quarter to ensu re that rushing for last minute expenditure at 
the end of the financial year is avoided. The main reasons for non-utilization and non – 
finalization of upgratation/ modernization plans of  Museums, and non-finalizations of schemes 
which were started in XI Plan period. The Committee  notes that the expenditure is less in those 
areas which are critical for preservation and propagation of Culture and invariably require more 
funds such as ASI, Museums and Archives. The Commit tee recommends that proper planning 
should be made at the time of proposal of the plan/  schemes and an effective monitoring 
mechanism be put in place and ensure that the expenditure is incurred fully and uniformly. 
      (Para 12 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
10. As against the BE of Rs.785.00 crore in 2011-12 , which was increased to Rs.805.00 
crore at RE 2011-12, the Plan expenditure was Rs.74 9.00 crore during the financial year 2011-
12, which is about 95.41% of BE and 93.04% of RE 2011-12.  The progress of 
implementation of schemes as well as expenditure un der each scheme is constantly monitored 
at the highest level i.e. Secretary (Culture) and A S & FA (Culture) and meetings are held 
regularly in this regard. Instructions are also iss ued to all Attached/ Subordinate Offices, 
Autonomous organizations and to Divisional Heads in  the Ministry at the beginning of the 
financial year to phase out the expenditure in such  a manner that the quantum of expenditure 
incurred under these organizations/ schemes is sust ained in an even manner over the financial 
year. The instructions of the Ministry of Finance r egarding phasing of expenditure on quarterly 
basis are closely followed and monitored at the highest level. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
11. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that mo nitoring of expenditure will be 
reviewed regularly.  Further, the Ministry should e ndeavor that the utilization of funds 
will be as high as it was during 2010-11. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
12. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of  Culture had projected a requirement 
of Rs.18353.94 crore for the XII Plan to carry out its ongoing as well as new schemes and 
activities. The Committee, however, notes with conc ern that for the year 2012-13, 30% less has 
been given than what was proposed by Ministry of Cu lture. The Committee is of the view that 
the Culture Sector has not received the priority it  deserved. It strongly recommends giving it 
adequate funds for the XII Plan. Ministry’s financi al performance was not bad except in 

 - 10 - 
Museum, Libraries, Archives etc., during the entire  XI Plan period. The Committee hopes that 
the Planning Commission would consider the importan ce of culture and art in human 
development and contribution of culture related act ivities and services to GDP, employment 
generation and above all, instilling a sense of nat ional pride/ identity. The Committee 
emphasizes the need for developing proper linkages not only with the Tourism which is 
conspicuous by absence today, but also with the Min istries such as Road and Highways, 
Transport, Civil Aviation, Railways etc., with a vi ew to having an integrated developmental 
activities for promoting and showcasing our rich cultural and art traditions to the world.  
      (Para 17 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
13. Secretary (Culture) had written to Member, Plan ning Commission for favourably 
considering the Ministry’s proposal for an enhanced  allocation for the culture sector during the 
12 
th  Plan period.     
14. An Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Principal Sec retary to the Prime Minister to sort out 
Inter-Ministerial issues relating to development of  tourism sector in the country. It was, inter 
alia, desired that Ministry of Culture should adopt  a pro-active tourism policy which should 
promote Museums, cultural and heritage sites, besid es monuments as well as to have close 
inter-face with the Ministry of Tourism. 
15. Ministry of Culture and Tourism are accordingly  closely coordinating to address 
tourism related issues. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
16. The Committee hopes that Ministry of Culture wo uld constantly review the 
policies/programs with various Ministries for touri sm related issues.  The Committee also 
hopes that the Ministry of Culture would take the b enefit of schemes of other Ministries 
like Tourism,  for road connectivity to connect important tourist destinations. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
17. The Committee notes that against the projected demand of Rs.2916.43 crore, the 
Ministry of Culture has been allocated only Rs.864.crore for 2012-13, less than 1/3 of what was 
proposed by the Ministry. The Ministry had made plans for utilizing the enhanced allocation for 
schemes like preservation and conservation of monum ents by ASI, introduction of new 
schemes for libraries, celebrating centenaries, str engthening and expansion of ongoing plan 
schemes implemented by Zonal Cultural Centres for c reative industries, benefit of Tribal/ Rural 
artists at grass root level, ten new schemes by Nat ional Archives, financial assistance for 
Professional Groups and Individuals, for Specified Performing Arts, National Mission for 
Monuments and Antiquities, Sangeet Natak Akademi, N ational School of Drama etc., The 
Committee notes the apathy of the Government toward s the cause of preservation and 
promotion of our ancient culture and has allocated plan outlay of less than 1/3 of what was 
proposed by the Ministry of Culture. During the XI Plan also, Art and Culture got a share of 
only 0.16% of the total Central Plan allocation of the Government of India. The Committee 
recommends that Ministry of Culture certainly deserves a better treatment in allocation of funds 
in view of its importance. The Committee recommends  that Ministry should strive to utilize the 
allocations optimally by September by every year so  that while submitting proposal for RE, 
Ministry can justify its stand for more allocation which is based on trend of last 6 months’ 
expenditure. However, the Ministry should also take  extra care/ measures to monitor the 
schemes/ plans on regular basis. 
      (Para 20 i bid  ) 

 - 11 - 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
18. The Ministry is making all possible efforts to optimally utilize its allocation by 
September every year through constant monitoring of  progress of schemes and expenditure 
related thereto. In 2012-13, the expenditure upto the 30 
th  September, 2012, has been 51.98 % of 
the B.E. of Rs.1447 crore, which is as per the instructions of Ministry of Finance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
19. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
20. In view of effecting a cut of about 70% in Mini stry’s projected demand, the Committee 
feels that either the Ministry’s projections were u nrealistically high or the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance did not accord t he importance this Ministry deserves. 
There is a need to sensitize the concerned agencies  to appreciate the contribution of art and 
culture to our nation’s life. Ministry has proposed  some very good schemes that were overdue 
and must be taken up on priority. 
      (Para 21 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
21. It may be mentioned that while formulating Annu al Plan 2012-13 and XII Plan, 
proposals were invited from all the Cultural Organizations and Divisional Heads of the Ministry 
and on the receipt of proposed outlays, Annual Plan  proposals for the Ministry as a whole were 
prepared, which showed a substantial increase over the approved outlay for the year 2011-12. 
On evaluation and analysis of those proposals, projections appeared to be unrealistic in so far as 
spending capacity of the Cultural Institutions/ Schemes taken into during the XI Five Year Plan. 
These proposals were reviewed and pruned suitably b efore sending them to the Planning 
Commission. A projected demand of Rs.2916.43 crore for the Annual Plan 2012-13 was made 
to the Planning Commission for their consideration,  against which only Rs. 864 crore for 2012-
13, constituting about 30% of the projected demand, has been allocated for the Ministry. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
22. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of C ulture should take up the need 
for more allocations with the Planning Commission a nd Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee hopes that Planning Commission/Ministry o f Finance would adopt pragmatic 
approach while considering the requirement of funds by Ministry of Culture. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
23. The Committee notes that ASI could incur expend iture of Rs.133.90 crore upto 29 
th  
February, 2012 out of the revised allocation of Rs. 161.75 crore.  The Committee hope that with 
the mandate of its various work, ASI would be able to utilize the resources allocated to it in RE 
2012-13.  The Committee notes the constraints faced  by ASI due to its specific nature of work 
whereby maintenance and conservation is limited to only a few months and also the fact that the 
RE allocation is received in March and as per speci fic instruction of Department of 
Expenditure, the expenditure cannot be more than 33 % in the last quarter and 15% in the last 
month.  The Committee recommends that ASI should ut ilize the allocation in a time frame and 
opt for relaxation on case-to-case basis.  
      (Para 30 i bid  ) 

 - 12 - 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
24. ASI had utilized funds to the extent of Rs.173. 91 Crore up to 31 
st  March, 2012 out of 
the revised allocation of Rs.178.22 Crore.  This co mes to 97.58%.  The recommendation of the 
Committee has been noted.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  
25. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
26. The Committee notes that Ministry of Culture ha d sent a letter to Principal Secretary, 
PMO for creation of Non-lapsable fund in 2008.  The  Committee would like to know the 
response of the PMO in this regard.  It recommends that owing to the nature of seasonal work, 
the Ministry's proposal for creation of non-lapsabl e fund for ASI activities deserves serious 
considerations.  
      (Para 31 ibid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
27. Secretary (Culture) had a discussion with the D y. Chairman of Planning Commission on 
11.7.2005 regarding creation of “Non-Lapsable Fund for Conservation & Preservation 
Activities on National Monuments of ASI” and for de velopment of tourist amenities in the 
monuments by allocating part of the income generate d by sale of entry tickets at the national 
monuments. Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission agreed  in principle.   The then Minister of 
I&B and Culture sent a formal proposal on this subj ect to the Finance Minister.   However, 
Ministry of Finance sought some details on the prop osal. Secretary (Culture) wrote to Secretary 
(Finance) on 27.7.2006 to expedite the proposal. Th e last communication to Secretary 
(Expenditure), Ministry of Finance as well as Princ ipal Secretary to PM was sent by Secretary 
(Culture) on May 28, 2008. 
28. However, in view of the recommendations of the Committee, the matter will again be 
taken up. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
29. The Committee recommends that the matter of cre ation of ‘Non-Lapsable Fund 
for Conservation and Preservation Activities on Nat ional Monuments of ASI’ should be 
taken up with Finance Ministry and the Committee apprised of the outcome. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
30. The Committee also notes the various initiative s taken by the Ministry for conservation 
and preservation of heritage. The Committee notes t hat ASI maintains 44 museums and has 
opened site museums at six sites. The Committee rec ommends that these Museums should be 
provided adequate allocation for maintenance and up gradation. Although ASI has been making 
efforts to provide visitors facilities at the world  heritage sites, the Committee feels that it is 
inadequate and not properly maintained.  The Commit tee recommends that Ministry of Culture 
should associate with the schemes of other Ministri es such as Tourism and Rural Development 
to provide basic facilities such as toilets for visitors.  
      (Para 32 i bid  ) 
 

 - 13 - 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
31. The ASI has 44 site museums in all. The optimal  utilization of funds allocated to site 
museums had been affected to some extent by the sho rtage of staff. The utilization of allocated 
funds is being sought to be ensured to the fullest by a functional management temporarily 
merging Museums with ASI Circles to address the pro blem of shortage of staff on an 
immediate basis.  
32. An Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Principal Sec retary to the Prime Minister to sort out 
Inter-Ministerial issues relating to development of  tourism sector in the country including 
provision of basic tourist facilities. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
33. The Committee is not happy with the stop-gap ar rangement of merging Museums 
with ASI circles to overcome the shortage of staff.   The Committee recommends that 
immediate steps be taken up to recruit the staff as per requirement. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
34. The Committee notes that there is a huge gap be tween the sanctioned strength and 
assessed strength, almost in all categories of staf f and officers in ASI which is certainly telling 
upon the work relating to preservation and protection of our monuments.  The Committee is at a 
loss to note that Institute of Archaeology which wa s set up in 1985, has remained non-
functional for want of requisite staff till date.  The Government has engaged manpower 
management and planning consultants to prepare a report on the restructuring and strengthening 
of ASI and its recommendations are under considerat ion of the Government. The Committee 
recommends that Government should examine those rec ommendations for early 
implementation in order to give fillip to the activ ities of the ASI.  The Committee feels that 
there is urgent need to meet the requirement of sta ff and officers, particularly in the field of 
archaeology, science, conservation, epigraphy, attendants and horticulture.  
      (Para 35 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
35. 
 The report of the Manpower Management and Planning consultants for strengthening/ 
restructuring of Archaeological Survey of India inc luding strengthening of all cadres of 
technical and non-technical staff was received and examined. Based upon this and other inputs, 
a comprehensive proposal for restructuring of the A SI including Institute of Archaeology is 
under preparation which would also address the concerns of the Committee. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
36. The Committee views the delay in restructuring of ASI and Institutions of 
Archaeology seriously.   The Committee recommends t hat there should be time bound 
plan to put the things in order so as to help ASI w hich is doing valuable services for 
conserving and preserving our heritage. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
37. The Committee recommends the Government to consider  ASI as scientific department 
and make available the benefits which are available  to other scientific and technical bodies in 

 - 14 - 
the Government.  In this connection, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations 
contained in its 91 st  report on the “Functioning of ASI” which is reproduced below:- 
The Committee is constrained to note that even afte r a lapse of fifteen years from the 
date of issue of the notification in this regard no  concrete action was taken by Ministry 
of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India for d eveloping Archaeological Survey of 
India as a Scientific and Technical Department, whi ch amply indicates the 
administrative apathy towards the whole issue. The Committee regrets that no internal 
exercise was undertaken by Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India 
during the last fifteen years for availing the bene fits and privileges which could be 
extended to the Archaeological Survey of India  as a Science and Technology 
department. The Committee observes that there has b een deviation in the working of 
Archaeological Survey of India and that it has fail ed in terms of developing 
Archaeological Survey of India not merely as an adm inistrative body but also as a 
spearhead for consolidating the scientific discipli ne of archaeology in the country. The 
Committee is of the view that the Archaeological Survey of India needs to reinvent itself, 
not merely as an administrative wing of the Governm ent, but as an agency for 
protecting and safeguarding our national heritage, which involves a lot of scientific and 
technical work. Unless the Archaeological Survey of  India converts itself fully into a 
scientific and technical organization, the basic role and function of the organization will 
be defeated. The Committee recommends that the Mini stry of Culture and 
Archaeological Survey of India should, without any further loss of time, take necessary 
follow-up action on the recommendations of the Comm ittee chaired by Director 
General, Archaeological Survey of India so as to av ail the benefits which accrue to a 
Science and Technology department. The Committee al so recommends that, if required, 
the Ministry of Culture should also take necessary legislative action to make 
Archaeological Survey of India Science and Technology department in the true sense. 
      (Para 36 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
38. In terms of DoPT OM No.2/41/97-PIC dated 9 
th  November, 1998, scientists and 
engineers in scientific departments or organization s are defined as persons who possess 
academic qualification of at least Master’s Degree in Natural/ Agricultural Sciences or 
Bachelor’s Degree in Engineering/ Technology/ Medicine. 
39. ASI is a multi-disciplinary body consisting of different disciplines/cadres i.e. 
conservation engineers, archaeologists, epigraphist s, archaeological scientists, and 
archaeological horticulturists.  Among these discip lines, archaeologists and epigraphists, the 
mainstay of ASI, do not possess the prescribed acad emic qualification (i.e. Master’s Degree in 
Natural/Agricultural Sciences or Bachelor’s Degree in Engineering/Technology/Medicine) 
essential to fall under the definition of scientists/engineers. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
40. The Committee may be apprised whether at any ti me the matter was taken up with 
the concerned Ministry to understand the peculiar n ature of work of scientists of ASI.  
The Committee would like to have the details of bac kground in which the notification was 
issued declaring ASI a scientific institute.  
 
 

 - 15 - 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
41. The Committee notes that Horticulture Branch re sponsible for landscaping of monument 
maintained by ASI and presently handling more than 500 gardens.  However, the sanctioned 
strength remained almost static in case of horticulture branch whereas in other cadre it has gone 
up.  
      (Para 40 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
42. The report of the Manpower Management and Plann ing consultants for strengthening/ 
restructuring of Archaeological Survey of India inc luding strengthening of all cadres of 
technical and non-technical staff, was received and examined. Based upon this and other inputs, 
a comprehensive proposal for restructuring of ASI i ncluding the Horticulture Branch is under 
preparation. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
43. The Committee hopes that the matter will be exp edited and implemented at the 
earliest and restructuring of ASI including Horticu lture Branch will be completed in a 
time bound manner. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
44. The Committee notes that in spite of having fiv e Commissions/Committees for 
restructuring of ASI including the Horticulture Bra nch, nothing has been done in this regard so 
far.  The Committee notes that allocation for the H orticulture Branch has been on decline 
despite the increase in the number of Gardens over the years.  It is learned that some of the post 
have been got downgraded. The Horticulture Branch n ot only maintains Gardens but it also 
preserves the intangible heritage in the form of tr ees and plants. If the area surrounding the 
monuments is beautiful, more people are inclined to  visit the monuments. The Committee feels 
that this Branch has been discriminated continuousl y against in respect of staff and budgetary 
allocations.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should realize the 
importance of the Horticulture Branch and take imme diate steps to strengthen and restructure it 
according to the requirement.  
      (Para 43 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
45. The report of the Manpower Management and Plann ing consultants for strengthening/ 
restructuring of Archaeological Survey of India inc luding strengthening of all cadres of 
technical and non-technical staff, was received and examined. Based upon this and other inputs, 
a comprehensive proposal for restructuring of ASI i ncluding the Horticulture Branch is under 
preparation. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  
46. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
47. The Committee is of the view that the Governmen t should strive for preserving our 
historical places such as 'Dev Varunark’, Bhojpur d istrict of Bihar.  The Committee 

 - 16 - 
recommends that Ministry of Culture should take nec essary action to restore and preserve the 
temple and place the idols and other artifacts belo nging to the temple. The place holds a good 
tourism potential and necessary infrastructure should be provided for the visitors.  
      (Para 45 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
48. Archaeological Survey of India can extend techn ical guidance for restoration and repair 
of the temple in question, if required and sought b y the concerned authorities. So far as tourism 
facilities are concerned, the work is beyond the ma ndate of ASI since this is not a centrally 
protected monument of the ASI. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
49.  The Committee notes the reply and desires that the  Ministry should sensitize the 
concerned authorities to take initiative to restore and preserve ‘Dev Varunark’. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
50. The Committee is dismayed to note that only Rs. 76.95 crore could be utilized up to Feb. 
2012 out of Rs.109.13 crore RE for Museums and othe r schemes. Even the BE was reduced at 
RE stage. The Committee notes that these savings we re mainly due to non-finalization of 
upgradation and modernization programmes in respect  of Victoria Memorial Hall, NCSM, 
Salarjung Museum, and Indian Museum.  The Committee  feels that upgradation / 
modernization of Museums are very important for the Museums if they have to keep themselves 
in the forefront in this technological era to keep visitors attracting towards Museums. The 
Committee, therefore recommends that Ministry of Cu lture should take initiative to put the 
plans in order and take prior approval of the Plans  so that modernization/ upgradation activities 
are not deferred. 
      (Para 49 ibid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
51. The position with regard to the various museums  is as follows:- 
1.National Council 
of Science 
Museums (NCSM) 
There was no under utilization of Plan allocation i n National Council 
of Science Museums (NCSM) during 2011-12. The appro ved regular 
Plan allocation to NCSM for the year 2011-
12 was Rs. 22.00 crore.  
Against this and keeping in view the upgradation an d modernization 
programmes, the Council had proposed an allocation of Rs. 33.84 crore 
which was duly approved by its Governing Body. It i s pertinent to 
mention that during 2011-12, the Council received P lan allocation of 
Rs. 32.30 crore as against original approved alloca tion of Rs. 22.00 
crore which was fully utilized by 31 st  March, 2012. There was no 
unspent balance or under utilization of Plan allocation.   
The upgradation and modernization of Exhibits, Gall eries and visitor 
facilities is a continuous process in all the units  of NCSM and during 
the year 2011-12, several galleries/facilities had major modifications. 
2. Indian Museum The work for upgradation, includin g restoration and repair of the 
heritage buildings and modernization of the galleri es of Indian 
Museum, has already started and an advance of Rs. 3 .00 crore has 

 - 17 - 
since been paid to the National Building Constructi on Corporation 
(NBCC) out of the normal plan grant. 
3.Victoria Memorial      
Hall (VMH) 
The master plan for modernization/ upgradation of V ictoria Memorial 
Hall was prepared by National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad. 
Initially they had agreed to take up the implementa tion in a phased 
manner but later expressed their unwillingness to d o so.  The Board of 
Trustees has now engaged M/s NBCC Ltd. as Implement ing Agenc y.  
They have submitted a Conceptual Project Report (CP R) which was 
approved by the Board.  Rs.472.00 lakhs has also be en released to 
them for pre-project works and works related to rep air and renovation 
of old restaurant and dormitory. These works are already in progress. 
4. Salar Jung 
Museum 
Funds were fully utilized. Modernization and expans ion schemes were 
taken up. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
52. The Committee notes the reply and expects that upgradation/modernization 
programmes in respect of these institutions will be completed without much delay. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
53.  The Committee had examined the functioning of Natio nal Museum, Delhi and while 
doing so, it has found that our Museums are not bei ng properly managed, for which various 
explanations were submitted.  It is noted that ther e is no dearth of funds.  But the other reasons 
such as large number of posts lying vacant for year s, lack of personnel with required 
training/skill, poor upkeep/maintenance, galleries being closed for longer period, CPWD not 
being able to do the work in time, lack of close co ordination with other agencies, etc. were the 
problems mainly affecting their working.  
      (Para 50 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
54. Necessary action for filling up the vacancies h as been initiated. Secretary (Culture) had 
personally taken up the matter with the Chairman, S SC for advertisement of posts of Assistant 
Curator in the National Museum. After intervention of Secretary (Culture), vacancy has been 
advertised by SSC on 15 September, 2012 and the pos ts will be filled up within six months. So 
far as closure of galleries are concerned, it is stated the out of 26 galleries, 4 galleries are closed 
for renovation work. These galleries will be opened by end of this year, 2012  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
55. The Committee hoped that the vacancy of Assista nt Curator would be filled up and 
the closed galleries would be opened as per the schedule. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
56. The Committee notes with concern the delay in s etting up the Museum at Jaipur, 
although sufficient allocation was made under the h ead ‘Museums’. The Committee did not 
know the reason for the delay.  It desires that the Ministry should monitor the work on a regular 
basis to implement the proposal.  The Committee hop es that as assured by the Ministry the 

 - 18 - 
proposal for setting up the Museum will be finalise d within a period of three months.  Any 
delay beyond this period may be communicated to the Committee along with the reasons.   
      (Para 51 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
57. Government of Rajasthan had submitted a proposa l for financial assistance under the 
Scheme “Regional & Local Museums” for establishment  of a museum at the old Vidhan Sabha 
Bhawan, Jaipur with a project cost of Rs. 45.00 cro re.  Since maximum limit of grant that can 
be given for establishment of a museum under the Sc heme is Rs. 6.00 crore, they were asked to 
submit a detailed break-up of funding promised by G ovt. of Rajasthan and Planning 
Commission.  However, the Government of Rajasthan d ecided to withdraw the proposal stating 
that Planning Commission has promised to provide ad ditional grant to the tune of 30% of the 
project cost for establishment of the said museum a nd that Government of Rajasthan had also 
made budgetary provisions for the same.  Since esta blishment of a museum by a State 
Government is a State subject and since no financia l assistance under the Scheme is being 
sought by the Government of Rajasthan, Ministry of Culture have no further role in the matter.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  
58. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
59. The Committee also recommends that the timings of the Museums specially in the 
metro cities should be changed to keep it open in t he evening, particularly during school 
vacations so that they can be visited by children in the evenings. 
      (Para 52 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
60. The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and the feasibility thereof shall be 
explored in consultation with the respective Museums.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
61. The Committee may be informed of the consultati ons and outcome thereof for 
change in the timings of Museums. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
62. The Committee notes that the Art acquisition Co mmittee is not being revived due to 
shortage of storage space.  It would be done once A SI vacates the Museum premises and 
construction of Phase III is finished. The Committe e finds this argument specious.  There is no 
timeframe either for completion of the third phase or for shifting out of the ASI office.  It 
means the art acquisition will be held up till an i ndefinite time.  The Committee would like to 
reiterate all its recommendations contained in its 167 
th  Report on National Museum and would 
like to have latest position in respect of its reco mmendations/observations made in that report 
along with the ATNs of this report. 
      (Para 54 i bid  ) 
 

 - 19 - 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
63. As per information available at present, ASI wi ll be vacating the premises in early 2013 
(i.e. the first quarter of 2013). Thereafter, the construction of phase III of National Museum will 
begin. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
64. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that th e National Museum would get 
space after ASI vacate the premises.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
65. When asked about the physical verification of a rtifacts of the museums, reply furnished 
by the Ministry revealed that the physical verifica tion of objects has not been done in National 
Museum, New Delhi and National Gallery of Modern Ar t since 2003 and 2000 respectively. 
The Committee does not know if it is to be carried out with a fixed periodicity. Physical 
verification is to ensure that the invaluable treasures of the nation are not missing or mishandled 
by unscrupulous elements. If it is not done for a longer period, fixing the responsibility will be a 
daunting task. The Committee, therefore, recommends  that for the sake of preserving the 
invaluable treasures, the Government should take im mediate steps to conduct physical 
verifications in National Museum, New Delhi and Nat ional Gallery of Modern Art, at the 
earliest.  
      (Para 55 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
66.  In respect of National Gallery of Modern Art, the p hysical verification of the collections 
of art works is in an advanced stage of completion.  As on date 90% of the entire collection has 
been physically verified. Physical verification of the art works loaned to various organizations/ 
museums is also required to be done. The work is be ing undertaken on an urgent basis. The 
entire process of physical verification report etc. , is expected to be completed by December, 
2012. 
67. National Museum has identified experts for phys ical verification. The National 
Museum, will, however, expedite the process. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
68 . The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of t he physical verification and 
recommends that the process should be carried out on regular basis.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
69. The Committee notes that an MoU has been signed  by the National Museum with 
Google Art Project to make its artifacts accessible  globally.  It is also redesigning its website. 
The Committee expresses its happiness on the effort s made for adoption of new techniques for 
the Museum Sector. These processes are, however, ta king longer time. The Committee 
recommends that efforts should be made for expediti ng these two processes in a time bound 
manner so that the reach of National Museum becomes international. 
      (Para 56 i bid  ) 
 

 - 20 - 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
70.  The Google Art project has been implemented and ima ges have been uploaded which 
can be accessed by the general public. The National  Museum website is in its final stage of 
preparation. 
71. The website ( 
www.theallahabadmuseum.com ) of the Allahabad Museum has been 
launched in which masterpieces of the Allahabad Museum have been uploaded. 
72. The Salar Jung Museum has already made 04 Virtu al Galleries and introduced touch 
screen kiosks in some galleries. The virtual galler y of Veiled Rebecca stands uploaded in the 
website. The Museum is also proposing to develop a virtual tour with the help of IIIT or 
Google. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
73. The Committee notes that the Government needs t o do a lot more to digitize the 
artefacts.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
74. The Committee was informed of the vacancies in various Museums:  
S.No. 
 Museums Sanctioned 
Strength  
Existing 
Strength  
Reasons for vacancies and steps taken 
to fill up the vacancies 
1. National Museum, 
New Delhi 
276  154  - 
2. National Gallery 
of Modern Art 
(NGMA), New 
Delhi 
185 
 93  - 
3. Allahabad 
Museum, 
Allahabad 
86 
 75  Vacancies are due to non finalization of 
Recruitment Rules 
4. Salar Jung 
Museum, 
Hyderabad 
166 
 137  Out of 29 vacant posts, 19 posts have 
been notified. The selection process in 
respect of 19 posts is on hand and by 
June 2012 the selection will be 
completed. 
As regards the remaining posts, the 
vacancies will be advertised shortly for 
filling up the posts. 
5. National Council 
of Science 
Museums 
1092 
 894  Vacancies are being advertised to fill up 
the posts 
6. Indian Museum 209  148  Vacancies are due to non-finalization of 
Recruitment Rules. All efforts are being 
made to finalize the RRs and fill up the 
vacancies. 
7. Victoria Memorial 
Hall 
175  130  Vacancies have been advertised to fill 
up the posts. 
8. Indira Gandhi 
Rashtriya Manav 
Sangrahalaya 
124 
 115  Efforts are on to fill up the vacancies. 
      (Para 57 i bid  ) 

 - 21 - 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
75. The Committee is of the view that existence of such a large number of vacant posts and 
that too for a long time, let alone the requirement , shows our (non) seriousness with the 
Museum's affairs.  The reasons given are purely tec hnical, vague and repetitive which could 
have been expedited, if done with required will and  commitment.  These vacancies would have 
been arisen over a period of time and the Ministry must have been aware of these vacancies.  
How the Museums are being looked after with such a depleted manpower could be anybody's 
guess.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate steps to fill up all 
the vacant posts in fixed time schedule.    
      (Para 58 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
76. The latest position with regard to filling up o f vacancies is as follows: - 
S.No Museums Sanctioned 
Strength 
 
Existing 
Strength  
Reasons for vacancies and steps taken to 
fill up the vacancies 
1. National Museum, 
New Delhi 
276  154  Necessary action for filling up the 
vacancies has been taken up. 
Advertisements have been issued in the 
Employment News After intervention of 
Secretary (C) Staff Selection Commission 
advertised for the post of Assistant Curator 
in September, 2012.   
2. National Gallery 
of Modern Art 
(NGMA), New 
Delhi 
185 
 93  The Recruitment Rules for the newly 
created posts and Amendment to existing 
Recruitment Rules for group ‘A’ & ‘B’ 
post have already been sent to 
DOPT’s/UPSC for their approval. Further 
action to fill up these posts will be initiated 
once the Rules are notified. However, 
necessary action has been initiated to fill 
up the Group ‘C’ vacancies through SSC / 
employment exchange in accordance with 
the existing Recruitment Rules. 
3. Allahabad 
Museum, 
Allahabad 
86 
 75  The posts of Director, Assistant 
Administrative Officer and Finance – cum 
– Accounts Officer have been filled up. 
The remaining vacant posts will be filled 
up by the end of this financial year. 
4. Salar Jung 
Museum, 
Hyderabad 
166 
 137  Out of 29 vacant posts 19 posts were 
advertised for various categories. In respect 
of 6 posts, the Selection Committee met on 
18.5.2012 and selected the candidates. 
Further course of action is under process.  
5. National Council 
of Science 
1092  894  198 posts could not be filled up due to the 
ban on recruitment.  Clearance for 54 posts 

 - 22 - 
Museums is under consideration of the Ministry. 
6. Indian Museum 209  148  Vacancies could not be filled up initially 
because of optimization exercise 
undertaken by the Government and, 
thereafter, due to some errors pointed out 
in maintenance of the reservation rosters.  
The reservation rosters have since been 
finalized. The Museum is now in a position 
to fill up the vacancies immediately. 
7. Victoria Memorial 
Hall 
175  130  13 DR posts stand advertised and 
applications received.  The Selection 
Committee for 8 posts has been formed, 
while the Selection Committee for 3 posts 
has already met.  The meetings for other 
posts will be held soon.  The Departmental 
Promotion Committee has also been 
formed for considering promotions to some 
posts. 
 
8. Indira Gandhi 
Rashtriya Manav 
Sangrahalaya 
 
122 103 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav 
Sangrahalaya has a sanctioned strength of 
122 under Groups ‘A’ ‘B’ & ‘C’. Out of 
these 122 posts, at present 103 Posts are 
filled up. Action is being taken to fill up 
remaining 19 vacancies by IGRMS. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
77. The Committee is not satisfied with the steps t aken by the Ministry to fill up the 
vacant posts.  The Committee notes that the adverti sements have been issued just for few 
posts.  RRs are still under formulation and approva l from DoPT/UPSC.  The Vacancies 
will definitely affect the functioning of the insti tutions.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that the Ministry should take action for  recruitment at all levels in a time 
bound manner so that these organizations can work effectively and efficiently.   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
78. The Committee does understand the non-availabil ity in India of managerial as well 
technical workforce in Museum sector, but how the w orld class Museum in Europe & America 
are being managed and how this shortage is being ov ercome by them.  The Committee notes 
that Working Group Report of 12 
th  Plan mentions about this problem but would like to  know 
detailed proposals for overcoming this shortage of cultural managers and technical experts.  The 
Committee recommends devising suitable courses for this purpose to be introduced in our 
academic institutions and universities at various l evels.  Idea of having separate cadres of 
Museum staff and inter Museum transfer also needs serious consideration.   
      (Para 59 i bid  ) 
 

 - 23 - 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
79. The recommendation of the Committee has been no ted. The matter has been taken up 
with the Ministry of Human Resource Development (De partment of Higher Education) for 
introduction of courses on Museum and Cultural Inst itutions Management in various 
Universities to produce capable managers and researchers for cultural resources and institutions 
in the country. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
80. The Committee recommends for introduction of su itable courses should be taken 
up seriously and concerted efforts made for identif ication of courses in consultation with 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development.  The Co mmittee again desires that the 
Ministry to offer their comments in the matter of c reation of separate cadres of Museum 
staff and inter-Museum transfer policy.   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
81. The Committee notes the efforts being made in p utting the Museums in order.   The 
Committee is no doubt aware of the constraints bein g faced by the Museums in terms of 
shortage of staff, space and other problems, it how ever feels that the recommendations of the 
Goswami Committee should be taken up in a time bound manner and the Committee would like 
to be informed of the achievements/ action taken so far.  
      (Para 61 i bid  ) 
Recommendation of the Sub-Committee on Museum Reforms 
  
82. Central Advisory Board on Culture (CABC) in its  meeting held on 4 th  November, 2009 
discussed issues relating to strengthening of the m useum movement and museum reforms. 
Keeping this in view, a Sub- Committee on Museum ma nagement under the chairmanship of 
Dr. B.N. Goswami was formed on 5th January, 2010. 
83. The CABC Sub-Committee held 7 formal 
 meetings and several informal discussions. 
The Sub Committee has submitted a Report on Museum Management. The status of action 
taken on these points is as under:- 
• A temporary post of Administrator was created in th e National Museum and an 
Administrator was appointed during 2010-11. 
• It is proposed to re-advertise the post of DG, National Museum. 
• Two posts of Addl. DG and Joint DG each were create d. The Recruitment Rules have 
been approved by DOPT and are now with UPSC. Recruitment to these posts will be done 
once the Recruitment Rules are notified. 
• A Museum Advisory Board has been constituted and 03 meetings have been held. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
84. The Committee notes that these are replies freq uently repeated by the Ministry.   
The Ministry has not moved further from the positions which were available a couple of 
years back.  The Ministry have to take proactive measures to move forward to fill up the 
vacancies. 
 

 - 24 - 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
85. However, the Committee finds that the financial  performance of all these institutions  in 
terms of allocations and expenditure every year sho wn in the table has been quite satisfactory 
but in the absence of the physical targets, the Com mittee could not measure the physical 
performance of these institutions.  
      (Para 64 i bid  ) 
86. Since the expenditure incurred on the activitie s in North East have been clubbed with 
the total expenditure of these institutions, the Co mmittee could not know the exact amount 
spent on these activities in NE region. Last year, this Committee had raised this point and has 
recommended to show these expenditures separately to enable the Committee to have a realistic 
assessment of their performance. From next year onw ards, the Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would present those figures separately in papers supplied to this Committee not only 
about above mentioned institutions, but in respect of all the schemes/ programmes of the 
Ministry. 
      (Para 65 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
87. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance in future. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
88. The Committee has been drawing the attention of  Ministry of Culture to present 
the information on financial performance vis-vis  physical achievements.  The Committee 
is however restrained to find nothing new in their replies except that noted for 
compliance.  The Committee wants the Ministry to pr ovide the details of action taken in 
compliance of recommendation of the Committee. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
89. The Committee notes that there are large number  of vacancies existing in various 
institutions which are as follows: - 
S.No. Name of the Institution/ Organization Vacant Post 
1. IGNCA 42 
2. Sahitya Akademi 15 
3. Lalit Kala Akademi 37 
4. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 83 
5. Anthropological Survey of India 361 
      (Para 66 i bid  ) 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
90. The Committee notes that large number of vacanc ies existing in the cultural institutions 
including Akademies, Museums, Libraries, etc., Somehow the Ministry has not been able to fill 

 - 25 - 
those vacancies which are existing for a longer tim e. The Committee learnt that many of these 
posts have been lapsed due to delay in recruitment process but a few of these were got revived 
from the Ministry of Finance after a longish proced ure. The Committee wonders how, with so 
many vacancies lying vacant in various cadres and a lso the heads of the organizations, these 
premier institutes are functioning. The Committee k nows that there are various recruitment 
rules and the posts in the purview of UPSC that takes a lot of time. The Committee reiterates its 
earlier recommendations to keep these posts out of purview of UPSC and the same should be 
pursued vigorously. The Committee recommends that t he Ministry should make all out efforts 
to fill the vacant in all the institutions. 
      (Para 67 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
91. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and action is being taken 
accordingly. Some of the institutions have reported as follows: - 
IGNCA : The process of filling up the vacant posts has be en initiated. Due to paucity of non-
plan funds, it may not be possible to fill up the remaining 39 vacant posts in near future.   
Lalit Kala Akadem i:  The Akademi has already filled up most of the v acant posts and has 
already taken steps for filling up all the promotio n posts from amongst the eligible employees 
of the Akademi and by direct recruitment for which the Akademi has already invited 
applications through Employment News and leading newspapers. 
Sahitya Akademi : Some of the posts are already filled and all effo rts are being made to fill the 
remaining 15 vacant posts. 
National School of Drama:    
i)  One post of Assistant Professor (Makeup) in Group ‘ A’ is lying vacant.  The post was 
advertised and interviews held in March 2012.  But no candidate was found suitable for 
the post.  As such, change in the nomenclature and qualification of the post is under 
consideration of the NSD.  As soon as it is finalized, necessary action to fill the post will 
be initiated. 
ii)  One post of Lighting Technician in Group ‘B’ is lyi ng vacant.  A proposal for 
upgradation of the post with some increased qualifications/experience was placed before 
the NSD Society in its meeting held on 23 
rd  July, 2012. The Society has not approved 
the proposal of upgradation of the post and, theref ore, the post is under process of 
advertisement. 
iii)  One post each of Information & Library Assistant, Electrician Gr. II and 2 posts of LDC 
in Group ‘C’ were advertised in the month of May 20 12 and the last date for receipt of 
applications was 22 nd  June, 2012.  The applications are under process of  scrutiny and 
interview will be fixed towards the end October, 2012. 
iv)  Eight posts of M.T.S. (which were earlier under Gro up ‘D’) are lying vacant.  These 
have not been filled up as there is Ban on creation /filling in vacant posts under Group 
‘D’.  As such, a proposal is being sent separately to MOC to approve the filling up of 
these posts. 
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library : At present the total number of vacant posts in th e 
Institution is 79.  8 posts fell vacant either due to retirement or resignation during the last one 
year. From August 2011, 29 employees of the Institution have been promoted.  
92. 4 posts reserved for OBC (Assistant Research Of ficer, Senior Research Assistant, 
Senior Library & Information Assistant and Guide) h ave been recently advertised. Others will 

 - 26 - 
be advertised after Recruitment Rules are finalized . Meanwhile, the remaining posts which 
come under promotion category will also be filled up at the earliest. 
93. The NMML revised the Recruitment Rules for all the positions in the year 2003. The 
Executive Council of the NMML has given directions to the Director in its meeting held on 19 th  
March, 2012 to review the Recruitment Rules for all  the posts and the process for the revision 
has been initiated.  
Anthropological Survey of India  (An.S.I)    
94. There are 361 posts vacant, out of which only 5 8 posts were released by the Screening 
Committee. Necessary procedure for filling up the above 58 posts has already been initiated. 18 
posts have already been filled up and necessary cor respondence is being made with concerned 
Commissions for filling up the remaining 40 vacant posts. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
95. The Committee is not satisfied with the positio n of vacancies in various 
organizations/Institutes under the Ministry of Cult ure.  In the absence of adequate staff, 
the organizations cannot function properly. There i s a need to fill-up the vacancies on a 
war-footing level.   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
96. The Committee notes that the allocation of Rs.4 6.27 crore could be utilized only in the 
year 2011-12 out of the RE of Rs.54.97 crore as the  National Mission on Libraries could not be 
implemented. The Committee notes that the National Mission on Libraries is an ambitious 
project of the Government which can do a lot to imp rove education and knowledge of the 
populations if it is implemented in right earnest. The Committee is also of the view that there is 
a need to strengthen the existing libraries and awa reness about reading is to be made focus in 
the internet world of today. For this with the help  of the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development initiative should start from the primar y classes. The Committee also recommends 
that to set up such a vast network of libraries spe cialized and trained staff would be required. 
For this purpose requirement should be assessed of the various categories of staff so that the 
Mission succeed its objective in spreading knowledge as per plans. 
      (Para 76 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
97. National Mission on Libraries has so far set up  four Working Groups to prepare specific 
projects for the development of the library sector in the country. They are: 
(i)  Working group on the setting up of National Virtual  Library, networking and 
ICT applications in libraries 
(ii)  Working group on National Census of Libraries, cont ent creation, and 
community information centres 
(iii)  Working group on  up-gradation of the existing publ ic libraries, school/college 
libraries and use of school libraries as community centers 
(iv)  Working group on library and information science ed ucation, training and 
research facilities 
98. The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standi ng Committee such as training of 
library98. staff so that they can become knowledge managers, provision of internet access in 
public libraries and creation of relevant regional material etc will be taken up by the Mission. 

 - 27 - 
The introduction of information technology based li brary service will be one of the major 
objectives of the Mission. It has also been decided  to set up a National Virtual Library in India 
which will provide access to relevant information o n subjects like health and nutrition, 
environment, education, employment opportunities et c. Upgradation of public libraries in close 
collaboration with State Governments is also propos ed to be undertaken. Reading rooms with 
books, magazines and newspapers will be set up in rural areas to develop reading habit. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
99. The Committee notes the various steps proposed by the NML and hope that it will 
take the recommendations of Committee seriously in order to reach the whole spectrum of 
stakeholders. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
100.  The Committee is at a loss to know that allocation proposed of Rs 20 crore has been 
drastically reduced to Rs 2.00 crore in 2012-13 to set up such a noble project.  The Committee 
recommends that allocation should be increased at RE stage. The Committee is also of the view 
that proper monitoring should be made of the project so that it is in place in a fix time schedule.  
The Committee is also of the view that a Mahatma Ga ndhi Heritage Trail linking all the places 
visited by Mahatma Gandhi at various places and maj or struggles organized in India during the 
freedom struggle should be conceptualized and made a reality. This would help public and 
especially the children to connect themselves to Gandhiji and in turn learn the importance of the 
facet of Non-violence and the struggles undertaken by Gandhiji which led to the independence 
of our country. From tourism point of view also Gan dhi Heritage trail would be a success as it 
will be visited by people of all countries.  
      (Para 78 i bid  ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
101. A Panel under the Chairmanship of Shri Gopalkr ishna Gandhi, then Governor of West 
Bengal, submitted its report on 26.11.2008. As per the recommendations of the Panel, Gandhi 
Heritage Sites Mission and five Zonal offices were to be set up and Gandhi Heritage Portal was 
to be set up in Sabarmati Ashram by Sabarmati Ashra m Preservation and Memorial Trust, 
Ahmedabad. The proposal for setting up of Gandhi He ritage Sites Mission is under 
consideration in the Ministry. For setting up Gandh i Heritage Portal, this Ministry has already 
released a Corpus Fund of Rs.7.00 crore to Sabarmati Ashram Preservation and Memorial Trust 
(SAPMT), Ahmedabad and the same would be launched d uring 2012. Heritage Trail would fall 
under the purview of Ministry of Tourism and the re commendation of the Committee has been 
sent to that Ministry for necessary action.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
102. The Committee may be apprised of the progress in setting up of Heritage Trail. 
NATIONAL MISSION ON MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES (NMMA) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
103. National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) was constituted for a period 
of 5 years i.e. 2007-2012 with the objectives to pr epare a National database on Built Heritage 
and Sites from Secondary sources and prepare a National database on Antiquities from different 
sources and museums. The term of the NMMA ended formally in March, 2012. The Committee 
was informed that a proposal has been sent for continuation in the next 5 year period 2012-2017 

 - 28 - 
with certain modification. Of an estimated 4.00 lac  built heritage and sites, about 80,000 have 
been documented so far. Out of an estimated 8.00 lac antiquities have been documented. 
      (Para 79 i bid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
104. The Committee notes that the work of the Natio nal Mission on Monuments and 
Antiquities is progressing at a slow pace.  During the 11 
th  Five Year Plan the Mission could 
document only 80000 built heritage and sites out of  4 lakh estimated.  If this pace continues it 
will take another 20 years to complete the document ation.  The Committee recommends that 
there is a need to augment the work of NMMA with an  objective to complete the Mission 
during the 12 th  Five year Plan.  The Committee also recommends tha t the Ministry should take 
appropriate measures, wherever required to preserve and protect the documented monuments.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
105. The Ministry of Culture proposes to continue N MMA during the XII five year plan 
period (2012-17) with a thrust on completing the re maining task.  The NMMA has proposed 
continuation with certain modifications in its give n mandate (such as, introduction of primary 
survey of monuments, sites and strengthening of Mission’s structure etc) expected to streamline 
and accelerate the task.  The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
106. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that t he work of documenting will be 
completed by the end of Twelfth Plan Period. 

 - 29 - 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-AT A 
GLANCE  
 
 
 The Committee is of the view that with the utiliza tion of overall allocation in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan,  there is a need to monito r the expenditure in all the heads 
thereby utilizing the allocation judiciously and ca rrying out the activities which were 
actually planned. 
(Para 8) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that monit oring of expenditure will be 
reviewed regularly.  Further, the Ministry should e ndeavor that the utilization of funds 
will be as high as it was during 2010-11.  
(Para 11) 
 The Committee hopes that Ministry of Culture would  constantly review the 
policies/programs with various Ministries for touri sm related issues.  The Committee also 
hopes that the Ministry of Culture would take the b enefit of schemes of other Ministries 
like Tourism,  for road connectivity to connect important tourist destinations.  
(Para 16) 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 19) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Cult ure should take up the need 
for more allocations with the Planning Commission a nd Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee hopes that Planning Commission/Ministry o f Finance would adopt pragmatic 
approach while considering the requirement of funds by Ministry of Culture.  
(Para 22) 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 25) 
 The Committee recommends that the matter of creati on of ‘Non-Lapsable Fund 
for Conservation and Preservation Activities on Nat ional Monuments of ASI’ should be 
taken up with Finance Ministry and the Committee apprised of the outcome.  
(Para 29) 
 The Committee is not happy with the stop-gap arran gement of merging Museums 
with ASI circles to overcome the shortage of staff.   The Committee recommends that 
immediate steps be taken up to recruit the staff as per requirement.  
(Para 33) 
 The Committee views the delay in restructuring of ASI and Institutions of 
Archaeology seriously.   The Committee recommends t hat there should be time bound 
plan to put the things in order so as to help ASI w hich is doing valuable services for 
conserving and preserving our heritage.  
(Para 36) 
 The Committee may be apprised whether at any time the matter was taken up with 
the concerned Ministry to understand the peculiar n ature of work of scientists of ASI.  

 - 30 - 
The Committee would like to have the details of bac kground in which the notification was 
issued declaring ASI a scientific institute.  
(Para 40) 
 The Committee hopes that the matter will be expedi ted and implemented at the 
earliest and restructuring of ASI including Horticu lture Branch will be completed in a 
time bound manner.  
(Para 43) 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 46) 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires that the  Ministry should sensitize the 
concerned authorities to take initiative to restore and preserve ‘Dev Varunark’.  
(Para 49) 
 The Committee notes the reply and expects that upg radation/modernization 
programmes in respect of these institutions will be completed without much delay.  
(Para 52) 
 The Committee hoped that the vacancy of Assistant Curator would be filled up and 
the closed galleries would be opened as per the schedule.  
(Para 55) 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 58) 
 The Committee may be informed of the consultations  and outcome thereof for 
change in the timings of Museums.  
(Para 61) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the N ational Museum would get 
space after ASI vacate the premises.  
(Para 64) 
 The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of th e physical verification and 
recommends that the process should be carried out on regular basis.  
(Para 68) 
 The Committee notes that the Government needs to d o a lot more to digitize the 
artefacts.  
(Para 73) 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the steps take n by the Ministry to fill up the 
vacant posts.  The Committee notes that the adverti sements have been issued just for few 
posts.  RRs are still under formulation and approva l from DoPT/UPSC.  The Vacancies 
will definitely affect the functioning of the insti tutions.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that the Ministry should take action for  recruitment at all levels in a time 
bound manner so that these organizations can work effectively and efficiently.   
(Para 77) 
 The Committee recommends for introduction of suita ble courses should be taken 
up seriously and concerted efforts made for identif ication of courses in consultation with 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development.  The Co mmittee again desires that the 

 - 31 - 
Ministry to offer their comments in the matter of c reation of separate cadres of Museum 
staff and inter-Museum transfer policy.   
(Para 80) 
 The Committee notes that these are replies frequen tly repeated by the Ministry.   
The Ministry has not moved further from the positio ns which were available a couple of 
years back.  The Ministry have to take proactive me asures to move forward to fill up the 
vacancies.  
(Para 84) 
 The Committee has been drawing the attention of Mi nistry of Culture to present 
the information on financial performance vis-vis  physical achievements.  The Committee 
is however restrained to find nothing new in their replies except that noted for 
compliance.  The Committee wants the Ministry to pr ovide the details of action taken in 
compliance of recommendation of the Committee.  
(Para 88) 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the position o f vacancies in various 
organizations/Institutes under the Ministry of Cult ure.  In the absence of adequate staff, 
the organizations cannot function properly. There i s a need to fill-up the vacancies on a 
war-footing level.   
(Para 95) 
 The Committee notes the various steps proposed by the NML and hope that it will 
take the recommendations of Committee seriously in order to reach the whole spectrum of 
stakeholders.  
(Para 99) 
 The Committee may be apprised of the progress in s etting up of Heritage Trail.  
(Para 102) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the w ork of documenting will be 
completed by the end of Twelfth Plan Period.  
(Para 106) 
 
* * * * 