 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 
THREE HUNDRED 
Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker, 
(P resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December,  2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in 
India 
 
resented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th  June, 20 22 
to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
326 
REPORT   
Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in 
22 ) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT  
 
Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in 
India 
 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available  

 
 
       
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-31 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   32-40 
    6. MINUTES         
 7. ANNEXURES        
 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41-45
46-50

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. *1vacant 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 
                                                             
1 *Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 4th May, 2022 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty Sixth Report on ‘Role of Indian Missions 
Globally for the growth of Tourism in India’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Senior 
Officers of Ministries of Tourism and External Affairs, on the subject on 31st May, 2022.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Tourism and 
Ministry of External Affairs for placing before the Committee , the material and information 
desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  8th June, 
2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
June 8, 2022                                                             Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Jyaistha 18, 1944 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ATOAI Adventure Tour Operators Association of India 
AVP Academic Visitors Programme 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
BC Before Christ 
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China, & South Africa. 
CGI Consulate General of India 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
DCG Deputy Consul General 
DCM Deputy Chief of Mission 
DVP Distinguished Visitors' Programme 
ETA Electronic Travel Authorization 
FAM trips Familiarization Trips 
FCA Foreign Correspondents Association 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FEE Foreign Exchange Earnings 
FRO Foreigners Registration Officer 
FRRO Foreigners Regional Registration Officers 
FTA Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
G 20 The Group of Twenty (A strategic multilateral platform connecting the 
world's major developed and emerging economies) 
GoI Government of India 
HAI Hotel Association of India 
HCI High Commission of India 
H.E. His Excellency 
IATO Indian Association of Tour Operators 
IBSA India, Brazil and South Africa 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
ICPB India Convention Promotion Bureau 
IDY International Day of Yoga 
IFS Indian Foreign Service 
INR Indian Rupee 
IOS i-Phone Operating System 
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. 
ITA International Tourist Arrivals 
ITB International Tourist Bureau 
ITMR India Tourism Market representatives 
ITO India Tourism Office 
KIP Know India Programme 
JATA Japan Association of Travel Agent  

iv 
 
LED Light-emitting diode 
LoI Letter of Intent 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MICE Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoC Ministry of Commerce 
MOT Ministry of Tourism 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
NRI Non–Residential Indian 
PIO Persons of Indian Origin 
PM Prime Minister 
PTDY Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RoK Republic of Korea 
SAARC South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
TIC Teachers of Indian Culture 
TTDI Travel & Tourism Development Index 
TV Television 
UAE United Arab Emirates 
UK United Kingdom 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization 
USA United States of America 
USD United States Dollar 
UT Union Territory 
VAT Value-added tax 
VVIP Very Very Important Person 
WTM World Travel Market 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 Tourism is generally regarded as a recent phenomenon but even in ancient times, people 
travelled not only for trade, business and religious purposes, but also to explore new unfamiliar 
places and cultures. Since ancient times, India has enjoyed a thriving trade and bilateral cultural 
relations with other countries via foreign travelers and  voyagers who visited India over the 
centuries in  search of knowledge and wisdom  and Indian traders who served as cultural 
ambassadors abroad and brought home ide as, impressions and customs of the distant lands. The 
Greek historian and diplomat Megasthenes travelled to Pataliputra in 302 BC during the reign of 
Chandragupta Maurya and introduced the world to the richness of Indian culture and customs 
through his boo k Indica, followed by the accounts and observations of other distinguished 
travelers like Fa -Hien, Ibn Battuta, Al -Biruni, Marco Polo and many others. The ancient Indian 
Universities like Nalanda and Vikramashila were the most important centers of cultural  interaction 
attracting large number of students and scholars from all over the world. Education, religion, trade 
and commerce were the dominant factors in tourism growth as they served to highlight India as a 
dream destination for traders and scholars, mystics and pilgrims alike in the ancient world.  
 
2. After independence in 1947,  a large number of Embassies and Missions were set up to 
play a pivotal role in political and economic cooperation, cultural promotion and interaction, trade 
and investment pro motion, press and media liaison, and scientific cooperation in bilateral and 
multilateral contexts and consular services. Overseas Tourism Offices were also set up by the 
Ministry of Tourism as early as in 1950 -60s and their restructuring was also done in 2018-19, 
under which 14 offices were co nsolidated into 8 t o coordinate with the Indian Miss ions and 
Embassies to carry out promotional activities showcasing India as an all year round  Tourist 
Destination. Despite the endeavours to synergize the efforts of the Ministries of External Affairs 
and Tourism, India is yet to realize its full potential as a tourist destination. India stands at 2 3rd 
rank in terms of international  tourist arrivals and 12th in terms of foreign exchange earnings from 
tourism for the year 2019; its percentage share in International Tourist Arrivals is a lowly 1.2 4. A 
country which boasts of one of the seven wonders of the world, 40 UNESCO World Heritage 
Sites, a seemingly inexhaustible number of forts, palaces, historical monuments, c aves and 
sculptures, geographically diverse and blessed with natural beauty and biodiversity, reported less 
International Tourist Arrivals in 2019 as compared to its geographically smaller Asian neighbour, 
Thailand. To realize the immense potential of the Indian tourism industry in building India a five 
trillion dollar economy as envisioned by the government, a “3T” (Trade, Technology and Tourism) 

2 
 
strategy has been implemented for the Indian Missions wherein their functioning would be judged 
by their abilit y to boost trade, tourist inflows and facilitating technology transfer to Indian 
companies. 
 
3. The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture, in this backdrop, decided to take up the subject „Role of Indian Miss ions Globally for the 
growth of Tourism in India‟ for examination and report thereon. As a sequel to examination of the 
subject, the Committee called for Background Notes and Replies to Questionnaires formulated to 
obtain exhaustive information on the stra tegies employed by the Ministries of Tourism and 
External Affairs for promotion of Indian Tourism in foreign markets . The Committee heard the 
views of the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Senior Officers of Ministries of Tourism and 
External Affairs, on the subject, in its meeting held on 31st May, 2022. 
  
4. The representatives of the Ministries of Tourism and External Affairs , through their oral 
and written submissions, highlighted the importance of Tourism as an engine for economic growth 
given its pot ential as a vehicle for job creation, economic growth and development. Globally, 
strong economic growth has generated millions of new travellers looking for exceptional travel 
experiences, be it business or leisure, domestic, regional or international, and  this trend is expected 
to continue with sustained momentum. Before the Covid pandemic, International Tourist Arrivals 
(ITA) in India had been consistently growing since 2003; however, India ranks 2 3rd position in 
Inbound Tourism and 12th rank in terms of Foreign Exchange earnings from tourism in 2019 and is 
yet to realize its full potential for Inbound Tourism. Inbound Tourism  covers all international 
tourist traffic entering a country and is also known as “export tourism” because although touris ts 
enjoy their travel experience within the destination country, they are paying for it using foreign 
currency.   
 
5. Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) 2015-2021 (Calendar year basis) 
Year FTAs in India (in Millions) Percentage(%) change over previous year 
2015 8.03 4.5 
2016 8.80 9.7 
2017 10.04 14.0 
2018 10.56 5.2 

3 
 
2019 10.93 3.5 
2020 2.74 -74.9 
2021 (Jan- June) 0.42  
Source: Bureau of Immigration 
 
6. Top Ten Source countries for Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) in India in 2020  are: 
(i) Bangladesh, (ii) United States, (iii) UK, (iv) Canada, (v) Russian Federation, (vi ) 
Australia, (v ii) France, (vi ii) Germany, (ix ) Malaysia, and (x) Sri Lanka.  Top Ten 
Emerging Markets for India are: (i) Japan, (ii) Singapore, (iii) Thailand, (iv) South Korea, 
(v) Italy, (vi) Myanmar, (vii) Spain, (viii) Netherlands, (ix) Portugal; and (x) Oman. 
 
Top Ten Indian States preferred by Foreign visitors are:- 
Rank State ForeignTouristVisits(in 
Millions) 
1 TamilNadu 6.87 
2 Maharashtra 5.53 
3 UttarPradesh 4.75 
4 Delhi 2.98 
5 WestBengal 1.66 
6 Rajasthan 1.61 
7 Kerala 1.19 
8 Punjab 1.10 
9 Bihar 1.09 
10 Goa 0.94 
 
7. The Committee observes that in concordance with UNWTO, International Tourist 
Arrivals (ITA) include both Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTA) and NRIs and from 2014 
onwards the Ministry of Tourism has started to compile the arrivals of NRIs on annual basis.  
Proper segregation of data regarding number of NRIs visiting India to meet their families 
and the actual number of foreign tourists coming for tourism purposes needs to be separately 
maintained as this data will help in the  formation of tourism policies. Since NRIs constitute a 
significant share of IT As, there has been a rise in ITAs since 2014, perhaps contributing to 
the rise of India to the 2 3rd rank in ITAs though still below even small countries like 

4 
 
Thailand, Austria and Poland The growth of FTAs however has been much slower taking a 
decade to double from 5.78 million in 2010  to 10.93 millions in 2019.   Other developing 
nations like Thailand r eported high er international tourism receipts. The Committee 
recommends that the promotional tactics of Thailand to utilize diplomacy and tourism 
promotion to attract foreign tourists despite their small population and geographical area as 
compared to Indi a may be assessed, and may be applied  in the Indian tourism sector, if 
found beneficial for the growth of Inbound Tourism in India. 
 
8. The Committee notes that there is no dearth of scenic places in India which are at par 
or even better than international locales but the latter  draw more international f ootfalls.  
Kashmir for example has similar weather and terrain as Switzerland but the l atter is more 
famous and draws more international tourists.  Similarly, Goa, Kochi, Kumarakom have 
beautiful beaches at par with international beaches.  The Committee is of the opinion that 
the Ministry should adopt a proactive policy to promote internationally such tourist places in 
India at par with those abroad.    
 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
9. The Secretary, Ministry of Tourism,  briefed the Committee that the Government launched 
„Incredible India‟ campaign to tap into the vast tourism potential of the country in an organized 
manner. The campaign highlighted various facets of Indian culture and history such as yoga, 
spirituality, festivals and monuments. The Incredible India campaign is one of the most successful 
campaigns that placed India on the world tourism map. Now the Ministry of Tourism has launched 
Incredible India Reconnect 2022  Campaign to position India as a preferred to urism destination in 
tourism generating markets.  However, Inbound Tourism  strategy should not be confined to  
campaigns and therefore Government of India has adopted a holistic appro ach to promote Inbound 
Tourism. Indian Missions and India Overseas Offices will execute a strategized, targeted approach 
tailored to each host country to promote Inbound Tourism to India. In order to forge partnership 
with Indian Missions for Inbound Tourism  and ensure effective implementation, the MoT in 
consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (Ministry of Civil Aviation) and Ministry of Commerce (MoC) has 
formulated a detailed stra tegy document covering the vision and objectives, key strategic areas, 
key operational areas and governance of the institutional arrangement  for promoting Inbound 
Tourism to India. The key objectives of the Strategy are:  

5 
 
(i) Position India as the most favoured tourist destination  
(ii) Create right perception about India as a tourism destination  
(iii) Promote India as a 365 days destination  
(iv) Promote specific themes, destinations and products of Indian Tourism  
(v) Strengthen India‟s role in various multilateral and bilateral forums on Tourism 
 
10. A Programme Implementation Committee under the Chairmanship of the Additional 
Secretary (Tourism) was set up to take forward the project. Two meetings have taken place so far. 
Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Tourism will look after overall direction 
and guidance for the program. 
 
11. KEY FEATURES OF TOURISM STRATEGY  
 
a) COUNTRY- SPECIFIC STRATEGIC PLANS  
 The Ministry of Tourism in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs and other 
relevant Ministries and Industry Stakeholders will identify the top source markets including 
established as well as emerging markets. In addition, focus areas such as Buddh ist Markets will be 
identified.  The Ministry of Tourism will accordingly prepare country specific multi -year strategic 
plans for marketing in these Key Markets on the basis of the needs, requirements and preferences 
of travelers.  Apart from generic measu res applicable to all the markets, the plans may also have 
targets for specific markets.  
 
b)  MEGA FAMILIARIZATION TOURS 
 Mega familiarization tours for specific countries covering specific tourism offerings such 
as Culture and Heritage, Yoga and Wellness, Medical Value travel, Adventure Tourism. 
 
c)  INTERNATIONAL ROADSHOWS  
 Plans for International roadshows in consultation with Indian Missions and Industry 
Stakeholders for various markets, which will showcase the relevant Indian Tourism products and 
offerings.  
  
(d) CONNECT WITH INDIAN DIASPORA  
 Missions will leverage their connect with Indian Diaspora to motivate them to travel to 

6 
 
various Indian Destinations. The Mission will also strategize how the diaspora can be leveraged to 
promote Indian tourism in their host countries.  
 
 (e)  ANNUAL EVENTS TO BE HOSTED BY INDIA  
 Plans for important events for promotion of Inbound Tourism  shall be prepared in 
consultation with Indian Missions and Industry Stakeholders. Some of the key events are 
International Buddhist Conclave, India Tourism Mart, Yoga Day etc.  
 
(f) ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL EVENTS WHERE INDIA PARTICIPATES  
 Plans for important international tra vel marts such as WTM, ITB etc which help in 
promoting Inbound Tourism shall be prepared in consultation with Indian Missions and Industry 
Stakeholders.  
 
(g) SPECIFIC STRATEGY FOR MEDICAL AND WELLNESS TOURISM 
 Medical tourism, especially wellness tourism and AYUSH may be promoted to position 
India as a health and wellness destination.   
 
(h) SPECIFIC STRATEGY FOR MICE TOURISM 
 MICE Tourism (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) constitute an important 
element of tourism and has a multiplier effect on the economy. A specific strategy to promote 
India‟s MICE offerings and winning bids for international events need to be planned.  Support 
from the Indian Missions will be crucial for winning the bids for hosting the events in India.  
 
11.1 The Committee appreciates that the tourism strategy has country specific strategic 
plans and targets specific markets . Different countri es have different social, economic and 
political situations and   country specific strategic plans would help to appeal to the general 
consciousness and expectations of the people of different countries. The Committee notes that 
the general assessment of the earlier tourism promotional campaigns of India  was that  
though impressive, they lacked focus on products and themes and failed to convey a clear cut 
message about India and that not much publicity w as given to the new and urban India, its  
new deve lopments and luxury properties. The Committee is pleased to note that the new 
strategic approach addresses these shortcomings and is tailored to suit specific markets.  
 

7 
 
11.2 The Committee notes that various tourism circuits such as „Buddhist Circuit,‟ 
„Ramayana Circuit‟ can provide tourists with enriching religious experiences. The 
Committee also observes that in the aftermath of the COVID pandemic, the importance of 
shorter distances in travel has become more pronounced and regional tourism is likely to 
grow. India should therefore leverage its cultural similarities such as the Buddha‟s trail with 
its neighbhours. The Committee recommends t hat necessary steps be taken to revive circuit 
tourism by organizing FAM trips and Buddhist Circuit Family Tours and Conferences with 
the help of Indian Overseas Tourism Offices and Missions to boost tourism in country.   
 
11.3 The Committee appreciates that strategic promotion of MICE tourism has been given 
importance. The Committee notes that there is a surge in business travel to India and 
promotion of MICE tourism would capitalize on the blossoming image of India as a n 
important MICE destination. India already has many cities which have good infrastructure 
for hosting conferences or are in the process of developing the same.  What is required is the 
connectivity between the cities to enable the growth of MICE tourism in India.  
 
11.4 India is a hub of holistic streams of medicine such as Ayurveda, Homeopathy, 
Naturopathy and the birthplace of Yoga.  Yoga has caught the world‟s imagination with 21 
June being declared as Yoga Day. Yoga and wellness retreats are now in great demand in the 
aftermath of the pandemic.  India has huge wellness tourism potential and the Committee 
appreciates its inclusion in the tourism strategy. India receives most of its medical tourists 
from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Oman, Bangladesh, Maldives, Nigeria, Kenya and Iraq. There is 
a huge potential for India to realize and aggressively advance towards attracting medical 
tourists from other parts of the world, including Europe and America. 
 
(i) FACILITATING VISA 
 Ministry of Home Affairs is developing e -VISA mobile application, which can be 
expedited.  
(j)  FACILITATING DIRECT CONNECTIVITY 
 South East Asia, Eastern Europe and South America have huge potential for increasing 
foreign tourist arrivals to India.  Therefore, it is important to introduce direct flight connectivity 
from these markets which have the potential to contribu te to tourist  traffic to India.  MoCA may 
look into initiating direct flights between India and countries that are witnessing a rise in the 

8 
 
number of outbound international tourists. 
 
11.5 The Committee observes that South Asia is home to many tourism based economies 
such as Nepal, Maldives, Bhutan and tourists also use India as transit to other places in the 
South Asian region and South Asian nations are often markete d as a part of a package tour 
and therefore connectivity between India and its South Asian neighbours i s of utmost 
importance for Indian tourism sector. 
 
(k)  PLANNING AND MONITORING OF TOURISM TRENDS 
1) Creating database for the respective country of travel agencies, tour operators, independent travel 
planners, MICE agencies, travel &  consumer Media and other relevant stakeholders in the travel 
industry.   
2) Monitor relevant tourism trends and opportunities and prepare quarterly market reports that 
can be shared with Ministry of Tourism and the private sector stakeholders  
 
 (l) PUBLIC RELATIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS 
 The Missions and India Tourism Overseas Offices need to undertake the following 
public relations and communication activities relevant to tourism promotion:-  
(i) To track and report articles related to India in the local media 
(ii) To ensure placement of positive news stories in trade and consumer media 
(iii) To ensure placement of official press releases from MoT 
(iv) Image building and to counteract negativity publicity as and when required 
(v) Active presence on Social Media 
 
(m) RELATIONSHIPS AND OUTREACH  
The Missions and India Tourism Overseas Offices  may build relationships with various 
stakeholders to create awareness about India tourism products, engage with museums, universities, 
trade organizations, local clubs, bring annu al conferences of travel and hospitality associations in 
the identified markets to India , identify eminent opinion makers, celebrities, TV teams, tour 
operators etc who can be invited to India under the Hospitality Scheme of the Ministry and to 
advise in the selection of travel shows for participation. 
  
 

9 
 
(n) INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AND ENGAGEMENT WITH 
 MULTILATERAL/BILATERAL FORUMS 
 Active engagement in multilateral forums like UNWTO, G -20, ASEAN, BRICS, IBSA, 
SAARC need to be pursued. Partnerships may be explored with SAARC and ASEAN countries to 
develop and promote common packages on themes that link the countries such as the Buddhist 
circuit, Ramayana circuit, Himalayan circuit, Heritage circuit that would yield excellent dividends 
to all participating nations.  
 
11.6 Apart from geographical proximity, the historical and cultural linkages between India 
and its South Asian neighbours offer great potential for d evelopment of regional tourism.  
The Committee is of the opinion that c ooperation with other South Asian countries on joint 
tourism and advertising campaigns and steps to facilitate seamless travel of tourists between 
India and its neighbourhood would promote Inbound Tourism in India 
 
(o) FACILITATE FDI INTO TOURISM SECTOR  
Government of India has allowed 100% FDI in hospitality sector. India is developing various 
destinations and actively promoting investment from Private sector includi ng Public Private 
Partnerships. The Missions can engage with the trade/ industry to promote  and encourage 
investment in tourism and hospitality sector in India.  
 
(p) GOVERNANCE AND MONITORING 
The Ministry of Tourism will set up a digital platform to bring visibility to all the stakeholders 
about the activities to promote Inbound Tourism . It will have a dashboard on trends and track 
performance of Inbound Tourism  from various countries .  The Ministry will organize quarterly 
meetings with relevant Ministries, participating States and Industry Stakeholders to review the 
progress on various initiatives and activities.   
Ministry of Tourism will designate a nodal agency for implementation of the program. There will 
be a Steering Committee and program implementation committee for overall direction, guidance, 
coordination and implementation of the program. 
 
Steering Committee 
11.7 Steering Committee comprising of the following members will be responsible for overall 
direction and guidance for the program: 

10 
 
(i). Secretary, Tourism – Chairman 
(ii). Representative of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department  of 
Commerce, Ministry of Home Affairs not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
(iii). Director General, Tourism 
(iv). Joint Secretary, Tourism – Convenor 
(v).  President, IATO 
(vi). President, ATOAI  
(vii). President, HAI 
(viii). Vice Chairman, ICPB 
 
Programme implementation Committee 
11.8 Program implementation Committee will be responsible for various implementation 
modalities and coordination at program and operational level: 
(i) Joint Secretary – Chairman 
(ii) Representative of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department of 
 Commerce, Ministry of Home Affairs not below the rank of Director 
(iii) Representative of IATO 
(iv) Representative of ATOAI 
(v) Representative of HAI 
(vi) Representative of ICPB 
(vii) Deputy Director General (Overseas Marketing) 
 
11.9 The Committee notes that the Incredible India Campaign was the first campaign to 
promote India uniformly as a destination offering a wide range of experiences and was 
hugely successful but marketing Campaigns are only part of the challenge.  Tourism requires 
easy visa clearances, hotels, flight, train and road connectivity and above all the promise of a 
safe, secure and convenient travel. In order to build a successful brand, all aspects of tourism 
infrastructure and services and supply -demand gaps must be given utmost importance and 
this can be achieved only by coordinated efforts of all the stakeholders. The Committee 
appreciates the holistic and targeted approach of the Government for promotion of Inbound 
Tourism and recommends that systematic monitoring of the coordinated efforts of all the 
stakeholders may be done by the Programme Implementation Committee 
 

11 
 
MULTILATERAL/BILATERAL MOUs  
12. In order to strengthen cooperation with foreign countries and multilateral fora in the field 
of tourism Ministry of Tourism has signed various MoUs / agreements. The list of multilateral and 
bilateral MoUs/agreements signed by Ministry of Tourism is attached. The main objectives of 
these Agreements/ MoUs signed by the Ministry of Tourism include the following:  
i. Exchange of information and data related to tourism. 
ii. Cooperation between tourism stakeholders including hotels & Tour operators. 
iii. Exchange of visits of Tour Operators/Media/Opinion Makers for promotion of two -way 
tourism. 
iv. Exchange programmes for cooperation in Human Resource Development. 
v. Investment in the Tourism and Hospitality sector. 
vi. Exchange of experience in the areas of promotion, marketing, destination development and 
management. 
13. The details of multilateral and bilateral tourism agreements/MoUs/tripartite agreements 
signed/ proposed to be signed by the Ministry of Tourism is placed at Annexure I. 
 
FILM TOURISM   
14. Upon query by the Committee, the Secretary informed that the Ministry of Tourism has 
issued guidelines dated 25.07.2012 for extending financial support to State Governments/ Union 
Territory Administrations, for promotion of „Film Tourism‟.   Financial assistance is provided up 
to Rs.2.00 Lakh per film for compone nts such as Space Hiring/Filming charges, Facilitation Fee 
etc.  
 
15. Government of India (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting), has launched scheme 
relating to incentives to foreign film producers for shooting in Indian locales . Under the scheme, 
international film production companies can claim a reimbursement of up to 30% on Qualifying 
Expenditure in India subject to a maximum of INR 2 crore. Foreign films shooting in India can 
claim an additional 5% bonus up to a maximum of INR 50 lakhs (USD 65,000 ) as additional 
reimbursement would be granted for employing 15% or more manpower in India.  
 
16. The Committee notes that countries offer various types of incentives to encourage film 
producers to use beau tiful locations to shoot films.  Most countries offer tax sops in the form 
of VAT refunds ranging from 10 -20% depending on the location and the budget of the film.  

12 
 
Sometimes the governments even bear some cost of the production as films act  as 
advertisements for the country and huge ben efits are accrued. The Spain Tourism Board 
partnered with the Bollywood film “Zindagi Na Mile gi Dobara” for promotions and got a 
huge influx of tourists that year.  The incentives offered by the Indian government appear to 
be meager compared to the interna tional norm s and the considerable payoffs. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may review the incentives provided to 
foreign film producers as per internationally competitive rates.  
 
OVERSEAS INDIA TOURISM OFFICES UNDER MINISTRY OF TOURISM  
17. The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has restructured its overseas offices by consolidating 14 
offices into 8 offices, currently located in Beijing, Dubai, Frankfurt, London, New York, 
Singapore, Tokyo, and Moscow (currently in the process of identifying a location for 
establishment). The overseas offices help the Ministry to connect with foreign operators, provide 
human interface and ensure that the Incredible India brand penetrates deep in the source markets.  
The purpose behind consolidating the 14 overseas India To urism Offices into 8 offices is carrying 
out effective/focused promotional activities and to reduce the financial implication in handling 
these overseas offices. The eight Overseas Tourist offices also look after count ries other than the 
one they are stationed in. 
 
18. Broadly the functions of India Tourism Offices in the overseas markets include:- 
 Industry-to-Industry Partnerships: Participation in leading international tourism 
fairs/exhibitions, organizing „Incredible  India‟ Road shows and „Know India Seminars,‟ Joint 
Promotion & Joint Advertising, etc.  
 Enhancing visibility: Undertaking advertising campaigns in the Print, TV, Radio, 
Online/digital including social media and outdoor media. 
 Facilitation: Extending brochure support to foreign tour operators, promotional events with 
Indian Missions, production and distribution of publicity material in local languages. 
Activities Undertaken By The India Tourism Offices overseas in promotion of „Incredible India‟ 
Campaign 
S.No. Activities 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 

13 
 
1. No. of Joint Promotions/ Promotional functions/ events, 
India Evenings/Food Festivals organized 
  
(Standalone and in collaboration with other organisations) 
83 79 160 
2. No. of Travel Fairs/Exhibitions participated 58 81 78 
3. No. of Know India Seminar/Roadshows Organized 48 59 94 
4. No. Hospitality guests hosted 517 767 567 
5. No. of Publications/TV Channels/Online/digital sites and 
outdoor units in which advertisements released 
152 193 110 
6. No. of Brochures printed/Brochure support extended. 87 37 77 
 
19. Upon query of the Committee regarding the rationale behind consolidating 14 Overseas 
Tourism Offic es into 8 offices, the Ministry explained that the purpose was to carry out 
effective/focussed promotional activities and to reduce the financial implication in handling these 
overseas offices.  The cost of running each Overseas Tourist office is as given below:  
Budget Estimates 2022-23  
(Rs. in Thousands)  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Operation 
Salary M.T. F.T.E. O.E. R.R.T. Grand 
Total 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1. Beijing 7806 800 1500 2400 18000 30506 
2. Dubai 10000 1000 1000 1600 8000 21600 
3. Frankfurt 20000 2000 2000 3500 15000 42500 
4. London 13000 1500 1500 4500 11000 31500 
5. New York 26000 3200 7000 7000 85000 128200 
6. Moscow 15000 2000 2500 4500 24000 48000 
7. Singapore 20000 1500 2000 2000 20000 45500 
8. Tokyo 15000 1200 500 1726 13140 31566 
 Total 126806 13200 18000 27226 194140 379372 
 
20. Upon query by the Committee as to the sanctioned and in position strength of the existing 8 
Overseas India Tourism Offices, the Ministry informed that the total India based sanctioned staff 
strength of 8 Overseas India Tourism O ffices is 31 [i.e. 05 Region al Director, 08 Director, 12 
Assistant Director and 06 Tourist Information Officer] out of which 7 are filled as on 19.05.2022. 

14 
 
The local staff strength is 19 and out of which 6 are vacant. The local staff are recruited as per 
rules framed by Indian Missions abroad under the MEA. 
 
21. As per the guidelines, Indian employees appointed to Overseas Tourist Offices are not 
required to be proficient in the local language. However, knowledge of foreign language is one of 
the criterions for appointment to Overseas Tourism Offices. 
 
22. The Committee notes that out of the 31 posts in the Overseas Tourism Offices, only 7 
have been filled while 24 lie vacant. More than 12 vacancies have been vacant for more than 
5 years. There are 6 vacancies in the local staff strength of 19 also. The Committee is 
dismayed to note that three fourths of the posts in the Overseas Tourism Offices are vacant, 
many of them for years altogether despite the fact that these offices were established 
specifically for the purpose of promot ion of tourism and incur huge expenditure. The 
Committee notes that most Offices are manned by a single person and fails to see how the 
Overseas Tourism Offices could have functioned effectively with a ba re minimum staff in 
position. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reason for such delay in filling these 
vacancies and bottlenecks faced in this regard and recommends that necessary steps be taken 
to fill the positions lying vacant for more than 5 years. 
 
23. The Committee also observes that as per relevant surveys, not many travellers to India 
were aware of the existence of an India Tourism Office in their country and even less felt that 
the information and guidance provided by the Office was adequate.  The Committee has 
been informed that the India n employees appointed to the Overseas India Tourism offices 
were not required to be proficient in the local language  which the Committee feels is an 
oversight.  The first point of contact for a potential tourist is often the Overseas India 
Tourism office a nd it is essential that the employees of the Tourism office should be able to 
give their guidance in the local language.  The brochures and website of India tourism should 
also be available in the local language. The Ministry has informed that the Incredible India 
website is presently available in 8 different foreign languages apart from English and Hindi 
and after revamp it would be available in 20 + vernacular and foreign languages.  The 
Committee urges that the brochures and website may be ma de available in as many 
languages as possible  as language plays a crucial role in global industries lik e tourism. It is 
essential that potential tourists are given clear information in the language that they are 

15 
 
familiar with to give them the confidence to  visit countries where they may encounter 
language barriers.   
 
INDIAN TOURISM MARKET REPRESENTATIVES 
24. The Ministry of Tourism has also hired professional marketing agency, India Tourism 
Market representatives (ITMR) to convert the interest of foreign tourists into actual visits, improve 
market coverage and efficiency, gain local expertise and market intelligence, and overcome 
language barrier. .The following 8 ITMRs in phase 1 including USA, Australia, Canada, Russia, 
France, Japan, Spain, and one in ASEAN country - Singapore are being proposed. 
The ITMR will furnish the following reports to the Ministry: 
(i) Monthly report of the activities and accomplishments; 
(ii) Quarterly report of the activities and accomplishments  during the period along with an 
analysis of the market and the impact of the initiatives of the MoT, Govt. of India; and 
(iii) Detailed annual report on the progress and achievements of the  activities undertaken for 
promotion of India in the market vis-a-vis the activities outlined in the annual action plan and the 
scope of work. 
 
25. The key objectives for appointment of ITMRs are as under: 
(i) To increase foreign tourist arrivals to the country 
(ii) To position India as a preferred tourist destination in key source markets,  
 emerging markets and potential markets 
(iii) To generate awareness about India‟s tourism destinations and products in  
 the overseas markets to increase India‟s global market share 
(iv) To supplement the promotional efforts of the MoT and the India Tourism  
 Offices overseas 
(v) To connect and engage with tourism stakeholders and ensure that India remains 
 their top year round preferred tourist destination 
(vi) To enhance the opportunities for the private sector stakeholders to increase 
 tourism business from the identified countries. 
 
26. The Committee observes that hiring agencies which hold India‟s interests paramount 
in terms of tourism promotion and can provide professional and impartial service at all times 
will greatly impact the promotional campaigns, given the untapped potential of Indian 

16 
 
tourism sector. The Committee recommends the MoT to monitor the travel and tour trend of 
the countries through ITMRs where the Overseas Tourism Offices are operating 
 
 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE EARNINGS THROUGH TOURISM  
27. The Committee was also informed that  based on available data of Balance of Payment 
from RBI and available Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs), the calendar year wise FEE through 
tourism in India during 2018 to 2020 is given below: 
Year 
FEE through tourism in 
India(in INR –Crore) 
FEE through tourism in India 
(in US $ Million) 
2018# 194881 28586 
2019# 211661 30058 
2020 50136 6958 
# Revised Estimate  
 
ROLE OF INDIAN MISSIONS  
28. Indian Missions will take ownership to promote Inbound Tourism  to India in the host 
countries where India Tourism Offices are not located i.e. in countries other than USA, UK, 
Germany, Russia, Dubai, China, Singapore and Japan.    In countries where India Tourism 
Overseas offices are located, they would work in close  coordination with the respective Missions 
to undertake various promotional activities 
 
29. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs further elaborated on the nature and 
number of promotional activities conducted by the Indian Missions and supported by the Ministry 
under the Market Expansion Activities and State Facilitation Budget Heads.  
 
 Tourism Road shows and Know India Seminars : Missions and Posts regularly organize 
tourism Ro ad shows and Know India S eminars in their host countries both for Ministry of 
Tourism, GoI as well as State -led initiatives. These help in popularizing Indian tourism, 
connecting the tour operators of both sides for tie ups and garnering interest in outrea ch among the 
travel industry in host countries. 
 
 

17 
 
ROAD SHOWS 
S. No. Country 
 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1.  Germany 0 9 4 0 0 
2.  UK 4 1 6 0 0 
3.  Dubai 0 0 0 0 0 
4.  USA  4 4 4 0 0 
5.  Australia  0 0 2 0 0 
6.  Canada 0 0 1 0 0 
 
KNOW INDIA SEMINAR 
S. No. Country 
 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1.  Germany 9 0 6 0 0 
2.  UK 4 2 6 0 0 
3.  Dubai 4 1 5 0 0 
4.  USA 0 0 0 3 0 
5.  Australia 6 4 2 0 0 
6.  Canada 0 0 2 2 0 
 
30. Incredible India Campaign : Missions have been actively working for the promotion of 
Incredible India Campaign. This is being done by distribution of Incredible India brochures 
translated in several languages; and organizing Incredible India road shows. The Missions have 
also been organizing Travel to India campaigns under which promotion of Incredible India is being 
done through billboards at prominent locations and advertisements on local city buses plying on 
busy routes 
 
 Social Media Outreach : Missions also undertake promotion of Incredible India campaign 
though their social media channels, which has found resonance in the last few years.  Studies 
have been conducted by Missions/Posts on social media analysis and shared with Ministry of 
Tourism. Missions/Posts regularly promote Incredible India including culture, heritage, 
Indian cinema, food, Indian Perspective, etc. through their social media handles. The Twitter 
and Facebook page followers of the Missions/Posts have been growing consistently  along 
with increase in percentage of local followers. The impressions registered on social media 
based promotional activities undertaken by the Missions/Posts have witnessed substantial 
increment during the Covid time. This has had positive impact and has in turn created interest 

18 
 
in potential tourists, with flights to/from India being almost fully booked post the lifting of 
Covid restrictions. 
 
 Participating in Travel Expos : Missions have been participating in global and regional travel 
markets and travel expos to promote tourism in India. 
 
 Tourism as a part of commercial and academic events : Missions also promote India for its 
plethora of tourist attractions across themes during the programs/engagements at all 
platforms – Universities, Think -tanks, Busines s and Commerce Chambers and interactions 
thereof.  
 
 Promotion Material: Missions have also been working to publish and distribute promotional 
material positioning India as a favourite Tourist destination. Missions also work for the 
promotion of State touri sm through distribution of publicity material during their various 
Commercial events, state days and seminars. Missions also promote tourism through slide 
shows and posters, LED screens and billboards at the prominent places. 
 
 Medical Tourism: Missions have been organizing several outreach seminars, exhibitions and 
investors summits to promote medical tourism in India, and AYUSH systems of medicine 
and related wellness  approaches. Missions have organized AYUSH promotion campaigns 
among travel and tourism in dustry operators, medical industry and among 
spas/resorts/wellness centers. 
 
 Signing several Memorandum of Understanding  for Promotion of Tourism with Foreign 
Governments. 
 
 Inviting Artists to India and organize their events in association with ICCR. 
 
 Providing „Grants in Aid‟ to local artists/groups  who promotes in Indian Culture, Dances, 
etc. 
 
 Other activities including:  

19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31. Indian Mission overseas also facilitate foreign TV Teams / Media by extending shooting permits 
to make documentaries/short films/programmes in India. Incredible India „Dekho Apna Desh‟: As a part of 
the promotion for targeting NRIs, India Tourism Overseas offices along with Indian Mission abroad 
organizes „Dekho Apna Desh,‟ in various countries. 
 
Visa facilitation by Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
32. The MEA acts as an effective coordinating point for smooth implementation of visa related 
policies between the MHA and Missions/Posts abroad while Missions/Posts abroad act as 
implementing agencies.  
33. Indian visas are primarily issued under (i) Regu lar/Paper Visa Scheme by Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad; (ii) e -Visa Scheme by Bureau of Immigration and (iii) Visa -on-Arrival 
Scheme by Bureau of Immigration. Under Regular Visa Scheme  Visa Sticker of appropriate 
category and duration is pasted on the passport of an applicant.  The Indian Missions/Posts process 
visa application, as per the MHA‟s guidelines, for 19 categories of visas. The e -Visa scheme has 
been expanded from e -Tourist visas to include new categories viz  e-Business visa, e -Medical 
visa, e-Conference and e -Medical Attendant. Nationals of 171 countries were eligible to avail e -
Visa scheme prior to its suspension in March 2020 (due to onset of Covid-19 pandemic).  
 
34. However, post Covid -19 pandemic e -Visa Scheme has been fully restored, in graded 
manner, for nationals of 156 countries. The Visa-on-Arrival scheme is available to select eligible 
nationals of three countries (i.e. Japan, RoK and UAE) visiting for the purp ose of business, 
tourism, conference and medical.   The process involved filling up of an application form which is 
required to be submitted at the Visa -on-Arrival desk on arrival along with Disembarkation Card.  
After due verifications and payment of applicable fee, the passport of these nationals are stamped 
with Visa-on-Arrival stamp with 60 days/double entry facility by the immigration officer. 
 Special Day/Weeks for promotion of tourism such as Celebration of India 
Day, Constitution Day, Gandhi Jayanti,  International Yoga Day etc. 
 Celebrating Indian Festivals - Promoting Indian Culture and Cuisine (Food 
Festival); 
 Exhibition 
 Indian Film Festival- Screening Indian Movies/Biopic of Freedom Fighters 
 Setting up of India Corners in several Universities, Institutions, Art Galleries, 
Indian Missions/Posts 
 Participating in local festivals for promotion of India tourism 

20 
 
35. As part of visa streamlining process, visa application has bee n made Online under Regular 
as well as e -Visa scheme. In Regular Visa application, the applicants are required to submit the 
duly filled-in application form, along with required documents, with nearest Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad or to the Outsourcing Age ncy (where Visa services are outsourced).    The applicant is also 
required to pay applicable Visa fee and other charges (wherever applicable). The GoI has launched 
a Pilot project w.e.f. 26 January, 2022 for 24 Missions/Posts abroad facilitating applicants  to 
upload required visa supporting documents also in the Online mode.   
 
36. Under e-Visa scheme, it is complete Online mode where the successful applicants receives 
ETA (Electronic Travel Authorisation) through registered email to facilitate their travel  into India. 
In addition, Bureau of Immigration, M/o Home Affairs also extends e -Tourist visa under e -Visa 
scheme to nationals of eligible countries. The e -visa service, including e -Tourist Visa, under the 
scheme is being rendered in time -bound manner and decision is communicated to applicant via e -
mail within 72 hours of making online application. Initially the scheme was open for e -Tourist 
visas for only 43 countries and entry was restricted through five airports only. Over the years, the 
scheme has been gradually liberalized by further including other categories of visas viz  e-Business 
visa, e -Medical visa,  e-Conference and e -Medical Attendant  under e -Visa scheme and also 
extending the facilities t o nationals of other countries.  Now, 28 Indian airports an d 5 Indian Ports 
have been designated for providing e -Visa services.   Nationals of 171 countries were eligible to 
avail e-Visa scheme prior to its suspension in March 2020 (due to onset of Covid -19 pandemic). 
However, in the post Covid -19 pandemic e -Visa S cheme has been fully restored, in graded 
manner, for nationals 156 countries only.  e-Visas issued under e -Visa scheme are of Single, 
Double, Triple and Multiple entry/entries facilities.  
 
37. Indian Missions and Posts have been actively engaged in creatin g awareness about the e -
Visa & Visa -on-Arrival Schemes, and also the India Visa Su -Swagatam Mobile App, which is 
aimed at easing travel of foreign nationals intending to visit India through visa and immigration  
facilitations.   The App enables foreign nationals all facilities right from visa applications stage till 
their exit from India besides facilitating such foreign nationals to apply for extension of visa, 
Residential Permit, Exit Permit with FRRO/FRO concerned if required. The App, for Android and  
IOS users, has been launched in July, 2021 as „pilot project‟ for nationals of 24 countries only 
which is further extended to nationals of another 36 countries w.e.f October, 2021. As on date, the 
Mobile App named “India Visa Su-Swagatam” is admissible to nationals of 60 countries.      

21 
 
 
38. In order to further liberalizing and strengthening information sharing mechanism, any 
changes in visa policy/instructions being issued by MHA are also uploaded on web portal 
(Indianvisaonline.gov.in) immediately upon i ssuance. The Indian Missions/Posts also regularly 
upload any changes in visa policies in Missions/Posts website for consumption of visa 
applicants.  Indian Missions/Posts abroad also maintains 24X7 help desk for consular related 
issues, including visa services. 
 
39. Hon'ble Finance Minister on 28 June, 2021 announced grant of First Five Lakh Tourist 
Visas without charging Visa Fee, once Tourist Visa is restored. The announcement made by 
Hon'ble Finance Minister has been implemented since  15 October, 2021 when the Tourist Visa 
was resumed. This is expected to give impetus in our efforts to promote tourism in the country. 
  
40. The Committee notes that easy policies/ regulations concerning visa  for foreign 
nationals will make it easy for them to visit India. The Committee is pleased to note the steps 
taken by the Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs to provide hassle free visa 
services.  However ensuring that the information regarding visa policies reaches the potential 
tourists is equally important.  The Committee observes that the Overseas Tourist Offices do 
not seem to have a Visa help desk for information and guidance of both tourists and agents.  
Visa rules change from time to time and it is essential that the agents and touris ts are kept 
updated of the same. In many countries, the visa issuance has been outsourced and tourists 
have to be informed clearly about any extra handling charges apart from the normal visa 
fees.  The Committee recommends that a Visa guidance Helpdesk be present at all the 
Overseas Tourist Offices as well as the Indian Missions for effective guidance of tourists.  
 
Dashboard 
41. Government has laid emphasis on the 3Ts – Trade, Technology and Tourism. Indian 
Missions/Posts have been working proactively in this direction. In order to focus on promotion of 
3Ts which include tourism, MEA is working on creation of dashboard which will enable Missions 
to provide the data and pr ogress related to trade, technology and tourism as well as the activities 
undertaken by Missions in pursuance to these objectives. 
 
 

22 
 
TOURISM OFFICERS IN INDIAN MISSIONS  
42. On the request of Ministry of Tourism, Minister of External affairs has designated Tourism 
Officers in the Indian Missions of top 20 source markets in October, 2021.   The Ministry of 
Tourism has identified and circulated functions, role and responsibilities of Tourism officers along 
with the format for monthly reporting for smooth functioning and effective marketing of Incredible 
India in the overseas markets.  The Ministry of Tourism has designed a Web -page for tourism 
officer posted in Indian Mission abroad to submit the monthly report on tourism promotional 
activities conducted by the respective missions. 
 
43. Tourism Officers in the Missions/Embassies are of the rank Second Secretary/First 
Secretary. They report to Ambassador/Consul General/DCM/DCG and have 1 -2 support staff 
usually. An IFS Officer/MEA personnel serving in the Mission is appointed as Tourism Officer. 
During the meeting with Tourism officers chaired by Secretary (Tourism) on 28.01. 2022, it was 
decided that each Mission will prepare a country specific strategy for promoting incredible India in 
the respective countries by mid-March 2022.    
 
44. Major improvements suggested by Tourism Officers of the top 5 shortlisted Country 
Specific Strategies (Australia, France, Japan, Spain, United Kingdom) are: 
i.  The connectivity to be improved. Air connectivity is not very good. 
ii. May give free familiarization trips to different parts of India to promote India as a 
 tourism destination.  
iii. Marketing may be increased by Blog Writers/ Travel Writer  
iv.  Thematic Conclaves such as Yoga, Gastronomy, Buddhism,  etc. can be conducted in 
 India.  
v.  Ministry should ensure a prominent Indian presence in different international events, as 
cultural programs and Exhibits 
  
45. The Committee observes that since the Overseas India Tourism offices which were 
handling the responsibility of tourism promotions have now been consolidated to only 8 
offices, the mandate of promotion of Indian tourism abroad is now effectively with the Indian 
Missions. The Committee has been informed that Tourism Officers, who are either IFS/MEA 
personnel have been designated in 20 Missions  who will be responsible for the holistic 
promotion of India as a tourist destination, creating country specific strategies among others.  

23 
 
The Committee feels that this is a cost saving measure which would enable the  Government   
to appoint dedicated Tourism Officers in as many countries as required w hile setting up an 
Overseas India Tourism Office would involve much expenditure and time and the returns 
did not seem to justify the expenditu re. Further, only a certain number of Ov erseas Offices 
can be set up while the diplomatic network of embassies and  consulates around the world  
can be a more effective marketing model for promotion of tourism. 
 
46. The Committee finds that hitherto, the promotional activities conducted by the Indian 
Missions appear to have been sporadic and irregular. For instance, the  data provided for the 
last five years on Road shows reveals that there have been no Road Shows conducted in 
Dubai in the past five years and only one in Australia in the same period of the time.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the reasons for the seemingly sporadic schedule of 
events.  The Committee notes that GoI has laid emphasis on the 3Ts – Trade, Technology and 
Tourism and Mea is working on creation of dashboard which will enable Missions to provide 
the data and progress related to trade, t echnology and tourism as well as the activities 
undertaken by Mission in pursuance to these objectives.  To achieve the target of US 400 
billion in merchandise exports, the Ministry of External Affairs has directed all its missions 
abroad to evaluate all the officers only on basis of 3Ts– Traderade, Technology and Tourism. 
 
47. The Committee notes that the 3T strategy will serve as a two -way funnel connecting 
Indian nationals, the states and businesses globally which will enhance exports, attract 
foreign in dustries, and businesses to India. The Committee recommends the MoT in 
collaboration with Ministry External Affairs formulate relevant guidelines to connect Indian 
businesses and investors seeking to conduct trade, investment and agricultural exports 
overseas. 
 
ICCR 
48. The mandate of Indian Council for Cultural Relations  (ICCR) is to promote Indian Culture 
aboard which has a significant bearing on promotion of tourism.  Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) through its 37 Cultural Centers and Chairs, promotes Indian languages, dance, 
art and culture. Organizing conferences/seminars/workshops, supporting Chairs in Indian Studies, 
exchange of cultural troupes are other means of propagating of Indian culture abroad.    ICCR has 
been sending Teachers in th e discipline of Yoga, Hindi Language and Performing Art forms to 

24 
 
promote Indian Culture. ICCR is also engaging local talent including from the Diaspora and ICCR 
alumni as per the directives of Hon'ble Prime Minister of India to promote Indian culture abroa d.  
As per available data from 204 Indian Missions, 2413 events have been organized in association 
with ICCR during the last five years.   
 
49. Ministry of Tourism through its India Tourism offices in overseas regularly provide 
publicity material / souvenirs to foreign educational institutes / hubs to promote Indian Culture 
overseas. As a part of the cultural and tourism outreach, Missions and Posts regularly conduct the 
visit and interactions with the students at foreign universities in their respective host countries. 
 
PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
50. Ministry of External affairs has a scheme through Indian Missions abroad called Know 
India – Bharat Ko Jaaniye (KIP) programme. 
 
Know India Programme (KIP)  
51. In the year 2003, the Government of India initiated flagship scheme titled  “Know India 
Programme” (KIP)  for the Indian origin youth in the age group of 18-30 years with an objective to 
reconnect them with their mother land and to motivate and inspire them by the transformations 
taking place in contemporary India. There are 40 participants in each group and the duration of the 
participant in India is 25 days including 10 days in any partner state. The duration of the 
programme has now been reduced from 25 days to 21 days effective from FY 20 22-23. Since its 
inception, Ministry of External Affairs had, so far, conducted 59 editions of this programme, with 
the participation of a total number of 2061 diaspora youth. 
 
52. The Committee observes that several Nations continue to develop „youth tourism‟ to 
foster diplomatic benefits; Israel‟s „Birthright programme‟ tours for diasporic young Jews, 
has resulted in hundreds of thousands of young Jews travelling to Israel for all -expenses-
paid, ten-day „heritage‟ tours intended to cultivate their Jew ish self-identity with support for 
the Israeli state. The programme, funded by Jewish people across the world  as well as the 
Israel government, has become a diplomatic success for Israel, which continues to grow while 
it has also inspired imita tors such as  Birthright Armenia, Heritage  Greece and Reconnect 
Hungary. The Committee pleased that India has also taken the initiative in this regard 
through the „Know India Programme‟ but feels that the programme should reach out to 

25 
 
more number of youth as a total pa rticipation of 2061 youth in 59 editions of the programme 
is meagre and as such will have a negligible impact. 
 
PRA V ASI TEERTH DARSHAN YOJANA (PTDY) 
53. Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY) was introduced in the fin ancial year 2018 -19 to 
provide the elder generation Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) in the age group of 45 -65 years an 
opportunity to reconnect with their root. It is a 17 days programme and conducted with 
coordination of Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. (IRCTC). The programme  
was introduced initially for those Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) in Girmitiya countries (Fiji, 
Guyana, Mauritius, South Africa, Suriname, Trinidad & Tobago, Reunion Island) who belong to 
lower income group and are unable to afford to visit India. Now, t he programme is open for PIOs 
in the age group of 45 -65 years across the globe. 04 editions of this programme has been 
conducted so far successfully with the participation 160 PIOs. 
 
CULTURAL DIPLOMACY AS A TOOL TO PROMOTE INDIAN TOURISM  
54. Through activities such as inviting foreign dignitaries at Kumbh Mela, International 
Conferences in India, their visits to pilgrimage centers and inviting distinguished guests under Gen 
next Democracy Programme, MEA plays an important role in promotion of tourism abroad. 
Likewise ICCR‟s Cultural Centers and Chairs programme organize activities promoting Indian 
Culture which reflects every aspect of life.  MEA promotes Indian tourism through use of various 
tools such as: 
 Scholarship Programmes  (ICCR administers tota l 23 scholarship schemes for foreign 
students to study in India, of which 14 schemes are for various Divisions of MEA, 3 for Ministry 
of AYUSH and 6 are ICCR‟s own scholarship programmes) 
 Conferences and Seminars:  ICCR regularly organises or supports vario us conferences 
and seminars as an important platform for exchange of ideas and views with flagship annual 
conferences on Indology, Yoga and Delivering Democracy. It also provides travel grants to 
academicians to attend other relevant conferences and semina rs abroad. Ladakh Region has been 
the priority of ICCR to organize conferences of the subjects relating to Buddhist studies. 
 Visitors' Programme:  ICCR implements two important programmes for Distinguished 
Visitors' Programme (DVP) and Academic Visitors Pro gramme (AVP). Under DVP, ICCR invites 
senior government functionaries from other countries such as former PMs, former Presidents, 
Members of Parliament, etc. while under AVP ICCR invites mostly Vice Chancellors of foreign 

26 
 
universities. Under the Gen-Next D emocracy Network Programme , young rising stars of the 
country‟s political parties (Ruling Party, Principal Opposition Party and one more from other 
parties , regional leaders, Mayors etc.) including rising figures / influencers in business / start -ups, 
media etc are invited to India.   These young leaders are exposed to the democratic system of 
India, rich heritage sites of India and new policies of India on Education, International relations 
etc.  Visits of such delegations are arranged to Parliament or State Assemblies.   
 Chairs programme : Under this, ICCR has established chairs in universities of various 
countries. At present, there are 50 Chairs in various foreign countries, mostly for teaching Hindi 
language and Indian studies.  
 Promotion of Yoga and In ternational Day of Yoga:  In 2015, with the announcement of 
International Day of Yoga (IDY) to be celebrated on 21 June every year, ICCR facilitated 
organizing of mega -scale IDY celebrations all over the world. ICCR has been deploying yoga 
teachers from India to its cultural centers, Missions and Posts since the time they were established. 
Currently, there are 7 Teachers of Indian Culture (TIC) and 34 Local Resource Persons in the 
discipline of Yoga posted at India Culture Centres, Missions and Posts for imparting teachings and 
training on Yoga.  
 Busts and Statues : ICCR's busts and statues programme has been primarily a goodwill 
programme of offering statues and busts of eminent Indian icons for installation at prominent 
locations abroad. As a special project , ICCR gifted Buddha statue to the Gandan Monastery in 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.  Around 60 busts/statues of Mahatma Gandhi have been commissioned to 
mark Gandhi@l50.  
 Incoming and Outgoing Cultural Delegations: ICCR sends around 80 -90 performing 
artistes and groups annually to overseas countries to participate in various cultural events. It also 
organizes inbound cultural festivals from time to time. International Ramayana Festival, Africa 
Dance & Music Festival, International Folk Festival, International Jaz z Festival are some 
important cultural events being annually organized by ICCR in India. 
 Exhibitions: ICCR promotes visual art by sending exhibitions for display abroad. It also 
hosts such exhibition in India by foreign artists. Exchange of visual art exhi bitions is done on the 
recommendations of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad. ICCR could consider organizing 
residencies and workshop in the Ladakh Region.  
 
 
 

27 
 
PROJECTING INDIA AS A SAFE TOURISM DESTINATION 
55. Upon query of the Committee, the Secretary informed that both the India Tourism 
Overseas Offices and Indian Missions have  been actively engaging in creating a positive image of 
India as a preferred tourist destination through publicity/ media campaigns and  regular interactions 
with travel agencies,  workshops on tourism, etc.   India is promote d as a safe tourist destination 
especially for female tourists during the various tourism promotion events.    
 
56. India Tourism Overseas offices  and Indian Missions abroad use  social media platforms to 
share good stories, positive narratives and updates regarding tourism in India. Negative news about 
India in local media, which could have influence on tourist arrivals, are immediately countered by 
the Indian Missions abroad. 
 
57. The Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matter of safe tourism with all State 
Governments/Union Territory (UT) Administrations for setting up of dedicated Tourism Police for 
the promotion of safe tourism with specific focus on foreign tourists. Ministry o f Tourism got a 
study conducted titled as “Functioning of Tourist Police in States/UTs & Documentation of Best 
Practices”. The same has been forwarded to all the State Govts/UT Admn. with the request to 
create a separate unit of police in the respective st ates/UT and also to sensitize them about the 
needs of the tourists.  
 
58. The Ministry of Tourism has set up a 24x7 Multi -Lingual Tourist Info-Helpline on the toll 
free number 1800111363 or on a short code 1363 in 12 Languag es including 10 international 
languages (German, French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
Arabic) for foreign tourists to provide information relating to Travel and to offer appropriate 
guidance to tourists in distress while travelling in India.   
 
59. The Ministry of Tourism along with all stakeholders, including the Tourism Departments 
of all States and UTs, have adopted the 'Code of Conduct for Safe & Honourable Tourism' which 
is a set of guidelines to encourage tourism a ctivities to be undertaken with respect for basic right 
like dignity, safety and freedom from exploitation of both tourists and local residents. 
 


28 
 
60. As a result of these efforts, India has improved its Safety and Security ranking from 122 in 
the year 2019  to 91 in 2021 a s per the reports published by World Economic forum, Travel & 
Tourism Development Index (TTDI) 2021 report. 
 
61. The Committee notes that Safety and security of the tourists both domestic and foreign 
are paramount importance for projecting the country as a safe haven for tourism. The 
Committee notes that only 39 tourist sites spread across fifteen States and UTs have been 
identified for implementation of „Tourist Police Scheme,‟ which is comparatively low. The 
Committee recommends that more Tourist Sites may be identified and added to the Scheme 
and all states may be covered under the scheme. 
 
COVID PANDEMIC  
62. The Committee desired to know the campaigns undertaken by the Indian Missions and the 
Indian Tourism Offices to combat the impact of the COVID 19 pandemic . The Committee was 
informed that during the pandemic, Missions regularly shared videos, photographs and information 
on its social media handles promoting Indian tourism. Incredible India posts were also shared 
through the social media channels to keep the tourists and tour operators informed . Missions also 
organized webinars and virtual events to publicize tourist destinations in India and also shared 
promotional Incredible India videos. ICCR's virtual events were broadcasted by the Missions on 
their social media handles.  
The details of activities undertaken to combat the impact of Covid -19 pandemic on the Indian 
Tourism industry by India Tourism overseas officers and Indian Mission abroad is listed 
at Annexure II.  
 
IMPEDIMENTS TO PROMOTION OF INDIA TOURISM ABROAD 
63. The Secretary also elaborated on the bottlenecks faced by the Ministries in promoting India 
abroad namely, Lack of Overseas Tourism Offices, lack of tourism promotional material in 
physical & digital format and in local languages, lack of direct connectivity between India and the 
target countries, Covid-19 related restrictions, lack of dedicated funds for tourism promotion , lack 
of speedy delivery of Incredible India tourism brochures, finding  local partners for pr omoting 
ICCR troupe  in s ome smaller Missions,  Lack of financial and human resources for effective 
promotion of tourism through consumer media platforms, Negative perceptions of safety in India, 
precarious economic and internal securit y situation in some countries, lack of E -Tourist visas, 

29 
 
shortage of frequent and regular flights from many countries to India resulting  in non availability 
of flight tickets at competitive rates, lack of guided tours in foreign languages in India, difficulty in 
receiving cultural troupes, absence of tourist helplines in regional languages etc. are some of the 
bottlenecks faced by Indian Missions while promoting Indian tourism overseas. 
 
64. The Committee notes that Embassies and Consulates are important sou rces of 
information and help for people travelling abroad as these provide visa/passport assistance, 
safe travel advice and access to justice in foreign countries and despite the increase in 
amount of Financial resources spent by the Government on Indian M issions as well as 
Overseas Tourism Offices, the Overseas Tourism Offices haven‟t been able to increase the 
FTAs in the past two years.  
 
65. The Committee observes that India has now only 8 Overs eas Tourism Offices which is 
less compared to other countries but as the  Committee has earlier observed, a country can 
open only a finite number of Overseas Tourist Offices whereas the diplomatic network 
stretches around  the globe and would prove to be a more effective mark eting mo del.  
Moreover having Offi ces with a bare minimum of staff who in most cases, cannot speak the 
local language and engage with the local population  defeats the very purpose of promoting 
Indian tourism in the target country.  The general perception of the Overseas Tourist Offices 
in the market has always been that the information provided by it w as not adequate or was 
outdated or not available in local languages.  There was lack of sharing of information about 
developments of tourism in India with the agents and tour operators who are  critical 
intermediaries in the trade.   The Committee observes that such perception was not 
surprising since most of the Overseas Tourist Of fices were functioning with a solitary or 
skeletal staff.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the vacancies in the 
Overseas Tourist Offices should be filled as quickly as possible and that the promotional 
materials should be made available in local languages.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Tourism needs to better engage and motivate both the Overseas Tourism Offices 
and the Indian Missions to act as effective and dynamic tourism promoters and for this a 
regular and efficient communication network between all the stakeholders is essenti al.  The 
Missions and Offices should engage with the tour operators and agents on a regular weekly 
or fortnightly basis sharing information and highlighting developments.  
 

30 
 
66. The Committee observes that the pandemic has brought into sharp focus the 
importance of social media marketing and virtual events  and the Overseas Indian Offices 
and Indian Missions should fully embrace the new digital tools for promotion of tourism 
along with the traditional methods.  Virtual e vents, webinars, hybrid events and virtual 
resources can be provided by Missions to allow potential tourists to explore India, its culture, 
food, destinations on its website .   It is not enough to distribute brochures and promotional 
material, the informat ion should be promoted on search engines for greater attention and 
awareness in the target groups.  
 
67. India's philosophy of 'Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam' (world is one family) and its 
traditions non-violence and pluralism give an unwavering belief in multilateralism, diversity 
and tolerance. The rise of Indian Diaspora to top echelons of professions across the world has 
given a great recognition to India. The Committee applauds the efforts of the MEA in 
increasing international recognition of India‟s c ultural and civilizational heritage, yoga and 
ayurveda, bollywood and classical dances in the foreign countries through its schemes like 
„Know India Programme,‟ and „Know Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana 
 
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
68. The Committee observes that many of the tourist spots and places of religious 
importance are located near the National Highways yet the state of the last mile connectivity 
from the National Highways to the tourist spot leaves much to be desired. The Committee 
feels that good quality last mile connectivity is important to ensure a positive experience for 
tourists visiting a tourist destination in the country, which in turn, helps attract more tourists 
through word-of-mouth publicity.  The Committee therefore recommends that Ministry ma y 
examine the state/quality of last mile connectivity roads at all such tourist spots near the 
National Highways at the earliest and ensure their construction and maintenance with the 
concerned Ministries/agencies to make the tourist places more accessible  to tourists, both 
domestic and international, which will invariably increase the number of tourists visiting 
such places.  
 
69. The Committee notes that with the advancement of technology and modern 
policymaking, high percentage of women are employed in the global tourism industry as 
compared to other sectors, i.e. women make up over 54% of the labour force in the tourism 

31 
 
industry. Women have mo re opportunities for advancement and assuming roles once 
dominated by men such as tour guides. However, Indian tourism industry still lags behind 
with only 12.1 percent share of female employment. The Committee desires to be apprised of 
the coordinating mechanisms formulated by the MoT to generate employment opportunities 
for women in Indian tourism industry. 
 
70. Despite the availability of numerous creative promotional ideas and vast amount of 
resources, several North -eastern Indian States have failed to be in the list of top ten. The 
Committee recommends that the vast potential of North -eastern States be tapped through 
extensive promotional campaigns focusing on their beauty and variety of tribal population 
and culture. 
 
71. To realize the concept of „Ati thi Devo Bhava,‟ in our country, we have to prove 
ourselves as good hosts. But it is seen that experiences of foreign tourists leaves much to be 
desired. There is need for behavioural change and Ministry of Tourism has to work on many 
fronts like training of drivers, police, hoteliers, to improve the attitude towards tourists,  as 
well as improve social facilities etc. to bring a turnaround on this front. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
 The Committee observes that in concordance with UNWTO, International Tourist 
Arrivals (ITA) include both Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTA) and NRIs and from 2014 
onwards the Ministry of Tourism has started to compile the arrivals of NRIs on annual basis.  
Proper segregation of data regarding number of NRIs visiting India to meet their families 
and the actual number of foreign tourists coming for tourism purposes needs to be separately 
maintained as this data will help in the formation of tourism policies. Since NRIs constitute a 
significant share of ITAs, there has been a rise in ITAs since 2014, perhaps contributing to 
the rise of India to the 23 rd rank in ITAs though still below even small countries like 
Thailand, Austria and Poland The growth o f FTAs however has been much slower taking a 
decade to double from 5.78 million in 2010 to 10.93 millions in 2019.  Other developing 
nations like Thailand reported higher international tourism receipts. The Committee 
recommends that the promotional tactics  of Thailand to utilize diplomacy and tourism 
promotion to attract foreign tourists despite their small population and geographical area as 
compared to India may be assessed, and may be applied  in the Indian tourism sector, if 
found beneficial for the growth of Inbound Tourism in India. 
(Para 7) 
*India Tourism Statistics 2019: 
The Committee notes that there is no dearth of scenic places in India which are at 
par or even better than international locales but the latter draw more international footfalls.  
Kashmir for example has similar weather and terrain as Switzerland but the l atter is more 
famous and draws more international tourists.  Similarly, Goa, Kochi, Kumarakom have 
beautiful beaches at par with international beaches.  The Committee is of the opinion that 
the Ministry should adopt a proactive policy to promote internationally such tourist places in 
India at par with those abroad.    
(Para 8) 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF TOURISM  
The Committee appreciates that the tourism strategy has country specific strategic 
plans and targets specific markets. Different countries have different social, economic and 
political situations and   country specific strategic plans would help to appeal to the general 
consciousness and expectations of the people of different countries. The Committee notes that 
the general assessment of the earlier tourism  promotional campaigns of India was that 

33 
 
though impressive, they lacked focus on products and themes and failed to convey a clear cut 
message about India and that not much publicity was given to the new and urban India, its 
new developments and luxury prop erties. The Committee is pleased to note that the new 
strategic approach addresses these shortcomings and is tailored to suit specific markets.  
(Para 11.1) 
The Committee notes that various tourism circuits such as „Buddhist Circuit,‟ 
„Ramayana Circuit‟ ca n provide tourists with enriching religious experiences. The 
Committee also observes that in the aftermath of the COVID pandemic, the importance of 
shorter distances in travel has become more pronounced and regional tourism is likely to 
grow. India should therefore leverage its cultural similarities such as the Buddha‟s trail with 
its neighbhours. The Committee recommends that necessary steps be taken to revive circuit 
tourism by organizing FAM trips and Buddhist Circuit Family Tours and Conferences with 
the help of Indian Overseas Tourism Offices and Missions to boost tourism in country.   
(Para 11.2) 
The Committee appreciates that strategic promotion of MICE tourism has been given 
importance. The Committee notes that there is a surge in business travel to India and 
promotion of MICE tourism would capitalize on the blossoming image of India as an 
important MICE destination. India already has many cities which have good infrastructure 
for hosting conferences or are in the process of developing the same.  What  is required is the 
connectivity between the cities to enable the growth of MICE tourism in India.  
(Para 11.2) 
India is a hub of holistic streams of medicine such as Ayurveda, Homeopathy, 
Naturopathy and the birthplace of Yoga. Yoga has caught the world‟s  imagination with 21 
June being declared as Yoga Day. Yoga and wellness retreats are now in great demand in the 
aftermath of the pandemic.  India has huge wellness tourism potential and the Committee 
appreciates its inclusion in the tourism strategy. India  receives most of its medical tourists 
from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Oman, Bangladesh, Maldives, Nigeria, Kenya and Iraq. There is 
a huge potential for India to realize and aggressively advance towards attracting medical 
tourists from other parts of the world, including Europe and America. 
(Para 11.4) 
The Committee observes that South Asia is home to many tourism based economies 
such as Nepal, Maldives, Bhutan and tourists also use India as transit to other places in the 
South Asian region and South Asian nat ions are often marketed as a part of a package tour 

34 
 
and therefore connectivity between India and its South Asian neighbours is of utmost 
importance for Indian tourism sector. 
(Para 11.5) 
Apart from geographical proximity, the historical and cultural linkag es between 
India and its South Asian neighbours offer great potential for development of regional 
tourism. The Committee is of the opinion that cooperation with other South Asian countries 
on joint tourism and advertising campaigns and steps to facilitate seamless travel of tourists 
between India and its neighbourhood would promote Inbound Tourism in India. 
(Para 11.6) 
The Committee notes that the Incredible India Campaign was the first campaign to 
promote India uniformly as a destination offering a wide range of experiences and was 
hugely successful but marketing Campaigns are only part of the challenge.  Tourism requires 
easy visa clearances, hotels, flight, train and road connectivity and above all the promise of a 
safe, secure and convenient travel. In order to build a successful brand, all aspects of tourism 
infrastructure and services and supply -demand gaps must be given utmost importance and 
this can be achieved only by coordinated efforts of all the stakeholders. The Committee 
appreciates the holistic and targeted approach of the Government for promotion of Inbound 
Tourism and recommends that systematic monitoring of the coordinated efforts of all the 
stakeholders may be done by the Programme Implementation Committee 
(Para 11.9) 
FILM TOURISM 
The Comm ittee notes that countries offer various types of incentives to encourage film 
producers to use beautiful locations to shoot films. Most countries offer tax sops in the form 
of VAT refunds ranging from 10 -20% depending on the location and the budget of the  film.  
Sometimes the governments even bear some cost of the production as films act as 
advertisements for the country and huge benefits are accrued. The Spain Tourism Board 
partnered with the Bollywood film “Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara” for promotions and go t a 
huge influx of tourists that year.  The incentives offered by the Indian government appear to 
be meager compared to the international norms and the considerable payoffs. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may review the incentives pr ovided to 
foreign film producers as per internationally competitive rates. 
(Para 16) 
 

35 
 
OVERSEAS INDIA TOURISM OFFICES UNDER MINISTRY OF TOURISM  
The Committee notes that out of the 31 posts in the Overseas Tourism Offices, only 7 
have been filled while 24 l ie vacant. More than 12 vacancies have been vacant for more than 
5 years. There are 6 vacancies in the local staff strength of 19 also. The Committee is 
dismayed to note that three fourths of the posts in the Overseas Tourism Offices are vacant, 
many of th em for years altogether despite the fact that these offices were established 
specifically for the purpose of promotion of tourism and incur huge expenditure. The 
Committee notes that most Offices are manned by a single person and fails to see how the 
Overseas Tourism Offices could have functioned effectively with a bare minimum staff in 
position. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reason for such delay in filling these 
vacancies and bottlenecks faced in this regard and recommends that necessary steps be taken 
to fill the positions lying vacant for more than 5 years. 
(Para 22) 
The Committee also observes that as per relevant surveys, not many travellers to 
India were aware of the existence of an India Tourism Office in their country and even less 
felt that the information and guidance provided by the Office was adequate.  The Committee 
has been informed that the Indian employees appointed to the Overseas India Tourism 
offices were not required to be proficient in the local language which the Committee  feels is 
an oversight.  The first point of contact for a potential tourist is often the Overseas India 
Tourism office and it is essential that the employees of the Tourism office should be able to 
give their guidance in the local language.  The brochures and website of India tourism should 
also be available in the local language. The Ministry has informed that the Incredible India 
website is presently available in 8 different foreign languages apart from English and Hindi 
and after revamp it would be avail able in 20 + vernacular and foreign languages.  The 
Committee urges that the brochures and website may be made available in as many 
languages as possible as language plays a crucial role in global industries like tourism. It is 
essential that potential tou rists are given clear information in the language that they are 
familiar with to give them the confidence to visit countries where they may encounter 
language barriers.   
 (Para 23) 
INDIAN TOURISM MARKET REPRESENTATIVES 
The Committee observes that hiring agencies which hold India‟s interests paramount 
in terms of tourism promotion and can provide professional and impartial service at all times 

36 
 
will greatly impact the promotional campaigns, given the untapped potential of Indian 
tourism sector. The Committee recommends the MoT to monitor the travel and tour trend of 
the countries through ITMRs where the Overseas Tourism Offices are operating 
(Para 26) 
ROLE OF INDIAN MISSIONS  
The Committee notes that easy policies/regulations concerning visa for foreign natio nals will 
make it easy for them to visit India. The Committee is pleased to note the steps taken by the 
Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs to provide hassle free visa services.  
However ensuring that the information regarding visa policies rea ches the potential tourists 
is equally important.  The Committee observes that the Overseas Tourist Offices do not seem 
to have a Visa help desk for information and guidance of both tourists and agents.  Visa rules 
change from time to time and it is essent ial that the agents and tourists are kept updated of 
the same. In many countries, the visa issuance has been outsourced and tourists have to be 
informed clearly about any extra handling charges apart from the normal visa fees.  The 
Committee recommends tha t a Visa guidance Helpdesk be present at all the Overseas 
Tourist Offices as well as the Indian Missions for effective guidance of tourists.  
(Para 40) 
TOURISM OFFICERS IN INDIAN MISSIONS  
The Committee observes that since the Overseas India Tourism offices which were handling 
the responsibility of tourism promotions have now been consolidated to only 8 offices, the 
mandate of promotion of Indian tourism abroad is now effectively with the Indian Missions. 
The Committee has been informed that Tourism O fficers, who are either IFS/MEA 
personnel have been designated in 20 Missions who will be responsible for the holistic 
promotion of India as a tourist destination, creating country specific strategies among others.  
The Committee feels that this is a cost saving measure which would enable the  Government   
to appoint dedicated Tourism Officers in as many countries as required while setting up an 
Overseas India Tourism Office would involve much expenditure and time and the returns 
did not seem to justify the  expenditure. Further, only a certain number of Overseas Offices 
can be set up while the diplomatic network of embassies and consulates around the world 
can be a more effective marketing model for promotion of tourism. 
(Para 45) 
 

37 
 
The Committee finds that hitherto, the promotional activities conducted by the Indian 
Missions appear to have been sporadic and irregular. For instance, the data provided for the 
last five years on Road shows reveals that there have been no Road Shows conducted in 
Dubai in the pas t five years and only one in Australia in the same period of the time.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the reasons for the seemingly sporadic schedule of 
events.  The Committee notes that GoI has laid emphasis on the 3Ts – Trade, Technology and 
Tourism and Mea is working on creation of dashboard which will enable Missions to provide 
the data and progress related to trade, technology and tourism as well as the activities 
undertaken by Mission in pursuance to these objectives.  To achieve the targe t of US 400 
billion in merchandise exports, the Ministry of External Affairs has directed all its missions 
abroad to evaluate all the officers only on basis of 3Ts– Traderade, Technology and Tourism. 
(Para 46) 
The Committee notes that the 3T strategy will serve as a two -way funnel connecting Indian 
nationals, the states and businesses globally which will enhance exports, attract foreign 
industries, and businesses to India. The Committee recommends the MoT in collaboration 
with Ministry External Affairs form ulate relevant guidelines to connect Indian businesses 
and investors seeking to conduct trade, investment and agricultural exports overseas. 
 (Para 47) 
PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
The Committee observes that several Nations continue to develop „youth tourism‟ t o 
foster diplomatic benefits; Israel‟s „Birthright programme‟ tours for diasporic young Jews, 
has resulted in hundreds of thousands of young Jews travelling to Israel for all -expenses-
paid, ten-day „heritage‟ tours intended to cultivate their Jewish self -identity with support for 
the Israeli state. The programme, funded by Jewish people across the world as well as the 
Israel government, has become a diplomatic success for Israel, which continues to grow while 
it has also inspired imitators such as Birthrigh t Armenia, Heritage Greece and Reconnect 
Hungary. The Committee pleased that India has also taken the initiative in this regard 
through the „Know India Programme‟ but feels that the programme should reach out to 
more number of youth as a total participatio n of 2061 youth in 59 editions of the programme 
is meagre and as such will have a negligible impact. 
(Para 52) 
 
 

38 
 
PROJECTING INDIA AS A SAFE TOURISM DESTINATION  
The Committee notes that Safety and security of the tourists both domestic and foreign are 
paramount importance for projecting the country as a safe haven for tourism. The 
Committee notes that only 39 tourist sites spread across fifteen States and UTs have been 
identified for implementation of „Tourist Police Scheme,‟ which is comparatively low.  The 
Committee recommends that more Tourist Sites may be identified and added to the Scheme 
and all states may be covered under the scheme. 
(Para 61) 
IMPEDIMENTS TO PROMOTION OF INDIA TOURISM ABROAD 
The Committee notes that Embassies and Consulates are imp ortant sources of 
information and help for people travelling abroad as these provide visa/passport assistance, 
safe travel advice and access to justice in foreign countries and despite the increase in 
amount of Financial resources spent by the Government o n Indian Missions as well as 
Overseas Tourism Offices, the Overseas Tourism Offices haven‟t been able to increase the 
FTAs in the past two years.  
(Para 64) 
The Committee observes that India has now only 8 Overseas Tourism Offices which is 
less compared to other countries but as the Committee has earlier observed, a country can 
open only a finite number of Overseas Tourist Offices whereas the diplomatic networ k 
stretches around the globe and would prove to be a more effective marketing model.  
Moreover having Offices with a bare minimum of staff who in most cases, cannot speak the 
local language and engage with the local population defeats the very purpose of p romoting 
Indian tourism in the target country.  The general perception of the Overseas Tourist Offices 
in the market has always been that the information provided by it was not adequate or was 
outdated or not available in local languages.  There was lack o f sharing of information about 
developments of tourism in India with the agents and tour operators who are critical 
intermediaries in the trade.  The Committee observes that such perception was not 
surprising since most of the Overseas Tourist Offices were  functioning with a solitary or 
skeletal staff.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the vacancies in the 
Overseas Tourist Offices should be filled as quickly as possible and that the promotional 
materials should be made available in local lan guages.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Tourism needs to better engage and motivate both the Overseas Tourism Offices 

39 
 
and the Indian Missions to act as effective and dynamic tourism promoters and for this a 
regular and efficient communicatio n network between all the stakeholders is essential.  The 
Missions and Offices should engage with the tour operators and agents on a regular weekly 
or fortnightly basis sharing information and highlighting developments.  
(Para 65) 
The Committee observes th at the pandemic has brought into sharp focus the 
importance of social media marketing and virtual events and the Overseas Indian Offices 
and Indian Missions should fully embrace the new digital tools for promotion of tourism 
along with the traditional meth ods.  Virtual events, webinars, hybrid events and virtual 
resources can be provided by Missions to allow potential tourists to explore India, its culture, 
food, destinations on its website.   It is not enough to distribute brochures and promotional 
material, the information should be promoted on search engines for greater attention and 
awareness in the target groups.  
(Para 66) 
India's philosophy of 'Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam' (world is one family) and its 
traditions non-violence and pluralism give an unwaverin g belief in multilateralism, diversity 
and tolerance. The rise of Indian Diaspora to top echelons of professions across the world has 
given a great recognition to India. The Committee applauds the efforts of the MEA in 
increasing international recognition of India‟s cultural and civilizational heritage, yoga and 
ayurveda, bollywood and classical dances in the foreign countries through its schemes like 
„Know India Programme,‟ and „Know Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana 
(Para 67) 
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committ ee observes that many of the tourist spots and places of religious 
importance are located near the National Highways yet the state of the last mile connectivity 
from the National Highways to the tourist spot leaves much to be desired. The Committee 
feels that good quality last mile connectivity is important to ensure a positive experience for 
tourists visiting a tourist destination in the country, which in turn, helps attract more tourists 
through word-of-mouth publicity.  The Committee therefore recommends  that Ministry may 
examine the state/quality of last mile connectivity roads at all such tourist spots near the 
National Highways at the earliest and ensure their construction and maintenance with the 
concerned Ministries/agencies to make the tourist place s more accessible to tourists, both 

40 
 
domestic and international, which will invariably increase the number of tourists visiting 
such places.  
(Para 68) 
The Committee notes that with the advancement of technology and modern 
policymaking, high percentage of women are employed in the global tourism industry as 
compared to other sectors, i.e. women make up over 54% of the labour force in the tourism 
industry. Women have more opportunities for advancement and assuming roles once 
dominated by men such as tour gui des. However, Indian tourism industry still lags behind 
with only 12.1 percent share of female employment. The Committee desires to be apprised of 
the coordinating mechanisms formulated by the MoT to generate employment opportunities 
for women in Indian tourism industry. 
(Para 69) 
Despite the availability of numerous creative promotional ideas and vast amount of 
resources, several North -eastern Indian States have failed to be in the list of top ten. The 
Committee recommends that the vast potential of North -eastern States be tapped through 
extensive promotional campaigns focusing on their beauty and variety of tribal population 
and culture. 
(Para 70) 
To realize the concept of „Atithi Devo Bhava,‟ in our country, we have to prove 
ourselves as good hosts. But i t is seen that experiences of foreign tourists leaves much to be 
desired. There is need for behavioural change and Ministry of Tourism has to work on many 
fronts like training of drivers, police, hoteliers, to improve the attitude towards tourists, as 
well as improve social facilities etc. to bring a turnaround on this front. 
(Para 71) 
 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41  
XXII 
TWENTY SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 31 st May, 2022 in Committee Room 
‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
12. Shri. Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that agenda for the meeting is to *   *  
 *   *   *   *   * 
 
2. *   *   *   *   * 
3. The Committee then proceeded with the second agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the 
views of Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Senior Officers of the    * and Ministry of 
External Affairs on ‘Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tou rism in India’ and         
*            *. 
 
WITNESSES: 
 
__________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

42  
 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
(i) Shri Arvind Singh, Secretary; 
(ii) Rakesh Kumar Verma, Additional Secretary; 
(iii) Shri Prashant Ranjan, Director 
 
 Ministry of External Affairs 
 
(i) Dr. Vinod Bahade, Director 
 
 
*  *  * 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Senior 
Officers of the Ministries of   *    *  and External Affairs and apprised them 
of the agenda of the meeting i.e. to deliberate on ‘Role of Indian Missions Globally for the gro wth 
of Tourism in India’ and  *  *  *. 
2. Initiating the discussion, the Chairman stated that Embassies and Missions are important 
sources of information regarding travel advice and also play a pivota l role in promoting India's 
image and culture overseas by attracting foreign traders and travellers to India.  The Chairman 
desired to know about the plans regarding the co -ordination between the Ministry of External 
Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism for  overseas tourism promotion under the   3Ts (Trade, 
Technology and Tourism). The Chairman suggested that various kinds of   places may be 
segregated pertaining to the interests of various groups such as students, senior citizens, family 
groups, honeymooners etc. for opening up business opportunities and development of tourism. 
3. *   *   *   *   * 
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, apprised the Committee that consequent to the 
pandemic of Cov id-19, the Ministry has made efforts to co -ordinate with the Indian Missions 
abroad in  key source markets, especially the top 20 countries of the world,  to focus on Trade, 
Technology and Tourism. Further, the Secretary pointed out that there are five implem entation 
steps that the Ministry has initiated or is going to initiate, which are as follows:  Country Specific 
Strategies by Indian Missions, Support to Indian Missions, Detailed Roles and Responsibilities of 
Tourism Officers of Indian Missions, Incredible  India Reconnect 2022 – Virtual Road shows, and 
Quiz Competition in Buddhist Countries. The Committee was further apprised of the top ten source 
markets for India, top ten emerging markets for India and key objectives of the partnership with 
Indian Mission s for promoting Tourism. He further emphasized on key strategic areas for 
partnerships with Indian Missions for promoting Tourism like country specific strategic plans, 

43  
annual Events to be hosted by India, facilitating Visa and direct connectivity of fligh ts etc. He 
further added that the Ministry of Tourism has forwarded publicity material to all the Missions and 
organized a virtual meeting of the Tourism Officers with States for familiarization with state 
tourism offerings. The Secretary highlighted that the Ministry is conducting virtual webinars, 
chaired jointly by the Ministry of Tourism and representatives from the Indian Missions with tour 
operators, travel companies, and tourism stakeholders from the source market in audience.   
5. The Ministry of Exter nal Affairs informed the Committee that  the Ministry and 
Indian Missions abroad have been playing a key role in the promotion of Indian tourism abroad in 
coordination with the Indian Tourism offices. He further told the Committee that the Indian 
Missions are organizing several events including Tourism Road shows and Know India Seminars. 
He further added that the Ministry is also focusing on promoting special themes of tourism, 
particularly, medical tourism, such as AYUSH and wellness tourism. He informed th at the Indian 
missions have also been facilitating the participation from India and participation of Indian tour 
operators in tour and travel mart being held outside. The Ministry also organized Indian Culture, 
Cuisine and Food Festivals outside along with  exhibitions and film festivals. He also stated that 
ICCR, which is an institution under MEA, also promotes tourism indirectly through culture by 
undertaking various activities such as, Scholarship programmes, conferences and seminars. 
6. *   *   *   *   * 
7. Members raised several queries such as development of Punaura Dham, birth place of Mata 
Sita; publicity of tourism through social media ; existing  control on private operators who have 
provided chopper services in various tourist destinations; time -bound insp ection visits of 
Archaeologists at archaeological sites; basic amenities at monuments and archaeological tourist 
spots, lack of signboards at tourist places; opening of all restricted places of Arunachal Pra desh 
for foreign tourists etc. 
8. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries raised by Members may be 
sent to the Secretariat within a week, by the respective Ministries and other stakeholders. The 
witnesses assured the same. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
9. The Committee deliberated upon  the need for improved audience engagement, availability 
of tourist amenities, light and sound shows etc. at museums across the country. *   *
  *   *   *   *. 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.06 P.M. 
 
_____________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

44  
XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th June, 2022 in Committee 
Room – ‘4’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Draft Reports on:- 
 
(i) *   *   *; 

45  
(ii) Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in India; and 
(iii) *   *   *   * 
 
2. The Committee suggested some minor changes in the abovementioned draft Reports. 
The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out the changes. The Committee, 
thereafter, adopted the draft Reports alongwith some minor modifications/additions. 
3. The Committee also authorized its  Chairman to present the aforesaid Reports to the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, during the ongoing inter-Session period.  
4.       The meeting adjourned at 3:07 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46  
ANNEXURE – I 
Details of multilateral and bilateral tourism agreements/MoUs/tripartite agreements signed/ 
proposed to be signed by the Ministry of Tourism 
 
 
S.No. Country with whom 
MoU/ Agreement 
singed 
MoU / 
Agreement / 
LoI 
Date of 
signature 
Valid Till Status 
1 Iraq Protocol 25.10.1986 5+5 years period each Valid 
2 Portugal Agreement 29.07.1991 5+5 year periods Valid 
3 Syria Agreement 08.10.1991 5+5 year periods Valid 
4 Israel Agreement 18.05.1993 5+5 year periods Valid 
5 Singapore Agreement 24.01.1994 5+5 year periods Valid 
6 Russia Agreement 30.06.1994 5+5 year periods Valid 
7 Iran MoU 18.04.1995 No validity clause Valid 
8 Mexico Agreement 28.03.1996 5+5 year periods Valid 
9 Cyprus Agreement 07.11.1996 5+5 year periods Valid 
10 Greece Agreement 13.01.1998 5+5 year periods Valid 
11 Indonesia MoU 08.02.2000 5+5 years period each Valid 
12 Italy Agreement 26.06.2000 5+5 year periods Valid 
13 Sri Lanka MoU 23.01.2004 5+5 year periods Valid 
14 Brazil Agreement 25.01.2004 5+5 year periods Valid 
15 Serbia MoU 02.11.2004 valid until either party 
terminates 
Valid 
16 IBSA Tripartite 
Agreement 
Agreement 15.10.2008 5+5 year periods Valid 
17 Poland Agreement 25.04.2009 5+5 year periods Valid 
18 ASEAN MoU 12.01.2012 12.01.2022 (5+5 years 
period) 
Valid 
19 Mauritius MoU 12.03.2013 5+5 year periods Valid 
20 Japan Memorandum 22.01.2014 5+5 year periods Valid 
21 Nepal MoU 25.11.2014 5+5 year periods Valid 
22 France LoI 09.04.2015 No validity clause Valid 
23 China Agreement 15.05.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
24 Tanzania MoU 19.06.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
25 Uzbekistan Agreement 06.07.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 

47  
26 Turkmenistan MoU 11.07.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
27 Egypt MoU 24.08.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
28 U.A.E. MoU 03.09.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
29 Cambodia MoU 16.09.2015 5+5 year periods Valid 
30 Maldives MoU 10.04.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
31 Qatar MoU 05.06.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
32 South Africa MoU 08.07.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
33 Kyrgyzstan MoU 20.12.2016 5+5 year periods Valid 
34 Oman MoU 11.02.2018 5+5 years period valid 
35 Bulgaria MoU 05.09.2018 5+5 year periods Valid 
36 Malta MoU 17.09.2018 5+5 years Valid 
37 Romania MoU 19.09.2018 Indefinite period Valid 
38 Colombia MoU 04.10.2018 5+5 yeas periods Valid 
39 Korea MoU 05.11.2018 5+5 year period Valid 
40 Argentina MoU 18.02.2019 5+5 year period Valid 
41 Saudi Arabia MoU 20.02.2019 5+1 years Valid 
42 Croatia MoU 26.03.2019 5+5 years period Valid 
43 Paraguay MoU 27.09.2019 5+5 years periods Valid 
44 Philippines MoU 18.10.2019 5+5 years periods Valid 
45 Finland MoU 21.11.2019 5 years Valid 
46 Australia MoU 11.02.2022 5 years Valid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48  
 
ANNEXURE – II  
CAMPAIGNS TO COMBAT THE IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON THE 
INDIAN TOURISM INDUSTRY 
 
Embassy of 
India, 
Bangkok 
Carried out regular interactions with Thai outbound tour operators and other  
stakeholders and briefed about massive Covid -19 vaccination drive in India and  
eased travel guidelines etc. Air Travel Bubble arrangement was agreed with  
Thailand w.e.f 1st March, 2022 to promote/facilitate regular international flights 
and movement of people/tourists. 
ITO Tokyo Updating the Travel trade in Japan through regular emails, interactions through  
zoom meetings and webinars and thereby keeping them updated about India’s  
tourism scenario, progress in controlling the Covid -19 pandemic along with  
positive messages. Post pandemic re -opening of India, India tourism Tokyo  office 
recently participated a Webinar organized by Japan Association of Travel  Agent 
(JATA) gave a welcome message from H.E. Ambassador of India to  Japan to the 
Travel Trade of Japan. Through this webinar, briefed about the  return of normal 
situation, success of Indian vaccination and growth of Domestic tourism within 
the country and encouraged them to visit India and make  packages for their 
clients. 
HCI Canberra (i) During the AusIndia Fair on 2nd April 2022, held in Canberra; High 
Commission of India put up “Incredible India”stall for tourism promotion. More 
than 2000 people attended the event. Tourism related videos were played on TV 
Screen and handouts of various states, tourism guide books, caps and other 
promotional material was distributed. The High Commissioner also gifted 
“Incredible India” goodies bags to VVIP dignitaries which included Ministers 
and Members of Australian Capital Territory Government. Tourism related 
promotional material was also distributed during the event. 
 
(ii) In March 2022, CGI Sydney sent India tourism promotion materials to 
Narrabri Public School, Narrabri, New South Wales to spread awareness and 
information among the local community on tourism opportunities in India. 
 
(iii) Rajasthan was promoted as tourism destination by CGI Sydney during the 
showcase of Indian textiles and apparels, Indian handloom craftsmanship at the 
Powerhouse Museum in Sydney on 25th March 2022. 
 
(iv) Consulate General of India, Melbourne; in collaboration with Economic 
Diplomacy Division, Invest India, “Incredible India,” Australia India Chamber of 
Commerce, Ayush Information Cell and Australia India Travel & Tourism 
Council (AITTC); organized an event on 17th March 2022 to promote tourism in 
India after opening of borders. The issues regarding opening of tourist visas 
and quarantine requirements were discussed. Hor, Chairman Australia India 
Travel & Tourism Council (AITTC) Vice President, Foreign Correspondents 
Association, Australia and South Pacific (FCA) also visited for this event from 
Sydney. Media coverage can be found at   
https://www.southasiatimes.com.au/community/india-open-for- 
tourism-with-e-visa-flights-reopening-from-27-march-2022/ 
 


49  
HCI Colombo An air travel bubble was established between India a nd Sri Lanka in April 2021  to 
facilitate two -way travel. Mission has been promoting India as a COVID safe  
destination in Sri Lanka by sharing milestones in India’s COVID -19 flight through 
its social media handles. Some other initiatives taken in 2021 are: A special 
inaugural flight from Sri Lanka to the Kushinagar International Airport,  
inaugurated by PM in October 2021; an exposition of Sacred Buddha relics in 
India, carried on the inaugural flight to Kushinagar. 
EOI,  
The Hague 
During the pandemic, promotion of tourism was undertaken through Mission’s  
social media handles - Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. Mission promotes  India 
as a tourist destination with specific hashtags. Mission maintains a dedicated page 
on its website for update on covid -10: travel advisory, which  provides guidelines 
for international arrivals, list of Countries at risk, restoration of evisa facility, 
FAQ with regard to visa restrictions related to 
COVID 19 etc. 
EOI Muscat During Covid-19 pandemic there were travel restrictions imposed by Government 
of Oman on travel from India to Oman for a major period April to  September 
2021. Embassy repeatedly took up the matter with the Foreign Ministry as many 
Indians were stranded in India. As  a result of Mission’s efforts,  travel 
restrictions have been removed by Oman. 
EOI Seoul During the seminar with Korean tour and travel operators as mentioned above,  the 
vaccination rate in India and effective steps by GoI to curb the COVID -19 were 
conveyed to the participants. Embassy social media handles are also  being used to 
tell India’s success stories in curbing the COVID-19 pandemic in local language. 
India Tourism, 
Singapore 
A Virtual Webinar on Buddhist Circuit Tourism in India on 8th November, 2021 
was organized by the Embassy  of India, Swami Vivekananda Cultural  Centre, 
Hanoi, Vietnam.  The Vice Chairman of Vietnam National  Administration of 
Tourism, the Deputy Director General, MoT, India Tourism,  Singapore, the 
Secretary of Editor Board-An Vien Buddhist Television Channel, Vi etnam 
Buddhist Sangha, representative of International Buddhist Confederation and Tour 
Operator from IATO participated in the Webinar. 
 
India Tourism, Singapore participated in a Webinar on “Incredible India” to  
observe National Tourism Day on 25th January 2022, organized by the Embassy 
of India, Bangkok, Thailand. 
 
India   Tourism,   Singapore   participated   in   the Webinar on 'Celebration   of 
India's National   Tourism   Day' on    25th January   2022,   organized   by   the 
Embassy of India, Hanoi, Vietnam. In the webinar, a presentation on Indian 
Tourism Products and guidelines issued by GoI presented by India Tourism, 
Singapore. 
IT London This office participated in WTM -2021 to showcase the tourism products of  India 
from 1st Nov to 3rd November, 2021- live format and 8th to 9th November, 2021 - 
virtual format. The Aim of WTM London this year was focused on reconnecting, 
rebuilding and reigniting the  Travel Industry. The highlight  of this year for the 
India Tourism Pavilion was “Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav” Celebrating 75 years of 
Independence. 
 

50  
 
ANNEXURE III 
 
31st May, 2022  
LIST OF WITNESS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
 
(11:00 A.M.) 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
1 Shri Arvind Singh Secretary 
2 Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma Additional Secretary 
3 Shri Prashant Ranjan Director 
 
Ministry of External Affairs 
 
4. Dr. Vinod Bahade  Director 
 
 
 
* * *  
 
 