115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS
 ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF
 MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  14.5.2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  14.5.2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929(SAKA)
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http: //rajyasabha.nic.in
 
 
                                       C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                               
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.             OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                    
5.         ANNEXURE                                                                                                                        
6.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                             
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2006-2007)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.   Shri S.S. Chandran
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.
      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.      Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
11.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.  Dr. P.P. Koya
23.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh
30.  Shri Suraj Singh
31.  *Shri Prahlad Joshi
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary    
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
                       
* Nominated on 20.3.2007 in the vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Manbendra Shah.  
 
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been
 authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Fifteenth Report of the
 Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
 
2.       The 
One Hundred and Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
 Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 22nd May 2006. 
 
 
3.     The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Sixth Report
 were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 10th November, 2006.
 
4.     The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16th April 2007.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ;                                                             SITARAM YECHURY
April 16 , 2007                                                                                           Chairman
            Chaitra 26 , 1929 (Saka)                               Department-related Parliamentary Standing
          Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
REPORT


115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the
 observations/ recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
 Ministry of Civil Aviation, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 27th February, 2006.
 
 2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 10 th November, 2006 in
 respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows: -
 
(i)         Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Para Nos. 15, 25, 32, 34, 68, 78, 92, 93, 99, 102, 118, 121, 133 &
139                                                                                                            Total- 14
(ii)        Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s
 replies:
Para No.                                                                                                          Nil.
(iii)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the
 Committee:
Para Nos. 19,  23, 27, 64, 73,  108, 123, 129, 141                                          Total- 9
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the    Ministry are still awaited:
Para No. 20, 104, 135                                                                                                 3
 
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of Action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One-Hundred
 and Sixth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry, and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each
 item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
ASSESSMENT OF ANNUAL PLAN 2005-06 AND ALLOCATION FOR    2006-07
(Recommendation at Para 15)
 
5.         The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has taken due cognizance of its earlier recommendations
 pertaining to utilisation of budget allocations and has made efforts to improve the earlier situation of consistent
 underutilization of funds.  The Committee notes that barring the low proportion of expenditure of Pawan Hans
 Helicopters Limited, the anticipated expenditure in respect of other organisations is satisfactory vis-a-vis the approved
 allocations.  The Committee, however expresses its concern that the Gross Budgetary Support has been reduced from
 Rs.370.85 crore in 2005-06 to Rs.130.00 crore in 2006-07.  The Committee expects that the targets set for internal and
 extra budgetary resources as well as external commercial borrowings from foreign banks/financial institutions for
 bridging the gap in budgetary support will materialize.  The Committee recommends that  the Ministry should take
 adequate steps during 2006-07 also to ensure optimum utilisation of the enhanced allocations made to various
 organisations.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
6.         The reduction in Plan Outlay during 2006-07 was primarily due to the fact that no provision had been made for
 payment of budgetary support to Indian Airlines during 2006-07.  A provision of Rs.325 crores had been made during
 2005-06 for payment of budgetary support to Indian Airlines in connection with their aircraft acquisition project which
 was released during the year.  The balance expenditure on aircraft acquisition project was to be met by Indian Airlines
 out of their internal and extra budgetary resources including external commercial borrowings.  The observations of the

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 Committee with regard to optimum utilization plan allocations for 2006-07 have been noted for compliance.
 
 
AIR INDIA LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 19)
 
7.         The Committee notes that the outlay for non-aircraft projects is an important component of the budget provision
 for Air India Limited as the programmes/projects undertaken there under viz. purchase of Ground Handling
 Equipments, Engineering Workshop Equipments, Security Equipments, Aircraft Refurbishment Programme etc. are
 aimed at enhancing the operational efficiency.   The Committee expects that the allocated funds would be fully utilised
 during 2006-07 and recommends that the Ministry should take suitable steps to ensure that the operational efficiency of
 Air India Limited is not compromised for want of funds.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
8.         The recommendations of the Committee has been noted for compliance.  It would be ensured that operational
 efficiency of Air India Limited is not compromised for want of funds.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
9.         The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and desires to know actual details
 of the programmes/projects undertaken viz. purchase of Ground Handling Equipments, Engineering Workshop
 Equipments, Security Equipments, Aircraft Refurbishment Programme etc. and how much amount was spent on these
 projects out of the total outlay.  The Committee also desires the Ministry to furnish detail about the steps taken during
 the year to improve the operational efficiency of Air India Limited.
 
 
 
(Recommendation at 
Para 20)
 
10.       The Committee notes that Air India has been reporting net profits consistently since 2001-02 and expects that
 this healthy situation will continue. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should endeavour to focus on all the
 individual parameters that enhance the overall operational performance with the available aircraft capacity till new and
 modern aircraft join its fleet.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
11.       The observations of the Committee have been noted.   Every endeavour is being made to enhance the operational
 performance of Air India to meet the ever increasing challenges in the aviation market.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
12.       The Committee desires that the recommendation should be taken seriously and reiterates its recommendation
 that the Ministry should endeavor to focus on all the individual parameters that enhance the overall operational
 performance with the available aircraft capacity till new and modern aircraft join its fleet.
 
(Recommendation at Para 23)
 
13.       The level of Passenger Load Factor has a direct impact on the profit/loss balance sheet. The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that Air India should adopt aggressive marketing strategies to improve its Passenger Load
 Factor to the desired level.  The Committee also recommends that the bilateral air services agreements should be
 leveraged to diversify the international air services and to avail the entitlements of new traffic rights to the full extent.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
14.       Air India has been following aggressive marketing practices to improve its Passenger Load Factors, and
 consequently its revenue and profitability.  Some of measures undertaken by Air India are :
 
a)          Launching of a low cost carrier, Air India Express;
 
b)          Leasing of 28 aircraft (including 7 for Air India Express) to increase its market share and reach;
 
c)
          Acquisition of 68 new aircraft (including 18 for Air India Express) to improve the product and cut
 maintenance, fuel and other costs;
 
 
d)
          Introduction of non-stop flights, standardized timings, better connectivity from interior points in India;
 
e)
          Commenced direct marketing practices to reach customers personally;
 
f)
            Improvement in overall product with installation of flat beds in First Class and Soubrettes in Executive Class
 of all B747-400 aircraft and introduction of schemes like Premium Traveler Programme and Companion Free
 Scheme to improve utilization of First and Executive Class;
 
g)
          Introduction of customer friendly facilities like e-ticketing, advance check-in,   city check-in at Mumbai
 Airport, domestic and international call centers, etc;
 
h)
          Frequent Flyer Programme, Maharaja Club and Leading Edge Club to give high yield passengers recognition
 and value added benefits to retain their loyalty;.
 
15.       With the acquisition of new aircraft, Air India will have additional flights on routes which are commercially and
 economically viable, thus improving utilization of traffic rights.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
16.       The Committee notes that the Air India has taken some measure to improve its passenger load factors.  However,
 the Committee takes exception to the fact that Ministry remains silent on its recommendation that the "bilateral air
 services agreements should be leveraged to diversify the international air services and to avail the entitlement of new
 traffic rights to the full extent."  The Committee desires to have action by the Ministry in the matter.
 
(Recommendation at 
Para 25)
 
17.       The Committee notes that important announcements have been made in the Annual Supplement, 2006 under the
 Foreign Trade Policy 2004-09, which inter-alia, will enable the country to offer competitive fuel prices and attract mid
 route stops for international flights and they are likely to play a catalytic role in the growth of civil aviation sector. The
 Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter regarding the issuance of notifications specifying
 the scope and extent of concessions/exemptions with the Commerce Ministry/Finance Ministry for deriving the
 anticipated benefits from the announcements made in the Annual Supplement, 2006 under the Foreign Trade Policy
 2004-09.   The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should initiate suitable steps in advance to facilitate
 the National Carriers to avail the full benefits of the announcements.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
18.       Necessary provisions for allowing duty neutralization benefits to supply of stores on board foreign going
 aircraft, through Advance Authorisation Scheme, have been made in para 4.1.3 of the Foreign Trade Policy (2004-09). 
 Department of Revenue have also issued necessary instructions for implementation of this facility by the Customs
 authorities.  Since the entire scheme is intended to reduce the cost of stores for foreign going aircraft by neutralizing the

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 duty incidence on inputs required for manufacture of these goods, Air India, Indian Airlines and other airlines can
 obtain the benefits of this scheme through a proportionate cost reduction by the manufacturers of stores.  Air India and
 Indian Airlines are being advised to suitably negotiate with their suppliers.
 
(Recommendation at Para 27)
 
19.       The Committee notes that Air India had approached only M/s. Jet Airways in July, 2005 to negotiate the wet-
lease of one A340-330E aircraft.  The Committee is of the opinion that Air India could have approached other Airlines
 organisations.  The procedure followed by Air India was against the practice of open competitive tendering process and
 therefore lacks transparency.  The Committee feels that the impending shortage could have been anticipated early had
 there been a constant assessment of the available aircraft capacity. The Committee further recommends that adequate
 contingency plans should be prepared including standing arrangements for lease of aircraft during exigencies by
 following the proper tendering process.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
20.       The lease of aircraft by Air India from Jet Airways was a very short term arrangement.   However, observations
 of the Committee in this regard have been noted by Air India for future guidance. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
21.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and desires to know whether
 there are any policy/guidelines for leasing of aircraft. The Committee recommends and directs that a market oriented
 transparent tender process should be formulated for leasing of aircraft either for short term or long term arrangements.
 
INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED
(Recommendation at 
Para 32)
 
22.       The Committee notes that there is a scope for further improvement in the overall load factor of Indian Airlines
 and recommends that there is a need to focus attention of all the factors that are responsible for acting as constraints in
 the achievement of the desired level of overall load factor.   The Committee also notes with concern that the market
 share of national carriers has decreased despite the overall increase in the growth rate of domestic passengers' traffic,
 which is also reflected in the decline in the reported profits of Indian Airlines.  The Committee recommends that
 adequate steps, in addition to the acquisition of aircraft, should be taken to enable Indian Airlines to tap the market
 opportunities in the domestic as well as international markets.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
23.       Overall Load Factor of Indian Airlines in the past few years has shown an increasing trend as can be seen from
 the statistics provided below:-
 
 
      Period
           Load Factor (%)
2003-04                 65.4
2004-05              68.6
2005-06              71.4
 
24.       Capacity share of Indian Airlines in the domestic market has been declining with the induction of capacity by the
 competitors and due to the reason that Indian Airlines has not been able to match its competitors in this regard.  
 Consequently IA’s market share has also tended to decline.    Airlines the world over experience a similar direct
 correlation between their capacity share and market share.   Indian Airlines has made efforts to retain its capacity share
 by leasing of aircraft pending renewal/augmentation of fleet through outright purchase route.  The aircraft that Indian
 Airlines has leased in the recent years have largely served to replace some of the aging A300 aircraft that have been
 phased out by the airline during this period.   

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
25.       Due to inordinate delay in the finalization of IA’s fleet acquisition programme the average age of IA’s fleet
 compares quite unfavourably with that of its competitors’.    The travelling public perceive an older aircraft to be an
 inferior product and consequently IA's services have not been quite as appealing to some of the passengers and as such
 they prefer the services offered by IA's competitors.   
 
26.       Indian Airlines takes continuous measures to improve its services and product offered to its passengers.   Some
 of the measures taken to improve services and product upgrades are as follows:-
-
          Schedule upgrades and capacity increases.
-          Special fares/schemes on the Domestic sectors and dynamic market fares as well as incentives on
 international sectors.
-          Sales and marketing initiatives.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
27.       The Committee notes that despite increase in the overall load factor, market share of the Indian Airlines has gone
 down.  The Committee hopes that after acquisition of fleet, the share of Indian Airlines in the market will also improve.
 
(Recommendation at 
Para 34)
 
28.       The Committee feels that the issue of wage revision of employees of Indian Airlines has been pending for a long
 time. In this connection, the Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the recommendations made
 by the Committee in its 96
th Report, which is reproduced below: -
 
“The Committee expresses its anguish over the evasive comments of the Ministry offered in response to the
 recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee.  The Committee is extremely unhappy about the lackadaisical
 approach of the Ministry on the issue of revision of scales of pay of employees of Indian Airlines.  The
 Committee is of the view that the satisfaction level of the personnel in the matter of service conditions is a
 major factor affecting the performance of any organisation.  The total inaction on the part of the Ministry in the
 matter of pay revision of employees of Indian Airlines is surprising, especially in the present age of poaching
 and stiff competition by other Indian scheduled carriers.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry
 should expedite its decision in the matter in the overall interest of the employees and the organisation.”   The
 Committee once again reiterates the above recommendation and expects an early action thereon.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
29.       Wage revisions up to 31.12.1996 in respect of all categories of employees in Indian Airlines had been completed
 in 2001.   Further, Productivity Linked Incentive (PLI) Schemes, which had been introduced in 1994, were revised in
 1996 and further revised in respect of all categories of employees from the year 2001. There has been substantial
 increase in emoluments consequent to payments under the Productivity Linked Incentive Schemes based on
 improvement in pre-determined productivity parameters.   The revised PLI Settlement in respect of non-technical
 categories of employees represented by the Air Corporation Employee’s Union (ACEU) was last signed on 23.3.2004.
 
30.       Indian Airlines had taken a decision in December 1999 that considering the financial position of the Company
 and increasing competitive pressures, there was no justification for increase in wages at that stage. 
 
31.       Subsequently,  Air India entered into a settlement with Air India Employees Guild for wage revision effective
 01.01.1997, a comprehensive note has been received  from Indian Airlines Ltd., requesting the Ministry for issuance of
 appropriate directions as per the guidelines.  Requisite directive has since been issued to Indian Airlines to commence
 wage negotiations with their Unions/Associations on 21.7.2006. 
 
 
ACQUISITION OF AIRCRAFT BY INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED & AIR INDIA LIMITED

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
(Recommendation at Para 64)
 
32.       The Committee expects that the Ministry would take necessary steps to ensure that the time schedules fixed for
 the delivery of aircraft to Indian Airlines and Air India are adhered to so that the National Carriers are able to take
 maximum benefits of exemption from payment of tax under Section 10(15A).  The Committee hopes that the Ministry
 would not hesitate to invoke the penalty clauses in the terms and conditions of the purchases in the event of failure to
 adhere to the agreed timeframe of delivery of aircraft.  The Committee recommends the Government to ensure that the
 commitments made by the M/s. Boeing and M/s. Airbus Industrie to set up training centers for flight and maintenance
 training, investment in areas such as Pilot training, aircraft maintenance and repair etc. may be in place well in time.  It
 is further recommended that the matter regarding the extension beyond 1
st April, 2007 of the exemption from payment
 of tax on lease rentals payable to a non-resident foreign lessor under Section 10(15A) should be pursued with the
 Ministry of Finance.  The Committee also recommends that Government should explore the possibility of extending its
 space/defence aeronautical endeavours to the manufacturing of civilian aircraft to reduce the dependency on foreign
 companies for the supply of aircraft.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
33.       The observations of the Committee with regard to adherence to the time schedule for delivery of aircraft to
 Indian Airlines and Air India have been noted for compliance.
 
34.       The Union Budget 2006 extended the exemption from with-holding tax on lease of aircraft and aircraft engines
 for a further period of one year i.e. lease agreements executed on or before 31.3.2007 would be exempted from levy of
 with-hold tax.  The proposal for further continuation of this exemption would be taken up with Ministry of Finance at
 the time of formulation of budget for 2007-08.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
35.       The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee is however constrained to note that the Ministry
 did not bother to even comment upon in the recommendation about exploration of the possibility of extending its
 space/defence aeronautical endeavors to the manufacturing of civilian aircraft to reduce the dependency on foreign
 companies for the supply of aircraft.
 
 
ALLIANCE AIR
(Recommendation at 
Para 68)
 
36.       The Committee notes with concern the deterioration of flight connectivity in the North Eastern region due to the
 constraints faced by Alliance Air on account of exodus of pilots, in view of the fact that the North Eastern region has
 got strategic importance.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the efforts being made to induct pilots should be
 intensified to normalize the operations of Alliance Air in the North-East. The Committee also recommends that the
 assurance of putting more aircraft on routes in the North-East after the acquisition of aircraft by Indian Airlines should
 be fulfilled immediately after the delivery of the first batch of aircraft.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
37.       Indian Airlines has replaced following Boeing-737 flights by A319 flights effective 1
st January 2006 with the
 induction of some leased A319 aircraft:-
 
1st January 2006:
                                                                                    Days of
Flight No.    Sector                                    Aircraft    Operation
 
IC-211/212  Kolkata-Aizawl-Kolkata              A319         Daily

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
 
Flights restructured to operate as under:-
 
1st May 2006:
                                                                                          Days of
Flight No.
    Sector                                      Aircraft      Operations
IC-211/212  Kolkata-Aizawl-Kolkata              A319                  1
IC-211        Kolkata-Aizawl-Imphal-Kolkata   A319             3,5,7
IC-211        Kolkata-Imphal-Aizawl-Kolkata   A319             2,4,6
 
Alliance Air  has developed a revived schedule with ATR aircraft which offers :
> Connectivity  to Guwahati,Agartala, Silchar, Aizwal, Lilabari,Shillong and Dimapur.
>  A same day connection via Guwahati is available for Delhi-Lilabari passengers on two days of the week and
 for passengers from Lilabari-Delhi via Guwahati and Kolkata also on  two days of the week.
> Connectivity between Guwahati-Silchar and Guwahati-Aizawl   has also been revised.
38.       It is expected that with the availability of additional ATR pilots, further enhancement would be made to this 
 revised scheduled. 
 
39.       With induction of 43 new aircraft being procured, rest of the Boeing-737 operations in North East would also be
 replaced by A319/A320/A321 operation in a gradual fashion.
 
 
AIR INDIA EXPRESS
(Recommendation at 
Para 73)
 
40.       The Committee feels that the operations of Air India Express have been of immense help to the expatriate Indian
 workers in the Gulf region.  The Committee recommends that the operations of this budget airline should be carefully
 planned with a view to achieve the objective of offering low cost air connectivity to skilled/unskilled Indian workers
 employed in the Gulf region and other parts of the world.  The Committee expects that the Ministry will take suitable
 steps so that aspirations of the people for increasing the frequency of operations as well as providing connectivity to
 new regions will be fulfilled.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
41.       Air India Express has so far leased 7 aircraft.  These are mainly deployed on Kerala/Gulf routes, which are price
 sensitive.  It is proposed to introduce flights from Chennai to Kuala Lumpur and Singapore and thereafter from
 Amritsar, Mangalore, Hyderabad, Thiruvananthapuram, Trichy to Dubai, Bahrain/Doha, India/Kuwait, and from
 Mumbai and Delhi to Abu Dhabi and Muscat. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
42.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of Ministry of Civil Aviation and desires to know about the steps
 taken to strengthen the operation of Air India Express so that it could be in a position to compete with the private
 carriers who are operating/permitted to operate in the above sectors.
 
 
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
(Recommendation at 
Para 78)
 
43.       The Committee feels that there is tremendous scope of utilizing the helicopter facility to connect the remote
 tourist places.  The Committee recommends that Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited should prepare specific plans to

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 diversify/connect to important tourist places as a part of diversification of its operations. The Committee expects that
 the approved outlay for new fleet acquisition will be fully utilised in the current financial year.  The Committee notes
 that a substantial number of the grounded operating fleet of Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited was rendered
 unserviceable during the torrential rains/floods at Mumbai in July 2005.  The Committee recommends that suitable
 contingency plans should be evolved to prevent the recurrence of such mishaps.  The Committee also recommends that
 efforts should be made to make the damaged Dauphin fleet serviceable in a time bound manner.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
CONNECTIVITY TO
  REMOTE TOURIST PLACES
           
44.       While continuing to provide connectivity to various tourist places in the North East, Andaman & Nicobar and
 Lakshdweep and major religious places, PHHL has plans to diversify/connect important tourist places in Uttranchal
 such as Ghangharia, Hemkund Sahib etc., (subject to necessary permissions).  PHHL is taking necessary action to start
 construction of Hangar at Gauchar airfield on the land allotted by the State Govt. on lease basis for helicopter
 operations.
 
45.       PHHL also plans to provide a Bell helicopter under wet lease arrangement for starting regular passenger services
 to Jain Temples situated in Girnar Hills in Junagarh District of Gujarat.   The proposal is under consideration of the
 Govt. of Gujarat.
 
46.       PHHL had seperately submitted proposals to Govt. of Nagaland & Mizoram for leasing its helicopters on long
 term basis for connecting important & remote places.
 
47.       PHHL would continue making efforts for connecting more religious & tourists sites in future as well.
 
UTILISATION OF APPROVED OUTLAY FOR NEW FLEET ACQUISITION DURING CURRENT
 FINANCIAL YEAR.
 
48.       All efforts are being made to ensure utilisation of approved Plan Outlay in the current financial year.  Delivery
 of 2 Dauphin N3 helicopters was received in May/June, 2006.  PHHL has signed contract with M/s. Eurocopter, France
 on 24.05.2006 for purchase of 2 more Dauphin N3 helicopters and  advance payment to M/s. Eurocopter has been
 released for this purpose. PHHL has also placed order for purchase of one spare aeroengine for Dauphine N3 fleet.
 
GROUNDING OF FLEET DURING MUMBAI FLOOD IN JULY, 2005
 
49.       All the damaged helicopters have since been made serviceable by PHHL.
 
CONTINGENCY PLANS FOR PREVENTING RECURRENCE OF MISHAPS DURING HEAVY RAINS.
 
50.       PHHL has chalked out the contingency plan as under:-
               i.       Flat racks of Westland helicopter available in the premises have been placed at strategic places and these flat
 racks have been covered with chequerred plates to accommodate 4 helicopters inside the hangar and 2
 helicopters outside operations building.
 
             ii.            Necessary  ramps have been fabricated to facilitate movement/positioning of helicopters.
 
            iii.             Cement concrete platform has been created with a view to have a permanent structure by utilizing the debris
 available at site arising from major structural work at Western Region.
 
           iv.      Covering the gangway area outside the store so as to convert intio a Receipt Station.
 
51.       PHHL can park 3 to 4 helicopters at Santa Cruz  Airport during the monsoon in emergency after obtaining ATC
 clearance.

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
52.       With all the above arrangements for security of helicopters, it would be possible for PHHL to accommodate the
 helicopters at safe places.   Under the contingency plan, PHHL has ensured proper deployment/mobilization of
 manpower with complete vigil.
 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at 
Para 92)
 
53.       The Committee notes that the approximate financial implication for the development of 35 Non-Metro Airports
 would be Rs.4662.50 crore over a period of five years starting from 2006-07 to 2010-11 and that the Ministry is
 considering a proposal to levy ADF/ UDF on passengers at these 35 Non-Metro Airports for funding the part
 development cost and to make the project financially viable as per the proposal.  In this context the Committee desires
 to draw the attention of the Ministry to the assurance given in the Action Taken Replies furnished by it on the
 recommendations contained in the 90
th Report of the Committee that after the restructuring of the Delhi and Mumbai
 airports, Airports Authority of India will be better off financially and it will not only be able to maintain other airports
 in the country but also upgrade and modernize these airports.  Further, it was also submitted that Airports Authority of
 India is planning to modernize 35 Non-Metro Airports to world-class standards by using reserves including internal
 reserves.  The Committee further recommends that the proposal should be expedited and implemented in a specific time
 frame.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
54.       Airports Authority of India (AAI) has decided to modernize 35 non-metro airports to world-class standards in
 phases with focus on airside and city side development and enhancement of non-aeronautical revenue.  These airports
 are located at Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Guwahati, Jaipur, Udaipur, Thiruvananthapuram, Lucknow, Goa, Madurai,
 Mangalore, Agatti, Aurangabad, Khajuraho, Rajkot, Vadodara, Bhopal, Indore, Nagpur, Vishakhapatnam, Trichy,
 Bhubaneshwar, Coimbatore, Patna, Port Blair, Varanasi, Agartala, Dehradun, Imphal, Ranchi, Raipur, Agra,
 Chandigarh, Dimapur, Jammu and Pune.  Indian Financing Consultants (IFCs) and Global Technical Advisors (GTAs)
 were appointed to conduct techno-economic feasibility study of 10 identified airports to evolve an appropriate model
 based on viability of the project.  Their reports were received.   Appointment of consultants for remaining airports is in
 process.
 
55.       Meanwhile, a Note on the development of Non-Metro airport was submitted to Committee on Infrastructure in
 the Planning Commission.  A Task Force comprising representatives of Planning Commission, Ministry of Civil
 Aviation, Department of Economic Affairs, Department of Expenditure was constituted to deliberate and submit a
 financing plan for development of regional airports.  The Task Force has submitted its final report to Committee on
 Infrastructure (COI) for acceptance.   The Committee in its meeting held on 8
th June, 2006 approved the Report of the
 Task Force subject to the following :
 
i)                    Instead of phasing airports in a sequential manner, development of all the 35 airports may be taken up under
 the authority and responsibility of AAI;
 
ii)                   In selected airports, particularly the larger ones, wholly owned subsidiaries of AAI may be created for
 development and operations of the respective airports;
 
iii)                 For Kolkatta and Chennai airports, the issue of how to proceed in this matter was being discussed and
 would be separately decided by the Prime Minister;
 
iv)                 Development of airports in the NE Region must be taken up by AAI on a priority basis.
 
56.       It has been decided that the Airports in North East and Civil Enclaves at Defence airfields (at 10 airports) will be
 developed by AAI only.  AAI will shortly be issuing Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for short listing of consultant for

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 selection of JVC Private Consortium for City Side Development including Terminal Buildings for identified airports.
 
57.       In all, reports in respect of 25 airports out of 35 selected airports have been got prepared by AAI so far.
 
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
58.       The Committee notes the reply and decided to take up the matter at the time of consideration of Demands for
 Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation for the year 2007-08
 
(Recommendation at Para 93)
 
59.       The Committee notes that there is a spurt in the commercial activities in Mangalore, which is likely to benefit
 the civil aviation activities in the region.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to harness the potential
 benefits, the necessary steps, including discussions with the State Government, for the early commissioning of the
 Mangalore airport and commencement of international flights should be taken by the Ministry.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
60.       Mangalore airport is being developed in a phased manner for limited international operations.   A new runway of
 8000 ft. X 150 ft. has been constructed and put in operation for trial landings in good weather condition. Instrument
 Lighting System (ILS) is also being installed on new runway. 
 
61.       The drawings are under preparation for construction of new integrated terminal building for handling 400
 domestic and 200 international passengers on modular concept with 5 aircraft parking stands. The required land is yet
 to be handed over by State Govt., who have assured that land will be handed over at the earliest possible.
 
62.       Government has already notified Mangalore airport as Custom Airport w.e.f. 3
rd May, 2006.  AAI is making
 efforts to commence limited international operations from existing terminal building and new runway.  Air India
 Express has already undertaken survey for international flights with B-737-800 class of aircraft.
 
(Recommendation at Para 99)
 
63.       The Committee notes that utilisation of funds and physical progress in the projects under implementation in the
 North Eastern region is very poor barring a few projects.  The Committee recommends that Airports Authority of India
 should give focused attention to the projects under implementation in the North Eastern Region and fix achievable
 targets for early completion of the same.   The Committee recommends that the preparatory steps for the construction of
 an airfield in Arunachal Pradesh should be completed at the earliest so that people of that State can be provided with air
 connectivity to rest of India. In the matter of provision of adequate finances, the Committee recommends that the
 Ministry should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region.  The Committee also
 recommends that  the Ministry should explore the possibility of allocating more funds from the internal resources to
 fund the airport developmental project in the North Eastern region.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
64.       Airports Authority of India has completed most of the works approved by North-East Council for which NEC is 
 providing 60% of completed cost as grants-in-aid. 
 
A.        The works complete during 9
th & 10th Five Year Plan Period are as under:-
 
Guwahati (Assam)

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
1        Expansion and modification of terminal building for 1200 pax.
2        Expansion of apron for parking of 1 additional A-320 class of
     aircraft and two helicopters.
3        Strengthening of runway and associated pavements for B 747-400
      class of aircraft.
4
        Installation  of MSSR / ARSR Radar.
5        Replacement of VOR with DVOR/ DME.
6        Construction of perimeter road and boundary wall around newly
      acquired land.
 
Dibrugarh (Assam)
 
7        Expansion of apron and construction of additional new link taxiway.
8        Replacement of VOR with DVOR/ DME.
 
Lilabari (
Assam)
 
9        Strengthening and extension of runway from 4500 ft to 7500 ft for operation of A-320 class of aircraft including
 installation of runway edge lights etc.
10
    Construction of new terminal building complex for 400 pax, car park, fire station Cat-VI, control tower cum
 technical block, apron, taxiway and boundary wall.
11
    Installation of DVOR/ DME.
 
Tezpur (
Assam)
 
1        Construction of new civil enclave comprising of a new terminal building for handling 400 pax. at a time, apron
 for parking of 2 A-320 aircraft and link taxiway etc.
 
Agartala (Tripura)
 
2        Strengthening and extension of runway from 6000 ft. to 7500 ft. and associated pavements.
3        Construction of new terminal building complex for 500 pax including car park etc.
4        Construction of new fire station, perimeter road, boundary wall, newly acquired land  etc.
 
 
Imphal (Manipur)
 
1        Construction of new terminal building complex for 600 pax including car park and allied works etc.
2        Strengthening of runway for B-737-800 class of aircraft, expansion of apron with additional link taxiway,
 construction of isolation bay, perimeter road etc.
3        Replacement of old ILS and VOR with new ILS / DME and DVOR/DME.
4        Construction of new control tower cum technical block and fire station.
 
Dimapur (Nagaland)
 
1        Construction of new terminal building complex for 400 pax, new apron and link taxiways.
2        Construction of control tower cum technical block
3        Installation of runway lights, parking etc.
4        Installation of DVOR/DME
5        Strengthening of runway, development of runway strip for installation of ILS .
6        Installation of ILS equipment and removal of obstacles.
 
B.         WORKS IN PROGRESS

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
Dibrugarh (Assam)
 
1        Extension and strengthening of runway from 6000 ft. to 7500 ft. and associated works.
2        Expansion of apron and additional link taxiway for parking of additional 3 aircraft.
3        Construction of new terminal building complex for 400 pax. at a time.
4        Construction of new fire station and technical block cum control tower (likely to start during 2006-07).
 
Silchar (Assam)
 
1        Strengthening and extension of runway from 5850 ft. to 7500 ft, expansion of apron, provision of Night Landing
 Facilities, installation of ILS, construction of Isolation Bay etc.
 
              Above mentioned works are likely to be completed during 2007-08.
 
            The detailed project report in case of construction of airports at Sikkim is under consideration for deciding the
 funding pattern. In case of Kohima AAI is undertaking detailed feasibility report and work is likely to be awarded IN
 Sept, 2006.  In case of Itanagar the site has been identified and State Govt. has been requested to provide the required
 information to assess aircraft operation feasibility to finalize the site.  The information is awaited from State
 Government.  In the meeting of Committee on Infrastructure held on 8
th June 2006, it was inter-alia decided that
 development of airports in North Eastern Region must be taken up by AAI on a priority basis.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
65.       The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Airport Authority of India will develop airports in the North-
Eastern Region on priority basis as decided by the Committee on Infrastructure.
 
 
RESTRUCTURING DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at 
Para 102)
 
66.       The Committee recommends that the Tripartite Committee with the representatives of Ministry of Civil
 Aviation, Airports Authority of India and AAI Employees Joint Forum should hold regular meetings and finalise its
 Report in a time bound manner in view of the importance of the issues relating to modernization of airports by Airports
 Authority of India and the stake of the employees including job security.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
67.       Meetings of Tripartite Committee have been held on a regular basis.  So far 5 meetings of the Committee have
 been held, but the recommendations of the Committee could not be finalized because of several issues raised by the
 AAI Employees Joint Forum some of which are not directly related to the scope of work of the Committee.   In view of
 this, the tenure of the Committee has been extended by a period of 3 months from 8
th August, 2006 so as to enable the
 Committee to complete its work. 
 
 
KOLKATA & CHENNAI AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at 
Para 104)
 
68.       The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry with regard to construction of international
 airports at Kolkata and Chennai. The Committee is of the opinion that with the growth of the aviation sector in the
 country, the pressure and strain on Mumbai and Delhi airports is also increasing.  The Committee is apprehensive that
 with the arrival of private players in the airline sector, there will be further intensification of this pressure.  As accepted

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 by the Secretary of the Ministry, the Delhi and Mumbai-centric activity was also becoming unmanageable.  The
 Committee, therefore, feels that there exists a need to develop alternate airports and recommends that work of
 international terminals at Kolkata and Chennai should be completed at the earliest.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
69.       As regards construction of an alternate airport for Mumbai , a proposal was received from City & Industrial
 Development Corporation of Maharashtra Limited (CIDCO) through Government of Maharashtra to construct a second
 airport at Navi Mumbai.  The proposal is under consideration of this Ministry.  Airports Authority of India is getting
 simulation study done through ICAO on the conflict free operation from the existing airport and the proposed airport.  
 A draft report of ICAO study was received, on which AAI  has furnished their views/comments to ICAO for
 preparation of final report.
 
70.       AAI has submitted a proposal for construction of new International Terminal Building at Kolkata which is being
 processed for approval of PIB/CCEA. 
 
71.       In order to make Chennai Airport as a world class airport, Ministry of Civil Aviation has requested State
 Government of Tamil Nadu  to acquire 583 hectares of land. However, at present land acquisition process has been held
 up due to litigation taken by the residents in the High Court of Tamil Nadu. The modernization of Kolkata and Chennai
 airports also came up for discussion in the meeting of Committee of Infrastructure held on 08
th June 2006 and it was
 decided that the issue of how to proceed in the matter would be separately decided.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
72.       The Committee notes that Ministry of Civil Aviation is considering the proposal for construction of an alternate
 airport for Mumbai, besides construction of new International Terminal building at Kolkata and upgradation of existing
 Airports at Chennai and Kolkata to world class standard.  However, the Committee further observes that further details
 about these may be furnished to the Committee.
 
 
PRIVATE SCHEDULED AIRLINES
(Recommendation at 
Para 108)
 
73.       The policy of opening up of international skies to Indian scheduled airlines was adopted to ensure full realization
 of the objective to enhance utilisation of traffic rights available to India.  The Committee however notes that despite the
 permission granted to private carriers to operate services to USA and Belgium, the services have not commenced and it
 is surprising that the Ministry has left the matter to the commercial judgement of the concerned airlines.  The
 Committee is of the view that there should be proper monitoring of the permissions granted by the Ministry and
 recommends that it must be ensured that actual operations are started by the operators so that the stated objective of
 optimum utilisation of traffic rights is achieved.  The Committee also reiterates its recommendations contained in its
 96
th Report, which is reproduced below: -
 
“The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that there are only two minimum eligibility criteria
 prescribed for selection of scheduled domestic airlines to be allowed to operate on international routes, namely,
 a minimum fleet strength of 20 aircraft and a minimum experience of five years operations on domestic routes. 
 The Committee also notes that the basic policy of the Government to allow the scheduled carriers to operate on
 international routes has been framed after due consideration of the Report of Naresh Chandra Committee, which
 was submitted to the Ministry in December 2003.  The said committee had reportedly revealed that we are
 presently using only 40% of our bilateral rights.  However, the Committee feels that the steep restrictions
 imposed by the Ministry are impediments in achieving the basic objectives behind the new policy to mitigate
 under capacity in the international segment and to enhance global connectivity to and from different states in the
 country.   The Committee recommends that in view of the irreversible nature of the new policy, the Ministry

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 should review its prescribed standards regarding fleet strength, maintenance facilities, safety systems etc. for
 granting licences to new airlines in the domestic sector, taking into consideration the requirements for the
 international sector also.  Such a review would enable the relaxation of the existing stringent restrictions on
 Indian scheduled airlines for international operations. The Committee also notes that the stringent restrictions
 have not been able to avoid the denial of flights to one of the private airlines to destinations in the United States
 of America.”
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
74.       Commencement of actual operations may not only be a commercial decision of the airlines, but approval of the
 Regulatory Authority of the foreign countries concerned is also required, which in some cases has not been granted.
 
75.       With regard to the minimum eligibility criteria prescribed for selection of scheduled domestic airlines to be
 allowed to operate on international routes, the Ministry has already clarified the position.  For operations of scheduled
 flights on the domestic sector, the requirement of minimum fleet strength is 5 aircraft, which is considered adequate for
 providing reliable schedule services on regional routes.  It is not possible to provide reliable schedule services on metro
 routes with 5 aircraft.  It is believed that more than 10 aircraft would be needed to provide reliable schedule services on
 metro routes.  For international operations the operator must have a proper network for providing services within India
 on metro, regional and sub-regional routes.  It was in this context that it was considered essential that an airline, which
 is permitted to operate on international routes must have a minimum of 20 aircraft. 
 
76.       Similarly, it is not possible for DGCA to closely monitor the operator’s systems at foreign destinations as is
 possible on domestic operations.  It was therefore felt that a 5 year operation on the domestic routes is needed to
 generate the confidence that the airline is responsible, has all the safety systems in place and can monitor itself to
 ensure safe operations on international routes even in absence of close monitoring of DGCA  officers.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
77.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of Ministry and feels that the steep restrictions imposed by the
 Ministry are impediments in achieving the basic objectives behind the new policy to mitigate under capacity in the
 international segment and to enhance global connectivity to and from different states in the country.   The Committee
 recommends that in view of the irreversible nature of the new policy, the Ministry should review its prescribed
 standards regarding fleet strength, maintenance facilities, safety systems etc. for granting licences to new airlines in the
 domestic sector, taking into consideration the requirements for the international sector also." 
 
SHORTAGE OF TRAINED MANPOWER IN CIVIL AVIATION SECTOR
Recommendation at 
Para 118)
 
78.       The Committee notes that the civil aviation sector in the country is growing at a fast rate and more and more
 private carriers are joining the field.  There is also a proposal for large-scale aircraft acquisition by Indian Airlines and
 Air India.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the various efforts at augmenting the number of trained Pilots,
 Air Traffic Control (ATC) Personnel and Service and Maintenance Engineers should receive focussed attention, so that
 there are no slippages in the targets sought to be achieved.   The Committee also recommends that   the capacity of
 upgradation of Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Academy (IGRUA) and the construction of the new Flying Training
 Academy at Gondia should be completed within a stipulated time frame.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
AUGMENTATION OF PILOTS
 
79.       The following measures have been taken to augment the pool of qualified pilots for the aviation industry:-
 
1.         There are 40 approved flying training institutes imparting flying training to pilots in the country  out of

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 which 29 are functional.
 
2.         A Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) has been issued by DGCA to facilitate availability of more Chief
 Flight Instructors (CFI), Flight Instructor Incharge (FII) by redefining eligibility criteria and also take Qualified
 Flight Instructors from Defence. A Civil Aviation Requirement (CAR) has been issued, which permits pilots
 holding Flight Instructor’s Rating to impart training upto the age of 65 years. The CAR for approval of Flying
 Training Institute has been amended on 01.07.2006 to address the demands of the sector in an effective manner.
 
3.         Flying requirements for issue of CPL has been reduced from 250 hours to 200 hours and for issue of
 Instrument Rating flying has been reduced from 150 hours to 100 hours and the age of pilots, who can operate
 commercial aircraft has been increased from 60 to 65 years.
 
4.         This Ministry is in the process of upgradation & modernisation of infrastructure at Indira Gandhi
 Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) at Rae Bareli to increase its training capacity to 100 pilots per year.
 
5.         The proposal of establishing a new flying training institute at Gondia, Maharashtra  is being pursued in
 time bound manner.
 
 
 
 
AUGMENTATION OF MAINTENANCE ENGINEERS
 
80.       At present there are 45 DGCA approved training school located  all over India in the field of Aircraft
 Maintenance Engineering training.  Together they are catering to the need of industry.  DGCA ensures the standard of
 training through regular inspections.
 
AUGMENTATION OF ATC PERSONNEL
 
81.       Airports Authority of India is contemplating setting up of an Advance Aviation Training Institute at Hyderabad
 to cater to the training in Air Traffic Control and Air Traffic Management, Communication & Navigation system, Fire
 Fighting & Rescue Operations etc. 
 
82.       During the last year, 166 posts of Jr. Executives (ATC) have been filled in for augmentation of the ATC
 services.  Further, 100 more posts have been advertised in Newspaper.  Besides, 60 posts of Jr. Executives (Elex.) in
 CNS Discipline have also been advertised for which recruitment action is in hand.  305 posts of Jr. Executive Civil /
 Electrical in Engineering Department have been advertised for which the recruitment action is in hand.
 
UPGRADATION OF INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI (IGRUA)
 
83.       Appreciating the concerns of Committee, the Ministry has been regularly monitoring the progress of cases for
 modernisation of IGRUA. Note for consideration of Standing Finance Committee for proposed upgradation of
 infrastructure at IGRUA at an estimated cost of Rs.21.82 crores has been considered by the Standing Finance
 Committee and recommended for approval of competent authority.   Expenditure sanction in respect of this project is
 likely to be issued shortly.   Separately, a comprehensive proposal for seeking approval of competent financial authority
 has been prepared to augment the trainer aircraft fleet of IGRUA, modernize the training equipment and augmenting
 the manpower for ensuring adequate training resources to IGRUA for increase in the number of trainees to 100 per
 annum.
 
 
COMPLETION OF NEW FLYING TRAINING INSTITUTE AT GONDIA
 
84.       The project for setting up of the proposed flying training institute at Gondia, Maharashtra is being processed in a
 time bound manner so as to ensure that the project is completed at the earliest. 

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
85.       Phased development of Gondia airport is proposed for creation of training facilities with 30 students per year in
 the first phase and 100 students per year in the second phase.  AAI has already awarded contract for the works relating
 to strengthening and extension of runway, apron, control tower and other facilities for safe aircraft operations have been
 awarded by AAI.  
 
86.       AAI has already invited “Expression of Interest” (EOI) from prospective Joint Venture Partner for participating
 and investing in the establishment of the proposed institute, which are being examined in AAI.   
 
 
MERGER OF AIRLINES
Recommendation at 
Para 121)
 
87.       The Committee observes that oflate there have been changes in the strategy of private airlines operators by way
 of consolidation of their operations.  The Committee feels that these conditions can lead to monopolistic situation in
 civil aviation sector and there is a need to check this trend.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that while
 formulating the new Civil Aviation Policy, all the consequences of merger of airlines including the matter regarding
 reallocation of infrastructural facilities at airports should be addressed properly.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
88.       Merger, takeovers etc. of airlines is part of the process of industry consolidations and is in line with global trends
 in the developed aviation market. The Government’s intent is to adopt a non-discriminatory approach towards all
 airlines, not to cause public inconvenience by disruption of flight schedules and to adopt a policy that would not be
 arbitrary and would not hamper growth and consolidation of airline industry.  Based on these considerations, a policy to
 be followed regarding use of Airport Infrastructure in case of merger/takeover of airlines and sale/transfer of aircraft
 has been approved in this Ministry and has been published on its web site.
 
89.       As regards the observation on likely monopolistic situation arising due to acquisition/merger, the same fall under
 the purview of Competition Commission/MRTPC.  Ministry of Civil Aviation is in favour of encouraging healthy
 competition in the aviation sector so that passengers have greater choices for travel at reasonable tariffs.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
90.       The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation have framed a policy regarding use of Airport
 Infrastructure in case of merger/takeover of airlines and sale/transfer of aircraft. The Committee hopes that the policy
 will encourage a healthy competition in Civil Aviation Sector which in turn benefit the passengers.
 
ROUTE DISPERSAL GUIDELINES
Recommendation at 
Para 123)
 
91.       The Committee is surprised to note that no final decision has been taken by the Ministry to review the existing
 Routes Dispersal Guidelines although the internal Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Director General of
 Civil Aviation had submitted its report on 18
th March 2005. The Committee also notes that although no decision has
 been taken on the proposal to impose a surcharge to fund the minimum subsidy to be given to the successful bidder
 who offers to operate in North Eastern region, island territories and the States of Jammu & Kashmir, the proposal was
 initiated on the demands made by airlines operators for amending/scrapping of the Route Dispersal Guidelines as they
 find it uneconomical to operate to the said regions on purely commercial considerations.  The Committee is of the view
 that the demands of the private operators are unjustified as the national carriers are also operating to the said regions on
 purely social considerations. The Committee is of the opinion that the private carriers should also share the social
 obligations.  In view of the boom in the domestic passenger traffic, the Committee feels that the hitherto non-
commercial or unviable routes have been transformed into profit making routes.  The Committee recommends that the

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 Ministry should make an analysis of the profit/loss on the so-called non-commercial routes before taking a final
 decision in the matter.   The Committee is also of the opinion that the profits generated by the private carriers are used
 by them to operate flights in the non-commercial routes, if any.  In this scenario, the Committee recommends that the
 Ministry should also make a study as to whether the grant of minimum subsidy to airline operators will result in
 corresponding reduction in airfares on the main routes.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
92.       The Government has laid down route dispersal guidelines with a view to achieve better regulation of air
 transport services taking into account  the need for air transport services of different regions of the country including
 North-East region.  It is, however, up to the airlines to provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic
 demand and commercial viability.   As such, the airlines are free to operate anywhere in the country subject to
 compliance of route dispersal guidelines issued by Government. The recommendations of the Committee under the
 Chairmanship of Director General of Civil Aviation for reviewing existing guidelines as well as other alternative
 strategies to facilitate connectivity to different region of the country including North East is under consideration of the
 Government.   It may be mentioned that there has been significant growth in the domestic aviation sector in the
 meanwhile and a comprehensive Civil Aviation Policy is also under Government’s active consideration.   Final decision
 on Committee’s recommendation will be taken keeping these aspects into consideration.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
93.       The Committee is constrained to note that till date there is no policy in place to take care of the connectivity of
 North Eastern region and other uneconomical routes.  The Committee notes that Government is in a process of having
 comprehensive Civil Aviation policy.   Pending finalisation of comprehensive Civil Aviation policy, the Committee
 recommends that Ministry of Civil Aviation should take steps to ensure that private carriers also share the social
 responsibility like that of public carriers in serving the North East and other uneconomical routes.  The Committee
 further recommends that the decision of the Committee under the Chairmanship of DGCA for reviewing existing
 guidelines to facilitate connectivity to different regions of the country including North East should also be intimated to
 the Committee.
 
UNDER UTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL
 AIRPORT, DELHI
(Recommendation at 
Para 129)
 
94.       The Committee notes that despite the efforts made by the Ministry, the private airlines operators have not yet
 trained their pilots for ILS Cat-III operations.  The Committee also notes that the Director General of Civil Aviation has
 been asked to thoroughly examine the legal and operational issues related to making the training in Cat-II / III A & B
 operations mandatory. The Committee recommends that the Report of Director General of Civil Aviation should be
 expedited and suitable steps should be taken in time to enhance the utilisation of ILS Cat-II/III A & B installed at Indira
 Gandhi International Airport, Delhi by private carriers.  In this context, the Committee reiterates its earlier
 recommendations contained in its 88
th and 96th Reports, extracts from which are reproduced below:-
 
“The Committee recommends that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy
 conditions, the Ministry should amend ‘Aircraft Rules’ to incorporate a provision for making training of pilots
 compulsory by the private airlines on CAT-III System so that the investment made by the Government on the
 installation of the system through the tax payers’ money is not underutilized.”
 
“The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that in order to improve the operational efficiency during
 the extreme foggy conditions, training of pilots should be made compulsory by the private airlines on CAT-III
 System.  The Committee further recommends that utilization of CAT-II and CAT-III systems by private airlines
 should be made compulsory by training a fixed minimum proportion of their pilots and it should be enforced by
 the Government strictly.”
 

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
95.       There is no mandatory requirement for Domestic Airlines to get their pilots trained to operate during low
 visibility conditions.  However, these airlines are counselled from time to time to train their pilots and operate in such
 conditions.  Operators who do not have pilots trained   for CAT-II/III operations may not be permitted to schedule their
 operations during expected CAT-II/III conditions to/from such airfields.   It is also insisted upon airlines to have their
 Training Captains authorized/ trained for ILS CAT-II/III operations to train maximum number of pilots for CAT-II/III
 operations to improve the operational efficiency during low visibility conditions.  Making CAT-III A training
 mandatory through amendments of Aircraft Rules may not be feasible at this stage as this system is installed only at one
 airport in the country viz. Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi.
 
96.       It may further be stated that Kingfisher Airlines, SpiceJet and Air Deccan have initiated measures for training of
 their pilots for CAT-II operations after complying with the Civil Aviation Requirements.  These airlines have been
 granted Initial Authorization for CAT-II operations.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
           
97.       The Committee is not satisfied with the approach of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in the matter of utilization of
 CAT II/III system installed at IGI Airport, New Delhi.  Because of the lethargic approach of the Government, the
 investment made on the installation of CAT III system going waste and the past experience of most of the private
 carriers during the foggy conditions show abysmal picture.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of
 Civil Aviation should take action against private carriers who are not imparting training to their pilot in CAT through
 ILS.  So, that the CAT III instruments installed at Delhi Airport should be used in an optimal manner.
 
 
BENCHMARKING OF AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at 
Para 133)
 
98.       The Committee notes that the although there are certain pre-requisites for declaration of an airport as
 international airport, the term world class airport is an objective term depending on the availability of facilities
 comparable to major airports in the region.  The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the airports declared as
 international airports in the country will not certainly be of world class standards unless passenger friendly facilities are
 developed.  In this context, the Committee notes that the customer satisfaction survey has revealed that overall
 satisfaction level with Mumbai International Airport, Delhi International Airport and Delhi Domestic Airport are well
 below the desired standard of 3.5 on a five point scale and also the average obtaining in airports in the Middle East/Asia
 Pacific region.  Only the figures in respect of Mumbai Domestic  Airport are near to the desired standard of 3.5 and the
 average obtaining in airports in the Middle East/Asia Pacific region.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that there
 is a need to develop suitable institutional mechanism to assess the performance standards on continuous basis and take
 steps to upgrade the same to world-class standards.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
99.       Airports Authority of India has already initiated action for upgrading, improvement and modernization of
 infrastructure facilities at the international airport at non-metro cities in addition to domestic airports in a phased
 manner.  Global Technical Advisor (GTA) has been engaged for suggesting improvement in the facilities as per world
 class standards.   New terminal buildings will have all the passengers' friendly facilities of world class standards.  The
 designs are being adopted as per the yardsticks recommended by International Air Transport Association (IATA) and
 International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Special care has also been taken for handling of physically
 challenged passengers.  For them, special design toilets, ramp areas at various places for movement of wheel chairs,
 provision of Ambu-lift and wheel chairs by AAI as well as Airline operator would be ensured.  In addition AAI is also
 providing passengers boarding bridges in the new terminal buildings alongwith escalators and elevators.
 
100.     With effect from the effective date i.e. 3.5.2006, the responsibility to operate, maintain, develop, design,
 construct, upgrade, modernize, financing and management of Chhatarpati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai and

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi has been transferred to Joint Venture Companies in accordance with
 Operation, Management and Development Agreement between JVCs and AAI.
 
101.     However, with a view to upgrade the standard and ultimately customer satisfaction level at other international
 airports, the concerned  Airport Director / Officer-in-Charge have been informed about  the parameter(s) / facility(ies)
 where the rating had been below the acceptable level and also to find ways and means to improve the same.
 
ALLOTMENT OF PARKING BAYS
(Recommendation at 
Para 135)
 
102.     The Committee notes that the Airports Authority of India is in the process of developing a policy on the
 allotment of night parking bays to various airlines and additional parking bays are being constructed at various airports
 in the country to meet the demand.  The Committee recommends that the policy should be formulated at the earliest and
 the work relating to construction of additional parking bays at various airports should be completed within a stipulated
 time frame.  The Committee also expects that the airline operators would avail the concessions offered by the Ministry
 to decongest the bigger airports.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
103.     In the past, major demand in respect of overnight parking stands has been for Delhi and Mumbai airports. These
 two airports have been handed over to JVCs w.e.f. 3.5.2006 for development, management & operation. The JVCs shall
 be allotting night parking stands at these two airports.
 
104.     In respect of other airports the draft policy for allotment of parking stands is under formulation in AAI. The list
 of apron works presently in planning stage and works in progress are given at Appendix A and B respectively.
 
105.     4 Nos. additional parking bays are under construction at Kolkata, while for another 8 bays, tenders are being
 called.
 
106.     20 Nos. additional parking bays are under construction at Chennai Airport. All efforts are being made to
 complete the works within this financial year.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
107.     The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee desires that a copy of the draft policy for allotment of parking
 stands should be given to the Committee as and when it is finalised by the AAI.  
 
 
PACKAGES FOR OFFICIAL TRAVEL AND LEAVE TRAVEL CONCESSION (LTC)
(Recommendation at 
Para 139)
 
108.     The Committee notes that Air India has initiated discussions with the various Ministries in the Government of
 India and is formulating a very attractive package for Government of India personnel travelling abroad.  The
 Committee recommends that the signing of the Memoranda of Understanding with various Ministries to ensure that a
 large part of Government of India personnel travel on Air India should be completed at the earliest so that the hitherto
 assured revenue will remain with the organisation.   The Committee notes that the special package of Leave Travel
 Concession to Government of India personnel to visit Jammu and Kashmir expires in June 2006 and therefore
 recommends that the Ministry should provide additional flights till such period to the extent possible in view of the
 non-availability of accommodation in the present flight schedule.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
109.     With a view to capturing the high yield Government of India business, Air India has been negotiating with
 various Ministries to ensure that their personnel travel abroad only on Air India’s services, by way of offering a

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 discount in fares, companion free offer, upgrades, etc.  MOUs have been finalized with various Ministries, viz. Labour,
 Legal Affairs, Law & Justice, Youth Affairs & Sports, Textiles, Lok Sabha, Non-Conventional Energy Sources, etc.    
 The matter is being pursued with other Ministries/Departments of Government of India.
 
110.     Apart from its scheduled services on Delhi-Srinagar route, Indian Airlines operated  three additional flights per
 week on the Delhi-Srinagar-Delhi route with A320 aircraft, from 31
st May 2006 to 30th June 2006, making a total of 14
 additional flights during the period.
 
NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY
(Recommendation at 
Para 141)
 
111.     The Committee notes that the draft National Civil Aviation Policy has been prepared prior to March 2005 and
 the same has not been finalised so far.  The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to regulate the growth of civil
 aviation sector particularly after the entry of private sector in this field.  The Committee is of the opinion that the boom
 in passenger and cargo traffic in the domestic sector emphasizes the need to provide protection to the users of the
 services provided by the airlines operators.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the National Civil Aviation
 Policy should be formulated and announced at the earliest to address the complex issues prevalent in the civil aviation
 sector of the country.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
112.     A final draft of the Civil Aviation Policy has been prepared after Inter-Ministerial Consultations and necessary
 action has been initiated for obtaining approval of the competent authority to the same.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
113.     The Committee is not satisfied with progress in preparing the Civil Aviation Policy. The Civil Aviation sector is
 growing at a fast rate, and a lot of issues in the aviation sector are still remaining unsolved/unaddressed due to the lack
 of policy and guidelines.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry should act promptly and have the Civil
 Aviation Policy finalization at the earliest along with a comprehensive and holistic Aircraft Bill to replace the existing
 outdated Aircraft Act, 1934.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIOINS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
 
AIR INDIA LIMITED
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and desires to know actual details
 of the programmes/projects undertaken viz. purchase of Ground Handling Equipments, Engineering Workshop
 Equipments, Security Equipments, Aircraft Refurbishment Programme etc. and how much amount was spent on these
 projects out of the total outlay.  The Committee also desires the Ministry to furnish detail about the steps taken during
 the year to improve the operational efficiency of Air India Limited.
[Para9]
 
The Committee desires that the recommendation should be taken seriously and reiterates its recommendation
 that the Ministry should endeavor to focus on all the individual parameters that enhance the overall operational
 performance with the available aircraft capacity till new and modern aircraft join its fleet.
[Para 12]
 
The Committee notes that the Air India has taken some measure to improve its passenger load factors.  However,
 the Committee takes exception to the fact that Ministry remains silent on its recommendation that the "bilateral air
 services agreements should be leveraged to diversify the international air services and to avail the entitlement of new

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 traffic rights to the full extent."  The Committee desires to have action by the Ministry in the matter.
[Para16]
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and desires to know whether
 there is any policy/guidelines for leasing of aircraft. The Committee recommends and directs that a market oriented
 transparent tender process should be formulated for leasing of aircraft either for short term or long term arrangements.
[Para 21]
 
INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED
 
The Committee notes that despite increase in the overall load factor, market share of the Indian Airlines has gone
 down.  The Committee hopes that after acquisition of fleet, the share of Indian Airlines in the market will also improve.
[Para 27]
 
ACQUISITION OF AIRCRAFT BY INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED & AIR INDIA LIMITED
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee is however constrained to note that the Ministry
 did not bother to even comment upon in the recommendation about exploration of the possibility of extending its
 space/defence aeronautical endeavors to the manufacturing of civilian aircraft to reduce the dependency on foreign
 companies for the supply of aircraft.
[Para 35]
 
AIR INDIA EXPRESS
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of Ministry of Civil Aviation and desires to know about the steps
 taken to strengthen the operation of Air India Express so that it could be in a position to compete with the private
 carriers who are operating/permitted to operate in the above sectors.
[Para 42]
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
The Committee notes the reply and decided to take up the matter at the time of consideration of Demands for
 Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation for the year 2007-08
 
[Para 58]
 
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Airport Authority of India will develop airports in the North-
Eastern Region on priority basis as decided by the Committee on Infrastructure.
[Para 65]
 
KOLKATA & CHENNAI AIRPORTS
 
The Committee notes that Ministry of Civil Aviation is considering the proposal for construction of an alternate
 airport for Mumbai, besides construction of new International Terminal building at Kolkata and upgradation of existing
 Airports at Chennai and Kolkata to world class standard.  However, the Committee further observes that further details
 about these may be furnished to the Committee.
[Para 72]
 
PRIVATE SCHEDULED AIRLINES
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of Ministry and feels that the steep restrictions imposed by the
 Ministry are impediments in achieving the basic objectives behind the new policy to mitigate under capacity in the
 international segment and to enhance global connectivity to and from different states in the country.   The Committee
 recommends that in view of the irreversible nature of the new policy, the Ministry should review its prescribed

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 standards regarding fleet strength, maintenance facilities, safety systems etc. for granting licences to new airlines in the
 domestic sector, taking into consideration the requirements for the international sector also." 
[Para 77]
 
 
 
 
 
MERGER OF AIRLINES
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has framed a policy regarding use of Airport
 Infrastructure in case of merger/takeover of airlines and sale/transfer of aircraft. The Committee hopes that the policy
 will encourage a healthy competition in Civil Aviation Sector which in turn benefit the passengers.
 [Para 90]
 
 
ROUTE DISPERSAL GUIDELINES
 
The Committee is constrained to note that till date there is no policy in place to take care of the connectivity of
 North Eastern region and other uneconomical routes.  The Committee notes that Government is in a process of having
 comprehensive Civil Aviation policy.   Pending finalisation of comprehensive Civil Aviation policy, the Committee
 recommends that Ministry of Civil Aviation should take steps to ensure that private carriers also share the social
 responsibility like that of public carriers in serving the North East and other uneconomical routes.  The Committee
 further recommends that the decision of the Committee under the Chairmanship of DGCA for reviewing existing
 guidelines to facilitate connectivity to different regions of the country including North East should also be intimated to
 the Committee.
[Para 93]
 
 
UNDER UTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL
 AIRPORT, DELHI
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the approach of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in the matter of utilization of
 CAT II/III system installed at IGI Airport, New Delhi.  Because of the lethargic approach of the Government, the
 investment made on the installation of CAT III system going waste and the past experience of most of the private
 carriers during the foggy conditions show abysmal picture.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of
 Civil Aviation should take action against private carriers who are not imparting training to their pilot in CAT through
 ILS.  So, that the CAT III instruments installed at Delhi Airport should be used in an optimal manner.
[Para 97]
 
 
ALLOTMENT OF PARKING BAYS
 
The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee desires that a copy of the draft policy for allotment of parking
 stands should be given to the Committee as and when it is finalised by the AAI.
 [Para 107]
 
 
 
NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY
 
The Committee is not satisfied with progress in preparing the Civil Aviation Policy. The Civil Aviation sector is
 growing at a fast rate, and a lot of issues in the aviation sector are still remaining unsolved/unaddressed due to the lack
 of policy and guidelines.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry should act promptly and have the Civil

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 Aviation Policy finalization at the earliest along with a comprehensive and holistic Aircraft Bill to replace the existing
 outdated Aircraft Act, 1934.  
 
[Para 113]
 
 
M I N U T E S
 
 
FOURTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16 th April 2007 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri S.S. Chandran
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
8. Shri Joachim Baxla
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Shri N.S. V. Chitthan
11. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
12. Shri P. Karunakaran
13. Dr. P.P. Koya
14. Shri Samik Lahiri
15. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Dushyant Singh
17. Shri Suraj Singh
18. Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary     
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.                  The Committee considered the following five draft Reports:
 
(i)                  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Second Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road Transport
 and Highways;
 
(ii)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Culture;

115 th Report of Committe on Industry
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/115%20th%20Report.htm[22-10-2018 12:21:04]
 
(iii)               Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
 in its One Hundred and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism;
 
(iv)              Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Shipping; and
 
(v)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the five Report with minor modifications.     The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the
 current session.
 
3.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again on 17
th April 2007 at 3.00 p.m.