Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2014/Pausha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 24th January, 2014)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 24th January, 2014)
REPORT NO. 
204
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT
The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  24 th January, 2014)
(Presented to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on  24 th January, 2014)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2014/Pausha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. T ABLE OF A BBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................. (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—7
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 9—4 8
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 4 9—61
7. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 62—79

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf
this Two Hundred and Fourth Report on “the Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013”.
*
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on the 24 th September, 2013 considered the Bill and
heard the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee also heard the views of
Organizations/experts/stakeholders on the provisions of the Bill, in its meetings held on 9
th and
22nd October, 21 st November, 2013 and 3 rd January, 2014.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil Aviation,
Ministry of Law and Justice and experts/stakeholders/organizations for placing before the
Committee the material and information desired in connection with the Bill and for clarifying the
points raised by the Members.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 13
th January, 2014.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January, 13th, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausha 23, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 20.8.2013 and Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin
Part-II No. 51264, dated 19.09.2013.

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
ANS – Air Navigation Services
CAA – Civil Aviation Authority
CEO – Chief Executive Officer
DG – Director-General
DGCA – Director-General of Civil Aviation
DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
FAA – Federal Aviation Authority
H R – Human Resources
IASA – International Aviation Safety Assessments
ICAO – International Civil Aviation Organization
PSU – Public Sector Undertaking
SARPs – Standard and Recommended Practices
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013* was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
20th August, 2013. The Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha had
referred the Bill to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture on the 18th September, 2013 for examination and report back to Parliament.
2. The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013 seeks to constitute a Civil Aviation Authority
as an autonomous regulator of civil aviation safety - for the better management of civil aviation
safety oversight over air transport service operators, air service navigation operators and operators
of other civil aviation facilities, matters relating to impact of financial stress on safety operations,
consumer protection and environment regulations in civil aviation sector and for proper
implementation of the provisions of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made thereunder and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
3. The Committee discussed the provisions of the Bill with the Secretary and other officials
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and several important stakeholders on the Bill**.
4. Currently, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), an attached office of Ministry
of Civil Aviation, is the safety regulator in the field of civil aviation in India. The DGCA is
responsible for formulation, implementation, enforcement and monitoring of stipulated standards and
regulations of air transport services to/from and within India, air safety, airworthiness and
coordination of regulatory functions with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
5. India, being signatory to the Chicago Convention 1944, is responsible for compliance of the
Standards and Recommended Practices (SAPRs) in the Annexure to the Chicago Convention, in
aspects like training, licensing of personnel and airline operators. The primary responsibilities of
DGCA are Safety oversight, regular audits and monitoring of operations of various entities.
6. The most important tool in the hands of DGCA to perform its functions is the trained
human resources supported by adequate modern equipments. But the effectiveness of DGCA has
been up to the mark mainly due to shortage of trained technical manpower with expertise required
to oversee fast growing aviation activities in the country. This has been mainly due to absence of
administrative and financial powers with the DGCA to recruit and retain adequate technical
manpower and redeploy them in a timely manner. The main reason for this has been the procedural
and structural problems due to involvement of several authorities/agencies including Ministry of
Civil Aviation in recruitment of personnel. It is, therefore, not able to carry out meaningful audits,
surveillance of a large number of airlines, non-scheduled operators, training institutes for pilots,
engineers, maintenance organizations and airport service providers without the required
administrative flexibility and financial autonomy.
7. While the passenger traffic has grown from 7.3 crore in 2005-06 to 16.2 crore in 2011-12;
aircraft movement handled at Indian Airports has increased from 8.38 lakh in 2005-06 to 15.44 lakh
in 2011-12; and freight traffic from 1.4 million metric tonnes in 2005-06 to 2.3million metric
tonnes in 2011-12, the manpower strength of DGCA has declined by over 40%. Certain steps were
taken to provide additional manpower to the DGCA office in 2009. 427 additional Group ‘A’
technical posts were created in May, 2009. However, due to lengthy, cumbersome, complicated and
unending recruitment procedures and processes, most of these posts are yet to be filled even after
3 years since their creation.
* Annexure-I.
** Annexure-II.

2
8. Apart from the personnel, the DGCA has limited financial powers as well. As such, DGCA
cannot hire and employ even a casual employee in case of urgency without going through various
stages of proposal, sanction, release, etc. causing avoidable delays. Even with the best of intentions
and efforts, it has not been possible for the organization to develop its capacity in line with the
requirements of safety oversight of the Civil Aviation Sector.
9. DGCA has also to discharge its responsibilities of compliance with ICAO standards, approve
organizations, license personnel, etc. DGCA is presently over loaded with increasing work of
safety-oversight, under staffed, under equipped and is lagging behind in its capacity and capabilities
as a safety regulator and hence may compromise on safety of the traveling public, if not
restructured and strengthened at the earliest. DGCA has also not undergone adequate structural
changes to meet the demand of this dynamic sector.
10.  In view of increasing responsibilities of DGCA and faster technical advancement in the
sector, it is imperative to have a safety regulator which is adequately empowered to effectively
carry out its functions in a seamless manner and with less reliance on Government for its funds
and other administrative support.
11.  The Audit of functioning of DGCA by ICAO in October, 2006 and the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) of United States of America (USA) pointed out several deficiencies in
the DGCA set up with India facing the risk of being downgraded from Category I level to
Category II level resulting in limitation of operations of Indian Carriers to USA. The FAA-IASA
Report also pointed out towards a need for an effective restructuring of DGCA with administrative
and financial flexibility to carry out its safety oversight work. The Kaw Committee on Review and
Restructuring of Directorate General of Civil Aviation also recommended for appropriate level of
administrative and financial autonomy in the DGCA.
12. Some of the countries which have already set up such an Authority are UK, Singapore, New
Zealand, Australia, Nigeria, Jamaica, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, etc. The Ministry of Civil Aviation had
undertaken a study of the Civil Aviation Authorities set up by Sri Lanka, Singapore, New Zealand,
Australia and Indonesia.
13. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, in its 168th
Report entitled “Directorate General of Civil Aviation – Issues and Challenges”  had
recommended setting up of a Civil Aviation Authority with required autonomy to take care of the
problems that DGCA is currently faced with.
Salient features of the CAA Bill, 2013
14. The proposed Civil Aviation Authority of India will have a Chairperson, a Director General
(as CEO of CAA) and not more than five whole-time Members who shall not hold any other office.
It may also have two to four part-time members. The Authority shall work on not-for-profit
principles. The existing DGCA will get subsumed in CAA, which shall, inter-alia, perform all
functions of the DGCA as safety regulator as per the Aircraft Act, 1934. The consequential
amendments required in the Aircraft Act, 1934 are also proposed to be made.
15. The Bill seeks to provide adequate autonomy to the proposed CAA particularly in
administrative and financial matters. It may create and select persons for various posts including
technical ones.
16. The proposed Civil Aviation Authority shall be a self-funding entity duly authorized by the
Central Government to levy charges and fees to ensure that all or parts of its costs and expenditure
are met from such charges and fees. For this purpose, a Civil Aviation Authority Fund is sought
to be created.

3
17. It has been proposed that the CAA shall collect an oversight fee on Air Navigation Services
(ANS) at 1% of ANS Revenue for providing safety oversight over Air Navigation Service provider,
and also collect fee and charges on other services currently levied by the DGCA. This is expected
to generate about Rs.18 crore per annum based on current ANS revenue level. Revenue from other
services (for which charges are levied and collected by DGCA currently) upon suitable revision is
expected to generate Rs.50 crore per annum.
18. The Government may give budgetary support to the CAA on tapering basis in initial years
(2 years) till ‘Safety Fee’ rules are formulated and charges/fee etc., are revised. The CAA shall
prepare its own budget for each financial year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Authority, determine level of fee/charges/safety fee required and forward the same to the
Central Government for information and approval wherever required. However, the capital
expenditure, if any, may be met from the grants-in-aid, as is the case with other autonomous
bodies.
19. Such a self-funding mechanism shall give freedom to the CAA to allocate the necessary
resources for its efficient functioning, thus ensuring greater administrative and financial flexibility
and regulatory efficiency. This will also enable the CAA to attract and retain necessary operational
staff required for safety oversight functions.
The Committee’s observations/recommendations have been given in the succeeding
paragraphs:–
20. This Committee during the scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation every year and other related issues had itself realized that the existing DGCA
needed to be restructured with a view to giving it adequate autonomy in administrative and
financial spheres so that it can tackle the aviation safety related issues effectively in the
emerging scenario. Accordingly, the Committee, in the year 2011, had comprehensively
examined the working of the DGCA and had presented its 168th Report to Parliament
containing its observations/recommendations for empowering the DGCA by creating a body
like CAA. All the major constraints faced by DGCA as an air safety regulator were
discussed in this Report by giving relevant data and examples. The Committee had strongly
recommended to put such an authority in place at the earliest. The Committee is happy that
the Government has ultimately come out with a Bill in this regard.
21. But after having studied the provisions of the Bill, the Committee feels that with the
instant provisions, it will be difficult to achieve as well as protect the autonomy that is
being sought to be given to the CAA, particularly those relating to composition of the
Selection Committee, qualifications of Chairperson and Members of the Authority, creation/
selection of the posts and lack of clarity regarding the powers/functions of Chairperson/DG
of the proposed authority.
22. The Committee feels that relevant provisions of the Bill require suitable amendment
with a view to remove possible duplication, overlapping, ambiguities, etc. The Committee
also notes that there are many provisions in the Bill which seek to lay down Rules/
Regulations in future whereas these should have been incorporated as substantive part in
the Bill itself.
23. The clause-wise observations/recommendations of the Committee to make
amendments wherever necessary are given below:-
24. In Clause 4 (3), the words “experience in civil aviation engineering and
management” be replaced with “experience in aviation engineering or aviation
management”. The Committee feels that the Chairperson essentially should have the

4
special knowledge and professional experience in aviation related engineering or aviation
Management. The existing criteria, in practice, will definitely open this post for the persons
from any field of engineering and management which may not be related to aviation at all.
25. In addition to the special knowledge and professional experience required for the
post of Chairperson, the Proviso to Clause 4(3) provides that only a Government servant
who holds or has held the post of the Secretary to the Government of India or an
equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government, can be appointed as
Chairperson, CAA. When asked about the necessity for inserting such proviso for the
appointment of Chairperson, the Committee found that the reply offered by the
representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation was not convincing.
26. The Committee finds that qualifications prescribed for the post of Chairperson of the
Authority will effectively tilt the balance towards the serving or retired Secretaries to the
Government of India. As such, the proposed Authority would become shelter for retiring/
retired Secretaries of Government of India especially, those from the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. The Committee disapproves such a Scheme.
27. Further, a careful reading of Proviso to Clause 4(3) leaves possibility for the serving
Secretary, Civil Aviation also to become the Chairperson of the Authority. In other words,
the Secretary, Civil Aviation can also hold the post of Chairperson of the CAA
simultaneously. The Committee feels that such convergence of powers will certainly go
against the autonomy of the Authority which is the basic aim for creating the CAA.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends to delete the words “who is or” from the
said Proviso.
28. The Committee feels that Clause 4(3) - (4) should be suitably amended to allow entry
of professionals and heads of PSUs such as AAI, who have the relevant experience and
knowledge also to be eligible for the post of Chairperson, although they may not be
equivalent to Secretary, Government of India.
29. Clause 4(4) prescribes six major fields from which the DG and whole-time Members
will be selected. These fields include HR and finance also. It leaves possibility for persons
from these two fields to be appointed as DG, which the Committee feels, will not be in
accordance with the requirements of the proposed Authority. DG and at least four of whole
time Members of the Authority, the Committee feels, should be strictly from technical
background in aviation field. Therefore, while prescribing the qualifications/experience
under the Rules/Regulations, adequate care should be taken to avoid person from HR and
Finance being appointed as DG. It should also be ensured that not more than one whole
time Member is from these two fields.
30. It would be still better to prescribe the qualifications of DG of the proposed authority
in Clause 4(4) of the Bill, instead of leaving it to be framed under the delegated legislation
by the Ministry as has been proposed.
31. Clause 4(6) introduces concept of two distinct functions - that of Director General as
also the CEO of the CAA. This aspect, the Committee feels needs to be made clearer so
that the CAA is able to function appropriately.
32. Clause 5 proposes a ‘Selection Committee’ for the appointment of Chairperson, DG
and Whole-time Members. It is heavily dominated by Secretaries to Government of India,
with just one expert to be appointed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. In view of the nature
of mandate of the proposed authority, the Committee feels that having Secretaries of
Ministry of DOPT and Law and Justice in the Selection Committee will hardly serve any

5
purpose. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that at least three experts from
the areas mentioned in Clause 4(4)(a) - (e) should be included in the Selection Committee
in view of the technical nature of the working of the proposed Authority.
33. The Committee notes that the Clause 5(5) of the Bill provides that while appointing
Chairperson or DG or a Member, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such
person does not have financial or other interest. Now, as per Proviso to Clause 4(3), the
Committee finds that Secretary, Civil Aviation himself may become Chairman of the CAA
and as per Clause 5(1) (b), he also will be a member of the Selection Committee. If the
serving Secretary of MoCA is also eligible to hold the post of Chairman, and is also a
Member of the Selection Committee, it would not only impinge upon the autonomy of the
CAA, but it will also lead to serious conflict of interests.
34. The Clause 7(1) (a) prescribes the term of office of the Chairperson, D.G. and
Members of the CAA to be five years. The Committee feels that five years in one go would
be a long time particularly for the Members in view of Clause 9 providing for their
reappointment. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that term of office of the Members
be restricted to three years instead of five years. In view of the fast growing and changing
aviation sector, appointing persons for as long as ten to fifteen years would block the fresh
entrants as Members with latest training/knowledge. Therefore, the Committee recommends
to restrict the term of Members to three years subject to a maximum of six years. The
Committee recommends to add “for one more term” after the word “reappointment” in
Clause 9.
35. The Committee also finds that terms of office and conditions of service of part-time
member has been provided only in Clause 7(1)(b) of the Bill. The Committee feels that the
selection procedure, powers and functions of part-time members should also find a place in
the Bill. The Committee also recommends that a senior officer not below the rank of Joint
Secretary should be ex-officio  part time Member of the Authority to provide necessary
linkage between the Authority and the Ministry.
36. Clause 10 of the Bill relating to the powers and functions of the Chairperson can be
divided into two parts. First part describes major functions of the Chairperson and the
second part authorizes the Government to prescribe/delegate more functions. The
Committee feels that the second part will certainly leave scope for abrogating powers that
might create problems between Chairperson and DG on the one hand and Chairperson and
the Ministry on the other hand. Nowhere does the proposed Bill explicitly provide that the
Chairperson will be a part-time. This ambiguity, if allowed, will create problems in the
functioning of the authority particularly between Chairperson and DG. Needless to say, any
possible clash between DG and Chairperson will go against the intended objectives of the
Bill. Therefore, the Committee feels that Chairperson should be only part-time and
recommends that the fact of the Chairperson being only part-time, should be explicitly
mentioned in the Bill. Prescribing further powers by delegated legislation should be confined
to the functions mentioned in Clause 10. The Committee, therefore, recommends to add
words, “relating to the functions mentioned above” after the word “Authority” at the end
of Clause 10.
37. The Clause 11 of the Bill provides that Ministry of Civil Aviation will frame rules of
procedure for transacting business by CAA through regulations. The Committee
recommends that this matter should be left to the Authority itself as is the normal practice.
Therefore, the Clause 11 should be amended, by adding “the Authority itself through”
between words “specified by” and “regulations”.

6
38. In the Clause 11 (2) it has been mentioned that in the absence of Chairperson, DG
or in his absence any other Member will preside the meeting of the CAA. The Committee
feels that the DG being CEO of the Authority should not preside the meeting as he is not
a Member of the Authority. Therefore, it would be appropriate if in the absence of
Chairperson, any other Member presides the meetings. The Committee recommends that
the words “the Director-General and in his absence” may be deleted from Clause 11(2).
39. The Committee finds that Clause 12(b) seeks to validate Authority’s decision even if
it has been taken with defectively appointed Members. The Committee feels that this can
be misused. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 12 (b) should be deleted.
40. The Clause 14 (1) and 14 (4) (a) are repetitious and thus should be redrafted. The
Committee notes that in the Preamble of the Bill, functions, duties and powers of the CAA
have been mentioned and the same have been repeated again in the sub-clause 2 of the
Clause 14. The Committee feels that the both are not matching each other and all the
functions mentioned in the Preamble should find place in Clause 14 (2).
41. The Committee recommends that it would be appropriate to replace word “main”
from clause 14(4) (f), with word “nodal”.
42. The Clause 14 (h) involves the issues pertaining to defence matters and therefore,
the Committee feels the MoCA should obtain necessary clarifications and clearances from
the Ministry of Defence in this regard.
43. The Clause 14 (4) (n) mentions that the CAA will “encourage indigenous design and
manufacture of aircraft and aircraft components” by acting as catalytic agent. The
Committee feels that manufacture of aircraft and aircraft components is an activity which
involves many other Ministries/authorities and which appears to be beyond the Authority’s
mandate. As an aviation safety regulator, it should only approve its design, standards, etc.
The Committee, therefore, recommends to replace the word “encourage” with the word
“approve” in clause 14(4) (n).
44. The Committee notes that Clause 14 (5) (a) necessitates prior approval of the
Central Government for creation of posts etc. of the CAA. This provision, the Committee
feels, will not make any material difference in this regard with the existing system. It
would necessitate not only approval of the Ministry but also of the DoPT and the Ministry
of Finance and in some cases, it might need the approval of the Cabinet which would be
cumbersome and time-taking particularly, for the highly technical and skilled posts. The
Committee recommends that in order to achieve the intended independence and autonomy
of CAA, the words “with the prior approval of the Central Government” should be deleted.
Authority may be vested with necessary powers to create and select posts within overall
strength approved by the Central Government which may be linked with the demand/growth
in the aviation sector.
45. Clause 14 (5) (c) mentions among other about the “agents”. The Committee is not
clear about its meaning and relevance and, therefore, recommends that it should be deleted.
Further, in the same it is proposed that advisors, attorneys etc. engaged on contract shall
be made as per the industry standard. Proviso to the above Clause provides that the salary,
allowance and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the
Authority other than those referred to in Clause (c) above shall be the same as that of the
officers and employees of the Central Government. The Committee recalls that it was
because of comparatively lower salary and allowance in the Government, the DGCA was not
able to attract and retain technical personnel from the industry and faced acute shortage
of skilled technical hands. Be that as it may, the objective of attracting much needed highly

7
skilled manpower will continue to be eluded. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
while administrative and non-technical officers and staff in the Authority may be given
Central Government salary and allowances, the skilled technical manpower may be offered
pay and packages comparable to that in vogue in the industry.
46. In Clause 23(2) (a) the word “others” before Member appears to be irrelevant and
have to be deleted.
47. Clause 28 and 29 of the Act deal with punishment for non-compliance of provisions of this
Act and punishment for non-compliance with order of Authority respectively. The Committee
feels that quantum of prescribed fine for first and subsequent offences are too meager to
have a deterrent effect on the operators in aviation sector. The Committee is of the view
that penalty should be so severe that it will deter the offender to commit the offence. It,
therefore, recommends to increase the fine heftily to obviate the possibility of repeating the
offences by paying the fine.
48. U nder clause 32 (3), the compounding amount to be deposited by the offender with
the Central Government, the Committee feels that it may go to Authority.
49. Clause 40 provides the extraordinary powers to the Central Government to supersede
the CAA under certain circumstances. The Committee feels that the words “grave
emergency” in sub-clause 1(a) and the words “any direction issued by the Central
Government” in sub-clause 1 (b) are vague leaving scope for its misuse. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that these words should be adequately and clearly specified in the
rules/regulations to be framed subsequently.
50. The Committee observes that there is no mention of regular safety aspects of
helicopters in this Bill and recommends that the provisions should be more comprehensive
and include all aspects pertaining to safety of helicopters also.
51. The Committee notes that the ‘officers of the Authority’ has not been mentioned in
the definitions, which should be provided.
Conclusion
52. In addition to the recommendations and observations made in the previous
paragraphs, the Committee feels that the proposed Bill seeks to create an Authority which
simply will be as good as the existing DGCA without much changes in its powers and
authority; it would be simply changing the nomenclature from DGCA to CAA. This was the
general opinion expressed by the stakeholders who deposed before the Committee. The
Committee also feels that the proposed Authority would not be able to achieve the
objectives stated in the Bill. The Committee is of the view that rather than bringing a
stand-alone Bill like this, it would have been better to come out with a comprehensive Bill
after revisiting the Aircraft Act, 1934 which has been too old to tackle the emerging
problems in the Aviation Sector, by incorporating the Civil Aviation Authority in that Bill.
53. Having observed so, the Committee feels that its recommendations would be suitably
incorporated in the Bill with a view to making the proposed Civil Aviation Authority more
autonomous without leaving much scope for impairing its authority.
54. The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a note for its consideration giving
reason for not accepting/agreeing with any of its recommendations/observations.

ANNEXURE

11
ANNEXURE -I
(Vide Para No. 1)
20 A UG. 2013
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 130 of 2013
THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA
BILL, 2013
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT  OF C IVIL A VIATION A UTHORITY
3. Constitution of Authority.
4. Composition of Authority.
5. Constitution of Selection Committee.
6. Disqualification for office of Member.
7. Term of office and conditions of service of Members.
8. Removal and suspension of Members.
9. Eligibility of Member for reappointment.
10. Powers and functions of Chairperson.
11. Meetings.
12. Vacancies not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
13. Authority to work on not-for-profit principles.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS , D UTIES  AND P OWERS  OF A UTHORITY
14. Functions, duties and powers of Authority.
15. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.
16. Power of Authority to issue directions.
17. Power of seizure.

12
CHAPTER IV
PROPERTY  AND CONTRACT
18. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Government to Authority.
19. Contracts by Authority.
20. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Authority.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
21. Power of Authority to levy fees and charges.
22. Additional capital and grant to Authority by Central Government.
23. Fund of Authority and its investment.
24. Allocation of surplus funds.
25. Budget.
26. Accounts and audit.
27. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
CLAUSES
28. Punishment for non-compliance of orders or directions under this Act.
29. Punishment for non-compliance with order of Authority.
30. Offences by companies.
31. Offences by Government Department.
32. Compounding of offences.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33. Directions by Central Government to Authority.
34. Bar of jurisdiction.
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.
36. Appeals.
37. Exemption from certain taxes.
38. Cognizance of offences.
39. Delegation of powers.
40. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
41. Application of other laws not barred.
42. Power to make rules.
43. Power to make regulations.
44. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
45. Amendment of Act 22 of 1934.
46. Power to remove difficulty.

13
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 130 of 2013
THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Civil Aviation Authority for
administration and regulation of civil aviation safety, for the
better management of civil aviation safety oversight over air
transport service operators, air service navigation operators
and operators of other civil aviation facilities, matters
relating to impact of financial stress on safety operations,
consumer protection and environment regulations in civil
aviation sector and for proper implementation of the
provisions of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made
thereunder and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Civil Aviation Authority of
India Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India and it applies also—
(a) to all citizens of India wherever they may be;
(b) to aircraft, and to all persons on aircraft registered
in India wherever they may be;
(c) to aircraft, and to all persons on aircraft registered
outside India but for the time being in or over India; and
13
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

14
(d) to aircraft operated by a person who is not a citizen
of India but has his principal place of business or permanent
residence in India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aerodrome” means any definite or limited ground
or water area intended to be used, either wholly or in part,
for the landing or departure or surface movement of aircraft,
and includes all buildings, sheds, vessels and other structure
thereon or appertaining thereto;
(b) “Airports Authority of India” means the Airports
Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994;
(c) “air navigation service” includes air traffic
management, communications, navigation and surveillance
systems, meteorological services for air navigation, search
and rescue and aeronautical information services provided to
air traffic during approach, aerodrome and en route  and all
other phases of operations;
(d) “air traffic service” includes flight information
service, alerting service, air traffic advisory service, air traffic
control service, area control service, approach control service
and airport control service;
(e) “air transport operator” means the operator of an air
transport service;
(f) “air transport service” means any service, for any
kind of remuneration whatsoever, for the transport by air of
persons, mails or any other thing, animate or inanimate,
whether such service relates to a single flight or series of
flights;
(g) “air transport undertaking” means an undertaking
whose business includes the carriage, by air, of passengers or
cargo for hire or reward;
(h) “appointed day” means such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint;
(i) “Authority” means the Civil Aviation Authority of
India constituted under section 3;
(j) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the
Authority appointed under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 4;
(k) “Convention” means the Convention relating to
International Civil Aviation signed at Chicago on the 7th day
Definitions.
55 of 1994.

15
of December, 1944 and Annexes thereto relating to
international standards and recommended practices;
(l) “Director-General” means Director-General of the
Authority appointed under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 4;
(m) “International Civil Aviation Organisation” means the
International Civil Aviation Organisation created under the
Convention;
(n) “Member” means a Member of the Authority
appointed under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4 and
includes the Chairperson and the Director-General;
(o) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” with its cognate
meanings and grammatical variation shall be construed
accordingly;
(p) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(q) “regulations” means regulations made under this
Act;
(r) “service provider” means any person who provides
any service ancillary to air transport services for any kind of
remuneration whatsoever, and includes the air traffic services,
ground safety and ground handling services, aeronautical
communication and navigational aids and meteorological
services, but does not include services for the provision of
aviation security.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF C IVIL A VIATION A UTHORITY
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the Central
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be called the Civil Aviation Authority
of India.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold
and dispose of property both movable and immovable, and to
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New
Delhi.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of —
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central
Government;
Constitution
of Authority.
Composition
of Authority.

16
(b) the Director-General to be appointed by the Central
Government; and
(c) not less than seven Members and not more than
nine Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Director-General and not more than five other
Members shall be appointed as whole-time Members and they shall
not hold any other office.
(3) The Chairperson shall be chosen from amongst persons
who have special knowledge of and professional experience in civil
aviation, engineering or management:
Provided that a person who is or has been in the service of
the Government shall not be appointed unless such person has held
the post of the Secretary to the Government of India or an
equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government.
(4) The Director-General and the whole-time Members, shall
be chosen from amongst persons who have such qualification,
professional experience and competence as may be prescribed in the
field of—
(a) airworthiness and aircraft engineering;
(b) flight standard operations;
(c) aviation safety;
(d) aerodromes, air navigation systems and air space
management;
(e) air transport, matters relating to impact of financial
stress on safety of operations, consumer protection and
environment regulations; and
(f) human resource and finance.
(5) The Chairperson, Director-General and other Members
shall be appointed by the Central Government on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee referred to in section 5.
(6) The Director-General shall be the Chief Executive of the
Authority.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, for the appointment of
the Chairperson, Director-General and whole-time Members,
constitute a Selection Committee consisting of the following,
namely:—
(a) Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson;
(b) Secretary, in the Ministry of Civil Aviation —
Member;
(c) Secretary, in the Ministry of Law and Justice —
Member;
Constitution
of Selection
Committee.

17
(d) Secretary (Personnel), in the Department of
Personnel and Training — Member;
(e) one expert to be nominated by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation — Member.
(2) The Central Government shall, within one month from the
date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation
or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before
the superannuation or end of tenure of the Chairperson or any
Member, make a reference to the Selection Committee for filling up
of the vacancy.
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
Chairperson, Director-General and whole-time Members within one
month from the date on which the reference is made to it.
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two
names for every vacancy referred to it.
(5) Before recommending any person for appointment as a
Chairperson or Director-General or other Member of the Authority,
the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does
not have any financial or other interest, which is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member.
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson, Director-General or
other Member shall be invalid merely for reason of any vacancy in
the Selection Committee.
6. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a
Member if he—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence, which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of
the Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by
the Government; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such
financial or other interest in the Authority as is likely to affect
prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a
Member.
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 8,—
(a) the Chairperson, Director-General and other whole-
time Member shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office:
Disqualification
for office of
Member.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Members.

18
Provided that no whole-time Member shall hold office,
as such, after he attains—
(i) in case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-
five years; and
(ii) in case of the Director-General or other
whole-time Members, the age of sixty-two years;
(b) every part-time Member shall hold office for a
period of three years from the date on which he assumes
office.
(2) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Director-General and other Members shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service
of the Chairperson, Director-General and other Members shall
not be varied to his disadvantage after their appointment.
(4) The Chairperson, Director-General or any Member may
resign his office giving notice, in writing for such period, as may
be prescribed, to the Central Government and, on such resignation
being notified in the Official Gazette by the Government, such
Member shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from
office the Chairperson or other Members, if the Chairperson or such
other Member, as the case may be, —
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude;
or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of
acting as a Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his
continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
(f) has engaged at any time during his term of office
in any other employment.
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be
removed from his office except by an order of the Central
Government on the ground of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity
after the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance
with the procedure prescribed in this behalf by the Central
Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought on any
such ground to be removed.
Removal and
suspension
of Members.

19
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member in
respect of whom an inquiry under sub-section ( 2) is being initiated
or pending until the Central Government has passed an order on
receipt of the report of the inquiry.
9. Any person ceasing to be a Member shall, unless
disqualified under section 6 or removed under section 8, be eligible
for reappointment.
10. The Chairperson shall have powers of general
superintendence and directions in the conduct of the affairs of the
Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of
the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and functions of
the Authority as may be prescribed or delegated to him by the
Authority.
11. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings), as
may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the
Authority and, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting
of the Authority, the Director-General or in his absence any other
Member chosen by the Members present at the meeting shall preside
at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Authority shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the
Members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes,
the Chairperson, or in his absence the person presiding, shall have
and exercise a second or casting vote.
12. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of
the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as
a Member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
13. The Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions
under this Act, work, as far as possible, on not-for-profit principles.
CHAPTER III
FUNCTIONS, D UTIES AND P OWERS OF A UTHORITY
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Aircraft
Act, 1934, the Authority shall be responsible for the proper
implementation of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and for that purpose it
Vacancies not
to invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
Eligibility of
Member for
reappointment.
Powers and
functions of
Chairperson.
Meetings.
Authority to
work on notfor-
profit principles.
Functions, duties
and powers of
Authority.22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.

20
shall discharge all the duties assigned to the Director-General of
Civil Aviation under that Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central
Government in this behalf, it shall be the function of the Authority
to regulate civil aviation safety, and provide for the better
management of civil aviation through safety oversight of air
transport operators, airport operators, air navigation service
operators and providers of other civil aviation services or facilities.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Aircraft
Act, 1934 and the rules, if any, made by the Central Government in
this behalf, it shall be the duty of the Authority—
(a) to issue licences, certificates, permits, approvals,
and any other legal authority or document required to be
issued under the Aircraft Act, 1934 and rules framed
thereunder or necessary for the safety of civil aviation sector;
(b) to regulate the activities of air transport operators;
(c) to provide environment regulations for airports,
airlines and other civil aviation activities; and
(d) to protect the interests of consumers under this Act
or rules or regulations made thereunder.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions
contained in sub-sections ( 1) to ( 3), the Authority may—
(a) perform all functions and duties required to be
performed by the Director-General of Civil Aviation under the
Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made thereunder;
(b) draw up a State Safety Programme and approve
safety management systems and look after their
implementation in coordination with other concerned
authorities;
(c) recommend to the Central Government amendments
to the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made thereunder for
complying with the amendments to Annexes to Convention
and initiate proposals for amendment to any other Act or for
passing a new Act in order to give effect to an international
convention or amendment to an existing convention;
(d) coordinate on matters relating to the International
Civil Aviation Organisation with all agencies and send replies
to the letters of signatory States to the Convention, and take
all necessary action arising out of the Safety Oversight Audit
Programme of the International Civil Aviation Organisation in
consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(e) cooperate with national civil aviation authorities of
other countries and work on cooperative programmes at
regional and global level in consultation with the Ministry of
Civil Aviation;
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.

21
(f) act as main agency for implementing provisions in
India of Annex 9 to the Convention and coordinating matters
relating to facilitation at Indian airports including meetings of
the National Facilitation Committee;
(g) render advice to the Central Government on matters
relating to air transport including bilateral air services
agreements, matters relating to the International Civil Aviation
Organisation and generally on all technical matters relating to
civil aviation;
(h) coordinate and regulate Indian air space at national
level including all aviation matters relating to civil and military
coordination such as flexi-use of air space by civil and
military air traffic and interact at regional and global levels
including the International Civil Aviation Organisation for
issues relating to Indian air space management;
(i) provide safety oversight of air navigation services in
the Indian air space and the assigned oceanic air space;
(j) provide safety oversight of aviation related
meteorological services;
(k) exercise regulatory power over foreign registered
aircraft;
(l) prepare and update Aeronautical Information
Publications under the rules made under the Aircraft Act, 1934;
(m) keep a check on aircraft noise and engine emissions
in accordance with Annex 16 to the Convention and
collaborate with the environmental agencies in this matter;
(n) encourage indigenous design and manufacture of
aircraft and aircraft components by acting as catalytic agent;
(o) establish training institutions for the training of civil
aviation personnel, including its own officers and employees;
(p) carry out analysis of traffic data and prepare
reports on the overall aviation developments in the country,
make projections for international and domestic traffic as well
as projection of aircraft demand in India, and assist airline and
airport operators to draw up their expansion plans;
(q) issue directions on subjects covered by the above
functions, duties and powers;
(r) take all such steps as may be necessary or
convenient for, or may be incidental to, the exercise of any
power or the discharge of any function conferred or imposed
on it by this Act, the Aircraft Act, 1934 and rules framed
thereunder;
(s) carry out any other function, duty and responsibility
which may be entrusted to it by the Central Government; and
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.

22
(t) lay down standards of quality of service to be
provided by the air transport operators, air traffic service
providers and air transport service providers, and monitor and
enforce the set performance standards relating to quality,
reliability and continuity of service.
(5) The Authority, for the purpose of enabling it to efficiently
discharge its functions under this Act, may—
(a) create posts of officers and other employees, as it
considers necessary with the prior approval of the Central
Government;
(b) select and appoint personnel necessary to carry out
the functions and duties of the Authority;
(c) obtain the services of consultants, advisors,
attorneys and agents as shall be necessary to carry out the
functions of the Authority by engaging them on contract basis
and provide for their remuneration consistent with industry
standards in India:
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms
and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the
Authority other than those referred to in clause ( c) above
shall be the same as that of the officers and employees of the
Central Government.
(6) While discharging its functions and duties under sub-
sections ( 1) to ( 5), the Authority shall not act against the interest
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or
morality.
(7) The Authority shall ensure good governance including
transparency and fairness while exercising its powers and
discharging its functions, inter alia , by—
(a) holding due consultations with stake-holders as may
be appropriate including setting up of user council;
(b) allowing stake-holders to make their submissions to
it; and
(c) making its decisions fully documented and
explained.
15. (1) Where the Authority considers it expedient so to do,
it may by order in writing,—
(a) call upon any air transport operator or service
provider at any time to furnish in writing such information,
including financial data, or explanation relating to its functions
as the Authority may require;
Powers of
Authority to
call for
information,
conduct
investigations,
etc.

23
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in
relation to the affairs of any air transport operator or service
provider; and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect
the books of account or other documents of any air transport
operator or service provider.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of any air
transport operator or service provider has been undertaken under
sub-section ( 1) —
(a) every office of the Government Department, if such
operator or service provider is a Department of the
Government; or
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer,
if such operator or service provider is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if
such operator or service provider is a firm; or
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had
dealings in the course of business with any of the persons
mentioned in preceding clause ( b) or clause ( c),
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry,
all such books of account or other documents in his custody or
power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject matter of such
inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement
or information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him,
within such time as may be specified.
(3) Every air transport operator or service provider shall
maintain such books of account or other documents as may be
specified by regulations.
(4) The Authority shall have the power to issue such
directions to monitor the performance of the air transport operators
or any service provider, as it may consider necessary for proper
functioning by such operator or service provider.
16. The Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of any
of its functions and duties under this Act, issue from time to time
to the air transport operators or to any other service providers such
directions as it may consider necessary.
17. The Authority or any other officer specially authorised by
it in this behalf may enter any building or place where the Authority
has reason to believe that any document relating to the subject
matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such
document or take extracts or copies therefrom subject to the
provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
in so far as they may be applicable.
Power of
seizure.
Power of
Authority to
issue directions.
2 of 1974.

24
CHAPTER IV
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT
18. (1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be
transferred to and vest in the Authority—
(a) all properties and other assets including the
equipment and facilities vested in the Central Government and
administered by the Director-General of Civil Aviation
immediately before the appointed day;
(b) all properties and other assets vested in the Central
Government, for the purposes of the regional and sub-regional
offices or any other offices, administered by the Director-
General of Civil Aviation immediately before the appointed
day;
(c) all residential buildings owned by the Central
Government for use by the Director-General of Civil Aviation
immediately before the appointed day.
(2) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts
entered into, and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with,
or for the Central Government immediately before the appointed day
for or in connection with the purposes of the Directorate-General of
Civil Aviation shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into
and engaged to be done by, with or for the Authority.
(3) All non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central
Government for or in connection with the purposes of the
Directorate-General of Civil Aviation up to the appointed day and
declared to be capital expenditure by the Central Government shall
subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, be
treated as capital provided by the Central Government to the
Authority.
(4) All sums of money due to the Central Government in
relation to any activities or purposes of the Directorate-General of
Civil Aviation immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed
to be due to the Authority.
(5) All suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which
could have been instituted by or against the Central Government
immediately before such date for any matter in relation to any
activities or purposes of the Directorate-General of Civil Aviation
may be continued or instituted by or against the Authority.
(6) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the
properties, rights or liabilities of the Central Government have been
transferred to the Authority or as to which of the employees serving
under the Director-General of Civil Aviation are to be treated as on
deputation with the Authority under this section, such dispute or
doubt shall be decided by the Central Government in consultation
with the Authority and the decision of the Central Government
thereon shall be final.
Transfer of
assets and
liabilities of
Central
Government
to Authority.

25
(7) Every employee holding any office under the Director-
General of Civil Aviation immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall be treated as on deputation with the Authority but shall
hold his office in the Authority by the same tenure and upon the
same terms and conditions of service as respects remuneration,
leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits as he
would have held such office if the Authority had not been
constituted and shall continue to do so for a period of three years
or until the Authority duly absorbs such employee in its regular
service, whichever is earlier:
Provided that such period of three years may be extended in
special cases:
Provided further that during the period of deputation of any
such employee with the Authority, the Authority shall pay the Central
Government in respect of every such employee, such contribution
toward his or her leave, salary, pension and gratuity as the Central
Government may, by order, determine:
Provided also that any such employee, who has, in respect of
the proposal of the Authority to absorb him in regular service,
intimated within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the
Authority his intention of not becoming a regular employee of the
Authority, shall not be absorbed by the Authority.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force,
the absorption of any employee by the Authority in its regular
service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any
compensation under that Act or any other law for the time being in
force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal
or other authority.
19. Subject to the provisions of section 20, the Authority shall
be competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for
the discharge of its functions under this Act.
20. (1) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Authority, be
made by the Director-General or such other Member or such officer
of the Authority as may be generally or specially empowered in this
behalf by the Authority and such contracts or class of contracts as
may be specified by the regulations shall be sealed with the common
seal of the Authority:
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as
the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this
behalf, shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the
Authority:
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of
immovable property or for the lease of any such property for a term
exceeding thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value
or amount as the Central Government may, from time to time, by
Contracts by
Authority.
Mode of
executing
contracts on
behalf of
Authority.
14 of 1947.

26
order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously
approved by the Central Government.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the form and
manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be
such as may be specified by regulations.
(3) No contract, which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the regulations, shall be binding on the
Authority.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. (1) The Authority may, collect fees and charges
chargeable under the Aircraft Act, 1934, the rules and regulations
made, requirements issued and the services provided thereunder,
which at present are being collected by the Directorate- General of
Civil Aviation.
(2) The Authority, for functions not covered under sub-
section ( 1), may make regulations, with the previous approval of the
Central Government to levy fees or charges—
(a) for safety oversight function of air navigation
services including the certification of its equipment on the
basis of a percentage of revenue collected by air navigation
provider;
(b) for safety of, from, the passengers;
(c) for safety oversight function and surveillance
inspections of air transport operators including cargo
operators, airport and aerodrome operators, the operators
providing ground safety services and meteorological services;
(d) for the use and employment by persons of facilities
and other services provided by the Authority;
(e) for the sale of aeronautical publications; and
(f) for any other service provided by the Authority.
Explanation .— The levy of fees or charges under this section
shall not apply to operations of aircraft belonging to any armed
force of the Union and to any aircraft belonging to the said force.
22. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf,—
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the
Authority for the discharge of its functions under this
Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such
terms and conditions as that Government may determine;
Power of
Authority to
levy fees and
charges.
22 of 1934.
Additional
capital and
grant to
Authority by
Central
Government.

27
(b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and
conditions as the Central Government may determine, by
way of loans or grants such sums of money as that
Government may consider necessary for the efficient
discharge by the Authority of its functions under this
Act.
23. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the
“Civil Aviation Authority of India Fund” and there shall be
credited thereto—
(a) all grants made to the Authority by the Central
Government under section 23;
(b) all fees and charges received by the Authority
under this Act; and
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such
other sources as may be approved by the Central
Government.
(2) The Fund may be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration
of the Chairperson, Director-General, other Members,
officers and other employees of the Authority;
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in
connection with the discharge of its functions and for
purposes of this Act.
(3) All moneys standing at the credit of the Authority
which cannot immediately be applied as provided in sub-section
(2), shall be—
(a) deposited in the State Bank of India or any
such Scheduled bank or banks other than public financial
institutions subject to such conditions as may from time
to time be specified by the Central Government; and
(b) invested in the securities of the Central
Government or in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation .— In this sub-section “Scheduled bank” has
the same meaning as in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934.
24. (1) The Authority may from time to time set apart
such amounts as it thinks fit as a reserve fund or funds for the
purpose of enhancing safety-related services, functions or
facilities or for the purpose of providing against any temporary
decrease of revenue or increase of expenditure from transient
causes or for purpose of replacement or for meeting expenditure
arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclone, air-crash or
other accident or for meeting any liability arising out of any act
or omission in the discharge of its functions under this Act:
Fund of
Authority
and its
investment.
Allocation of
surplus funds.
2 of 1934.

28
Provided that without prejudice to the right of the
Authority to establish specific reserve for one or more specific
purposes, the Authority shall also have the power to establish
a general reserve:
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in
respect of each or any of the specific and general reserves and
the aggregate at any time of such sums shall not exceed such
limits, as may, from time to time, be fixed in that behalf by
the Central Government.
(2) After making provision for such reserve fund or funds
and for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets and all other
matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956, the Authority shall pay
the balance of its annual net profits to the Central Government.
25. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such
time in each financial year as may be prescribed its budget for the
next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure
of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government
for information.
26. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may
be specified by him.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such audit, as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has, in
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and
the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
27. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government,
at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or
as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements
and such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction
of the Authority, as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require.
1 of 1956.
Budget.
Accounts and
audit.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.,
to Central
Government.

29
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such form
and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a
summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the
report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall
be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
28. Whoever fails to comply with any order or direction given
under this Act, or contravenes, or attempts to contravene or abets
the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules or
regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent
offence with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the
case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which
may extend to four thousand rupees for every day during which the
default continues.
29. If any person wilfully fails to comply with an order or
direction of the Authority, passed under Chapter III he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and, in
the case of a second or subsequent offence, with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing failure,
with an additional fine which may extend to four thousand rupees
for every day during which such failure continues.
30. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Punishment
for non-
compliance
of orders or
directions
under this Act.
Punishment
for non-
compliance
with order of
Authority.
Offences by
companies.

30
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director” means a whole-time director of the
company and in relation to a firm, means a partner in the
firm.
31. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by any Department of Government or any of its undertakings, the
Head of the Department or its undertakings shall be deemed to be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly unless he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by any
Department of Government or its undertakings and it is proved that
the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of,
or is attributable to any neglect on the part, of any officer, other
than the Head of the Department, or its undertakings such officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
32. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of compounding
the offences constitute a Committee consisting of such Members of
Authority, as the Chairperson may deem fit, to be headed by the
senior most Member in the Committee and the decision of the
Committee shall be by majority and in case of equality of votes of
Members in Committee, the view taken by the Chairperson shall be
final.
(2) The Committee referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall, before
the court has taken the cognizance of the offence, having regard to
the circumstances in which an offence was committed under this
Act or under the Aircraft Act, 1934, compound the offences, for a
sum not exceeding fifty per cent of the maximum fine provided for
the offence under this Act or as the case may be under the Aircraft
Act, 1934, or the rules made thereunder.
(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence where the
offence has been compounded under sub-section ( 2) and the
offender has deposited the compounding amount with the Central
Government.
(4) Where the court has taken cognizance of the offence, the
Committee referred to in sub-section ( 1), may compound an offence
under this Act or the Aircraft Act, 1934 at any time before judgment
is delivered, after having obtained the consent of the court and the
court shall, after the offender deposits the compounding amount
with the Central Government, discharge the offender.
22 of 1934.
Offences by
Government
Department.
Compounding
of offences.
22 of 1934.

31
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
33. (1) In discharge of its functions, the Authority shall be
guided by such directions in the matter of policy involving public
interest as the Central Government may give to it in writing.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction
relates to a matter of policy involving public interest, the decision of
the Central Government thereon shall be final.
34. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any
matter, which the Authority is empowered by or under this Act to
determine.
35. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Central Government or the Authority or any Member,
officer or other employee thereof for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules and
regulations made thereunder.
36. If any person is aggrieved by an order or direction passed
or issued by the Authority, or any of its Members, or officers in its
name, in the exercise of the power conferred by this Act or
delegated to him under the Aircraft Act, 1934, he may prefer an
appeal to the Central Government within such period, in such
manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957,
the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time
being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, services, or gains,
the Authority shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax,
service tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income,
services, or gains derived.
38. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under this Act, except upon a complaint in writing made by the
Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly authorised by the
Authority for this purpose.
39. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing,
delegate to the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the
Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may
be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act (except the power to compound offences and the power to
make regulations), as it may deem necessary.
40. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the
opinion—
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority
is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it
by or under the provisions of this Act; or
Directions by
Central
Government
to Authority.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Appeals.
Exemption
from certain
taxes.
Cognizance
of offences.
Delegation of
powers.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.
22 of 1934.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961.

32
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in
complying with any direction issued by the Central
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act and as a result of which default, the financial
position of the Authority or the safety of civil aviation has
deteriorated; or
(c) that other circumstances exist which render it
necessary in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the
Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be
specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-
section for the reasons mentioned in clause ( b), the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to
show cause as to why it should not be superseded and shall
consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-
section ( 1) superseding the Authority,—
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the
Authority is re-constituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised
and discharged by such person or persons as the Central
Government may direct;
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority
shall, until the Authority is re-constituted under sub-
section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified
in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment
and in such case the Members who vacated their offices under
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified
for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before
the expiration of the period of supersession as specified under sub-
section ( 1) take action under this subsection.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under
this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.

33
41. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the qualification, professional experience and
competence of the Director-General and the whole-time
Members under sub-section ( 4) of section 4;
(b) the salary, allowances and the other conditions of
service of the Chairperson, Director-General and other
Members under sub-section ( 2) of section 7;
(c) the period of giving notice for resignation from
office by the Chairperson, Director-General or any Member
under sub-section ( 4) of section 7;
(d) the procedure for inquiry for removal of the
Chairperson or other Member under sub-section ( 2) of
section 8;
(e) other powers and functions of the Chairperson
under section 10;
(f) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform
its functions under sub-section ( 2) of section 14;
(g) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform
its duties under sub-section ( 3) of section 14;
(h) the terms and conditions subject to which all non-
recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Government for
or in connection with the purposes of the Directorate-General
of Civil Aviation to be treated as capital provided by the
Central Government to the Authority under sub-section ( 3) of
section 18;
(i) manner of investing the moneys under clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;
(j) the form in which and the time at which in each
financial year, the Authority shall prepare its budget under
section 25;
(k) the form in which accounts and other relevant
records shall be maintained and the annual statement of
accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-
section ( 1) of section 26;
(l) the time at which and the form and manner in
which the returns and statements shall be furnished by the
Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 27;
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power to
make rules.

34
(m) the form in which and the time at which the annual
report, shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-
section ( 2) of section 27;
(n) the period within which, the manner in which and
the fee on payment of which appeal may be preferred under
section 36;
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made by
rules.
(3) The rules made under the Aircraft Act, 1934, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder, shall continue to be in force till the Central
Government makes rules or, as the case may be, the Authority
makes regulations under this Act on the same subject.
43. (1) The Authority may, by notification, may make
regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority
and the procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-
section ( 1) of section 11 for the transaction of business by
the Authority including the quorum necessary for the meeting;
(b) the books of account or other documents which are
required to be maintained by every air transport operator or
service operator under sub-section ( 3) of section 15;
(c) the contracts or class of contracts which shall be
sealed with the common seal of the Authority under sub-
section ( 1) of section 20;
(d) the form and manner in which any contract shall be
made under sub-section ( 2) of section 20;
(e) levy of fees and charges under sub-section ( 2) of
section 21; and
(f) any other matter which under the provisions of this
Act is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
44. Every rule made by the Central Government, and every
regulation made by the Authority under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses
Power to
make
regulations.
22 of 1934.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

35
agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
45. In the Aircraft Act, 1934, in section 2, after sub-
section ( 2A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(2B) “Director-General of Civil Aviation” means
Director-General appointed under section 4 of the Civil
Aviation Authority of India Act, 2013;’.
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to
be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Amendment of
Act 22 of 1934.
Power to
remove
difficulty.

36
36
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Directorate General of Civil Aviation, an attached office of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation (hereinafter referred to as Directorate) is
the safety regulator in the field of civil aviation in India and is
responsible for formulation, implementation, enforcement and
monitoring of stipulated standards and regulations of air transport
services to, from and within India, air safety, airworthiness and
coordination of regulatory functions with the International Civil
Aviation Organisation. Directorate with Delhi as its Headquarter is
assisted by its regional offices in carrying out its responsibility and
functions.
2. The functioning of Directorate was audited by International
Civil Aviation Organisation in October 2006 under Universal Safety
Oversight Audit Program and the Federal Aviation Administration of
United States of America under International Aviation Safety
Assessment Program in March 2009. International Civil Aviation
Organisation and Federal Aviation Administration audits pointed out
severe deficiencies in the Directorate set up, such as inadequacy of
staff, 40% of posts lying vacant, role of other Ministries in creation
and hiring of personnel, etc., and as a result there was even a risk
of Directorate/India being downgraded to Category II level from
Category I level with consequences on limitation of operations of
Indian Carriers to USA. Both International Civil Aviation Organisation
Audit Report and Federal Aviation Administration – International
Aviation Safety Assessment Program Report pointed out the need for
an effective organisational structure of Directorate with
administrative and financial flexibility to carry out safety oversight
work. The International Civil Aviation Organisation visited
Directorate on a Validation Mission in December, 2012 to review the
implementation of the recommendations made during the audit
conducted in 2006. The Law Committee on Review and
Restructuring of Directorate also commented upon the
unsatisfactory situation of Directorate and recommended for
appropriate level of administrative and financial autonomy.
3. Keeping in view the above, a need was felt to set up a
Civil Aviation Authority having administrative and financial flexibility
to regulate the Civil Aviation sector under overall oversight of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation. The proposed legislation seeks to establish
a Civil Aviation Authority with administrative and financial flexibility
and legal status of a separate entity for effective civil aviation safety
oversight capabilities over air transport service operators, air service
navigation operators and operators of other civil aviation facilities,
development and standardisation of civil aircraft and aeronautics,
provision of certain economic regulations, consumer protection and

37
environment regulation in civil aviation sector and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
4. The Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 2013 provides for
establishment of the Civil Aviation Authority comprising of a
Chairperson, Director-General, who will also act as Chief Executive
Officer of the Civil Aviation Authority and not less than seven and
not more than nine Members representing various technical areas
such as airworthiness, air safety, etc., out of which, not more than
five members shall be on a whole-time basis. The Authority shall
work on not-for-profit principles. Major functions of the Civil
Aviation Authority both, financial and administrative includes—
(a) to regulate civil aviation safety, and provide for the
better management of civil aviation through safety oversight
of air transport operators, airport operators, air navigation
service operators and providers of other civil aviation services
or facilities;
(b) to protect the interests of consumers under the
proposed legislation or rules or regulations made thereunder;
(c) to draw up a State Safety Programme and approve
safety management systems and look after their
implementation in coordination with other concerned
authorities;
(d) to coordinate on matters relating to the International
Civil Aviation Organisation with all agencies and send replies
to the letters of signatory States to the Convention and take
all necessary action arising out of the Safety Oversight Audit
Programme of the International Civil Aviation Organisation in
consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(e) to levy fees and charges chargeable under the
Aircraft Act, 1934;
(f) the Authority shall be responsible for the proper
implementation of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and for that purpose
it shall discharge all the duties assigned to the Director
General of Civil Aviation under that Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; AJIT SINGH.
The 6th August, 2013.

38
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. A.60015/119/2010-DG, dated 6 August, 2013
from Shri Ajit Singh, Minister of Civil Aviation to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President having been informed of the subject matter of
the proposed Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill recommends the
introduction of the Bill in the House under article 117 (1) and
consideration of the Bill under article 117 (3) of the Constitution.

39
39
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.— This clause seeks to provide for the short title,
extent and commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.— This clause defines certain words and
expressions used in the proposed legislation.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution
of the Civil Aviation Authority of India.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for the composition of the
Authority. It further provides that the Authority shall consist of a
Chairperson, a Director-General and not less than seven Members
and not more than nine Members. It also provides that the Director-
General and five Members as whole-time Members.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution
of a Selection Committee which shall finalise the selection of the
Chairperson, Director-General and whole-time Members.
Clause 6.— This clause provides for the disqualification for
the office of Member.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for the term of office and
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Director-General and
Members.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the removal and
suspension of Members.
Clause 9.— This clause contains provisions regarding the
eligibility of a Member for re-appointment.
Clause 10.—This clause provides the powers and functions of
the Chairperson.
Clause 11.—This clause lays down the provisions regarding
the meetings of the Authority.
Clause 12.—This clause provides that vacancies etc. shall not
invalidate the proceedings of the Authority.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide for the Authority to
work on not-for-profit principles.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for the functions, duties
and powers of the Authority.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide for the powers of
the Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.

40
Clause 16.—This clause contains provisions regarding the
powers of the Authority to issue directions.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Authority or any
other officer specially authorised by it in this behalf may enter any
building or place where the Authority has reason to believe that any
document relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be found,
and may seize any such document or take extracts or copies
therefrom.
Clause 18.—This clause provides provisions regarding the
transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government to
Authority.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide that the Authority
shall be competent to enter into and perform contracts necessary
for the discharge of its functions.
Clause 20.—This clause provides the mode of executing
contracts on behalf of the Authority.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for the powers of the
Authority to levy fees and charges under the Aircraft Act, 1934.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide provisions for
additional capital and grant to the Authority by the Central
Government.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for the constitution of the
Civil Aviation Authority of India Fund and its investment.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide for the allocation of
surplus fund for setting a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of
enhancing the safety related services or for meeting any liability
arising out of any act or omission in the discharge of its functions
by the Authority.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for the preparation of the
Budget of the Authority.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide that the Authority
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts. This clause also seeks to
provide that the accounts of the authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 27.—This clause provides that the Authority shall
furnish to the Central Government, such returns and statements and
such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the
Authority, as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require. This clause also provides that the Authority shall prepare an
annual report, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the
Central Government. This clause further provides that a copy of the
report shall be laid by the Central Government before each House of
Parliament.

41
Clause 28.—This clause provides for the punishment for non-
compliance of orders or directions under the proposed legislation
and for contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation
or any rules or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 29. —This clause seeks to provide for the punishment
for non-compliance with an order or direction of the Authority,
passed under Chapter III of the proposed legislation.
Clause 30.—This clause makes provisions regarding the
offences by companies.
Clause 31.—This clause contains provisions with regard to
the offences by the Government Department.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for the compounding of
offences.
Clause 33.—This clause provides that, in discharge of its
functions, the Authority shall be guided by such directions in the
matter of policy involving public interest as the Central Government
may give to it in writing.
Clause 34.—This clause provides that no civil court shall
have jurisdiction in respect of any matter, which the Authority is
empowered by or under the proposed legislation to determine.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide that no suit,
prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or the Authority or any Member, officer or other
employee thereof for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under the proposed legislation or the rules and
regulations made thereunder.
Clause 36.—This clause makes provision for preferring appeal
before the Central Government against an order or direction passed
or issued by the Authority, or any of its Members, or officers in its
name.
Clause 37.—This clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Income-tax
Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in force
relating to tax on wealth, income, services, or gains, the Authority
shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax, service tax or any
other tax in respect of their wealth, income, services, or gains
derived.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide that, no court shall
take cognizance of an offence punishable under the proposed
legislation, except upon a complaint in writing made by the Authority
or by any officer of the Authority duly authorised by the Authority
for this purpose.
Clause 39.—This clause provides that, the Authority may, by
general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson or

42
any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions
and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its
powers and functions under the proposed legislation (except the
power to compound offences and the power to make regulations),
as it may deem necessary.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for the power of the Central
Government to supersede the Authority.
Clause 41.—This clause provides that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 42.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to
make regulations.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to provide for laying of every
rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by
the Authority under the proposed legislation, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for the amendment of the
Aircraft Act, 1934 to define the terms “Director-General of Civil
Aviation”.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to provide for the power to
remove difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the
proposed legislation.

43
43
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an
Authority to be called as the Civil Aviation Authority of India.
2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 7 of the Bill provides that the
salary and allowances of the Chairperson, Director-General and
other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.
3. Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, provide any capital that may be required by the Authority for
discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation or for any
purpose connected therewith, and pay to the Authority, on such
terms and conditions as the Central Government may determine, by
way of loans or grants such sums of money as that Government
may consider necessary for the efficient discharge by the Authority
of its functions under the proposed legislation.
4. Clause 23 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a
Fund to be called the Civil Aviation Authority of India Fund into
which all Central Government grants, fees and charges received by
the Authority and all sums received by the Authority from other
sources approved by the Central Government shall be credited. The
Fund is to be used for meeting the salaries, allowances and other
remuneration of the Chairperson, Director-General, other Members,
officers and other employees of the Authority and other expenses of
the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and
for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 24 of the Bill provides that the
Authority may set apart such amounts as it thinks fit as a reserve
fund or funds for enhancing safety related services, functions or
facilities and meeting any liability arising out of any act or omission
in discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) of clause 24 provides that the Authority, after making
provision for reserved fund or funds shall pay the balance of its
annual net profits to the Central Government.
6. The details of the estimated recurring and non-recurring
expenditure to be incurred for the purposes mentioned in above
paragraphs shall be as under:—

44
Statement Showing Estimated Expenditure (Rs. in crore)
Recurring T otal Non-Recurring T otal Non-
Recurring Recurring
Expenditure Expenditure
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
First Year 12.00 112.00 124.00 50.00 0.00 50.00
Second Year 12.00 112.00 124.00 100.00 0.00 100.00
Subsequent – – – 385.50 0.00 385.50
three
years
T
OTAL 24.00 224.00 248.00 535.00 0.00 535.00
7. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not
involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature.

45
45
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2)
of this clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the rules
may be made under this clause. These matters, inter alia , relate to,—
(a) the qualification, professional experience and competence
of the Director-General and the whole-time Members
under sub-clause (4) of clause 4;
(b) the salary, allowances and the other conditions of service
of the Chairperson, Director- General and other Members
under sub-clause (2) of clause 7;
(c) the period of giving notice for resignation from office by
the Chairperson, Director-General or any Member under
sub-clause (4) of clause 7;
(d) the procedure for inquiry for removal of the Chairperson
or other Members under sub-clause (2) of clause 8;
(e) other powers and functions of the Chairperson under
clause 10;
(f) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform its
functions under sub-clause (2) of clause 14;
(g) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform its
duties under sub-clause (3) of clause 14;
(h) the terms and conditions subject to which all non-
recurring expenditure incurred by the Central
Government for or in connection with the purposes of
the Director General of Civil Aviation to be treated as
capital provided by the Central Government to the
Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 18;
(i) manner of investing the moneys under item (b) of sub-
clause (3) of clause 23;
(j) the form in which and the time at which in each
financial year, the Authority shall prepare its budget
under clause 25;
(k) the form in which accounts and other relevant record
shall be maintained and the annual statement of accounts
shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-clause (1)
of clause 26;
(l) the time at which and the form and manner in which the
returns and statements shall be furnished by the
Authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 27;

46
(m) the form in which and the time at which the annual
report shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-
clause (2) of clause 27;
(n) the period within which, the manner in which and the
fee on payment of which appeal may be preferred under
clause 36;
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed
or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make
regulations, not inconsistent with the proposed legislation and the
rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters in
respect of which the regulations may be made under this clause.
These matters, inter alia, relate to—
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority and the
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-
clause (1) of clause 11 for the transaction of business by
the Authority including the quorum necessary for the
meeting;
(b) the books of account and other documents which are
required to be maintained by every air transport operator
or service operator under sub-clause (3) of clause 15;
(c) the contracts or class of contracts which shall be sealed
with the common seal of the Authority under sub-
clause (1) of clause 20;
(d) the form and manner in which any contract shall be
made under sub-clause (2) of clause 20;
(e) levy of fee, and charges under sub-clause (2) of
clause 21; and
(f) any other matter which under the provisions of the
proposed legislation is required to be, or may be
specified by regulations.
3. Clause 44 of the Bill requires that the rules made by the
Central Government and the regulations made by the Authority shall
be laid as soon as may be, after they are made, before each House
of Parliament.
4. Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
remove any difficulty which arises in giving effect to the provisions
of the proposed legislation, by order published in the Official
Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation. This clause requires that every such order shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may
be made and orders may be issued are generally matters of
procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.

47
47
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Civil Aviation Authority for
administration and regulation of civil aviation safety, for the
better management of civil aviation safety oversight over air
transport service operators, air service navigation operators
and operators of other civil aviation facilities, matters relating
to impact of financial stress on safety operations, consumer
protection and environment regulations in civil aviation sector
and for proper implementation of the provisions of the
Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made thereunder and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Ajit Singh, Minister of Civil Aviation)

48
ANNEXURE -II
(vide para No. 3)
List of Organisations/Associations/Unions/Stakeholders
1. Air India
2. Airports Authority of India
3. Airports Authority Employees Union
4. Business Aircraft Operators Association of India
5. Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation
6. Chimes A viation Academy
7. Civil Aviation Department Airworthiness Control Officers Association
8. Director-General of Civil Aviation
9. GMR Airports
10. Indian Commercial Pilots’ Association
11. Indian Pilots’ Guild
12. International Air Transport Association (IATA)
13. Jet Airways
14. Ministry of Civil Aviation
15. Rotary Wing Society of India

MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The re-constituted Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th September, 2013 in
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
5. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri S. Pakkirappa
10. Shri Prabodh Panda
11. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
12. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
13. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan,  Committee Officer
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri S. Machendranathan, Spl. Secretary & FA
2. Shri Ashok Kumar, Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Rubina Ali, Director
4. Shri J.S. Rawat, Joint DG, DGCA
51

52
.* * *
2. * * *
3. The Chairman also informed the Committee about two Bills referred to the Committee for
examination and report; (i) “The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013” referred on
20
th August, 2013 for submitting the report within three months and (ii) “Civil Aviation Authority
of India Bill, 2013” referred on 18 th September, 2013 for submitting the report within two months.
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the “Civil Aviation
Authority of India Bill, 2013”. The representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation explained to the
Committee on various provisions of the Bill.
6. Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues relating to both the Bills which
the concerned officials replied. For the unanswered questions and other information sought, the
Chairman directed the officials of the Ministries to submit written replies to the Committee.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

53
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
4. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
5. Shri S. Pakkirappa
6. Shri Prabodh Panda
7. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
8. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
9. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
10. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
11. Shri K. Sudhakaran
12. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Airports Authority of India
1. Shri. V .P. Agarwal, Chairman
2. Shri. M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
3. Shri S. Dayal, GM (Law)
GMR Airports
4. Shri A.K. Pandey, Chief Strategy Officer Airports
Civil Aviation Department Airworthiness Control Officers Association
5. Shri Rajendra Prasad, General Secretary
53

54
International Air Transport Association (IATA)
6. Shri Amitabh Khosla, Country Director - India
Airports Authority Employees Union
7. S.R. Santhanam, President
8. Shri Balraj Singh Ahlawat, General Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and also the
representatives of the above mentioned organisation to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee heard
their views on the provisions of the Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013.
3. Members of the Committee raised queries on various issues relating to the Bill to which the
stakeholders replied. The Chairman directed them to send written replies for the unanswered
questions and other information sought by the Committee.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.

55
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22 nd October, 2013 in Main Committee
Room (MCR), Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
9. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
10. Shri Subrata Bakshi
11. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
12. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
13. Shri Prabodh Panda
14. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri K. Sudhakaran
18. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Jet Airways
1. Shrimati Ragini Chopra, Vice-President
2. Shri Gautam Acharya, General-Manager
55

56
Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation
Shri Kapil Kaul, CEO
Indian Commercial Pilots' Association
1. Capt. Rajat Rana, General-Secretary
2. Capt. Amitesh Ahuja, Committee Member
3. Capt. Gaurav Prathambir, Member
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views/suggestions of the stakeholders on various issues
related to the Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013. The Committee also directed them to
furnish written memoranda if they want to furnish additional information on the Bill.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

57
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
6. Yogi Adityanath
7. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
10. Shri S. Pakkirappa
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
13. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji.B, Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Air India
1. Shri Rohit Nandan, Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri Pankaj Srivastava, Director (Commercial)
3. Shri Arvind Kathpalia, General Manager (OPS)
4. Shri Chetan Prakash, General Manager (OPS)
57

58
Indian Pilots’ Guild
1. Capt. Aditya Dhillon
2. Capt. Ajay Goyat
3. Shri Anchit Bhardwaj
4. Shri Chetan Prakash
Rotary Wing Society of India
1. A VM K. Sridharan VM, President
2. Shri N.K. Labroo
Business Aircraft Operators Association of India
1. Capt. R.K. Bali, Secretary
2. Shri Pradeep Agarwal
2. At the outset Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and recalled the
deliberations of the last meeting of the Committee wherein it was decided to seek extension of time
for three months for presentation of report on the Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013 from
Chairman, Rajya Sabha. The Bill was referred to the Committee on 18
th September, 2013 for
examination and presentation of report before 17 th November, 2013. The Chairman informed the
Committee that Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted two months extension i.e. till 17 th January, 2014
for presentation of Report on the Bill as against the request for three months. The Committee after
some deliberations decided that further consideration of the Bill would be taken up after the Winter
Session and the Report would be presented thereon.
3. * * *
4. The Chairman then welcomed the witnesses and requested them to present their views/
suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill. Thereafter, the witnesses submitted their views
and suggestions mainly on the composition of Civil Aviation Authority, autonomous status of the
proposed Authority, qualification and appointment of Chairperson and members thereof, lack of
technical manpower for enforcing air safety regulations and proposed amendments to the Aircraft
Act, 1934, etc. Except CMD, Air India, other witnesses expressed certain apprehension on the
above points.
5. Members of the Committee raised certain queries on various issues relating to the Bill to
which the witnesses replied. The Chairman also directed them to send written replies for the
unanswered questions and other supplementary information sought by the Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

59
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 3 rd January, 2014 in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
3. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
4. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri Anil Shrivastava, Joint Secretary & CMD, PHL
3. Shri Alok Sinha, Joint Secretary
4. Shri G . Asok Kumar, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Suyash Narain, Director
6. Dr. Balmiki Prasad, Director
7. Shri V .R. Hegde, Deputy Secretary
Director-General of Civil Aviation
1. Dr. Prabhat Kumar, DGCA
59

60
2. Shri A.K. Sharan, Joint DGCA
3. Shri Lalit Gupta, Joint DGCA
4. Shri Charan Das, Joint DGCA
5. Shri Vishweshwar Prasad, Consultant
6. Shri R.P. Sahi, Consultant
Airports Authority of India
1. Shri. V .P. Agarwal, Chairman
2. Shri S. Raheja, Member (Plg.)
3. Shri V . Somansundaram, Member (ANS)
4. Shri. M.C. Kishore, Executive Director and Company Secretary
Chimes Aviation Academy
1. Shri Y .N. Sharma, Chief Operating Officer
2. Ms. Tina Singhal, Sr. Exe. (Marketing)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee. He apprised the
Committee about the major points emerged out of its deliberations on the Civil Aviation Authority
Bill, 2013 and informed the Members that two months extension granted by the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha expires on 17
th January, 2014.
3. The Committee thereafter welcomed the newly appointed Secretary, Civil Aviation Shri
Ashok Lavasa and his team of officials to the meeting. The Committee discussed the Civil Aviation
Authority Bill, 2013 clause-by-clause in the light of its earlier discussions held with the Ministry
of Civil Aviation and various stakeholders on the Bill. The concerned officers replied to various
points.
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the representative of the Aviation Training Institutes on the
Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 2013. The Chairman directed to furnish written memorandum on any
points they wish to add further.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

61
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 13 th January, 2014 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
4. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
5. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Prabodh Panda
7. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
8. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
9. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
and adopted the draft report on the Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013 with certain
modifications.
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that the time given to the Committee for presenting
the Report was expiring on 17
th January, 2014 and therefore, the report would need to be presented
to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman to seek
convenience of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to present the report to the him.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 12.40 
P.M.
61
*** Relate to other matters.

62
62
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

63
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

64
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (l Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

65
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.08.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

66
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel, Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

67
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.2004
09.01.2004
22.01.2004
22.01.2004
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

68
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of the
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2005-06 (18 Reports)

69
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

70
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

71
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006.
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006.
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.08.2007
16.08.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

72
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133th
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

73
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

74
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.12.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

75
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

76
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House of
the Parliament 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament on
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

77
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.052012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11.2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

78
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

79
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
2013-14 (7 Reports)
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.