 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
374
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Sixty 
Eighth Report on the subject Status of Ship Building, Ship Repair and 
Ship Breaking Industries in the Country 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  3rd February, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 


 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Sixty Eighth Report on the subject Status of Ship Building, Ship 
Repair and Ship Breaking Industries in the Country 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19th  December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  3rd February, 2025) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-23 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   24-25 
6. *MINUTES     
      
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
26-28


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shrimati Sudha Murty  
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
9.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi* 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f.  10th October, 2024 in lieu  of  Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy who ceased to 
be  Member of Committee w.e.f. 10th October, 2024. 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Seventy Fourth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Sixty Eighth Report on the subject Status of Ship Building, Ship Repair and Ship 
Breaking Industries in the Country. 
2. The Three Hundred Sixty Eighth  Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the 8th February, 2024. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Sixty Eighth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 3rd June, 
2024.  
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  16th 
December, 2024.   
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 16, 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ports, Shipping and
Waterways on 3rd June, 2024.

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AKAM Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BASS Besant Arundale Senior Secondary School 
BE Budget Estimates 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General 
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTSSS Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme 
DISHA District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees 
G20 Group of Twenty 
GFR General Financial Rules 
ICH Intangible Cultural Heritage 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi  National Centre for the Arts 
MoA Memorandum of Association 
MPLAD Member of Parliament Local Area Development 
NEP New Education Policy 
NER North East Region 
NMCM National Mission on Cultural Mapping 
NSD National School of Drama 
OTT Over the Top 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RE Revised Estimates 
SNA Sangeet Natak Akademi 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
ZCC Zonal Cultural Centre 

1 
 
                                                                  REPORT                                        
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ports , Shipping and 
Waterways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Sixty 
Eighth Report on ‘Status of Ship Building, Ship Repair and Ship Breaking Industries in the 
Country’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 8th February, 2024.   
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 3 rd June, 2024 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13.5, 23, 24, 25, 34, 53, 84, 86, 88 
Total: 9 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 33, 35, 54, 55, 56, 62, 85, 87 
Total: 9 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13.6, 20, 21, 22, 32 
Total: 5 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
Total: 0 
  
3. The Committee desires that final reply in respect of the recommendation/observation 
which has been categorized as interim reply by the Committee should be furnished at 
the earliest. 
  
  
  

2 
 
Chapter-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
  
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE POLICY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.         The Committe e observes that the earlier subsidy scheme of the Ministry of 5 
years offered shipbuilders 30% extra on building ocean -going merchant vessels that are 
more than 80 metres in length, if they are manufactured for the domestic market. For 
export orders, however, ships of all types and capacities were eligible for the subsidy. In 
the new ﬁnancial    assistance scheme, assistance will be given for all types of ships 
irrespective of size. In the new scheme, both state -owned and private yards will get the 
assistance only after they construct and hand over to the ship to the buyer to ensure 
timely delivery of ships. The new ﬁnancial assistance  scheme was therefore for double 
the period of the earlier subsidy scheme, the focus extended for all ships and ensured 
timely delivery which had been a constraint in the earlier scheme. The Committee also 
observes that when commercial orders dried up in the wake of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, 
Indian shipyards were focusing mainly on defence orders to stay aﬂoat. The 
Government’s ﬁnancial assistance policy was meant to help bring in more and major 
commercial ship building orders. 
(Para 13.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1       Comments of the Committee are agreed. Additionally, from the data available in the 
SBFAP scheme, about 88 vessel orders have been procured by 35 Shipyards during the last 5 
years from domestic as well as export orders and these orders are worth Rs. 8631 crore. 
Further, shipyards have delivered 128 vessels worth Rs. 1145 crore to domestic and 
international ship owners in last 5 years that have received assistance under SBFAP of about 
Rs. 327 Crore.   Also, with the latest Government of India initiative to provide higher SBFA 
funding to green fuelled ships and hybrid vessels, further shipbuilding orders are expected t o 
be received. 
Sl Fin. Year FA Releases (in Cr) 
1 FY-2016-17 0 
2 FY-2017-18 0 
3 FY-2018-19 29.02 
4 FY-2019-20 26.97 
5 FY-2020-21 58.03 
   

3 
 
6 FY-2021-22 64.62 
7 FY-2022-23 58.04 
8 FY-2023-24 89.93 
  Total 326.61  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.         The Committee observes that skilled manpower is the most essential 
prerequisite in Ship Building industry. Ensuring proper education and training could 
bolster the effectiveness of the industry. The Committee observes that as per 
studies the labour p roductivity value for India is approximately 10 times lower than 
the major shipbuilding nations. All these translate to about 20 -25 per cent cost 
advantage for major shipbuilding nations vis -à-vis India. The Committee 
recommends that investments in automat ion should be encouraged in order to 
improve labor productivity and reduce costs. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1       In this regard Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways have already joined hands 
with Siemens and Indian Register of Shipping (IRS ) to build World Class Center of 
Excellence in Maritime and Ship Building (CEMS) in Mumbai and Vishakhapatnam under 
the ministry’s flagship Sagarmala Programme.CEMS aim is to provide industry -relevant skill 
development, equip students with employable engin eering and technical skills in the port and 
maritime sector and contribute to the Government of India’s ambitious Sagarmala 
Programme. This initiative also adds to the Make in India and skill India efforts in the 
Maritime sector.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.         One of the constraints of shipbuilding in India is the limited investment in 
R&D in ship design and innovation. The Committee recommends that the 
Government focus on skill development and developing an R&D base to increase the 
competitiveness of the Indian shipbuilding industry. 
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1       The aim of setting up of National Centre of Excellence for Green Port & Shipping 
(NCoEGPS) is to provide Green solutions to transform Ports & Shipping. India is also 
implementing IMO energy efficiency requirements for existing ships and carbon intensity 
requirements on all its vessels whether coastal or international in order to help achieve IMO 
GHG reduction targets. 

4 
 
 3.2      Ministry of shipping has already joined hands with S iemens and Indian Register of 
Shipping (IRS) to build World Class Center of Excellence in Maritime and Ship Building 
(CEMS) in Mumbai and Vishakhapatnam. 
3.3       CEMS aim is to provide industry -relevant skill development, equip students with 
employable engineering and technical skills in the port and maritime sector and contribute 
to the Government of India’s ambitious Sagarmala programme. This initiative also adds to 
the Make in India and skill India efforts in the Maritime sector.           
Recommendation/Observation 
4.         The MIV document also advocates creation of a Maritime Development Fund 
to provide easy access to working capital and long -term ﬁnance needs across marine 
sectors. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may implement the creation of 
the Fund which can give access to Indian ship owners to improve their capacity   and 
shipyards to improve the infrastructure 
(Para 25)  
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways organized two workshops involving the 
financial institutions, PSUs and Private Shipyards to deliberate on the ship and ship building 
and financing aspect s, Maritime Development Fund, risk insurance etc. Based on the 
workshops different aspects of ship building such as finances, lower insurance rates, long 
interest loans, building maritime clusters, potential investments in the shipping sector were all 
discussed. Necessary actions are being carried out by this ministry. 
 4.2      The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) is working on developing 
a Maritime Development Fund (MDF) to propel growth and sustainability within the 
maritime sector. 
 4.3      The concept of the MDF has featured in both the Maritime India Vision 2030 (MIV 
2030) and Maritime Amrit Kaal Vision 2047 (MAKV 2047) documents. 
 4.4      Currently, MoPSW is actively engaging with stakeholders across the maritime 
industry to assess their needs, challenges, and expectations regarding the fund. 
4.5       These insights will be instrumental in shaping the mandate and structure of the MDF. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.         As per a FICCI report, Indian shipyards require about 25 -35% of the ship's 
cost as working capital during construction, with interest rates averaging 10 -10.5%. 
In contrast, overseas shipbuilding yards enjoy significantly lower rates along with 

5 
 
lower-interest export credit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  measures to 
reduce interest rates on working capital for Indian shipyards be explored.  
(Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has taken initial actions/stakeholders 
discussions regarding setting up a specialized maritime development fund Also Risk 
insurance cover and various other financial instruments are being evaluated. Leasing/other 
financial instrument through GIFT city also is being discussed by Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways. 
SHIP REPAIR 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.         The Committee notes that India is suitably located to offer repair services for the 
Indian Navy as well as the US Navy for its 5 th and 7 th Fleet deployed in the Indian 
Ocean and the Arabian Sea. It has also been seen that many contracts of the US Navy 
have been awarded to either private Indian Shipyards or to other foreign shipyards.   
Indian PSU Shipyards are not strong contenders for repair amidst global competition.   
The Committee has also learnt from media repo rts that the US Navy and L&T have 
signed a 5 year Master Ship Repair Agreement (MSRA) which shows that the US is 
committed to utilize ship repair facilities on a regular basis at the L&T shipyard in 
Katupalli in Tamil Nadu. The Committee understands that M azagon Docks 
Shipbuilders have also concluded an agreement with an entity of the US Navy. While 
appreciating the above -said achievements, the Committee feels that while other Asian 
countries, notably Singapore and Japan have bagged many foreign ship repair  orders, 
India has lagged behind due to inadequate infrastructural support services needed for 
ship repair. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to 
improve the infrastructure to enable other shipyards to bag ship repair orders. 
(Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has already joined hands with Siemens 
and Indian Register of Shipping (IRS) to build World Class Center of Excellence in Maritime 
and Ship Building (CEMS) in Mumbai and Vishakha patnam under the ministry’s flagship 
Sagarmala Programme. 
6.2       CEMS aim is to provide industry -relevant skill development, equip students with 
employable engineering and technical skills in the port and maritime sector and contribute to 
the Government of India’s ambitious Sagarmala Programme. This initiative also adds to the 
Make in India and skill India efforts in the Maritime sector.  
Initiatives taken for reviving the Ship Recycling Industry 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.         The Committee apprec iates the steps taken by all agencies involved to resolve 
the issues arising out of the Basel Ban Agreement and that EU ships may start to 
arrive in India from April, 2024 which would restore much of the problems affecting 
the recycling industry.    Regarding the issue of TMT bars, the Committee has learnt 
from media reports that the Committee set up by the Steel Ministry to look into the 
issue of the manufacturing TMT bars from ship steel has reportedly been unable to 
devise an SoP ( Standard Operating Proc edure) for usage of ship plates without 
testing of chemical composition. Non -standardised offerings and the absence of wider 
data are seen as major reasons for the rejection of using ship breaking steel plates for 
making TMT bars. The Committee studying th e issue has also suggested that ship 
breakers can sell the plates along with grade certiﬁcate and chemistry. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry, GMB and Ship Recyclers may cooperate 
with the Committee and ensure that large size data is made availab le for long -term 
durability studies to settle the issue of use of TMT bars for structural purposes. The 
Committee also recommends that the industry may explore the possibility of making 
other forms of steel, apart from TMT bars, from ship scraps, like gril ls, strips and 
other bars which may not require the same standards as TMT bars. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1       Regarding exploring the feasibility of using ship breaking steel plates to produce 
TMT bars under the IS 1786,the Ministry of Steel, v ide letter dated 13.03.2024 has 
forwarded the final version of SoP (Standard Operating Procedure) to DG, BIS for 
consideration and further action. BIS have a working group especially for IS 1786, which 
gives the final recommendation to the main Committee b ased on the examination of reports 
and SoP. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.         While appreciating the efforts being made to establish India once again as the 
top country in ship recycling as the industry is an economic driver for India,    the 
Committee underlines the importance of strategic planning to ensure that 
environmental conditions and workers safety and health standards are not 
compromised in the pursuit of doubling the capacity of the industry by 2030. 
(Para 86) 
           
Reply of the Ministry 

7 
 
8.1       Gujarat Maritime Board is planning to prepare the Master Planning to double the 
capacity of Alang through the renowned consultant. The Master Planning will be done to 
comply all the health safety and environmental standard for the green ship recycling. 
8.2       Safety Training and Labor Welfare Institute at Alang 
 In the view of the safety of the worker, Gujarat Maritime Board has established the training 
institute in Alang in 2003; Gujarat Maritime Board has follow the policy that each worker 
should get required training before work at ship recycling yard i.e. "No Training No Work". 
The institute has been in operation for the last 20 years and has trained more than 156,000 
workers so far. The new workers are trained as per the National Skill De velopment 
Standards. Only after receiving certification from the Gujarat Maritime Board, workers are 
considered trained and fit for working in the plots. 
 8.3      Health facilities at Alang 
 Gujarat Maritime Board started the 15 bedded Multi Specialty Hos pitals in support of the 
Indian Red Cross Society at Alang since March 2019 which provides medical services to the 
workers. These services include Ortho, Physician, Skin, Dental, Pediatric, X -Ray, Patho-Lab, 
ECG etc with indoor facility at free of cost. This hospital is operationalized on 24 x 7 bases at 
free of cost and till date; more than 2.86 lakh patients have been treated. GMB has started the 
expansion work of this hospital with additional 20 beds and facilities like MRI, CT Scan, and 
Trauma Centre etc. to comply the European Union Ship Recycling Regulations. Moreover, a 
Primary Health Care Facilities with 20 beds has been also operationalized at Alang since 
1983 by IRCS with financial aid of GMB. 
 8.4      Gujarat Maritime Board in its own capacity ha d assessed many ships beached at 
Alang, witnessed recycling of the ships, studied mass balance of the recycled ships including 
tanker, bulk carrier, container vessel, referred vessel and passenger liner. Various laboratory 
tests and studies related to Mate rial Safety Data Sheets were carried out for materials which 
were neither categorized as hazardous waste or non-hazardous waste. 
8.5              Gujarat Maritime Board, Gujarat Pollution Control Board and State 
Government are constantly carrying out the d rives for reuse, reduce and recycle of ship 
recycling materials leading to minimization of waste receipt at TSDF at Alang. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.         The Committee observes that as informed by the GMB, the activities at Alang 
does not encroach  any vegetation cover and infact the green covers are seen to have 
been increased by more than 10% in the last 15 years. While appreciating the non -
encroachment of green areas, the Committee further recommends that green areas like 
herbal gardens and green  avenues may be developed in the residential areas for 
labourers to counter the ill effects of ship breaking activities which is highly polluting. 

8 
 
The Community Centres should also have libraries, ﬁlm shows and other recreational 
facilities for the psychological well being of labourers and their families.  
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1       The following activities has been undertaken: 
  
Sr 
No.  
Program Category Persons Beneficial 
1 Medical Camp- Every Month Workers, Ladies & Children 600-800 
  
2 School Kits School Children 400 
3 15th August & 26 January 
celebration 
Workers with family 1000 
4 Movie Show on School Visit Children 200 
5 Movie Show-Saturday night Workers with family 500 
6 Gandhi Jayanti Celebration Children and Women 500 
7 Cricket Tournament Workers 150 (12-14 teams) 
8 31 December Celebration Workers 2500-3000 
9 Kite Festival Children 300 
10 Safety Week Celebration Workers 1000 
  
  
 9.2      Welfare activities conducted for workers at Alang by the Association as 
informed by Ship Recycling Industries Association 
  
 Contributions to the hospitals and charitable trusts in Bhavnagar. 
 Contribution towards CM Relief Funds in the contingencies of natural calamities. 
 Contribution towards PM's Relief fund during Cargill war and Tsunami 
 Rescue operations and cleaning of debris during the Gujarat Earthquake, 2000. 
 Construction of 4 primary schools in Kutch region is fully sponsored by the industry. 
 The association also organizes and participates in the trade fares. 
 Set up a Disaster Management Centre at Bhavnagar for the Government 

9 
 
 Recently, a short -term, on -the-job training program on 'Safe handling of crane 
operations' was organized by SRIA under the guidance of GMB. The response, in 
participation, from the members and workers was overwhelmi ng and it has 
encouraged SRIA to conduct more such training programs in the days to come. 
9.3       Moreover, a separate playing area in the Labor Housing Colony, shopping Centre, and 
canteen has been provided in the Labor Housing Colony complex. 
  
Green a reas and recreational zones will be embarked and developed during the Master 
planning. 
  
**** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Chapter-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY: 
  
SHIP BUILDING 

10 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.         The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry for its efforts under 
the “Make In India” programme for promotion of shipbuilding activities . The 
Committee observes that Approved Standardized Tug Design and  Speciﬁcations 
(ASTDS) have been issued by the Ministry to assist the Major Ports in expeditious 
implementation of the Make in India Order. The Committee desires to know how 
many locally built Tugs have been ordered by the Major Ports since the 
implementation of this Order in September, 2020. 
     (Para 
10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1       V.O. Chidambaranar Port Authority has proposed for hiring of one number of ASTDS 
locally built tug and currently it is in the tendering stage. 
 Chennai Port Authority has hired a 40 Ton Bollard Pull Tug on September 2022. 
 Order/Tender for New ASTDS three tugs, is in process at JNPA 
 Kamarajar Port has chartered indigenously built 2 nos. of Pilot Launches, 2 nos. of 
Mooring Boats and one no. High Speed Patrol Boat. 
 Paradip Port Authority has engaged/ chartered one no. of ASTDS approved 60 Ton 
Bollar Pull Tug with effect from 20.12.2023 
 New Mangalore Port Authority has placed order for “Hiring of 1 No. 60T Bollard Pull 
New Indian built Tug as per ASTDS” on dt.4-3-2024 for a period of 8 years. 
 VPA intend to procure a 50 Ton BP (Tractor) Electric Tug for approximately Rs.120 
Crore from M/s Hindustan Shipyard Ltd., Visakhapatnam basing on ASTDS and 
GTTP as promulgated by MOPS&W. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.         Overall, the C ommittee observed that faced with high financial costs, the 
shipbuilders in India encounter difficulties in expanding their operations and 
providing competitive pricing to end -users. This predicament has led to low orders, 
diminished profits and a constrained capacity for reinvestment. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways organized two workshops involving the 
financial institutions, PSUs and Private Shipyards in February, 2024 to deliberate on the ship 

11 
 
and ship  building and financing aspects, Maritime Development Fund, risk insurance etc. 
Based on the workshops different aspects of ship building such as finances, lower insurance 
rates, long interest loans, building maritime clusters, potential investments in the  shipping 
sector were all discussed. Necessary actions are being carried out by this ministry. 
 2.2      The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) is working on developing 
a Maritime Development Fund (MDF) to propel growth and sustainability wi thin the 
maritime sector. The concept of the MDF has featured in both the Maritime India Vision 
2030 (MIV 2030) and Maritime Amrit Kaal Vision 2047 (MAKV 2047) documents.  
2.3        Currently, MoPSW is actively engaging with stakeholders across the mariti me 
industry to assess their needs, challenges, and expectations regarding the fund.  
 2.4      These insights will be instrumental in shaping the mandate and structure of the MDF. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.         The Committee feels that a potential  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme can go a long way to boost the shipbuilding industry. This multifaceted 
scheme could include output -based rewards, wherein shipbuilders stand to receive 
incentives commensurate with the quantity and type of ships t hey manufacture. 
Additionally, the PLI scheme might introduce investment incentives tailored to 
encourage shipbuilders to modernize their facilities and integrate advanced 
manufacturing technologies. Shipbuilding entities making investments in upgrading 
infrastructure and adopting state -of-the-art manufacturing processes could qualify 
for these investment incentives. This dual approach of incentivizing both production 
and investment could create a dynamic environment that propels the shipbuilding 
industry t owards technological advancement, increased efficiency and global 
competitiveness. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1       Production Linked Incentive Scheme in shipbuilding can be possible when the 
volume of production is high and the shipyards are able  to deliver more vessels during each 
consecutive years, Currently Shipbuilding Financial Assistance (SBFA) is available for 
supporting shipbuilding activities in the country. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.         The Committee notes that as per the Statist ics of the Ministry placed at 
Annexure-II, 725 ships were repaired in private shipyards during the years from 2019 -
20 to 2021 -22 whereas 448 ships were repaired in Government/PSU shipyards in the 
same period. Among Government/PSU shipyards, Cochin Shipyards handles the bulk of 

12 
 
the ship repair market.   In 2021-22 for example, out of the total 157 ships repaired in 
the public sector shipyards, 100 ships were repaired by CSL, 33 by Goa Shipyard and 
14 by Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. That is, out of the approximatel y 24 Shipyards in the 
country, only 3 Shipyards are carrying out Ship Repair works of significance. The 
Committee notes that among the Major Ports, the Syama Prasad Mukhejee Port 
(SMPK), Kolkata has 5 Dry Docks while the Mumbai Port, Vishakhapatnam Port, 
Paradip Port and Deendayal Port have 1 Dry Dock each but no ship repair activity has 
been undertaken by these Major Ports in the last few years. The Committee desires to 
know the reason for no ship repair activity in the Dry Docks of the above -said Major 
Ports and also whether the facilities in the Dry Docks are lying unutilized or are being 
utilized for other purposes. The Committee also sought to know the plans of the 
MoPSW for augmenting facilities at these ports to carry out ship repair activities. 
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       DPA has 01 No of Steel floating Dry Dock (SFDD) moored to maintenance jetty, 
Kandla, having length of 95 Meters & width between wall 20 Meters and overall length of 
104 Meters and width 26 Meters. The Steel Floating Dry  Dock is utilized to dry dock DPA 
vessels, government vessels and private vessels as per policy adopted by the Board of DPA. 
Regarding augmentation of ship repair facilities at DPA - a ship repair cluster is planned to be 
developed by CSL in partnership wi th DPA at Vadinar (DPA limit) with floating dry docks. 
DPA will develop civil infrastructure like jetty, electrical/mechanical works, power supply 
etc., while CSL will install and operate floating dry docks and ship repair facilities. The work 
is at DPR and approval stage.  
4.2       At SMPK, there are 5 Dry Docks at KDS, out of which, 2 Dry Docks are at NSD and 
3 Dry Dock are at KPD. Due to shortage of qualified manpower in SMPK, Dry Docks could 
not be utilized to their full potential and therefore, the Dr y Docks have been handed over to 
CSL and GRSE in the following manner for better utilization: - 
 
(a) SMPK has entered into a Concession Agreement on 28.03.2019 for a period 
of 15 years, with an option of renewal of another 15 years, with Cochin 
Shipyard Ltd. (CSL) for ship -repair management facility at 2 Nos. of Dry Dock 
and one Berth at Netaji Subhas Dock (NSD). Ship Repair Operation started 
functioning w.e.f. 29.09.2019 under the banner “CSL-Kolkata Ship Repair Unit” 
(CSKRU). Till December 2023, 25 No. of Vessels/Crafts were repaired in 2 Dry 
Docks of NSD. As per the said Concession Agreement, CSL shares 40% of the 
profit before tax with SMPK.  
 
(b) SMPK has entered into a Concession Agreement on 07.10.2021 for a period 
of 15 years, with an option of renewa l of another 15 years, with Garden Reach 
Ship Builders and Engineers (GRSE) for Ship Repair / Ship Building Operation 

13 
 
and Management of Facility at 3 Dry Docks of Khidderpore Dock (KPD). The 
Dry Docks were handed over to GRSE on  01.12.2021. 30 No. of Vessels/ Crafts 
were repaired in 3 Dry Docks of KPD since 2021. As per the said Concession 
Agreement, GRSE shares 50% of the profit before tax with SMPK. 
4.3       Paradip Port Dry Dock is in good working condition since the year 2009 onwards and 
it is being op erated through outsourcing on payment of License fee. Every year, around 15 
vessels are carrying out dry docking repair in the Dry Dock. Dry Docking repairs of Port 
Crafts and Tugs are being carried out in PPA Dry Dock. In addition to that, most of the Coa st 
Guard vessels and others off shore supply Vessels and Tugs operating in and around Paradip 
Port are doing their dry docking repair at PPA dry Dock. 
4.4       VPA has got ORS Dry Dock. The facility is being used for repairing VPA owned 
crafts and Coast guard / private vessels. Due to Covid, in the years 2020 -21 and 2021-22, the 
revenue from the private vessels were hampered due to postponement of docking schedules 
by coast guard vessels / private vessel owners, however VPA vessels were Docked and got 
repaired in the Dry Dock.  
4.5       For better utilization of the existing Dry Dock at ORS/VPA, VPA planning to lease 
out the asset for 15 years for better revenue earnings.  
4.6       In order to finalize the modalities VPA intends to prepare TEFR by outsour cing the 
work to empanelled consultants. Accordingly, budgetary offers were obtained from the 
empanelled consultants. Upon finalization, work will be awarded to a firm for preparation of 
TEFR. Upon obtaining TEFR report VPA intend to go for leasing out VPA  ORS Dry Dock 
for better utilization and for better revenue earnings. 
4.7       CSL has set up ship repair units (SRUs) at Mumbai ports and Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port (Kolkata) after entering into long term MoU with these ports CSL has also 
set up SRUs at Port Blair under an MoU with A&N Administration. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.         The Committee, on an earlier Study Visit to Mumbai Port, had been informed 
that the Mumbai Port has been having financial difficulties and the only solution 
appeared to be monetization of its landbank. Due to the nearby JNPA port, there was 
no scope for container or any other type of cargo except liquid bulk cargo. The Port had 
a Ship breaking facility second only to Alang which is now almost closed.   The 
Committee desir es to know whether Ship Repair activities can be revived in the 
Mumbai Port to offset its financial difficulties.   
(Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1       98% of the ship recycling in India is happening in Alang in Gujarat where organic 
development of the Ship recycling sector has happened. With the HKC compliance approved 

14 
 
by IMO will come into force by 2025, more ships are expected to come to Alang for 
recycling.  
5.2       Cochin Shipyard Limited has already set a ship repair facility in Mumbai port un der 
an Memorandum of Understanding with Mumbai port Authority.  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.         The Committee also observes that a Ship Repair facility at Pandu first 
announced in August, 2021 is now rescheduled for completion by 2025. This facility at 
Pandu would enable repair of inland vessels with dry docking in the North -Eastern 
Region itself instead of having to go to Kolkata, which will result in less cost and shorter 
repair time. The Committee would like to know the status of the project at Pandu.   
(Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1       The work from concept to commissioning entrusted to HCSL with NTCPWC as PMC 
on deposit work basis. Agreement & Addendum –I (payment terms) signed on 26.08.2021 & 
16.02.2022 respectively.  Layout parallel to fl ow free zed & Revised DPR dated Sept, 2022 
approved by IWAI .DIB cleared the project for Rs 208.00 Cr. on 03.01.2023. BID process 
management for civil works completed & work awarded to M/s L &T Geo structure Pvt. Ltd., 
Chennai on 31.03.2023 at a total cost  of Rs. 145, 49, 50,258.00. 3.599 acre of land under 
possession of IWAI has been handed over to HCSL on 18.04.2023 & in turn to M/s L&T Geo 
Structure on 04.05.2023. 
6.2       For Equipment Procurement (Cranes & winches) &MEP services tender document is 
under finalization by NTCPWC & HCSL. The likely cost of award is Rs. 60.71 
6.3       Piling equipment Mobilized on 19.05.2023. Topographical survey completed, & 
vetted by NTCPWC . Topographical survey vetted by NTCPWC& accordingly area cleared, 
Bench mark/ lev eling carried out.   All 03 nos test piles each of   800/1200/1300 mm 
completed and 06 nos. reaction piles completed and load test completed on all 03 nos. piles 
6.4       Physical Progress.  Land piles:-124/ 124 no & 21 no. Pile cap casted, pile chipping 
120/124 nos completed, pile muff 85/124 nos completed, pile muff PCC 101/124 nos 
completed, Pile integrated test (PIT) 15/124 nos completed.  
6.5       Marine Piles:- Approach (1200 mm) 18/18 nos completed, Repair bay (1200 mm) 
11/55 nos completed, Boat hois t (1300 mm) 20/40 completed, Approach pile cap 2/18 nos 
completed, Approach pile chipping   12/16 nos completed, Jack up commissioning 90% 
completed, pre cast pile muff 70/154 nos completed, beam 41/41 nos completed.  
 Admin. Building: Lift pit pile muff com pleted, Linear fabrication: 70/172 nos 
completed.  
 Pre cast fender beam: 6/41 completed. Likely completion by Dec. 2024. 

15 
 
 Overall progress - 26% 
 Likely completion by Dec’2024. 
*Approved DIB Rs.388.00 Cr. (For project on NW-2) 
Overall financial progress of 26.89% has been achieved up to 31.03.2024 
  
  
  
Regulatory framework for Sustainable Ship Recycling in India. 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.      Ship Breaking Code in 2013: 
In 2013, the Government of India enacted the Ship Breaking Code , a comprehensive set  
of guidelines  that  encompasses various statutes and rules related to the management of 
hazardous waste disposal, Factory Rules, Explosive Act, Petroleum Rules, Atomic 
Regulatory Board Act, Labour Laws, Employee State Insurance Corporation Act, Air 
Act, Water Act, etc. This code was   formulated  in consultation with Directorate 
General of Shipping, Mumbai,  ensuring alignment  with the stipulation  outlined in the 
Hong Kong Convention for Ship Recycling (HKC) 2009 . Hong Kong Convention for 
Ship Recycling, 2009 
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Ship breaking Code 2013 will continue to be as a National regulatory framework for 
India towards Ship Recycling till the entry in to force of the Hong Kong International 
Convention on 26th June, 2025. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.         The Committee has been informed that due to the issue of the TMT bars, 
thousands of workers employed in small industries selling such bars have lost their 
jobs. The Committee recommends that workers from such allied industri es may be 
trained in various processes of ship recycling. The Committee also desired to know the 
impact of the incentives provided by the Government of India and the Gujarat 
Maritime Board and socio- cultural benefits being given to the people of the area. 
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 

16 
 
8.1       The acceptance and subsequent implementation of SoP will help to reinstate the re -
rolling mills. Accordingly, re -rolling industries will able to retain the workers, meantime 
Gujarat Maritime Board (GMB) with Ship Recycling Industries Association (SRIA) is in 
consultation of re -rolling Association and  will explore the possibility to train the workers 
involved in re-rolling mills for the recycling industry at Alang. 
8.2       Further it is to submit that incentives p rovided by the Government of India and 
Government of Gujarat/ Gujarat Maritime Board have resulted in terms of regular payment of 
daily wages and other facilities to the workers by the plot holders during the current recession 
period which cannot be quantified in general. 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.                The Committee    had    been informed       at the presentation by the 
representatives of the Ship Recyling Association that trade speciﬁc diseases like those 
found in the mining industry were not  present in the Ship Recyling Industry and the 
risk of accidents was the main occupational hazard. The Committee observes that 
exposure to some pollutants like asbestos only manifest after long periods post 
exposure. The Committee recommends that comprehen sive risk assessment studies 
due to exposure to pollutants in the ship recycling industry may be                        conducted. Like the 
regular monitoring of gas emissions and sea water and soil water, the pollution 
exposure of workers should also be  monitored continuously. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1       Under the Ship Breaking Code 2013, various statutes of Safety,   Health and 
Environment  Management are being enforced by various regulatory agencies whom are 
powers vested under those statut es i.e. State Pollution Control Board (Air Water and 
Hazardous Waste Rules), Director of Industrial Safety & Health (Factory Act for Safety and 
occupational health Radioactive substance rules), Custom Department   for AERB( import of 
ship for ship breaking under custom act), State Maritime Board/Port Authority (State 
Regulations for allotment of plots, beaching, breaking etc). These agencies check the 
compliances to in corresponding statutes. 
 9.2      The following steps have already been taken by Gujarat M aritime Board under 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways for prevention and control of Pollution scrapping.  
 Development & Operation of Hazardous Waste Disposal Facility at Alang to protect 
soil, water and air environment at Alang from generation of hazardous waste from 
ship recycling. 
 Monitoring parameters of various related to ambient environment of Alang Sosiya 
Ship Recycling to assess the pollution levels in view of ship recycling with respect to 
handling wastes. hazardous 

17 
 
 Obtained Consents for ope ration of ship recycling yards from Gujarat Pollution 
Control Board to properly handle hazardous waste generated in the plots. 
 Obtained Environmental Clearance for expansion of existing yards to prevent adverse 
environmental impacts from increase in capacity of ship recycling. 
  
 Current TSDF (including incinerator) is being upgraded up to EU Norms for which 
tenders are invited and shortly agency will be appointed. After up gradation of TSDF, 
Alang may get more vessels directly from EU states will add more v olume 
contributing a progress towards doubling capacity. 
**** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Chapter-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.         However, the Committee observes that in the nearly 8 years since the launch of the 
scheme, only a paltry 6 -7% of the Rs. 4000 corpus has been utilized. The target of Rs. 200 
crores for the next ﬁnancial year appears to be bit rather unrealistic considering the poor 
response of the past few years. Since there are only 2 years left for the Scheme, it appears 
that the ﬁnancial beneﬁts under the Scheme have not been utilized to the extent possible. 
The Committee disagrees with the Ministry’s contention that the increase in  ﬁnancial 
assistance availed over the years is signiﬁcant enough to prove that the volume of ship 
building is increasing in India. The Committee desires to know how many of the 31 
Shipyards approved under the policy have actually utilized the beneﬁts of th e scheme and 
how many ships have been built by individual shipyards under the Scheme. The Committee 
may also be informed of the type of vessels that have been built by the Shipyards which 

18 
 
have actually utilized the beneﬁts. While CSL in the government sector has been able to win 
orders from global clients, the Committee desires to know whether the private shipyards 
beneﬁtting under the scheme have also been competitive enough to win global orders to 
build large container ships. The leading Ship Building nat ions of China, South Korea and 
Japan thrive on export orders to build their shipbuilding expertise. The Committee while 
appreciating the Government’s efforts to create an ecosystem for boosting shipbuilding 
recommends that the Ministry should evaluate the reasons for the poor utilization of the 
ﬁnancial assistance scheme and whether technical reasons like high imports of material for 
shipbuilding, less automation in the shipbuilding processes are affecting the 
competitiveness of Indian Ship yards. 
(Para 13.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1       Government of India initiative to provide higher SBFA funding to green fuelled ships 
and hybrid vessels will further boost the latest and more shipbuilding orders are expected to 
be received.  
1.2       Following measures have already been taken by this Ministry with regard to modern 
technologies and machinery to increase indigenous manufacturing: 
(a)The SBFAP guidelines have been amended to include wind farm installation vessels and 
construction of sophisticated dredgers as specialized vessels which are eligible to get higher 
financial assistance. 
(b) The SBFAP guidelines have been amended to include financial assistance of 30% for 
vessels where main propulsion is achieved by means of green fuels such as Methanol/ 
Ammonia / Hydrogen fuel cells. 
1.3       The SBFAP guidelines have been amended to include a financial assistance of 20% 
for vessels with electric means of propulsion or vessels fitted with hybrid propulsion system. 
(2) Further, in order to make this policy more s hipyard friendly, further amendments are 
being considered by this Ministry. 
1.4       Discussion workshops were held with stakeholder in February, 2024. Based on the 
workshops different aspects of ship building such as finances, lower insurance rates, long  
interest loans, building maritime clusters, potential investments in the shipping sector were all 
discussed.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.5       The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that 88 vessel orders have been 
procured by 35 shipyards during the last 5 years from domestic as well as export orders 
and shipyards which have received assistance under SBFAP Scheme of about Rs. 327 
crores, have delivered 128 vessels worth Rs. 1145 crores to domestic and international 
ship owners. The Committee would like to have the details of the Shipyards which have 

19 
 
availed assi stance under the Scheme and the type of vessels delivered by them.   The 
Committee further desires to know whether the private shipyards beneﬁtting under the 
scheme have also been competitive enough to win global orders to build large container 
ships, if so, the details thereof. 
  
Promotion of tonnage under Indian Flag 
Recommendation/Observation 
 2.        If India is to be positioned among the top 10 nations in Ship Building, then an 
ecosystem which would address the infrastructure, regulatory, ﬁscal issues  and capability 
development is to be developed. The Committee observes that as per the Rangarajan 
Commission, six indicators of sectors to be classiﬁed under Infrastructure were –  
(a) natural monopoly;  
(b) non-tradability of output;  
(c) bestowing externalities on society;  
(d) high- sunk costs or asset speciﬁcity; 
 (e) non-rivalness (up to congestion limits) in consumption; and,  
(f) possibility of price exclusion. The Commission had recommended the inclusion of Ships 
and other Vessels on the basis of the characteristics from (d) to (f).  
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways have granted infrastructure status to 
shipyards and the same was published in the Gazette of India on 14th Nov, 2017. 
 2.2      Ministry of Ports,  shipping and waterways vide Office Memorandum dated 22nd 
August, 2023 to Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance requested to revisit 
the Classification of Infrastructure and to include vessels as it qualify for classification as 
Infrastructure sub-sector. 
 2.3      Further Indian National Ship Owner Association (INSA) vide their letter dated 08th 
August, 2023 to Economic Advisory Council to Prime Minister requested Need to grant 
'infrastructure status to Indian ships in order to gain access to  competitive funding for 
purchase of new and second-hand ships and to adopt greener technologies. 
 2.4      Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways organized workshop on 14th February, 
2024 to discuss with the concerned stakeholders on  different aspects of ship building such as 
finances, lower insurance rates, long interest loans, building maritime clusters, potential 
investments. 
2.5       The Committee observes that the grant of infrastructure status to Shipyards 
due to which the Ship Building industry would be able to avail long term funding at 

20 
 
lower rates and for various forms of ﬁnancial assistance, beneﬁts and concessions. The 
Committee also observes that the Government is planning to give infrastructure status 
to coastal shipping. The Committee reco mmends that the Government may consider 
extending infrastructure status granted to Shipyards to all ships and Vessels, not only 
coastal shipping. 
(Para 20 and 21) 
2.6       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways have granted infrastructure status to 
shipyards and the same was published in the Gazette of India on 14th Nov, 2017. 
 2.7      Ministry of Ports, shipping and waterways vide Office Memorandum dated 22 nd 
August, 2023 to Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance requested to revisit 
the Classification of Infrastructure and to include vessels as it qualify for classification as 
Infrastructure sub-sector as it fulfills the following characteristics set -out by Dr. Ranjarajan 
Committee:  
 (i) Natural Monopoly - As a mode of transportation. It  has natural monopoly as the most 
energy efficient and cost -effective mode of transportation when compared with other modes 
under similar fuel category and maintenance purpose. Also, as plying of vessels are under the 
license by the Government, it qualifies under natural monopoly. 
 (ii) High Sunk Cost - Vessels have high sunk cost due to high CAPEX involved and 
uncertain and long recovery period due to capacity constraint. 
 (iii) Non -tradability of output - As other transportation Infrastructure, vessels ca n also be 
considered to have non-tradability of output as it is just means of transportation and not such 
a tradable commodity. 
 (iv) Presence of externalities and one of the three parameters namely its importance to the 
scheme of economic development, its  ability to contribute to the human capital and specific 
circumstances under which it is developed in India - In case of vessels. The operations are 
depended on externalities and support in procurement & operations would increase their 
availability thus contribution towards subsequent economic development and human capital. 
 2.8      Further Indian National Ship Owner Association (INSA) vide their letter dated 08 th 
August, 2023 to Economic Advisory Council to Prime Minister requested Need to grant 
'infrastructure status to Indian ships in order to gain access to competitive funding for 
purchase of new and second-hand ships and to adopt greener technologies.           
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.9       The Committee would like to know the current st atus of the request made to 
Economic Advisory Council to Prime Minister in order to grant 'infrastructure status to 
Indian ships’. The Committee also recommends the Government to consider this 
demand as soon as possible for overall development of shipping industry in India. 

21 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.         The Committee recommends that the production of specialized steels domestically 
should be incentivized and strategic partnerships with global suppliers should be 
established to ensure a cost -effective supply chain to address the high costs of materials. 
The Committee recommends that setting up a specialized ﬁnancing institution/marine 
ﬁnance scheme could provide a much -needed boost to the shipbuilding industry. The 
Ministry may also explore the possib ility of getting a risk insurance cover scheme for ships 
in India on the lines of the ones in Korea and China which would attract domestic and 
international investors to participate in financing maritime projects. The Committee 
observes that the private se ctor ship building companies are mostly struggling with hardly 
any proﬁts, the most recent casualties being Western India, Bharati and ABG Shipyards. 
The Committee recommends that the private sector must be considered as much of a 
stakeholder in shipping a s the public sector and a level playing field for both sectors must 
be the concern of the Government. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1       To promote Indigenous shipbuilding industry in India, Ministry of Ports, shipping and 
Waterways has brought in S hipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy (SBFAP) scheme for 
Indian shipyards to procure orders from domestic as well as international 15 market and to be 
competitive in international market for securing global orders. Under this scheme about 88 
vessel orders have been procured by 35 Shipyards during the last 5 years from domestic as 
well as export orders include both Govt and private shipyards.  
 3.2      Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways organized two workshops involving the 
financial institutions, PSUs and Private Shipyards in February, 2024 to deliberate on the ship 
and ship building and financing aspects, Maritime Development Fund, risk insurance etc. 
Based on the workshops different aspects of ship building such as finances, lower insurance 
rates, long interest loans, building maritime clusters, potential investments in the shipping 
sector were all discussed. Necessary actions are being carried out by this ministry. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.3       The Committee recommends that apart f rom SBFAP scheme, the Ministry 
should also consider to engage private sector in this sector to leverage Public Private 
Partnership. The Committee reiterates that that setting up a specialized ﬁnancing 
institution/marine ﬁnance scheme could provide a much -needed boost to the 
shipbuilding industry. 
         
GREEN SHIP BUILDING 
Recommendation/Observation 

22 
 
4.         The Committee observes that ship engines and ship fue ls are undergoing rapid 
change and moving away from fossil fuels to new fuels like green methanol, green ammonia 
etc. In the near future, every goods/service will have an identiﬁable carbon footprint and 
carbon neutral products and services will have a com petitive advantage. While the 
Committee appreciates the initiatives of CSL in constructing green vessels, there does not 
appear to be the same efforts on the part of other shipyards. The Committee recommends 
that the National Centre for Excellence in Green  Ports and Shipping may act as a nodal 
entity for green shipping so that there is a coordinated effort by all shipyards to position 
India as a global hub for green shipping. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterway s has initiated action for green ships with 
Green Tug Transition Program (GTTP) and has evolved broad frame work for the greening of 
Inland water ways and coastal ships. The broad contour of the ' Harit Nauka' program has 
been promulgated and enhanced SBFA for hybrid and Green vessels have been notified. 
4.2       Further, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has finalized the scheme 
guidelines for implementation of Pilot Projects for use of Green Hydrogen in the Shipping 
Sector and has accordingly allotted  Rs.80 crore for retrofitting of existing ships to run on 
Green Hydrogen or its derivatives and Rs.35crore for development of bunkering and 
refueling facilities at VOCPA for Green Hydrogen based fuels. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.3       The Commi ttee recommends to provide incentives for research and 
development in green maritime technologies, such as tax breaks for companies that 
invest in the development of sustainable shipping solutions. This can spur innovation 
and lead to the creation of more efficient and cost -effective green shipping 
technologies. 
*** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

23 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
-NIL- 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

24 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Financial Assistance Policy 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that 88 vessel orders have been pro cured 
by 35 shipyards during the last 5 years from domestic as well as export orders and 
shipyards which have received assistance under SBFAP Scheme of about Rs. 327 crores, 
have delivered 128 vessels worth Rs. 1145 crores to domestic and international shi p 
owners. The Committee would like to have the details of the Shipyards which have 
availed assistance under the Scheme and the type of vessels delivered by them.   The 
Committee further desires to know whether the private shipyards ben eﬁtting under the 
scheme have also been competitive enough to win global orders to build large container 
ships, if so, the details thereof. 
(Para 1.5) 
  
Promotion of tonnage under Indian Flag 
The Committee observes that the grant of infrastructure status t o Shipyards due to 
which the Ship Building industry would be able to avail long term funding at lower 
rates and for various forms of ﬁnancial assistance, beneﬁts and concessions. The 
Committee also observes that the Government is planning to give infrastructure status 
to coastal shipping. The Committee recommends that the Government may consider 
extending infrastructure status granted to Shipyards to all ships and Vessels, not only 
coastal shipping. 
(Para 2.5) 
The Committee would like to know the current st atus of the request made to Economic 
Advisory Council to Prime Minister in order to grant 'infrastructure status to Indian 
ships’. The Committee also recommends the Government to consider this demand as 
soon as possible for overall development of shipping industry in India. 
(Para 2.9) 
 
The Committee recommends that apart from SBFAP scheme, the Ministry should also 
consider to engage private sector in this sector to leverage Public Private Partnership. 

25 
 
The Committee reiterates that that setting up a speciali zed ﬁnancing institution/marine 
ﬁnance scheme could provide a much-needed boost to the shipbuilding industry. 
(Para 3.3) 
 
         
GREEN SHIP BUILDING 
The Committee recommends to provide incentives for research and development in 
green maritime technologie s, such as tax breaks for companies that invest in the 
development of sustainable shipping solutions. This can spur innovation and lead to 
the creation of more efficient and cost-effective green shipping technologies. 
(Para 4.3) 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
MINUTES 
  

27 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM & CULTURE (2024-25) 
VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 16th December, 2024 
in Committee Room-“B”, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   -  Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
 
Lok Sabha  
8. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
9. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
10. Shrimati June Maliah  
11. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
12. Shri K. E. Prakash  
13. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Monica Baa,  Director  
Shri T. Kennedy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary 
  

28 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the following draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: - 
(i)     XXXXXi 
 
(ii)    XXXXX 
(iii)   XXXXX 
(iv)  XXXXX 
(v)    Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its Three Hundred Sixty Eighth (368 th) Report on ‘Status of 
Ship Building, Ship Repair and Ship Breaking Industries in 
the Country’ 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Reports, 
one by one. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman and in his absence 
Shri Neeraj Dangi, MP or Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  to present the aforesaid 
Reports in Rajya Sabha on 19 th December, 2024. Additionally, the Committee 
authorized Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri, MP and in his absence Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy, MP to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same 
date. 
4. XXXXX 
5. XXXXX 
The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
 
Monica Baa 
Director 
New Delhi, 
16th December, 2024 
 
                                                           
i  Relates to other matters 
 