        PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON TRANSPORT, TOURIS
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New DelhiMarch
THREE HUNDRED Demands for Grants (2025(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of
 
  PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE       Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi March, 2025 / Chaitra, 1947 (Saka)  
REPORT NO.375
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT  Demands for Grants (2025-26) of Ministry of Civil Aviation resented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2025) Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  25th  March, 2025)  Y STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 375
26) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
   PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  TOURISM AND CULTURE   THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT  Demands for Grants (2025-26) of Ministry of Civil Aviation  (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  25th March, 2025) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  25th  March, 2025)    RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  March, 2025 / Chaitra, 1947 (Saka)  
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAG E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
4.  REPORT                                1-38 
5. KEY HIGHLIGHTS OF THE COMMITTEE’S  
               RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS                 39-42 
6. MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43-49
43-50

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shrimati Sudha Murty  
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
9.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi* 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
Ms. Arshi, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f.  10th October, 2024 in lieu  of  Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy who ceased to 
be  Member of Committee w.e.f. 10th October, 2024. 

ii 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Seventy Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants (2025-
26) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on 28th February, 2025 considered the subject and 
heard the Secretary and other officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 20th 
March, 2025 
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
March 20, 2025                                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Palguna 29, 1946 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
Acronym Full Form 
AAIB Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
AIAHL Air India Assets Holding Limited 
AIESL Air India Engineering Services Limited 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BE Budget Estimates 
CPSUs Central Public Sector Undertakings 
CRS Commission of Railway Safety 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FY Financial Year 
GFA Greenfield Airports 
GIS Geographic Information System 
I&EBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MSMEs Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
NER North Eastern Region 
OOMF Outcome-Output Monitoring Framework 
PHL Pawan Hans Limited 
PLI Production Linked Incentive 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RE Revised Estimates 
RGNAU Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University 
ROI Return on Investment 
R&D Research and Development 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Naagrik 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation plays a vital role in creating a safe, secure, 
affordable, and sustainable environment for air travel, catering to both passengers 
and cargo transportation. It establishes a comprehensive regulatory framework to 
ensure safety and security in air transport services while formulating policies to 
develop adequate infrastructure to accommodate the sector’s rapid growth. Given 
the global nature of civil aviation, the Ministry ensures adherence to international 
standards and norms. It supervises various attached offices and Public Sector 
Undertakings, ensuring effective governance. Additionally, it promotes ease of 
doing business and enhances passenger facilitation.  
2. The Ministry is responsible for implementing treaties and agreements related 
to civil aviation and administering the Aircraft Act, 1934, as well as the Airports 
Authority of India Act, 1994. Its remit includes the regulation of aircraft and air 
navigation, the provision and management of aerodromes, and the organisation of 
air traffic, excluding the sanitised control of air navigation. It also oversees the 
provision of navigational aids and other facilities related to air navigation. 
Furthermore, the Ministry is responsible for the carriage of passengers and goods 
by air, the development of commercial aero-related manufacturing and its 
ecosystem, and the issuance of technical licences, certificates, and approvals for 
civil aircraft operations. It also supports the growth of the private air transport 
industry, including cargo services, and handles matters related to Greenfield airport 
development by State Governments and private/joint-sector companies. 
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 
3. The Outcome-Output Monitoring Framework (OOMF)/Outcome Budget for 
the Financial Year (FY) 2025-26 of the Ministry throws light on the Ministry’s 

2 
 
primary goalof bridging the regional connectivity gap, particularly in underserved 
and remote areas, while boosting economic growth through aviation sector 
development. Through itsRegional Connectivity Scheme (RCS-UDAN), it seeks to 
enhance regional air connectivity by focusing on infrastructure development, 
operational efficiency, and improved accessibility, particularly in underserved 
regions. The following key goals and objectives can be inferred: 
i. Expansion of Airport Infrastructure – The Ministry aims to upgrade and revive 
airport infrastructure in collaboration with the Airports Authority of India 
(AAI) and State Governments to support regional connectivity. This includes 
the development of new airports, heliports, and water aerodromes to improve 
accessibility. 
ii. Enhancing Regional Air Connectivity – A major objective is to operationalise 
new Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) routes and increase the number of 
flights under the scheme, thereby making air travel more accessible to the 
general public. 
iii. Improved Air Connectivity in the North Eastern Region (NER) – Recognising 
the strategic and economic significance of the North Eastern region, the 
Ministry seeks to operationalise additional airports, heliports, and water 
aerodromes, and introduce new RCS routes and flights in the region. 
iv. Increase in Passenger Traffic and Flight Operations – A clear objective is to 
facilitate higher passenger movement on RCS flights, targeting 20 lakh 
passengers and 40,000 RCS flights in FY 2025-26.  
v. Development of Specific Air Infrastructure Projects – The Ministry has outlined 
targeted infrastructure projects, such as: 
 Heliports: Tuting, Daparizo, Nagaon, and Bageshwar. 
 Water Aerodromes: Long Island, Shaheed Dweep, Swaraj Dweep, and 
Prakasam Barrage. 
 Airports: Fursatganj (Uttar Pradesh), Rangeilunda (Odisha), 
Rairangpur (Odisha), Shivpuri (Madhya Pradesh), and Ratnagiri. 

3 
 
 
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
4. The Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has the following organizations 
under its administrative control: 
i. Attached Offices/ Organizations: 
a. Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
b. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
c. Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
d. Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
 
ii. Autonomous Bodies: 
a. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 
b. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
c. Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) 
 
iii. Public Sector Undertakings: 
a. Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
b. Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) - Disinvestment is underway 
c. Air India Assets Holding Limited (AIAHL) and its subsidiaries. 
 
BUDGET ANALYSIS AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2025-26)  
5. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture considered Demand No. 8 containing the details of budget 
allocations of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, for the financial year 2025-26, in its 
meeting held on the 28th February, 2025. During the meeting, the Committee heard 
the views of the Secretary and other senior officers of the Ministry of Civil 

4 
 
Aviation, as well as the heads of the organizations under its purview, on budgetary 
and other aspects. 
 
6. The Committee was apprised of the following details of the provisions made 
in the budget of the Ministry of Civil Aviation during 2023-24 (BE/RE/Actuals), 
2024-25(BE/RE) and provisions approved for 2025-26 in respect of all constituent 
units of Ministry of Civil Aviation are summarized as under:- 
 
                                                                                                      (Rs. in crore) 
 
Capital Revenue Total 
Budget Estimates 2023-24 (BE) 86.66 3026.70 3113.36 
Revised Estimates 2023-24 (RE) 771.77 2150.35 2922.12 
Actuals 2023-24 755.18 2002.22 2757.4 
Budget Estimates 2024-25 (BE) 99.35 2257.79 2357.14 
Revised Estimates 2024-25 (RE) 101.74 2556.94 2658.68 
Budget Estimates 2025-26 (BE) 70.00 2330.31 2400.31 
 
7. The Capital Outlay in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2025-26 is 
Rs. 4263.83 crore with a budgetary support component of Rs.70.00 crore and 
I&EBR of Rs. 4193.83 crore.  The budgetary support component as reflected in the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry is as under:- 
 
Capital Outlay –BE 2025-26   
                                                                                                                         (Rs. in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of Organization Budgetary Support 
1. Directorate General of Civil Aviation 30.00 
2. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 15.00 
3. Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 20.00 

4. Ministry (Main)  Total   Figure- Capital Outlay distribution amongst the major Branches of the Ministry. 
Figure- Chart depicting the capital outlay8. The Committee observes that the Capital Outlay for BE 2025distinct imbalance in the allocation of funds across key aviation bodies. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), entrusted with reoversight, commands the largest share of budget. While its role in ensuring compliance with aviation standards is indisputable, the justification for such a significant allocation must be carefully examined to ensure efficiency and accountability. The discrepancy in funding raises important questions about the prioritization of regulatory compliance over security infrastructure and accident investigation capabilities. 
Capital Outlay distribution amongst the major Branches of the Ministry. 
Chart depicting the capital outlay The Committee observes that the Capital Outlay for BE 2025distinct imbalance in the allocation of funds across key aviation bodies. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), entrusted with reoversight, commands the largest share of ₹30 crore—nearly half of the total budget. While its role in ensuring compliance with aviation standards is indisputable, the justification for such a significant allocation must be sure efficiency and accountability. The discrepancy in funding raises important questions about the prioritization of regulatory compliance over security infrastructure and accident investigation 
5.00 70.00 
 The Committee observes that the Capital Outlay for BE 2025-26 has a distinct imbalance in the allocation of funds across key aviation bodies. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), entrusted with regulatory nearly half of the total budget. While its role in ensuring compliance with aviation standards is indisputable, the justification for such a significant allocation must be sure efficiency and accountability. The discrepancy in funding raises important questions about the prioritization of regulatory compliance over security infrastructure and accident investigation 


6 
 
9. In contrast, the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) and the 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) receive ₹15 crore and ₹20 
crore, respectively. While regulatory compliance remains essential, the rapid 
expansion of aviation infrastructure - with airports increasing from 74 in 2014 
to 147 in 2022 and a target of 220 by 2024-255 - necessitates proportional 
growth in security capabilities and accident investigation resources. In view of 
the growing complexity of aviation security threats and the critical nature of 
accident investigations, the Committee finds these allocations relatively 
modest. The UDAN scheme, which has enabled 1.5 crore passengers to access 
air travel and is planned to connect 120 new destinations in the coming 
decade, has seen its allocation reduced by 32 percent to Rs 540 crore in the 
current budget. This reduction, coupled with the announcement to expand the 
scheme significantly, creates potential resource constraints that could affect 
implementation.The government has committed to expanding the UDAN 
scheme to 120 new destinations with a target of carrying 4 crore passengers in 
the next decade. This ambitious goal, coupled with the establishment of new 
airports and helipads in hilly, aspirational, and North Eastern regions, will 
require enhanced security protocols and accident response mechanisms that 
appear underfunded in the current allocation structure. In its view, it is 
imperative to assess whether these funds are adequate to strengthen security 
infrastructure and enhance investigative capabilities. As aviation expands to 
tier II and III cities under the modified UDAN scheme, security infrastructure 
and capabilities must be extended proportionally. 
10. The Committee recommends the adoption of performance-based 
budgeting for aviation regulatory bodies, linking allocations to specific 
performance indicators and outcomes. This approach would enhance 
accountability and ensure that funds are utilized efficiently to address the 
most pressing challenges within each domain. Regular performance audits 

7 
 
should be conducted to assess the effectiveness of allocated resources and 
inform future budgeting decisions. 
11. On the Revenue side, approved outlay of Ministry of Civil Aviation for 
2025-26 is Rs.2330.31 crore which is earmarked for establishment related 
expenditure of various organizations under the Ministry as well as Regional 
Connectivity Scheme (Rs.540.00 crore), Tax matters of Air India Limited (Rs. 
80.00 crore) and Servicing of interest/loan debt transferred from Air India Ltd. to 
Air India Asset Holding Ltd. (SPV) (Rs.945.51 crore).  Necessary details in this 
regard are as under:- 
 
Revenue Outlay -BE 2025-26                                                    (Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  Organisation BE 2025-
26 
1. 
 
(i) Ministry of Civil Aviation – Secretariat. 
(ii) Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(iii) Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
(iv) Commission of Railway Safety 
65.00 
300.00 
80.00 
22.00 
2. Air India Asset Holding Ltd.(SPV) 945.51 
3. Tax matters of Air India Limited 80.00 
4. Medical Benefits to Retired Employees of erstwhile Air 
India 
125.00 
5. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India  20.00 
6. IGRUA  
National Aviation University  
0.02 
10.00 
7. Customs Cost Recovery Charges 142.75 
8. Airports Authority of India (International Arbitration) 0.01 

9. Regional Connectivity Scheme (including RCSRs.240.00crore) 10. Skill Development 11. Skill Development for Promotion/Development of Aero Sports 
 
Total – Revenue  Figure-Diagrammatic representation of the revenue side allocation. AIR INDIA-RELATED EXPENDITURE12. The Committee notes that a disproportionately large share of the budget, amounting to ₹945.51 croreHolding Ltd. (SPV), in addition to another crore for medical benefits for retired employees of erstwhile Air India. While the Committee recognises the necessity of addressing leexpresses deep concern over the continued fiscal burden placed on public funds. The Committee therefore recommends, Ministry to establish a fiveyear phased reduction plan for financial obligations to AIAHL, with clear annual targets for decreased funding. This plan should include monetization 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (including RCS-NER Skill Development for Promotion/Development of Aero 
Diagrammatic representation of the revenue side allocation. RELATED EXPENDITURE The Committee notes that a disproportionately large share of the ₹945.51 crore, has been allocated to the Air India Asset Holding Ltd. (SPV), in addition to another ₹80 crore for tax matters and ₹125 crore for medical benefits for retired employees of erstwhile Air India. While the Committee recognises the necessity of addressing legacy liabilities, it expresses deep concern over the continued fiscal burden placed on public funds. The Committee therefore recommends, Ministry to establish a fiveyear phased reduction plan for financial obligations to AIAHL, with clear or decreased funding. This plan should include monetization 
NER 540.00 0.01 0.01 2330.31  The Committee notes that a disproportionately large share of the , has been allocated to the Air India Asset ₹80 crore for tax matters and ₹125 crore for medical benefits for retired employees of erstwhile Air India. While gacy liabilities, it expresses deep concern over the continued fiscal burden placed on public funds. The Committee therefore recommends, Ministry to establish a five-year phased reduction plan for financial obligations to AIAHL, with clear or decreased funding. This plan should include monetization 


9 
 
of remaining non-core assets held by AIAHL including stakes in Hotel 
Corporation of India, artwork, and real estate properties to offset ongoing 
liabilities. Secondly, Implement a cost-sharing mechanism for medical benefits 
to retired Air India employees, exploring options such as a one-time 
settlement or transition to a contributory healthcare scheme that gradually 
reduces government financial exposure while ensuring continued care for 
beneficiaries. Thirdly, create a dedicated oversight committee to monitor and 
regularly report on the utilization of funds allocated to AIAHL, ensuring 
transparency in expenditure and accelerating the resolution of outstanding 
liabilities to minimize long-term financial impact on the aviation budget. 
AIR FARE REGULATION - THE NEED OF THE HOUR 
12.1 The Committee, while examining the Demand for Grants of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2025-26, recommends the establishment of a 
stringent airfare pricing regulation mechanism under the framework of an 
AI-powered predictive monitoring system, tentatively named “AirPrice 
Guardian.” This system should aim to address consumer grievances related to 
unpredictable and exorbitant airfare surges, particularly during peak travel 
periods and emergencies, while ensuring transparency and fairness in pricing 
practices. The Committee notes that the current regulatory framework under 
the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) lacks the capacity to 
proactively monitor and regulate airfare trends, necessitating a 
transformative approach leveraging advanced technology. 
12.2 The proposed “AirPrice Guardian” system will utilize machine learning 
algorithms and predictive analytics to forecast airfare trends based on 
historical data, demand patterns, fuel costs, seasonal fluctuations, and 
external factors such as festivals or emergencies. By establishing dynamic fare 
bands for each route, updated quarterly through predictive models, this 
system will empower regulators to monitor deviations in real-time and take 

10 
 
preemptive action against excessive pricing. The Committee recommends that 
DGCA be empowered with quasi-judicial authority to impose temporary price 
caps or penalties on airlines engaging in exploitative practices. Additionally, a 
Pricing Transparency Index should be developed to rate airlines on their 
adherence to fair pricing norms, with this information made publicly 
available through a consumer-facing portal. 
12.3 The Committee further recommends that the existing Tariff Monitoring 
Unit (TMU) within DGCA be revamped with AI-driven tools for real-time 
data analysis and anomaly detection.  
12.4 In alignment with the Ministry’s focus on regional connectivity under the 
RCS-UDAN scheme, the Committee underscores that airfare monitoring must 
extend to underserved routes to prevent excessive fares that undermine 
accessibility. A portion of the funds should be allocated for RCS and that 
should be utilized to integrate fare monitoring mechanisms into regional 
connectivity projects. This will ensure that affordable air travel remains a 
cornerstone of India’s aviation growth strategy. 
12.5 The Committee also highlights the need for public awareness campaigns 
to educate consumers about their rights under this new regulatory 
framework. The Committee recommends the development of a mobile 
application, “Airfare Vigil,” modeled on the Election Commission’s cVIGIL 
app, to empower citizens to report instances of arbitrary airfare pricing. This 
app will allow users to upload evidence such as screenshots of ticket prices 
and contextual details, with features like real-time geo-tagging, automated 
complaint tracking, and time-bound resolution mechanisms. Upon 
submission, users will receive a unique ID to track their complaint status, 
ensuring transparency and accountability. The app will also include 
safeguards against misuse, such as filtering duplicate or frivolous complaints, 
while allowing anonymous submissions to encourage wider participation. 

11 
 
12.6  “Airfare Vigil” will be integrated with the AI-powered “AirPrice 
Guardian” system, enabling citizen reports to complement predictive 
analytics in identifying exploitative pricing patterns. This initiative will foster 
participatory governance by involving citizens in airfare regulation while 
strengthening DGCA’s ability to address consumer grievances swiftly and 
effectively. 
12.7. Given the Ministry’s overall revenue expenditure allocation of ₹2,330.31 
crore and capital outlay of ₹70 crore for 2025-26, the Committee recommends 
reallocating from underutilized allocations (such as Air India liabilities) 
toward developing and implementing this airfare monitoring system. The 
timeline for implementation should span 18-24 months, with Phase I focusing 
on high-traffic routes within six months and nationwide rollout completed by 
2026. 
12.8 The Committee believes that implementing “Air Price Guardian” & 
“Airfare Vigil” will address long-standing consumer grievances regarding 
airfare volatility while fostering transparency and accountability in India’s 
aviation sector. By aligning this initiative with broader policy goals such as 
regional connectivity and sustainable aviation growth, it will not only protect 
consumer interests but also strengthen India’s position as a global leader in 
aviation innovation and regulation. 
REGULATORY OVERSIGHT AND SECURITY 
13. The Committee observes and appreciates the fact that the Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (₹300 crore) and the Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security (₹80 crore) have been accorded significant funding. However, the 
Commission of Railway Safety (₹22 crore) has received markedly lower 
funding, despite its critical role in ensuring passenger and freight safety in 
railway operations. The Committee advises a reassessment of this allocation, 
with a view to strengthening railway safety mechanisms. Simultaneously, it 

12 
 
urges regular performance evaluations of DGCA and BCAS funding to ensure 
that these resources translate into tangible improvements in aviation safety, 
regulatory efficiency, and security preparedness. The Committee also 
recommends that Ministry should establish an integrated safety oversight 
mechanism that promotes collaboration between transport safety regulators 
including DGCA, BCAS, and the Commission of Railway Safety, utilizing 
shared resources where appropriate and developing common standards for 
multi-modal transport safety. Further, Committee recommends for 
development of a sustainable funding mechanism for aviation oversight 
functions at both national and regional levels, potentially including air safety 
charges, to ensure regulatory bodies can fulfill their mandates effectively 
without complete dependence on general budgetary allocations. 
 
IMPROVING AIRCRAFT INTERIOR - ENSURING STANDARDS 
13.1 The Committee has taken cognizant of reports concerning premature 
deterioration of seating materials, ergonomic failures, and technological 
obsolescence plaguing multiple airlines. This urgent disparity demands 
ministerial intervention through a standardized regulatory framework to 
ensure Indian aviation maintains competitive parity with global leaders. The 
Committee proposes establishing the Aviation Interior Quality Commission 
with immediate effect to implement rigorous testing protocols, sustainability 
guidelines, and accessibility standards across all domestic carriers. The 
situation is particularly concerning given the considerable fleet expansion 
underway. With Air India alone having ordered 570 new aircraft—including 
the recent addition of 100 more Airbus aircraft comprising 10 wide-body 
A350s and 90 narrow-body A320 family planes—the potential scale of interior 
quality issues demands immediate ministerial attention. Sustainability must 
become a central consideration in interior design and material selection. The 
Commission would establish progressive environmental standards for cabin 

13 
 
interiors, including recyclability requirements, VOC emissions limits, and 
lifecycle assessment obligations. These standards would align with India’s 
broader environmental commitments while positioning Indian aviation as a 
leader in sustainable cabin design. 
REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY SCHEME  AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
EXPANSION 
14. The allocation of ₹540 crore to the Regional Connectivity Scheme, with 
₹240 crore earmarked for the North-Eastern Region, demonstrates the 
government's commitment to regional connectivity. However, the Committee 
notes that historical data shows significant variation in route sustainability 
and regional imbalances in performance. To enhance the effectiveness of this 
allocation, the Committee recommends:  
14.1 Institution of a tiered funding approach that prioritizes routes with 
proven passenger load factors exceeding 70% while providing targeted 
support for underperforming routes with high development potential, 
particularly in the Eastern, Northeastern, and Central regions where recent 
data shows promising growth trajectories. 
14.2 Development of comprehensive performance metrics beyond passenger 
numbers, including economic impact assessments, connectivity improvements 
for underserved communities, and operational sustainability of routes beyond 
the initial subsidy period. These metrics should inform quarterly reviews of 
fund disbursement. 
14.3 Creation of a dedicated infrastructure development component within 
the Regional Connectivity Scheme, targeting airports serving tourist and 
pilgrimage destinations which have demonstrated higher passenger traffic 
growth following route establishment. This approach would maximize 
economic returns on investment while enhancing sector sustainability. 

14 
 
 
INVESTMENT IN AVIATION EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
15. The Committee expresses serious concern regarding the inadequate 
allocations for the National Aviation University (₹10 crore) and Indira 
Gandhi Institute of Aeronautics (₹0.02 crore), which appear insufficient to 
meet the growing demand for aviation professionals. With pilot training costs 
ranging from ₹40 lakh to ₹1.5 crore per candidate, and the sector's projected 
expansion, the Committee recommends: 
15.1 Substantial enhancement of budgetary support for aviation education 
institutions with a minimum five-fold increase in allocation to the National 
Aviation University and a significant revision of IGRUA's funding to enable 
infrastructure modernization and curriculum enhancement aligned with 
international standards. 
15.2 Establishment of a National Aviation Scholarship Fund designed to 
support deserving candidates from economically weaker backgrounds and 
underrepresented regions to pursue aviation careers, addressing both talent 
gaps and regional imbalances in the aviation workforce. 
15.3 Development of a public-private partnership model for aviation training 
infrastructure, wherein government investments in educational institutions 
are complemented by industry contributions, creating centers of excellence 
that combine academic rigor with practical training facilities meeting current 
industry requirements. 
 
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE MINISTRY’S PERFORMANCES 
OVER THE LAST THREE FYS 
 

15 
 
 
Capital Outlay Analysis 
 
 (Rs. in crore) 
  2023-24 Capital 2024-25 
Capital 
2025-
26  
Capital 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Organization 
Actuals Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actuals 
Upto 
31.01.25 
Reasons    for 
variations 
BE 
1. Directorate 
General of Civil 
Aviation 
117.01 22.64 22.64 15.14 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are 
provisional 
30.00 
2. Bureau of Civil 
Aviation 
Security  
24.29 15.00 8.00 4.42 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are 
provisional 
15.00 
3. Ministry 
(Secretariat + 
AAIB) 
13.88 4.31 13.70 1.78 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are 
provisional 
25.00 
4. Rohini Heliport 
Limited 
- 0.26 0.26 0.00 - - 
5. Hotel 
Corporation of 
India 
- 57.14 57.14 57.14 - - 

6. Equity Infusion in AIAHL for Financial Support to Alliance Air Aviation 600.00  Total  755.18  
Figure-  Capital Outlay Trends (2023 16. The Committee has reviewed the expenditure pattern over the last three FYs and notes that the actual expenditure up to January 2025 indicates significant underutilisation of funds, particularly for DGCA (spent out of ₹22.64 crore), BCAS (₹4.42 crore out of ₹8 crore), and the Ministry (Secretariat + AAIB), which spent only crore. While provisional savings have been cited as the reason, this pattern do raises concerns about inefficiencies in fund deployment and potential delays in 
    99.35 101.74 78.49   
Outlay Trends (2023-24 to 2025-26) The Committee has reviewed the expenditure pattern over the last three FYs and notes that the actual expenditure up to January 2025 indicates significant underutilisation of funds, particularly for DGCA (₹15.14 cror₹22.64 crore), BCAS (₹4.42 crore out of ₹8 crore), and the Ministry (Secretariat + AAIB), which spent only ₹1.78 crore out of ₹13.70 crore. While provisional savings have been cited as the reason, this pattern do ciencies in fund deployment and potential delays in 
 70.00 
 The Committee has reviewed the expenditure pattern over the last three FYs and notes that the actual expenditure up to January 2025 indicates ₹15.14 crore ₹22.64 crore), BCAS (₹4.42 crore out of ₹8 crore), and the ₹1.78 crore out of ₹13.70 crore. While provisional savings have been cited as the reason, this pattern do ciencies in fund deployment and potential delays in 


17 
 
planned projects. The Committee therefore urges the Ministry to exercise 
greater fiscal accountability and timely fund utilisation to ensure that 
allocated resources are effectively employed within the financial year. It may 
establish robust fund absorption mechanisms and quarterly review systems to 
track project progress and financial performance so that risk of unspent 
allocations may be minimised. 
17. The Committee notes that Rohini Heliport Limited, which received a 
nominal allocation of ₹0.26 crore in 2024-25, does not feature in the 2025-26 
budget. Similarly, several aviation infrastructure projects lack consistent 
funding streams which do raise concerns about disruptions in long-term 
development projects. Such inconsistencies may hinder aviation 
infrastructure expansion and regional connectivity, and private sector 
confidence in Government-led aviation projects. The Committee therefore 
urges the Ministry to chart a dedicated and sustained funding approach for 
aviation infrastructure projects which can ensure that capital outlays are not 
arbitrarily introduced and withdrawn.  
18. The Committee also observes a sharp reduction in total capital outlay 
from ₹755.18 crore in 2023-24 to ₹70 crore in 2025-26. While fiscal prudence 
is necessary, the Committee feels such a steep decline may impact the aviation 
sector’s capacity for growth, modernisation, and global competitiveness. The 
Committee is also concerned that allocations are increasingly concentrated in 
select areas, while other critical aviation functions receive marginal funding. 
The Committee strongly recommends a re-evaluation of capital budget 
reductions and adoption of a nuanced/balanced distribution of capital outlay 
across core aviation functions so that necessary investments in aviation safety, 
regulatory strengthening, and infrastructure development are not 
compromised. 
 

18 
 
Revenue Outlay Analysis 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
  
2023-24 
Revenue 
 
2024-25 Revenue 2025-26 
Revenue 
S. 
No 
Name of 
Organization 
Actuals Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actuals 
Upto 
31.01.25 
Reasons for 
variations 
BE 
1. Ministry 
(Main+AAIB) 
46.99 53.50 63.85 43.37 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
65.00 
2. Directorate 
General of 
Civil Aviation 
234.27 280.00 278.00 205.59 
 
Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
300.00 
3. Bureau of 
Civil Aviation 
Security  
64.93 74.00 79.00 68.09 Increased 
budget in RE 
will be made 
available in 
March 2023 
after 
Supplementary 
Grant is 
passed by 
Parliament. 
80.00 
4. Commission 
of Railway 
Safety  
18.28 20.00 22.00 17.85 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
22.00 

19 
 
5. Air India 
Assets 
holding 
Ltd.(SPV) 
650.00 1158.79 967.67 266.00 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
945.51 
6. Medical 
Treatment 
forretired 
employees of 
erstwhile Air 
India  
51.00 85.00 85.00 60.00 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
125.00 
7 Tax matters 
of erstwhile 
Air India 
---- 0.00 50.00 0.00 Budget 
provided in 
RE will be 
made available 
in March 2025 
after 
Supplementary 
Grant is 
passed by 
Parliament. 
80.00 
8. Grants-in-aid 
to AERA 
29.88 17.45 22.20 17.45 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
20.00 
9. Custom Cost  
Recovery 
Charges to 
AAI and 
AAICLAS  
--- 0.00 124.17 0.00 Budget 
provided in 
RE, will be 
used by  
March 2025 
142.75 
10 Regional 
Connectivity 
Scheme 
822.22 502.00 800.00 210.44 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
540.00 

20 
 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
11. National 
Aviation 
University 
7.00 10.00 8.00 4.17 Since the 
actuals are up 
to January, 
2025 savings 
are provisional 
10.00 
12. IGRUA 2.00 0.02 0.02 0.00 Only a token 
provision, 
hence no 
expenditure 
0.02 
13. International 
Arbitration 
- 0.00 0.01 0.00 Only a token 
provision, 
hence no 
expenditure 
0.01 
14. GIA to 
institutions in  
in Civil 
Aviation 
Sector in 
India for Skill 
Development  
0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 Only a token 
provision, 
hence no 
expenditure 
0.01 
15. GIA to 
institutions in  
in Civil 
Aviation 
Sector in 
India for for 
promotion of 
Aero Sports 
0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 Only a token 
provision, 
hence no 
expenditure 
0.01 
16. Krishi Udaan  
in NER 
0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 Only a token 
provision, 
hence no 
expenditure 
-- 

17. PLI for Drones and Drone Components 31.22 57.0018. Air India Engineering Services (AIESL) 0.00 -19. Airports Authority of India 44.43 -
 
Total = 2002.22 2257.79 
Figure- Comparative revenue outlay over past three FYs19. The Committee notes a recurring pattern of underutilization of funds across multiple allocations. For instance, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) had an actual expenditure of 2025 out of a revised allocation of Connectivity Scheme (RCS) spent only 
57.00 57.00 2.43 Since the actuals are up to January, 2025 savings are provisional- - - - - - - - 2257.79 2556.94 895.45 
 
Comparative revenue outlay over past three FYs The Committee notes a recurring pattern of underutilization of funds across multiple allocations. For instance, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) had an actual expenditure of ₹205.59 crore up to January 2025 out of a revised allocation of ₹278 crore. Similarly, the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) spent only ₹210.44 crore out of the ₹800 crore 
Since the actuals are up to January, 2025 savings are provisional -- - - 2330.31  The Committee notes a recurring pattern of underutilization of funds across multiple allocations. For instance, the Directorate General of Civil ₹205.59 crore up to January 78 crore. Similarly, the Regional ₹210.44 crore out of the ₹800 crore 


22 
 
allocated in 2024-25. The Committee recommends implementing a dynamic 
fund allocation system with milestone-based disbursement mechanisms tied to 
project completion stages rather than time periods. This system should 
incorporate real-time digital dashboards accessible to all stakeholders for 
monitoring expenditure against key performance indicators, allowing for mid-
cycle reallocation of funds from underperforming areas to high-priority 
projects. Furthermore, the Committee suggests introducing a 'fast-track 
approval system' for critical aviation projects with streamlined decision-
making protocols that reduce procedural delays while maintaining financial 
oversight. The Ministry should also develop a specialized capacity-building 
program for financial officers within aviation bodies to enhance expenditure 
planning expertise and implement advanced forecasting methodologies that 
more accurately project utilization requirements. 
20. The Committee also notes with concern that the allocation for the 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) has fluctuated significantly, dropping 
from ₹822.22 crore in 2023-24 to ₹502 crore in 2024-25 (BE) before being 
revised to ₹800 crore and subsequently reduced again to ₹540 crore for 2025-
26. This inconsistency raises concerns about the sustained commitment to 
improving air connectivity in underserved regions, particularly in the North-
Eastern Region. The Committee recommends establishing a 'Regional 
Aviation Stability Fund' with a guaranteed minimum corpus over a five-year 
period, insulated from annual budgetary fluctuations through legislative 
safeguards. Within this framework, the Committee suggests implementing a 
tiered subsidy structure that progressively reduces support based on route 
maturity metrics, thereby encouraging operational sustainability while 
maintaining essential connectivity. Additionally, the Ministry should develop 
a comprehensive 'Last-Mile Air Connectivity Index' for evaluating and 
prioritizing route development decisions based on quantifiable social, 
economic, and strategic parameters. The Committee further recommends 

23 
 
initiating pilot projects for small-scale, modular airport infrastructure 
development models specifically designed for low-traffic but strategically 
important destinations, with standardized designs that reduce construction 
timeframes and operational costs. 
21. The Committee notes that the funding allocations for skill development 
and higher education in aviation remain critically low. The National Aviation 
University received only ₹10 crore in 2025-26, while the Indira Gandhi 
Institute of Aeronautics (IGRUA) was allocated a mere ₹0.02 crore. The 
Committee recommends establishing an 'Aviation Excellence Fund', 
developed through a public-private partnership model where government 
contributions are matched by industry stakeholders. This fund should finance 
comprehensive curriculum modernization, faculty development programs, 
and infrastructure upgradation at aviation institutions. Furthermore, the 
Committee recommends developing specialized 'Centers of Aviation 
Technology' at existing educational institutions, each focusing on emerging 
areas such as sustainable aviation fuels, unmanned aerial systems, and next-
generation air traffic management. These centers should feature mixed-reality 
simulation environments that reduce training costs while enhancing learning 
outcomes. Additionally, the Ministry should implement an 'Aviation 
Scholarship Program' targeting students from underrepresented regions and 
economically disadvantaged backgrounds, with guaranteed industry 
placements upon graduation to address critical skill shortages in the sector. 
22. The Committee notes that the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for Drones and Drone Components received ₹57 crore in 2024-25, yet 
the actual expenditure up to January 2025 was only ₹2.43 crore. The 
Committee recommends restructuring the PLI disbursement mechanism to 
incorporate an accelerated reimbursement pathway for qualifying 
manufacturers, with monthly rather than annual claim processing to address 
working capital constraints of smaller enterprises. The implementation should 

24 
 
include a two-track approach: a 'Standard Track' for established 
manufacturers and an 'Innovation Track' with simplified compliance 
requirements for startups and MSMEs developing cutting-edge drone 
technologies. Furthermore, the Committee suggests creating specialized 
'Drone Application Zones' in each state where regulatory exemptions and 
infrastructure support are provided for real-world testing and demonstration 
of drone applications across sectors such as agriculture, healthcare, and 
disaster management. Additionally, the Ministry should develop a 'Drone 
Manufacturing Capability Index' to identify and address specific bottlenecks 
in the indigenous production ecosystem, with targeted interventions to 
develop domestic capacity for critical components currently being imported, 
including advanced sensors, precision navigation systems, and specialized 
battery technologies. 
 
REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY SCHEME (UDE DESH KA AAM 
NAAGRIK) 
23. To a query of the Committee, the Ministry submitted a written reply on the 
allocation of schemes under UDAN. The Ministry inform the Committee that in 
the Financial Year 2017-18, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
approved the revival and development of 50 unserved and underserved airstrips 
belonging to State Governments, the Airports Authority of India (AAI), Civil 
Enclaves, and Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs), with a total financial 
outlay of ₹4,500 crore. Additionally, the CCEA sanctioned the revival and 
development of further aerodromes, to be identified through subsequent Regional 
Connectivity Scheme (RCS) bidding processes, within the same financial 
allocation. In 2023, the CCEA approved a second phase of the aerodrome revival 
and development initiative, allocating ₹1,000 crore for the revival and 
development of 50 additional aerodromes. As of 31 December 2024, a total 

25 
 
expenditure of ₹4,309.34 crore has been incurred towards the development of 
aerodromes under both Phase 1 and Phase 2, resulting in the successful 
development and operationalisation of 88 aerodromes to date. The year-wise 
expenditure under the ‘Revival / Development of Airports’ Scheme is as under:- 
S.No. Year Budget (Rs. In Crore) 
1. 2017-18 200.10 
2. 2018-19 316.99 
3. 2019-20 420.13 
4. 2020-21 630.00 
5. 2021-22 900.00 
6.     2022-23 900.00 
7.      2023-24 618 
8.      2024-25 598 
 
 The above expenditure scheme is visualized as below- 
 
 
Figure- Expenditure pattern under the Revival/Development of Airports Scheme of UDAN. 


 24. During its presentation on the demands for grants, the Ministry further tendered that the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS), also known as U(Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik), was launched on 21st October 2016 with the objective of enhancing air connectivity to underserved and unserved regions across the country. Since its inception, the scheme has undergone five rounds of bidding. As of 31st January 2025, a total of 619 routes have been operationalised, including 90 routes from the North-Eastern region. The scheme has successfully connected 88 RCS airports, of which 12 are located in the Northintegration of 13 heliports and 2 wareflected in the movement of over 149 lakh passengers, who have availed RCS flights, alongside the operation of more than 2,96,000 flights under the UDAN scheme. Currently, the 5.5 round of bidding is underway, and seaplane operations with the aim of further expanding the scope of regional air connectivity and ensuring greater accessibility to geographically challenging terrains. The progression of the RCS is depicted in the following diagr
Figure-  Route operationalisation and passengers load under RCS 
During its presentation on the demands for grants, the Ministry further tendered that the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS), also known as U(Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik), was launched on 21st October 2016 with the objective of enhancing air connectivity to underserved and unserved regions across the country. Since its inception, the scheme has undergone five rounds of bidding. y 2025, a total of 619 routes have been operationalised, including Eastern region. The scheme has successfully connected 88 RCS airports, of which 12 are located in the North-East, alongside the integration of 13 heliports and 2 water aerodromes. The success of the scheme is reflected in the movement of over 149 lakh passengers, who have availed RCS flights, alongside the operation of more than 2,96,000 flights under the UDAN scheme. Currently, the 5.5 round of bidding is underway, focusing on helicopter and seaplane operations with the aim of further expanding the scope of regional air connectivity and ensuring greater accessibility to geographically challenging terrains. The progression of the RCS is depicted in the following diagram
Route operationalisation and passengers load under RCS 
During its presentation on the demands for grants, the Ministry further tendered that the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS), also known as UDAN (Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik), was launched on 21st October 2016 with the objective of enhancing air connectivity to underserved and unserved regions across the country. Since its inception, the scheme has undergone five rounds of bidding. y 2025, a total of 619 routes have been operationalised, including Eastern region. The scheme has successfully connected East, alongside the ter aerodromes. The success of the scheme is reflected in the movement of over 149 lakh passengers, who have availed RCS flights, alongside the operation of more than 2,96,000 flights under the UDAN focusing on helicopter and seaplane operations with the aim of further expanding the scope of regional air connectivity and ensuring greater accessibility to geographically challenging am-   


27 
 
25. It was further submitted that the modified version of the RCS Scheme is 
proposed to be extended for 10 years from the commencement of the first flight, to 
further enhance regional air connectivity, particularly for underserved and 
unserved airports, including hilly, aspirational, and North Eastern Regions. 
Further, Government is aiming to increase regional connectivity to 120 new 
destinations in the next 10 years. However, the approval process for the modified 
UDAN scheme is still in progress. The budget allocated for FY 2025-26 is for the 
Phase-II of the 'Revival / Development of Airports Scheme' only. The budget 
component for the modified UDAN scheme is presently at EFC stage. The RCS 
scheme seeks to bring air connectivity to tier-2 and tier-3 cities by taking up 
existing airstrips identified through UDAN bidding rounds for development and 
upgradation under the 'Revival of unserved and underserved airports' scheme. 
 
26. The Committee examines the response of the Ministry on the status of 
the working and implementation of the Regional Connectivity Scheme-Ude 
Desh ka Aam Naagrik. The Committee observes that the Ministry has 
reported a total expenditure of ₹4,309.34 crore towards the development of 
aerodromes under both Phase 1 and Phase 2, with 88 aerodromes developed 
and operationalised to date. While acknowledging the progress made, the 
Committee recommends implementing a multi-dimensional Return on 
Investment (ROI) assessment framework that measures outcomes beyond 
mere infrastructure development. The Ministry should establish a 
comprehensive digital monitoring system capturing granular data on 
economic multipliers, including tourism revenue increases, local employment 
generation, and supply chain expansion attributable to each aerodrome. The 
Committee further recommends instituting a tiered funding mechanism that 
recalibrates financial allocations based on a "connectivity impact score" 
derived from passenger volumes, operational consistency, and regional 
economic indicators. Additionally, the Ministry should develop a specialized 
Asset Utilization Optimization Model that identifies operational inefficiencies 

28 
 
at underperforming aerodromes and implements corrective measures, 
potentially including alternative aviation uses for facilities with persistently 
low passenger traffic. 
27. The Committee appreciates that 619 routes have been operationalised, 
including 90 routes in the North-Eastern region, and that 88 RCS airports are 
now connected, with 12 of these located in the North-East. To address regional 
imbalances, the Committee recommends developing a Geographic 
Information System (GIS)-based "Connectivity Gap Index" that quantifies 
accessibility deficits using multiple parameters including travel time to 
nearest operational airport, population density, economic activity centers, and 
existing transportation alternatives. This index should prioritize future route 
development with mandatory allocation of at least 30% of new routes to 
regions scoring above a defined threshold. The Committee further 
recommends implementing a "Hub-and-Spoke+" model specifically tailored 
for remote regions, wherein strategically located airports serve as regional 
hubs connected to smaller airfields through fixed-wing aircraft, while final 
connectivity to truly remote locations is provided through helicopter services. 
The Ministry should also introduce "Seasonal Route Flexibility" provisions 
allowing operators to temporarily redirect capacity to meet seasonal demands 
(such as festival periods, harvest seasons, or tourism peaks) while maintaining 
essential connectivity year-round. 
28. The Committee notes with appreciation that 149 lakh passengers have 
availed RCS flights, alongside the operation of 2,96,000 flights under the 
scheme. To enhance long-term financial sustainability, the Committee 
recommends implementing a graduated "Viability Transition Program" 
wherein routes beginning with full VGF support would transition through 
defined sustainability milestones—including load factor thresholds, 
operational reliability metrics, and ancillary revenue generation—with 
proportional reduction in subsidies linked to each milestone achievement. The 

29 
 
Ministry should develop specialized "Multi-Use Aerodrome" guidelines 
enabling operators to generate supplementary revenue through co-located 
facilities such as cargo operations, aircraft maintenance services, aviation 
training centers, and non-aeronautical commercial activities appropriate to 
local market conditions. Additionally, the Committee recommends 
establishing an "Aviation Enterprise Zone" framework offering tax incentives 
and streamlined regulatory processes for businesses establishing operations 
within defined proximity to RCS airports, creating economic ecosystems that 
generate passenger traffic organically rather than through fare subsidies. 
29. The Committee acknowledges the proposed extension of the modified 
RCS Scheme for 10 years with targets to connect 120 new destinations, 
particularly in hilly, aspirational, and North-Eastern regions. To address 
approval delays, the Committee recommends establishing a specialized 
"UDAN Fast-Track Clearance Cell" with dedicated representatives from all 
relevant ministries empowered to process approvals concurrently rather than 
sequentially. This cell should operate with defined decision timeframes and 
escalation protocols for unresolved matters. The Committee further 
recommends implementing a modular approval approach whereby the overall 
scheme framework receives principal approval while allowing dynamic 
adjustments to specific components through a streamlined modification 
protocol, thereby preventing total scheme paralysis when adjustments are 
needed. Additionally, the Ministry should institute a "Provisional Operational 
Authorization" mechanism allowing airlines to commence operations on 
approved routes with interim financial arrangements pending final EFC 
approval, supported by appropriate financial guarantees to protect both 
operator and government interests. 
30. The Committee notes the ongoing 5.5 round of bidding for helicopter 
and seaplane routes and recognizes their potential for enhancing connectivity 
in challenging terrain. To accelerate development in this sector, the 

30 
 
Committee recommends implementing a specialized "Waterway Aerodrome 
Development Program" that identifies and categorizes potential water landing 
sites based on multiple factors including water body stability, surrounding 
infrastructure, tourism potential, and connectivity needs. This program 
should include standardized floating infrastructure designs that can be 
rapidly deployed with minimal environmental impact. For helicopter 
operations, the Committee recommends developing modular, prefabricated 
heliport infrastructure kits specifically designed for rapid deployment in 
remote and challenging terrains, complete with standardized navigation aids 
and essential ground support equipment. The Ministry should also establish a 
"Mixed-Mode Operations Framework" enabling seamless passenger 
transitions between conventional aircraft, helicopters, and seaplanes with 
harmonized scheduling, ticketing, and baggage handling protocols, creating 
truly integrated multi-modal connectivity networks rather than isolated 
transport solutions. 
31. To a pointed query on how the Ministry plans to ensure timely completion of 
projects under the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS), the Ministry tendered a 
written reply that the Project Evaluation Committee undertakes regular reviews to 
gauge progress on the development of all aerodromes to ensure that targets are 
being met. While most of the aerodromes identified under the Scheme were 
developed within expected timelines, the non-readiness of mentioned aerodromes 
was primarily due to unforeseeable challenges in obtaining environmental 
approvals, land unavailability, challenging terrain impacting the availability of 
qualified contractors/developers to undertake such specialized works, long 
processing time for approvals by the State Govt., delays incurred for getting 
permission for defence airports/helipads, etc. 
32. The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s assertion that the Project 
Evaluation Committee conducts regular reviews to monitor progress under 
the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS). However, it does note that delays 

persist due to regulatory approvals, land constraints, difficult terrain, prolonged State Governmentthe view of the Committee, the Ministry may explore the establishment of a dedicated task force to streamline approvals, enhance intercoordination, and ensure timeThe adoption of technology-time tracking dashboards and predictive risk assessment tools, is also advised to identify and mitigate potential delays at an early stage. DEVELOPMENT OF GREENFIELD AIAIRPORT CAPACITY 
                                                                                                    33. On a written query on how the Ministry plans to utilisefor the development of new greenfield airports in FY 2025of the Ministry already approving 15 greenfield airports, and the mechanism in place to ensure these projects adhere to their timelines and budgetary cwas submitted by the Ministry that Government has formulated a Greenfield 
persist due to regulatory approvals, land constraints, difficult terrain, prolonged State Government clearances, and defence-related permissions. In the view of the Committee, the Ministry may explore the establishment of a dedicated task force to streamline approvals, enhance intercoordination, and ensure time-bound clearance of regulatory requi-driven project monitoring systems, including realtime tracking dashboards and predictive risk assessment tools, is also advised to identify and mitigate potential delays at an early stage.  DEVELOPMENT OF GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AND EXPANSION IN 
                                                                                                    Source- MoCA, GoIOn a written query on how the Ministry plans to utilise the funds allocated for the development of new greenfield airports in FY 2025-26, particularly in light of the Ministry already approving 15 greenfield airports, and the mechanism in place to ensure these projects adhere to their timelines and budgetary cwas submitted by the Ministry that Government has formulated a Greenfield 
persist due to regulatory approvals, land constraints, difficult terrain, related permissions. In the view of the Committee, the Ministry may explore the establishment of a dedicated task force to streamline approvals, enhance inter-agency bound clearance of regulatory requirements. driven project monitoring systems, including real-time tracking dashboards and predictive risk assessment tools, is also advised RPORTS AND EXPANSION IN 
 MoCA, GoI the funds allocated 26, particularly in light of the Ministry already approving 15 greenfield airports, and the mechanism in place to ensure these projects adhere to their timelines and budgetary constraints, it was submitted by the Ministry that Government has formulated a Greenfield 


32 
 
Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008 for development of new Greenfield airports in the 
country. As per the Policy, the responsibility for implementation of the Greenfield 
airport projects including its funding lies with the concerned airport developer. The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation does not have separate budgetary allocation for 
development of Greenfield Airports. Already 'In-Principle' approval for setting up 
of 21 new Greenfield Airports across the country has been accorded. Out of which, 
12 Greenfield airports have been operationalised.At present, six Greenfield airport 
projects, namely Navi Mumbai, Noida (Jewar), Dholera, Vijayapura, Hassan and 
Bhogapuram are under various stages of development. The Ministry is also 
reviewing the ongoing Greenfield Airport Projects with stakeholders concerned to 
facilitate resolution of any issues/problems in project implementation and to ensure 
its timely completion. 
34. The Committee notes that while the Ministry has granted 'In-Principle' 
approval for 21 Greenfield airports with a total estimated cost exceeding Rs. 
45,000 crore, only 11 have been operationalized to date. The Committee 
recommends establishing a dedicated "Greenfield Airport Monitoring Portal" 
providing comprehensive project tracking with standardized milestone-based 
reporting requirements for all developers. This digital system should generate 
monthly progress alerts highlighting critical delays requiring ministerial 
intervention. The Committee further recommends creating a specialized land 
acquisition facilitation team within the Ministry to coordinate with state 
governments, offering technical assistance and standardized compensation 
frameworks to accelerate the historically problematic land acquisition 
process. Additionally, the Ministry should establish a "Strategic Airport 
Development Fund" specifically for greenfield airports in priority regions 
including the Northeast, island territories, and economically underdeveloped 
areas with high tourism potential. This fund should implement a matching-
grant model where Central government contributions increase proportionally 
in regions with limited fiscal capacity but strong connectivity needs. 

33 
 
35. The Committee appreciates the inclusion of smaller cities in expansion 
plans but notes with concern that the current allocation framework may not 
adequately address emerging air travel markets in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities. 
The Committee recommends implementing a "60-40 Development Ratio" 
wherein at least 40% of airport infrastructure investment is mandatorily 
directed toward non-metro airports serving cities with populations under 1 
million. To support this approach, the Ministry should develop a standardized 
"Regional Airport Viability Assessment Tool" incorporating five key 
parameters: current surface transport connectivity gaps, tourism potential, 
industrial development plans, population growth patterns, and estimated 
catchment area travel demand. This assessment should be conducted for all 
proposed airport locations with results published transparently to justify 
investment priorities. Furthermore, the Committee recommends creating 
"Airport Access Zones" extending 50km around each regional airport with 
coordinated development of connecting infrastructure including dedicated 
airport expressways, rail links, and regional bus networks through formalized 
agreements with respective ministries and state governments. These zones 
should include simplified land-use conversion processes specifically for 
transportation infrastructure development to reduce implementation delays. 
 
PRODUCTIVITY LINKED INCENTIVE (PLI) SCHEME FOR DRONES 
AND DRONE COMPONENTS 
 
36. The Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Drones and Drone 
Components, notified on 30th September 2021, aims to promote domestic drone 
manufacturing and innovation. With a total outlay of ₹120 crore over three years, 
the scheme offers one of the highest PLI rates at 20% of value addition, providing 
strong financial incentives for manufacturers. Unlike other PLI schemes, the value 
addition threshold is set at 40% instead of 50%, and eligibility norms for MSMEs 
and startups are relaxed, ensuring broader participation. The scheme also includes 

34 
 
developers of drone-related software and caps individual manufacturers’ incentives 
at 25% of the total annual outlay, thereby ensuring a wider distribution of benefits. 
Furthermore, if a manufacturer fails to meet the eligibility threshold in a given year, 
they are allowed to claim the lost incentive in the following year upon meeting the 
shortfall. The Ministry further informed that amounts disbursed under the scheme 
is : 
Financial Year (FY) Amount Disbursed 
(₹ Crore) 
FY23 29.43 
FY24 28.76 
FY25 (Till Date) 13.59 
 
37. The Committee acknowledges the Liberalised Drone Rules, 2021 and the 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Drones and Drone 
Components, introduced with a ₹120 crore outlay over three years to boost 
domestic drone manufacturing. While the PLI rate of 20% of value addition is 
among the highest across PLI schemes, the Committee observes that 
disbursements have been slower than expected (₹29.43 crore in FY23, ₹28.76 
crore in FY24, and ₹13.59 crore so far in FY25) which seems to be indicative 
of possible implementation delays, industry participation hurdles, or 
challenges in meeting eligibility norms. The relaxed value addition norm of 
40% and MSME-friendly criteria are commendable, but the cap of 25% per 
manufacturer may limit scaling opportunities for key industry players. The 
Committee therefore recommends a review of participation levels to identify 
impediments in fund utilisation, alongside stronger industry engagement to 
encourage wider adoption, particularly among MSMEs and startups. In the 
opinion of the Committee, given drones' strategic and commercial potential, 
the scheme may be considered for extension beyond three years, allowing 
sustained scaling and R&D investment.  
 

35 
 
STAFFING AND MANPOWER CAPACITY 
38. To a written query from the Committee on the status of sanctioned posts vis-
à-vis vacancies in the major organisations under the Ministry, the status of staffing 
and vacancies in DGCA, BCAS, and AAI was submitted by the Ministry as under:-  
Organisation Total 
  Sanctioned Strength In Position Vacancies 
DGCA 1633 754 879 
BCAS 598 390 208 
AAI 19269 16004 3265 
 
39. The Committee notes with serious concern the high number of 
vacancies across key aviation regulatory and operational bodies, particularly 
in the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), the Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security (BCAS), and the Airports Authority of India (AAI). The 
DGCA, responsible for aviation safety and regulatory oversight, has a 
vacancy rate exceeding 53 percent, raising fundamental concerns about its 
capacity to enforce aviation safety standards effectively. Similarly, BCAS, 
which is tasked with maintaining aviation security, has nearly 35 percent of its 
sanctioned posts unfilled, posing risks to the robustness of security oversight 
at airports. AAI, managing critical airport infrastructure and air traffic 
services, has over 3,200 vacancies, representing nearly 17 percent of its 
sanctioned strength, potentially impacting operational efficiency and airport 
expansion. The Committee is deeply concerned that chronic understaffing in 
these institutions could undermine safety, security, and service delivery 
standards, particularly as air traffic volumes continue to rise.The Committee 
urges the Ministry of Civil Aviation to expedite the recruitment process to fill 
vacancies across DGCA, BCAS, and AAI, ensuring that regulatory oversight, 
security enforcement, and airport operations are not compromised. Given the 
rapid expansion of air traffic and aviation infrastructure, the Ministry must 

36 
 
adopt a long-term workforce planning strategy to ensure staffing levels 
remain to meet operational demands. 
 
GRANTS-IN-AID TO INSTITUTION IN CIVIL AVIATION FOR 
PROMOTION/DEVELOPMENT OF AERO SPORTS 
40. The budget for aero sports and allied activities was initially planned for 
Rs. 1 crore in the year 2022-23 but no expenditure was made. The following 
year 2023-24 the budget was reduced to Rs. 0.10 crore. Subsequent for the 
year 2024-25 has been kept to Rs. 0.10 crore. The committee takes note of the 
fact that the Government of India has formed the National Aero Sports 
Guidelines (NASG) to develop a robust aero sports ecosystem, which has a 
global potential to partner in $30 billion industry across the world. The 
government has consciously taken a call to create a strong ecosystem for aero 
sports, which includes Ballooning, Aeromodelling, Amateur Built and 
Experimental Aircraft, Drones, Gliding, Microlights, Para Motors, 
Parachuting and Rotorcraft. The Aero Club of India has been designated as 
the National Airsports Control (NAC) by the government for promotion of 
aero sports across all the states. In order to implement the policy in letter and 
spirit, ACI requires a hand holding through a budgetary support to create an 
ecosystem for aero sports. The Committee recommends that budgetary 
allocation as per the requirement of the Aero Club of India may be enhanced 
as to support Flying Training Organizations and aero sports across the 
country. The committee also notes that the Aero Club of India has been one of 
the oldest autonomous organization of the Ministry of Civil Aviation working 
to support development for flying training and has successfully established an 
ecosystem of flying training for last 50 years. The Aero Club of India 
headquartered at the Safdarjung Airport area, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New 
Delhi and it was managed and run as an autonomous organization to conduct 
aero sports and flying training by assets created by the budgetary funding of 

37 
 
the Government which intern created an ecosystem for pilots training in 
India. The Aero Club of India was dispossessed of its office building some 
years ago, which requires restorations as the office building constructed 
through its own resources which now has been turned into a Directorate of 
Licensing for Air Traffic Services (ATS) under Airports Authority of India 
(AAI). The Committee recommends that the Ministry prioritize spending on 
aero sports and allocate budgetary support, including restoring the 
administrative infrastructure of the Aero Club of India (ACI), to facilitate the 
fulfillment of the National Aero Sports Guidelines (NASG) issued by the 
Government. The Committee further recommends enhancing budgetary 
support for the ACI will strengthen India’s aero sports sector and Flight 
Training Organizations (FTOs), ensuring the sustainable growth of the sector. 
FLYING TRAINING ORGANISATIONS 
41. The Committee notes that with the growth of the aviation sector, the 
airlines in India would require over 30,000 pilots in the next decade or so. 
Presently, in the country there is an acute shortage of Flying Training 
Organizations, with the limited infrastructure and resources. The Committee 
is of the opinion that the ecosystem for Flying Training Organizations is 
inadequate to meet the growing requirements which results in large numbers 
of Pilots going abroad for training. The requirement of commercial pilots in 
the country is roughly a thousand every year. However, with the existing 
FTOs, the country can barely produce 300 Commercial Pilots and another 
300 pilots train abroad, leaving a large gap of the requirement for commercial 
pilots. The training of pilots who go abroad, result in large foreign exchange 
drain. The present ecosystem of flying training has several shortcomings 
including long duration of training, high cost with constraints of shortage of 
trainer aircrafts, trainers / instructors, institutional funding, aircraft 
manufacturing, spares and training infrastructures. The Committee notes 
that there is an urgent need to proliferate flying training across the country to 

38 
 
meet the Pilot requirements of the future. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry develop clear policy reforms to ensure strong partnerships with 
state governments, the Airports Authority of India (AAI), and other 
stakeholders. These reforms should also streamline the regulatory 
mechanisms of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) for flight 
training. To further promote flight training and establish India as a global 
hub, the Committee advises making budgetary provisions for this sector. 
GREENFIELD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT 
42. In the Budget, it was mentioned about Greenfield Airport project in 
particular reference to Bihar. The Committee is of the opinion that to cater 
the requirement of the state, which does not have a single International 
Greenfield Project like Shamshabad (Hyderabad), Devanahalli (Bangalore) or 
MoPA (Goa) or for that matter Jewar (Uttar Pradesh), it would be essential to 
establish an International Greenfield Airport next to Patna for the futuristic 
requirement as desired by the state for next 50 to 70 years to meet the 
aspirational needs of 14 crore people of the State of Bihar. The Committee is 
of the opinion that an International Greenfield Airport like Jewar should be 
given a top priority for futuristic development and growth of aviation 
infrastructure along with other Greenfield projects across the country. The 
Committee also notes that, in order to match the anticipated growth in 
national and international air traffic across the country and to supplement 
RCS connectivity, greenfield infrastructure projects should be expedited to 
achieve overall greater connectivity and promote air travel. 
                                                        **** 
 
 

39 
 
KEY HIGHLIGHTS OF THE COMMITTEE'S 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
Budget Analysis and Allocation 
1.   Imbalance in Capital Outlay: The Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA) receives nearly half of the capital budget allocation (₹30 crore), 
raising concerns about prioritization over security infrastructure and accident 
investigation capabilities. The Committee recommends a balanced allocation 
across aviation bodies to address critical gaps in security and investigative 
resources . 
2.  UDAN Scheme Funding: The UDAN scheme allocation has been reduced by 
32% to ₹540 crore despite ambitious expansion goals. The Committee 
recommends proportional enhancement of security protocols and accident 
response mechanisms to support the scheme's growth into tier II and III cities . 
3.  Performance-Based Budgeting: The Committee advocates linking 
allocations to specific performance indicators and outcomes, supported by 
regular audits to ensure efficient fund utilization. 
Air India-Related Expenditure 
4.  Reduction Plan for AIAHL Liabilities: Establish a phased five-year plan to 
reduce financial obligations, monetize non-core assets, and implement cost-
sharing mechanisms for medical benefits to retired employees. 
5.  Transparency in Fund Utilization: Create an oversight committee to 
monitor expenditures and accelerate liability resolution to minimize long-term 
fiscal impact. 
Airfare Regulation 

40 
 
6.  AI-Powered Monitoring System: Implement "AirPrice Guardian" for 
predictive airfare monitoring, dynamic fare bands, and real-time anomaly 
detection. Empower DGCA with quasi-judicial authority for price regulation. 
7.  Consumer Empowerment: Develop the "Airfare Vigil" app for citizens to 
report arbitrary pricing, integrated with "AirPrice Guardian" for participatory 
governance and swift grievance redressal. 
8.  Reallocation of Funds: Redirect underutilized allocations toward the 
development of airfare monitoring systems, with phased implementation over 
18–24 months. 
Regulatory Oversight and Security 
9.  Integrated Safety Mechanism: Promote collaboration between DGCA, 
BCAS, and CRS for multi-modal transport safety standards and sustainable 
funding mechanisms. 
Aircraft Interior Standards 
10.  Aviation Interior Quality Commission: Establish a regulatory framework 
for cabin standards, including environmental sustainability guidelines to align 
with India's commitments. 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 
11.   Tiered Funding Approach: Prioritize routes with high passenger load 
factors while supporting underperforming routes in growth regions like the 
Northeast. 
12.   Performance Metrics: Develop metrics beyond passenger numbers, 
including economic impact assessments and operational sustainability 
reviews. 

41 
 
13.   Infrastructure Development Component: Focus on airports serving 
tourist/pilgrimage destinations with high traffic growth potential. 
Aviation Education and Training 
14.   Enhanced Funding: Increase allocations to aviation education institutions 
by fivefold, modernize infrastructure, and establish scholarship funds for 
economically weaker candidates. 
15.   Public-Private Partnerships: Develop centers of excellence combining 
academic rigor with practical training aligned with industry needs. 
Expenditure Analysis 
16.   Fund Utilization Efficiency: Address underutilization of funds through 
milestone-based disbursement mechanisms tied to project completion stages, 
supported by real-time digital dashboards. 
17.   Stability Fund for RCS: Establish a guaranteed corpus insulated from 
annual budget fluctuations, complemented by modular airport infrastructure 
models for low-traffic destinations. 
18.  Balanced Capital Distribution: Reassess steep reductions in capital outlay 
from ₹755 crore in FY 2023-24 to ₹70 crore in FY 2025-26 to avoid 
compromising modernization goals. 
Drone Manufacturing Incentives 
19.   Accelerated PLI Disbursement: Restructure PLI mechanisms with 
monthly claim processing pathways for MSMEs/startups, alongside creating 
specialized zones for drone application testing . 
Greenfield Airports 
20.  Monitoring Portal: Establish a "Greenfield Airport Monitoring Portal" for 
milestone-based reporting and intervention alerts. 

42 
 
21.   Strategic Development Fund: Create a matching-grant model targeting 
priority regions like the Northeast and island territories with limited fiscal 
capacity but high connectivity needs. 
22.  Regional Viability Assessment Tool: Mandate at least 40% investment 
toward non-metro airports serving populations under one million through 
coordinated infrastructure development zones. 
Staffing and Workforce Capacity 
23.  Expedited Recruitment Process: Address high vacancy rates across DGCA, 
BCAS, and AAI through long-term workforce planning strategies aligned with 
aviation growth demands. 
 

43 
 
  
MINUTES  

44 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE (2024 -25) 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on 28th February, 2025 , in Main Committee Room , 
Parliament  House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha -    Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jaggesh 
4. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
5. Smt. Sudha Murty 
 Lok Sabha 
6. Kumari Selja 
7. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
10. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
11. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Anil Firojiya 
14. Shri Anurag Sharma 
15. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
16. Shri Avimanyu Sethi 
17. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
18. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
19. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas  
20. Shri K E Prakash 
21. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad 
 
 
Secretariat 
      1. Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Monica Baa, Director 
3. Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
 
  

45 
WITNESS 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
1. Shri Vumlunmang Vualnam, Secretary, Civil Aviation  
2. Shri Padam Lal Negi, JS&FA 
 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure -I) 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
of the agenda of the meeting i.e. (i) oral  evidence of the Secretary, M/o Civil Aviation on 
Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of the Ministry ; and (ii) *****i 
i. Oral evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation  
2.  The Chairman, extended a warm welcome to the Secretary and other senior officials of 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
3. The Chairman underlined the importance of the deliberations, particularly in the context 
of enhancing regional connectivity, ensuring efficient budget utilisation, strengthening civil 
aviation infrastructure, and addre ssing challenges related to airline regulation and pricing 
mechanisms. He emphasised that the aviation sector plays a crucial role in economic 
development and national connectivity , and therefore, its governance and financial planning 
warrant meticulous parliamentary scrutiny. 
4.  Commencing the presentation, Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation apprised the 
Committee about the total budgetary allocation of ₹2,400.31 crores  for the financial year 2025-
26 for the Ministry , outlining the key areas of expendi ture. He informed that a  substantial 
portion, ₹ 945.51 crores , has been earmarked for Air India Asset Holding Limited (AIAHL)  to 
service Non-Convertible Debentures (NCDs)  issued against Air India’s outstanding liabilities 
post-disinvestment. The Ministry a ssured the Committee that efforts were underway to develop a 
long-term strategy to phase out such financial obligations , ensuring that the government’s burden 
in this regard is progressively reduced . The Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS -UDAN) has 
been allocated ₹540 crores , with ₹240 crores designated for the North -Eastern region , aimed at 
enhancing connectivity in underserved areas . The Ministry acknowledged, however, that only 
₹210 crores of the ₹502 crores allocated for the previous year had been utilis ed, citing delays in 
infrastructure readiness at smaller airports and operational challenges faced by airlines  as the 
primary reasons. 
5. Coming to the  regulatory and administrative expenditures, The Ministry informed that 
₹467 crores has been assigned for salaries and establishment costs  across various aviation bodies, 
including the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
(BCAS), Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB), and other regulatory institutions . 
Moreover, ₹142.75 crores has been allocated to cover customs cost recovery charges at smaller 
international airports , where low customs revenue generation necessitates government support . 
The Ministry also highlighted the success of the Production -Linked Incenti ve (PLI) Scheme for 
Drones, with ₹120 crores in incentives disbursed to 23 companies , which has lead  to a tenfold 
increase in sector turnover to ₹1,300 crores . On the infrastructure front, the Ministry reported 
progress in greenfield airport projects , though land acquisition and regulatory approvals continue 

46 
to pose challenges. Efforts to revive seaplane operations  were also underway, with targeted 
regulatory clearances expected by mid-2025. The Ministry acknowledged concerns regarding 
high airfares , stating that DGCA was actively monitor ing airline pricing trends but d id not 
directly regulate fares. 
6. During the course of the deliberations, Members  raised several concerns and sought 
clarifications on the following issues:  
 Members questioned the government’s continued financial commitments towards Air 
India’s liabilities post-disinvestment. 
 Members sought explanations for the substantial underutilisation of allocated funds , 
particularly in the North -Eastern region, and demanded a clear roadmap for expe diting 
the operationalisation of awarded routes . 
 Serious concerns were raised over exorbitant airfares during peak seasons , with instances 
where domestic tickets cost more than international fares .  
 Members sought updates on the status of greenfield airpor t projects , particularly those 
facing delays due to land acquisition and regulatory hurdles . The issue of stalled projects 
in Haryana (Hisar and Ambala) was raised . 
 Concerns were raised over the high number of vacancies in DGCA, BCAS, and AAI , 
with members questioning how these shortages would impact aviation safety and 
regulatory efficiency. 
 Members noted the slow  progress in expanding seaplane operations  and urged  the 
Ministry to provide a clear timeline for revival efforts . 
 While appreciati ng the success of the PLI scheme for drones , M embers urged further 
efforts to promote domestic manufacturing of drone components to reduce reliance on 
imports. 
7. To address these concerns effectively, the Committee made the following actionable 
recommendations: 
 Formulating a definitive plan to phase out government -backed debt servicing  for Air 
India so that such financial burdens do not persist indefinitely . 
 Expediting of  infrastructure readiness at smaller airports  and implement ing a viability 
assessment for commercially unviable routes  to ensure efficient utilisation of allocated 
funds. 
 Strengthenening of DGCA’s  tariff monitoring framework  to prevent unjustified fare 
hikes, particularly during peak seasons and emergencies.  
 Fast-tracking of  greenfield airp ort projects , particularly in under-served regions , and 
implementation of a streamlined clearance mechanism to prevent unnecessary delays . 
 Urgently fill ing of  critical vacancies in regulatory bodies  so that  aviation safety and 
oversight are not compromised due to staffing shortages. 
 Submission of a  structured implementation plan which detailed  steps to address 
regulatory bottlenecks and timelines for the resumption of operations . 
 Introduction of dedicated policies to encourage domestic production of drone 
components, reducing dependency on imports and strengthening the country’s  aviation 
technology ecosystem. 
 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  

47 
8.   The Chairman expressed appreciation for the Ministry’s efforts in advancing the aviation 
sector, while stressing that greater efficiency in budget utilisation, regulatory oversight, and 
policy execution is imperative. He directed the Ministry that any that any unanswered queries or 
requests for additional information be addressed in  writing and submitted to the Secretariat 
within one week.  
9.  The meeting was adjourned at 01:51 P.M. 
 
(The Committee reassembled after lunch break ) 
(Second Part of the meeting) 
 
10. ***** 
 
11. ***** 
 
12. ***** 
 
13. ***** 
 
14. ***** 
 
15.   The meeting adjourned with the assurances that written responses to any unanswered 
queries would be submitted to the Secretariat.  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
 
16.  Verbatim records of the proceedings of the meetings were kept.  
17.  The meeting adjourned at 03:55 P.M.  
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                         Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak  
28th February, 2025.                                                                                  Joint Secretary 
 
  

48 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Officer Designation  Ministry/Deptt. 
1.  Shri Vumlunmang Vualnam  Secretary Civil Aviation 
2.  Shri Padam Lal Negi JS&FA  
3.  Shri Piyush Srivastava Senior Economic 
Adviser 
 
4.  Smt. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary  
5.  Shri Asangba Chuba Ao Joint Secretary  
6.  Shri Shobhit Gupta Joint Secretary  
7.  Shri Madhu Sudana Sankar  Joint Secretary  
8.  Shri P.K. Thakur DDG  
9.  Shri Avtar Singh Sandhu Chief Financial 
Officer 
 
10.  Shri Manish Raut Financial Controller  
11.  Shri Om Prakash Sharma Director  
12.  Ms. Nayonika Dutta Joint Director  
13.  Mrs. Ritu Pathak Finance Officer IFD 
14.  Shri M.P. Arora Consultant IFD 
15.  Shri Sanjay Sharma Accountant  
16.  Shri Harish Kumar Vashisht  Joint Director 
(General) 
 
17.  Shri Lalit Kumar Chandel Economic Adviser  
18.  Shri Rajesh Nirwan DG BCAS 
19.  Ms. Kavita Jalan DDG  
20.  Shri Jitendra Kumar LO to DG  
21.  Shri Janak Kumar Garg Chief 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety 
 
22.  Shri GVG Yugandhar  DG AAIB 
23.  Shri S.K.G. Rahate Chairperson AERA 
24.  Shri Suyash Narain  Secretary  
25.  Shri Ram Krishan Director  
26.  Shri Faiz Ahmed Kidwai   
 
***** 
  

49 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM & CULTURE (2025-26) 
XIII THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 20th March, 2025 in 
Committee Room  ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha -    Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Jaggesh 
3. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak  
4. Smt. Sudha Murty  
5. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi  
6. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
 Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad 
8. Shri Pradan Baruah 
9. Shri R K Chaudhary 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
12. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
13. Smt. June Maliah  
14. Shri K E Prakash  
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Kumari Selja  
17. Shri Anurag Sharma 
18. Shri Avimanyu Sethi 
19. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
20. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary 

50 
 
2.    At the outset, the Chairman welcome d Members of the Committee  
and informed the Committee of the agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration 
and adoption of the following draft Reports: 
 i.  Draft Report on Demands for Grants (202 5-26) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation; 
 ii.  ***** 
 iii.  ***** 
 iv.   ***** 
 v.    ***** 
 
3.   The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports. After some discussion 
the Committee adopted all the reports. The Committee authorized the Chairman to 
carry out minor errors of typographical and factual nature , formatting and add 
highlights in all the Reports.  Also, the additional comments of Shri R.P. Rudy, 
Member of Parliament on Report of Civil Aviation was directed to be incorporated 
by the Committee 
4.   Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman, Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha, 
M.P., and in his absence, Shri Neeraj Dangi, M.P., to present the above  mentioned 
Reports in the Rajya Sabha on Tuesday, 25 th March, 202 5. The  Committee also 
authorized Smt. June Maliah , M.P. and in h er absence, Shri Amarsing Tisso, M.P. 
to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 5.   The meeting adjourned at 10.45 AM.  
 
New Delhi,                                                                         Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak 
20th March, 2025.                                                                          Joint Secretary 
 
 
                                                           
i Relates to other Matters 