 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA                    166 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT ON THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................................... 1-15 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE ..................................... 16-17 
5. A NNEXURES ..................................................................................................................... 19-25 
6. M INUTES ......................................................................................................................... 27-30 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2010-2011)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 4.  Shri Narendra Kashyap 
 5.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8.  Shri Satish Sharma 
 9.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12.  Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13.  Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo  
 14.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 15.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 16.  Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq 
 23.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25.  Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29.  Shri Kabir Suman 
 30.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31.  Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
 
 

  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultu re, 
having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred a nd Sixty Sixth 
Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 
One Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation”. 
2.   The One Hundred Fifty Eighth Report of the Dep artment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 20th April, 2010. 
3.   The Action Taken Replies on the recommendation s of the Committee contained on its One Hundred Fifty Eighth 
Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 3 c0th August, 2010. 
4.   The Committee considered and adopted the Repor t at its meeting held on the 20th December, 2010. 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
December  20, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Agrahayana 29 , 1932 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-
11) of Ministry of Civil Aviation, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 22nd April, 2010. 
2.  Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Ministry on the 31st August, 2010 in respect of a ll the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been a ccepted by the Department: 
 Para Nos. 8, 13, 21, 22, 23, 24, 31, 38, 39, 41, 4 6, 51, 57, 62, 67, 71, 74, 75, 76 and 77  Total : 20 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of the Departm ent 
replies: 
 Nil 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Department have not been accepte d by 
the Committee: 
 Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Department are still awaited: 
 Nil 
3.   Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as  
interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.  
4.   On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the C ommittee has made observations on each item of Acti on 
taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred and 
Fifty Eighth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each 
item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
ANNUAL PLAN 2009-10  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
5.   The Committee notes that the Ministry was able  to expend the allocations made during 2009-10 near  to cent 
percent. The expenditure pattern of the Ministry has seen a remarkable improvement as compared to the previous years. 
The Committee hopes that the spending pattern of th e Ministry in 2009-10 will become a bench mark for them and 
hopes that the Ministry will be in a position to repeat the performance in this year also. 
(Recommendation at Para 8 of the 158th Report)  
Reply of the Government  
6.  Noted for compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
7.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 

ANNUAL PLAN FOR 2010-11 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
8.  The Committee after examining the allocations f or 2010-11 finds that Rs.85 crore has been allocated under Non-
plan which is merely Rs.I0 crore more than that of the allocation in 2009-10. The Committee feels that the allocation is 
inadequate considering the functioning and responsi bilities discharged by various offices under the Mi nistry of Civil 
Aviation. The Committee is. of the opinion that the  Ministry should persuade the Planning Commission t o allocate 
more funds under this head at RE stage, so that civ il aviation sector does not suffer for want of fund s. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would be in a position to e xpend the enhanced allocation under plan head judic iously and 
optimally during 2010-11. 
(Para 13 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
9.   The recommendations of the Committee regarding  inadequacy of Non Plan funds of Rs.85.00 crores ha ve been 
noted and the Ministry will try to get it enhanced at RE stage for the financial year 2010-11. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10.   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and  hopes that the Ministry will impress upon the Planning 
Commission to release more funds under Non-plan hea d which is very meagre when compared to the 
requirements of this sector. 
NATIONAL  AVIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LIMITED  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
11.   The Committee feels that the NACIL has to put  its act together as early as possible for reclaimi ng its ‘maharaja’ 
status. The Committee is of the opinion that NACIL has to be careful to ensure that the merger related  issues not make 
any negative impact on its growth. The Committee fe els that the Government should give more autonomy t o this PSU 
and not impose its decisions on NACIL. The Committe e finds that NACIL still needs some aggressive mark eting and 
promotional strategies to strengthen its presence in domestic and international markets. The Committee hopes that with 
the induction of new aircrafts NACIL should be in a  position to expand its air services to the length and breadth of the 
country. The international connectivity from Guwahati and Srinagar needs to be reviewed and adequate actions may be 
taken. 
(Para 21 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
12.   NACIL and its subsidiaries, Air India Express  and Alliance Air operate regular domestic and inte rnational air 
services from total of 63 cities in India offering about 140 domestic city pair links and about 120 international city pair 
links with about 500 departures per day on complete NACIL network. A list of the stations is enclosed at Annexure 1 . 
As regards new aircraft induction, NACIL has alread y completed the induction of new A320 family aircra ft which are 
predominantly deployed on the domestic & short haul  international routes. With respect to the mention that “NACIL 
should be in a position to expand services with the induction of new fleet”, we would like to mention that a major share 
of the new A320 family aircraft capacity has been u sed to replace the routes operated by the old B737- 200 aircraft, 
A300 aircraft and A320 aircraft on lease that have been returned to the lessors. Additionally, about 2 0% of the new 
A320 family aircraft capacity has been deployed to replace the wide body equipment on the feeder servi ces for 

international operations in order to minimize costs  of such feeder services and as replacement capacit y on some of the 
international routes where the wide body aircraft have either been phased out or returned to the lessor. 
13.   Not withstanding the above, NACIL has been ab le to increase its capacity offered in the domestic  market. As 
regards the purely domestic services, NACIL’s capac ity offered (in terms of ASK-available seat kilomet ers) (though 
dropped by about 10% during 2008-09 over 2007-08 mainly on account of planned capacity reduction to minimize cash 
losses due to high fuel prices and subsequent econo mic slowdown) has gone up by about 3% during 2009-1 0 over 
2008-09 and by 12% during April-May, 2010 compared to April-May, 2009. In the recent past, following 
improvements were effected in NACIL’s domestic schedule: 
/circle6 New links introduced - Delhi-Kozhikode (non-stop), Delhi-Coimbatore (non-stop), Delhi-Mangalore, 
Delhi-Dehradun, Delhi-Amritsar (domestic flight), D elhi-Ludhiana Hyderabad -Cochin, Hyderabad -
Coimbatore, Hyderabad - Pune, Chennai -Coimbatore ( Restored), Barigalore-Pune (one-stop) (restored), 
Chennai-Bhubaneswar (restored). 
/circle6 Additional frequencies - between Delhi and Mumbai/C hennai/Kolkata/Bangalore/ Patna/ 
Amritsar/Guwahati; 
/circle6 Ahmedabad-Delhi - equipment upgraded from CRJ to A319. 
14.   As regards international connectivity from Sr inagar and Guwahati, it may be mentioned that Srina gar is 
connected with regular services by NACIL with Delhi  which is NACIL’s hub for international as well as domestic 
services while Guwahati is connected with regular s ervices by NACIL with Kolkata as well as Delhi whic h are 
NACIL’s hub for international as well as domestic services. Passengers to/from Srinagar and Guwahati can avail of the 
connecting services offered by NACIL over its hubs.  However, NACIL is not in a position to introduce i nternational 
services ex-Srinagar and Guwahati due to capacity constraints. 
15.   As regards aggressive marketing strategy, wit h respect to network, it may be stated that NACIL has deployed the 
new aircraft on the important and high density dome stic and international routes. This would enable NA CIL to offer 
improved product and better on-time performance in the important markets. Moreover, consequent to the merger, 
NACIL has introduced more number of feeder services  for its international operations, improved the tim ings of major 
international services to the timings that are pref erred by the travelling public, common flight numbe r introduced from 
the interior points on select international long ha ul services, streamlined the schedule to enable NAC IL to generate 6th 
freedom feeds, the domestic and international sched ule of NACIL now generate feeds from both direction s; etc. 
NACIL is also in the process of reviewing its netwo rk strategy with the help of experts in the field a nd would 
implement their recommendations subject to operatio nal feasibility. A detailed note on other marketing /promotional 
strategies is enclosed at Annexure 2 . 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
16.   The Committee also feels that the NACIL shoul d revisit the underutilized bilaterals signed in th e past and try to 
add more services with the new aircrafts. 
(Para 22 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
17.   At present India has signed/initialed bilater al Air Services Agreement with 108 countries. The c apacity 
entitlement available for the designated airlines o f India is 8 lakhs seats/week (approx). Usually, th e designated 
airline(s) of any country are unable to utilize the  total capacity entitlement available with the resp ective country. The 

airlines utilize the capacity entitlements availabl e on different sectors as per their commercial judg ment, which is also 
guided by other factors, such as traffic demand, viability, flow of traffic on that particular route etc. 
18.   Prior to 2003, Air India (erstwhile Indian Ai rlines also) was the Indian carrier who operated on  the international 
sector. At that time, Air India was not able to uti lize the traffic rights or serve the different inte rnational sectors 
substantially due to fleet constraint and other, prevailing reasons. (The position more or less remains same even now). 
19.   In order to pave way for the maximum utilizat ion of traffic rights by Indian carriers, it was de cided to open way 
for the private scheduled carriers also for operati ons in the international sectors. The prime objecti ve of permitting our 
private scheduled airlines to operate on internatio nal sector is optimal utilization of traffic rights  available with us, 
which otherwise remained unutilized due to various factors. 
20.   At present, in order to ensure the maximum ut ilization of traffic rights, the Government is gran ting the traffic 
rights to private scheduled carriers also after giv ing due consideration to the traffic demand of Air India and on those 
sectors where the demand is high. 
21.   Therefore, the utilization of total traffic r ights available to the designated airlines of India  should not be the 
responsibility of Air India alone and Government ne eds to ensure maximum utilization by Air India as w ell as the 
private scheduled carriers (Apart from Jet Airways,  JetLite and Kingfisher Airlines, Spice Jet has alr eady become 
eligible for international operations and Indigo wi ll become eligible from next year as per the guidel ines). Moreover, 
keeping in view the difficult position being faced by our carriers, when the things were getting more and more difficult 
for our airlines during the last two years due to economic slow down and steep rise of ATF prices, the Government has 
been adopting calibrated approach towards granting further bilateral traffic rights. It is expected th at with future 
expansion of fleet of Air India would be in a posit ion to utilize more traffic rights and will be able  to connect more 
foreign destinations. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
22.   The Committee is of the opinion that the perf ormance of Air India Express in the low cost carrie r market is not 
up to expected levels. The Committee feels that NAC IL should take giant steps to gain more market shar e in this 
market also. 
(Para 23 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
23.   The steps taken by NACIL’s subsidiary, Air In dia Express, to gain more market share in the low c ost carrier 
market are as under: 
- Introducing more flights on Routes which are doin g well and have demand; 
- Making more flights non-stop to improve the produ ct;  
- Spreading brand awareness through publicity campa igns; 
- Moving to a new Reservations system to improve th e selling online, selling experience and providing 
additional features; 
- Improving the On-time Performance through various  measurers.  
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24.   The Committee had examined the issues of the merger of Indian Airlines and Air India and made ce rtain 
recommendations in its 151st Report. However, the r esponse of the Government is still awaited. The Com mittee 
recommends that all the merger related issues should be settled according to the recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Committee. The Committee hopes that the NACIL will come out of the merger related issues in the coming  years and 
produce the required results to establish the NACIL as leader in civil aviation market. 
(Para 24 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
25.   Action Taken Replies to Report No.151st has a lready been submitted to Rajya Sabha Secretariat on  29th June, 
2010. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
26.  The Committee notes the replies of the Ministry. Th e Committee feels that the measures taken by the 
management of Air India to bring back its lost glor y can be fruitfully achieved only after basic issue s related to 
merger of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines have been sorted out. The Committee is of the opinion that by 
adopting prudent business practices it can face the  onslaught of the private Low Cost Carriers. The Co mmittee 
feels that the recent withdrawal of services from p rofitable routes is not going to augur well for the  growth of 
Air India.  
27.   The rationale given by the government for granting more and more bilateral to private sector is not 
convincing especially when the Air India flights ar e operating with low capacity and making losses on 
international routes. The Committee recommends that the Government should differentiate between the private 
airlines and Air India a Public Sector Undertaking supported by the Government, occasionally by granti ng 
thousands of crores of money for its functioning.  
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (AAI) 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
28.   The Committee notes that AAI has been able to  utilize around 95% of the revised estimates for the year 2009-10. 
The Committee, while appreciating the commitment of  AAI in developing airport infrastructure and other  facilities in 
the country, feels that the potential and expertise  available with mini-navratna PSU is not being full y utilized. The 
Committee feels that with the highly trained and ex perienced manpower, the AAI can give-tough competit ion to the 
private airport developers subject to financial and other operational autonomy available to them. The Committee hopes 
that the AAI will perform in the coming year true to its potential. 
(Para 31 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
29.   AAI has incurred Rs. 2742.54 crores against R E of Rs. 2822.50 crores during 2009-10 which is 97% of RE. AAI 
will continue to make all efforts to utilize the capital expenditure allocated during the year 2010-11 as well. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
30.   The Committee finds that in view of the ever increasing number of flights in the fully operational airports as also 
more and more airports being opened, need for having modern landing/take off equipments with accurate precision has 

become of utmost importance. The Committee is of th e view that GAGAN project, as usually happens, shou ld not be 
allowed to languish; it should be completed by its target date i.e.  June 2013. 
(Para 38 ibid)  
Reply of the Government  
31.   The implementation of the GAGAN Project which  is being jointly undertaken by AAI and ISRO, Depar tment of 
Space is on schedule and is likely to be completed by the target date of June, 2013. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
32.   Similarly, procurement of auto systems, surve illance and ancillary equipments, electronics and g round safety 
system should be done on time as these constitute important aspects of airports functioning. 
(Para 39 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
33.   AAI is in the process of modernizing its CNS- ATM systems. The project involves Air Traffic Servi ces 
Automation System for 38 airports, supply of Monopu lse Secondary Surveillance Radar (MSSR) at Chennai,  Bellary, 
Vizag, Kolkata, Bhopal, Porbandar and Jharsuguda, N ew Integrated Air Traffic Services Automation syste m at 
Chennai airport, Voice Communication and Control Sy stem at 30 airports, installation of Non radar proc edural air 
traffic control simulator at CATC, Allahabad and Go ndia Training Centers, Installation of Airport Surv eillance Radar 
co-located with MSSR at Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, A mritsar, Delhi and Cochin airports. The remaining p rojects are 
in various stages of implementation. 
34.   Airfield Crash Fire Tenders (ACFTs) are also being replaced in a phased manner. 40 ACFTs are bei ng replaced 
in Phase 1. 
KOLKATA & CHENNAI AIRPORTS 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
35.   It was brought to the notice of the Committee  that certain airports such as Jabalpur, Kanpur, Bihta etc. are in dire 
need of various developmental activities. The moder nization of Jabalpur airport is in limbo for so man y years. The 
Committee desires that the AAI should pursue the allocation of land for development of Jabalpur airport with the State 
government. The Committee recommends that every eff ort should be made to operationalize the night land ing system 
and expansion of the runway of the Jabalpur airport. The Committee also desires that the development work of Kanpur 
airport should be taken up on priority so that this  industrial town is also included in the aviation m ap of the country. 
The Committee feels that the development of Bihta airfield is the need of hour to ease the burden of Patna airport since 
there is little scope for expansion of runway at Pa tna airport. The Committee is of the opinion that u nused 
airports/airstrips should also be developed in cons ultation with State governments as provision of air  connectivity 
should not be restricted to major cities only. It w as further brought to the notice of the Committee t hat various tourist 
destinations of the country lack airstrips even for  helicopter services. Thekkady and Bekal in Kerala are two such 
destinations. The AAI should explore the possibilit y of constructing airstrips at these places to boos t the tourism 
potential of these areas. 
(Para 41 ibid ) 
 
 

Reply of the Government  
Jabalpur in Rajasthan  
36.   AAI has initiated several measures for develo pment of this airport, and has completed Installati on of aerodrome 
ground lights, apron and taxiway edge lights. 
37.   Work is in progress for Installation of abrid ged simple approach lights for runway 06/24. Works planned are 
extension of runway from 1988 m to 2286m to facilit ate A-321 type of aircraft operations in all weathe r conditions, 
construction of new apron, new technical block cum control tower, fire station and other allied works. Request for land 
measuring 214.07 acres has been made to the State G overnment on 23rd November 2009. Chairman AAI visit ed 
Jabalpur airport on 18/19th May 2010 & interacted w ith District administration. Due to topography and land 
constraints, revised land assessment is necessary, which will be done shortly and will be projected to  the Govt. of 
Madhya Pradesh. 
Kanpur (Chakeri) in Uttar Pradesh  
38.   The airport belongs to IAF and AAI maintains a Civil Enclave. Keeping in view the growth in Aviation, IAF has 
been requested to transfer 5.5 acres of contiguous defence land for development and upgradation of pas senger 
amenities at the civil air terminal. However IAF has refused to part with the land requested by AAI. 
Bihta in Bihar  
39.   On the request of the Govt. of India, a team of officers from AAI carried out a preliminary feas ibility study 
regarding development of Bihta Air force station situated at Bihta into a full-fledged airport as an alternate to the Patna 
airport which is facing constraints for expansion. The recommendations have been sent to the Govt. of Bihar for its 
acceptance. Report indicates that developing the existing airport at Bihta is technically feasible. 
Other Airports  
40.   AAI conducted a study through Ms RITES to ope rationalise / upgrade some of its non-operational s mall airports 
in the country including airports in North-East, su bject to availability of land from the State Govern ments free of cost 
and free from all encumbrances. 
41.   As per the Government of India policy, the de velopment of new Greenfield airports in the country  is normally 
undertaken through the PPP mode. With regards to Bekal it is situated about 30 Km from Mangalore airport and hence 
no separate airstrip is desirable. Thekkady is a Wi ld Life Reserve forest area, hilly terrain located at a distance of 120 
Km from Thiruvananthapuram and 140 Km from Cochin, and development of an Airport at that location will  raise lot 
of environmental issues which therefore necessitate s TEFS including Environment Impact Assessment (EIA ). Pawan 
Hans Helicopter Limited may consider the recommendation of the committee for helicopter services. 
SCHEMES UNDERTAKEN IN NORTH EASTERN REGION  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
42.   The Committee feels that the airports in Nort h-Eastern Region need more attention from the AAI. Development 
of airports in Guwahati, Dibruagarh and Teju should  be given due consideration for improvement of faci lities at these 
airports. 
(Para 46 ibid ) 
 

Reply of the Government  
43.   AAI continues to lay special emphasis on the development of airport infrastructure in the North- Eastern Region. 
AAI spent an amount of Rs. 127.68 crores in the yea r 2008-09 and Rs. 118.66 in the year 2009-10 for de velopment of 
airports in the NER. During the year 2010-11, AAI h as earmarked Rs. 237.76 crores for development of a irports in 
NER including the Greenfield airports at Pakyong in Sikkim, Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh and Cheitu in Nagaland. 
44.   The status of development of the airports at Guwahati, Dibrugarh and Teju is given below:- 
GUWAHATI 
Present Status  
1. Airport is suitable for wide bodied aircraft suc h as A310 in all weather conditions for day and nig ht 
operations. 
2. Integrated Terminal Building recently expanded i s suitable to accommodate 1200 domestic and 300 
internal passengers at a time. 
Works recently completed  
1. Extension of runway by 360M completed on 10.6.20 09. Awaiting DGCA clearance for operationalisation. 
2. Expansion of apron for 11 bays and link taxiways  completed on 10.6.2009 
3. Construction of Isolation Bay completed on 25.3. 2010. 
Works planned  
1. Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building  will be taken up depending upon traffic growth. 22 0 
acres of land is required from the State Govt. free of cost and free from encumbrances. 
2. Construction of parallel taxiway to the east of runway. IAF has been requested for 122 acres of lan d 
required for construction of parallel taxi track and provision of approach lights. 
DIBRUGARH 
Present Status  
1. The airport is suitable for the operation of A32 0 (with load penalty) class of aircraft in all weat her 
conditions during day. 
2. A modem Terminal Building for 500 passengers has  been completed and put into operation. Installatio n of 
2 Nos. Passengers Boarding Bridges is in progress. 
Work in progress  
  Strengthening of existing runway and taxiway work  is in progress. 
Works planned  
Runway will be extended by 640 M on land measuring 5.33 acres being transferred to AAI by the Defence 
Authorities. Matters being pursued. 
 
 

TEZU 
Present Status  
1. The airport belongs to the State Govt. and is be ing used by IAF and Arunachal Pradesh Helicopter Services 
(operated by Pawan Hans) for helicopter movements. 
1. The runway 04/22 has dimension of 1372M x 30M an d is unsuitable for the fixed wing aircraft. All 
facilities required major repair/improvement works. 
2. AAI is entrusted to develop the airport. 
Works planned  
1. The final DPR for phased development of Tezu Air port, submitted in June, 2008, has recommended: 
/circle6 Phase I development to make the aerodrome suitable  for ATR42/ATR72 operations at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 80.35 crores and with land acquisition of 43 Ha. 
2. Secretary, North-East Council has accorded appro val to the work of “Construction of Tezu Airport in Lohit 
District of Arunachal Pradesh” at a total cost of Rs. 79 crores. 
3. The airport and additional land required for the  development of Tezu airport is yet to be handed ov er by 
State Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
45.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is of the opinion that 
development/upgradation of airports in North-Eastern Region should be given priority by Airports Authority of 
India as air connectivity to this region with immense tourism potential can hardly be further delayed. 
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
46.   The Committee observes that Pawan Hans Helico pter Limited has performed reasonably well in the l ast year 
without having additional man power and capacity ad dition. The fleet serviceability has improved from 66% in 2006-
07 to 83% in 2009-10. The operating profit has rema rkably increased from mere Rs.2.78 crore in 2006-07  to Rs.34.00 
crore in 2009-10. The Committee appreciates the performance of Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited despite the fact that 
the overall performance of helicopter industry has not been good. The Committee hopes that PHHL will k eep up with 
this performance and will not be complacent in future. The Committee expects a major role from the reliable helicopter 
service provider during the Common, Wealth Games 20 10, Delhi for a better connectivity to tourists and  business 
community and also for emergency/ disaster manageme nt. The Committee is of the opinion that PHHL shoul d lend 
their hands in promotion of unexplored tourist destinations by expanding their commercial operations to such places in 
consultation with AAI. 
(Para 51 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
47.   Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited has noted the observations of the Committee for compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
48.   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and h opes that Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited will play a  
decisive role in promotion of tourism in the countr y. The Committee recommends that as suggested by th e 

Ministry, Pawan Hans Limited may explore the possib ility to start helicopter services in Bekal and The kady in 
Kerala. 
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
49.   The Committee feels that the handing over of Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar and Chefair Fligh t Catering, 
Mumbai to professionals on Management Contract will  strengthen the infrastructure and performance of t hese units. 
The Committee is of the opinion that Centaur Lake V iew Hotel, Srinagar requires much needed facelift and renovation 
to attract more domestic and international tourists  to the valley. The Government has offered certain benefits to 
hospitality sector in connection with the Common We alth Games 2010. The Committee recommends that Government 
should explore the possibility of extending some financial assistance to HCI for the renovation of Centaur Hotel, Delhi 
Airport. 
(Para 57 ibid)  
Reply of the Government  
50.   The proposal of HCI for budgetary support is under examination/consideration in consultation wit h Planning 
Commission. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
51.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that the Ministry should pursue the  
proposal for budgetary support for HCI with the Planning Commission vigorously. 
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
52.   The Committee feels that IGRUA being the pion eer pilot training institute plays a major role in the country’s 
requirement of pilots. The Committee hopes that han ding over its management to professionals has some positive 
effects on its performance. The Committee is of the  opinion that after the modernization, IGRUA should  be in a 
position to meet the shortage of trained manpower in the aviation industry adequately. 
(Para 62 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
53.   IGRUA has initiated many steps/measures to ov ercome the shortage/requirement of trained pilots. Some of the 
major steps/measures undertaken by IGRUA are as under: 
(a)  Increase in intake of students from 40 to 100 per annum; 
(b)  Duration of course has been reduced to 16 mont hs from 18 months; 
(c)  Exploring the possibility of a satellite airfi eld in near area to increase the flying so that the  flying 
requirement can be achieved; 
(d) Acquired additional 14 aircraft and 2 simulator s and ordered for another 2 aircraft and 1 simulato r to 
complete the task within the time frame; 
(e) Acquired additional Gen. Sets to support uninte rrupted power supply for smooth training. 
 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
54.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee while appreciating the efforts taken by 
IGRUA to overcome the shortage of trained pilots fe els that the curtailment of duration of course from  18 
months to 16 months should not be at the cost of quality of training imparted to pilots. 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
55.   The Committee notes that against Rs.2 crore p lan outlay in 2008-09, the DGCA has been allocated Rs.86 crores 
in 2010-11. This manifold increase in the allocatio n is in keeping with the need for strengthening of this aviation 
regulatory body in the country. The Committee hopes that the proposed Safety Programme will be developed as per the 
schedule, so that airlines and airports follow the uniform safety programmes seriously. The Committee hopes that long 
pending construction of new building for DGCA will get its final shape as shortcomings in infrastructu re should not 
make the regulator handicapped in performance of it s designated role. The Committee is constrained to note that a 
number of critical posts were kept vacant for years together. The Committee is of the view that fiscal restrictions should 
not be imposed mechanically and operational requirement of the post must be considered before deciding  to abolish or 
keeping the post vacant. The Committee further feel s that recruitment for filling up the newly created  posts will be 
completed as per schedule to ease the pressure on t he existing staff. The Committee has decided to exa mine the whole 
gamut of issue relating to DGCA including its authority, manpower, etc. separately. 
(Para 67 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
56.   It has been decided to construct a building f or DGCA & BCAS at Safdarjung Airport. The executive agency will 
be Airports Authority of India. In this regard, EFC Memo has already been prepared. DGCA has formulated plan to fill 
all vacancies in a time bound manner. It has started filling up posts on short term basis, where Recruitment Rules (RRs) 
are not in place, so that crucial functions of DGCA are not hampered for want of manpower. 
BUREAU OF CIVIL  AVIATION  SECURITY  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
57.   The Committee finds that there is a major inc rease in allocation of funds to BCAS under the plan  head which 
clearly indicates the role of BCAS to play in the c oming years. The Committee hopes that issues revolv ing around the 
construction of its headquarters building will be s orted out at the earliest. The Committee is of the opinion that 
introduction of biometric passes will strengthen th e security apparatus of the airports and will restr ict the entry of 
unauthorized persons in sensitive areas. 
(Para 71 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
58.   Since the land could not be allotted for sepa rate new HQ building of BCAS, the proposal for comm on HQ of 
DGCA and BCAS, wherein separate floor is to be prov ided for BCAS HQ is being examined. Biometric based  smart 
card type Airport Entry Passes are being issued by BCAS from August, 2010 onwards. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
59.   The Committee would like to know the progress regar ding (i) construction of separate buildings for 
DGCA and BCAS; and (ii) filling up of vacancies in DGCA. 

AERO CLUB OF INDIA  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
60.   The Committee finds that enhanced Grants-in a id to Aero Club of India will be expended judicious ly as 
strengthening of this institution will meet the dem ands of qualified pilots and maintenance engineers for aviation 
industry. 
(Para 74 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
61.   Budget provision for 2010-11 is to enable Aer o Club of India (ACI) mainly to procure Trainer air craft, 
Simulators, Gliders, Parasails, Aeromodels, Parachutes and Gypsies etc. ACI has started action to prep are the requisite 
proposals in respect of the various equipment to be  procured during 2010-11. It is expected that the p rocurement 
process shall be completed by March, 2011. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
62.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that purchase of equipments by 
Aero Club of India (ACI) should not be hampered due to non-availability of required funds. 
REGULARIZATION OF CASUAL EMPLOYEES 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
63.   It was brought to the notice of the Committee  that in Jammu & Kashmir there are certain categori es of casual 
employees working with NACIL and its predecessor Indian Airlines, Hotel Corporation of India and Airports Authority 
of India for the last so many years. They are not g iven the benefits of regular employees. They worked  with the 
organizations for decades together braving all odds  in their career. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that these 
employees who worked with Indian Airlines/NACIL, Hotel Corporation of India and Airports Authority of India for so 
many years braving all odds may be regularized at the earliest. 
(Para 75 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
64.   There are 68 temporary employees working at C entaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar under a Consent Ag reement 
dated 24.4.2002 signed between the Management of Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar and temporary employees with 
the approval of the Hon’ble High Court of J&K. As p er the Consent Agreement, the workers were engaged in July, 
2002 on temporary basis on a consolidated salary of  Rs.5120/- per month. As per the Agreement, the fol lowing was 
also undertaken by HCI before the Hon’ble High Court of J&K: 
(i) In case the company goes in for any recruitment  for permanent employees, preference will be given to 
temporary employees, if they are found suitable for the post intended to be filled; 
(ii) In the event of disinvestment or privatization  of HCI or transfer of Centaur Lake View Hotel, Sri nagar, the 
temporary employees shall be paid compensation, as per the law applicable to them; 
(iii) The management shall not arbitrarily or in sh eer abuse of authority retrench the temporary emplo yees 
without any valid reasons. 
65.   As per the policy of HCI, uniform is not issu ed to temporary employees; however, the Management has been 
providing them old uniforms during duty hours. Besi des, 15 days Privilege Leave and 12 days Sick Leave  and Casual 
Leave is being given to the temporary employees as provided in the Shops & Establishment Act from 2009 . Further, 

the Management has contemplated to increase the consolidated salary of these temporary employees covered under the 
Consent Agreement by Rs.725/- per month, if it is acceptable to them. The proposal to offer contractual employment to 
the casuals employed in NACIL (erstwhile Indian Air lines) in Srinagar is under consideration and is be ing placed 
before the HR Committee. 
66.  AAI has not employed any casual workers. There fore, the recommendation of the Parliamentary Commi ttee to 
regularize such workers does not arise. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
67.   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
ROLE OF CIVIL AVIATION IN PROMOTION OF TOURISM 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
68.   The Committee is of the opinion that the Mini stry of Civil Aviation can play an anchor role in p romoting such 
unexplored tourist places with the coordination of State governments, tourism department and local bod ies by 
providing requisite airport infrastructure. Places in North East and Leh region could be easily access ible by air rather 
than a taxing road journey. The Committee feels tha t the Ministry should strengthen the airport infras tructure and 
enhance air services to these areas. The Committee came to know about the hardship faced by government  employees 
in getting tickets under LT80 scheme for air travel using the Leave Travel Concession. Limited availability of seats has 
made getting confirmed tickets under this scheme a hard proposal. The Committee feels that NACIL shoul d take steps 
to increase the number of seats under the category to alleviate the present hardship of getting ticket s under the L T80 
scheme. The Committee is of the opinion that specia l tourist packages for air travel should be made av ailable region 
wise to cater the needs of air travelers. 
(Para 76 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
69.   NACIL and its subsidiary, Alliance Air curren tly operate regular air services to 11 cities in 6 NE States as under: 
1. Assam Silchar, Guwahati, Jorhat, Lilabari, Dibru garh, Tezpur 
2. Mizoram Aizawl 
3. Nagaland Dimapur 
4. Tripura Agartala 
5. Manipur Imphal 
6. Meghalaya Shillong 
  
70.  Current operations* of NACIL to/from the North  Eastern States are as follows: 
Route Frequency/wk Aircraft Type 
Delhi - Guwahati - Bagdogra - Delhi 2 A320 
Delhi - Bagdogra - Guwahati - Delhi 3 A320 
Delhi - Guwahati - Imphal & v. v. 2 A320 

Kolkata - Agartala & v.v. Daily A320 
Kolkata - Aizawl - Imphal - Kolkata 4 A319 
Kolkata - Imphal - Aizawl - Kolkata 3 A319 
Kolkata -,- Guahati & v.v. Daily A320 
Kolkata - Dibrugarh vv 5 A319 
Kolkata - Si1char vv 4 A320 
Kolkata - Dimapur vv 3 A319 
  
71.   As regards Leh, NACIL operates regular air se rvices linking Leh with Delhi, Srinagar and Jammu as under: 
Sector Frequency/week Aircraft 
Delhi-Leh & vv 3 A320 
Srinagar - Leh & vv 1 A320 
Jammu-Leh & vv 2 A320 
  
72.   However, NACIL is not in a position to introd uce more number of services to North East and Leh due to capacity 
constraints. As regards the LTC80 scheme, it may be  stated that economy class seats are divided into v arious sub-
classes (RBDs). Each RBD is allotted a certain amou nt of seats, which are directly proportionate to th e price of the 
ticket. 
73.   For LTC travel, we have assigned RBDs Q/G and  approximately 45% of the total available seats in the economy 
class are assigned for this purpose. These seats are allocated on first come first served cases. Therefore, in certain cases 
seats might not be available in the LTC RBD as they may be already sold out. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
74.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that with the induction of new age 
aircrafts into its fleet Air India should be in a p osition to increase its seat capacity especially in  north-eastern 
sector and Delhi-Srinagar and Delhi-Leh sector. The  Committee is of the opinion that Air India can dra w more 
benefits from the LTC offered by the Central Government for its employees for North-eastern and Srinagar/Leh 
sectors by mobilizing its resources efficiently.  
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
75.   The Committee on scrutinizing of budget paper s of Ministry of Civil Aviation finds that the over all performance 
of the Ministry during the last year has been almos t satisfactory. The Committee feels that strengthen ing of aviation 
infrastructure, inculcating corporate governance in  NACIL, promotion of helicopter tourism, strengthen ing and 
restructuring of DGCA and BCAS, empowering AAI and providing it a level playing field in development a nd 
modernization of airports, etc. are some of the maj or areas where the Ministry has to take some initia tives. Shortage of 
pilots, Air Traffic Controllers, Aerodrome Inspecto rs, Helicopter inspectors is also major cause of co ncern. The 

Committee feels that unless the Ministry addresses these issues with a sense of urgency, it cannot kee p the present 
momentum of the industry for long. The Committee is  of the opinion that the Ministry will take all the  necessary steps 
to meet shortage of man power so that the mismatch in demand and supply in aviation market is addressed successfully. 
The Committee further hopes that the Ministry will take more steps to make air travel an affordable, r eliable and safe 
one. 
(Para 77 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
76.  This Ministry agrees with the observations of the Committee. Regarding Corporate Governance, the Board of 
NACIL has been strengthened with the appointment of five Independent Directors by the Government of India. Various 
Board sub-committees have been set up each headed by an Independent Director. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
77.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would revisit the  
issue of shortage of manpower in civil aviation sector and take remedial actions in a time-bound manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS----AT GLANCE  
Annual Plan 2009-10 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para:7) 
Annual Plan for 2010-11 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and  hopes that the Ministry will impress upon the Planning 
Commission to release more funds under Non-plan hea d which is very meagre when compared to the 
requirements of this sector. (Para: l0) 
National Aviation Company of India Limited 
  The Committee notes the replies of the Ministry. The Committee feels that the measures taken by the 
management of Air India to bring back its lost glor y can be fruitfully achieved only after basic issue s related to 
merger of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines have been sorted out. The Committee is of the opinion that by 
adopting prudent business practices: it can face the onslaught of the private Low Cost Carriers. The Committee 
feels that the recent withdrawal of services from p rofitable routes is not going to augur well for the  growth of 
Air India.    (Para: 26) 
  The rationale given by the government for grantin g more and more bilateral to private sector is not 
convincing especially when the Air India flights ar e operating with low capacity and making losses on 
international routes. The Committee recommends that the Government should differentiate between the private 
airlines and Air India a Public Sector Undertaking supported by the Government, occasionally by granti ng 
thousands of crores of money for its functioning. (Para: 27) 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. Th e Committee is of the opinion that 
development/upgradation of airports in North-Eastern Region should be given priority by Airports Authority of 
India as air connectivity to this region with immense tourism potential can hardly be further delayed.  
      (Para: 45) 
Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and  hopes that Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited will play  a 
decisive role in promotion of tourism in the countr y. The Committee recommends that as suggested by th e 
Ministry, Pawan Hans Limited may explore the possib ility to start helicopter services in Bekal and The kady in 
Kerala.    (Para: 48) 
Hotel Corporation of India Limited 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. Th e Committee feels that the Ministry should pursue t he 
proposal for budgetary support for HCI with the Planning Commission vigorously. 
      (Para: 51) 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. Th e Committee while appreciating the efforts taken by  
IGRUA to overcome the shortage of trained pilots fe els that the curtailment of duration of course from  18 
months to 16 months should not be at the cost of quality of training imparted to pilots. (Para:54) 

Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
  The Committee would like to know the progress reg arding (i) construction of separate buildings for 
DGCA and BCAS; and (ii) filling up of vacancies in DGCA. (Para: 59) 
Aero Club of India 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. Th e Committee hopes that purchase of equipments by 
Aero Club of India (ACI) should not be hampered due to non-availability of required funds.   
      (Para: 62) 
Regularization of Casual Employees 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (P ara: 67) 
Role of Civil Aviation In Promotion of Tourism 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. Th e Committee hopes that with the induction of new ag e 
aircrafts into its fleet Air India should be in a p osition to increase its seat capacity especially in  north-eastern 
sector and Delhi-Srinagar and Delhi-Leh sector. The  Committee is of the opinion that Air India can dra w more 
benefits from the LTC offered by the Central Government for its employees for North-eastern and Srinagar/Leh 
sectors by mobilizing its resources efficiently. (Para:74) 
General Observations/Recommendations 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. Th e Committee hopes that the Ministry would 
revisit the issue of shortage of manpower in civil aviation sector and take remedial actions in a time-bound 
manner.          (Para: 77) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annexure-1  
(vide para 12 of the Report) 
DOMESTIC STATION LIST - NACIL  
NORTHERN WESTERN SOUTHERN EASTERN  
AMRITSAR AHMEDABAD BANGALORE AGARTALA  
ALLAHABAD AURANGABAD CHENNAI AIZW AL  
BHOPAL GOA COIMBATORE BAGDOGRA  
CHANDIGARH INDORE HYDERABAD BHUBANESHW AR  
DEHRADUN JAMNAGAR KOCHI DIBRUGARH  
DELHI MUMBAI KOZHIKODE DIMAPUR  
GWALIOR NAGPUR MADURAI GAY A (SEASONAL) 
JAIPUR PUNE MANGALORE GUWAHATI  
JABALPUR RAJKOT TRIVANDRUM IMPHAL  
JAMMU SURA T TIRUCHlRAPALLI JORHAT  
JODHPUR VADODARA TIRUPATI KOLKATA  
KANPUR  VISAKHAPATNAM LILABARI  
KHAJURAHO   PATNA  
KULLU   PORT BLAIR  
LEH .  RANCHI  
LUCKNOW   SHILLONG  
LUDHIY ANA   SILCHAR  
PATHANKOT   TEZPUR  
RAIPUR     
SRINAGAR     
UDAIPUR     
VARANASI 
     
 
 

Annexure 2  
(vide para 15 of the Report)  
  Air India has always been aggressive in the marke t and some of the initiatives taken by us in 2009-1 0 are 
highlighted below: 
1.   Companion Free Scheme  
  The offer is valid for travel between the followi ng countries:  
India - USA 
India -  Canada 
India -  UK 
India - Europe 
Germany  - USA 
UK - Canada 
  This scheme is valid on full IATA published fares  in all classes for both one way and round trip tra vel. On our 
non-stop Mumbai - John F Kennedy (JFK) - Mumbai and Delhi - John F Kennedy (JFK) - Delhi flights, the Companion 
Free Scheme is available on full IATA published far es in Executive and Economy Class only. However, pa ssengers 
travelling on full IATA First Class fares are offered the Companion Free Scheme with companion travelling in J class. 
  This scheme is also available for passengers trav elling ex  India to Tokyo/Osaka/Shanghai/Hongkong/ 
Singapore/Bangkok/Middle East in First and Executive class. 
  The scheme is valid ex  India only, including ex  interior points from India on IC code domestic flights. 
  The above schemes have been extended for travel u pto 31st December 2010. 
2.  Special Companion Scheme  
  Passengers buying a ticket on the highest market fares in First/Executive Class, without any incenti ve, are 
entitled to a companion ticket at 50% of the same f are. This scheme is not valid in First Class on the  non-stop JFK 
flights. 
  This scheme is also valid for outbound travel upt o 31st Dec 2010. 
3.   Spouse Plus Scheme - Domestic  
  Passengers travelling on full Executive Class far es can now take accompanying Spouse/Child/Parents free of cost 
in the same class and flight while travelling on domestic sectors of AI. 
  Similarly, passengers buying a full fare ticket i n Economy Class are entitled to a complimentary dom estic ticket 
which is valid for 3 months - for their family (spouse/child/parents). Only Government/Airport taxes will be payable on 
the complimentary ticket. 
  The above scheme is valid for outbound travel upt o 31st Dee 2010. 
4.   Corporate House Scheme  
  Air India has launched a revamped Corporate House  Scheme under which tie-ups are done with corporate  for 
targeted volume of yearly travel undertaken by them on AI/IC/ CD code flights. 

/circle6 Incentives by way of credit of a given percentage o n the volume of agreed business are given to the 
corporate. 
/circle6 Corporate Help Desks have been set up at the metros  (at Delhi & Mumbai Airports) to facilitate the 
Corporate clients. 
5.   Various Short-Term Promotional Schemes/ Benefits Launched  
/circle6 AI-AMEX Co-Brand Card  
Silver Card: 15% discount in Normal Economy Class f are 
 (10 KGs Extra Baggage Allowance) 
Gold Card:  15% discount in Economy and 
 10% discount in Executive Class 
 (Lounge facility available at all Metro stations e xcept CCU) 
 (10 KGs Extra Baggage Allowance) 
/circle6 Senior Citizen Discount (travelling on International sectors)  
 20% discount to Senior Citizen (65 years and above ) for their travel on any International sector on a ll 
Market Fares in First and Executive Class w.e.f.  17.11.2009. This scheme was valid for outbound travel on 
or before 31.03.2010. 
/circle6 Get Lucky Offer - II  
 Every 100th passenger booking a domestic sector ti cket for IC code flights online would win one Economy 
Class (2 coupons) on IC code flights on any domestic sector of their choice (except DEL-TRV/ DEL-COK/ 
DEL-CCJ/ DEL-CJB and v.v. sectors). Period of online sale: 16.01.2010 upto 31.03.2010. 
/circle6 Economy Plus Scheme (Upgradation at the Airport)  
 A short-term scheme was launched between 15th Feb.  to 31st March 2010 whereby passengers could avail 
of upgradation at the airport within 45 minutes pri or to the departure of the flight, subject to avail ability of 
seats in Business Class for the flight. 
/circle6 Holiday Packages  
 Special Holiday Packages on Commonwealth Games (In dia at a Glance, Luxury Holidays and Exotic 
Vacations) are available for sale through our website. 
/circle6 Bulk Purchase of Super Saver (8 coupons) in Executive Class  
 A bulk purchase Super Saver scheme in Executive Cl ass was launched during the period 17th February ti ll 
26th February, 2010. After observing the tremendous  response to the scheme, the same was re-launched 
between 02nd March to 20th March, 2010. 
/circle6 Lean Season Promotion:  
 In order to optimize seat utilization on select se ctors having less than 50% seat factor, we launched a short-
term promotional scheme across India Region to all our authorized Passenger  Sales Agents.  The 

scheme was valid for ticketing between 20.03.2010 t ill 30.04.2010 and for travel between 20.03.2010 ti ll 
30.04.2010. 
/circle6 Directional LTC Fares for sale in Q class  for select tourist destinations from DEL to BLR/ COK/ GAU / 
GOI / IXB / IXZ / TRV / IXL / SXR introduced for sale till further notice. 
In order to increase our web sales to 12%, which is  at present 3%, the following initiates have been 
undertaken:  
/circle6 Web Fare Discounts  
 10% discount on all Basic web fares (including non -refundable and night fares) both Domestic and 
International sectors for travel and ticketing till 31 st  July, 2010. 
 Incentive to Online Travel Agents (B2C) Portals ac ross India Region  
 A short-term promotional scheme specially worked o ut for Online Travel Agents (B2C) ex -India for the 
period starting from 01.04.2010 till 30.06.2010. 
Pricing Initiatives April 2009 till 30th April 2010 - Domestic  
/circle6 In order to promote business class travel on Air I ndia domestic sectors Leave Travel Concession Schem e 
(LTC-Executive)  was introduced in Business Class from 7th June 09 . Tickets under the offer are available 
for sale in India. Employees of State & Central Government, Public Sector Undertakings and employees of 
educational institutions, who are entitled to trave l in Executive class, and their Family members trav elling 
on leave and availing LTC facility are eligible for availing these fares. 
/circle6 In order to promote Business class travel on the Domestic network AI introduced Short term promotion for 
selling of Business class Super Saver  tickets in June, 09. Under the scheme multiple use r, Four coupon, 
Business class Super saver booklets were offered for sale at Rs 38000. Validity of sale was 13th June’09 to 
20th June’09. Validity for travel was till 30th Setptember’09. 
/circle6 To promote travel during Lean season short term instant purchase Monsoon Special fares,  were introduced 
for Sale from 27th June, 09 till 3rd July, 09. Travel to be completed before 15th September, 09. 
/circle6 In order to promote Economy class travel  during the lean period, a short-term promotion ‘Quick Returns’  
was launched, for selling of four-coupon Super Saver  booklet @ Rs. 22916. The offer was valid for sale 
from 4th July, 09 to 11th July, 09 and the tickets issued against the offer were valid for travel till 20th Sep, 
09. 
/circle6 In order to promote Lean Sectors, advance purchase fares  were introduced at AP-3 level,  for a limited 
period. The fares were available for sale from 18th July, 09. Travel under these fares was permitted till 20th 
September 09. 
/circle6 Select Lean flights were promoted by offering Flight Specific fares.  These fares were available for sale 
from 5th August, 09 till 23rd September,09 for travel till 26th September, 09. 
/circle6 ‘Independence Special Fares’  were offered on the eve of Independence Day on sel ect sectors/flights. The 
fares were available for Sale from 8th August, 09 to 17th September, 09 for travel to be completed by 20th 
September, 09. 
/circle6 Inaugural fares on the New Sectors  introduced in winter schedule: Short-term Instant purchase inaugural 
fares were launched. The fares were available for sale from 17th October, 09 to 15 November, 09 for travel 
to be completed by 30th November, 09. 
 W.e.f.  1st January, 2010, Seasonality based fares were introduced on: 
 /circle6 DEL-SXR/IXL/IXJ or v.v. 

 /circle6 IXL-IXJ/SXR or v.v.  
 /circle6 IXJ-SXR or v.v. 
/circle6 W.e..f.  1st February, 2010, ‘L’ class fares sold under LEIP was opened for sale outside India. Free baggage 
under Piece concept was extended to passengers traveling to/from USA or Canada against tickets issued in 
‘L’ class. 
/circle6 Link Fares, with Single fuel surcharge were introdu ced on select Domestic routings w.e.f.  5th February, 
2010. 
/circle6 W.e.f.  l0th March,20l0., LTC Fares to/from Bangalore, Kochi, Trivandrum, Bagdogra ,Guwahti, Port Blair, 
Goa, Leh and Srinagar saleable in higher RBD “Q” ag ainst applicable GEIP fares (i.e. third level of 
refundable Easy fares) were introduced to enable Go vernment employees to get confirmation of seats on 
the above high demand destinations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Monday the 20th December, 2010 in Committee Ro om ‘B’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury  ––    Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 3.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
 4. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 5.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 6.  Yogi Aditya Nath 
 7.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 8.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 9.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 10.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 11.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 12.  Shri K. Sugumar 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 * * * 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee and informed them about the agenda of the 
meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
(i) 162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred 
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism; 
(ii) 163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundre d 
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; 
(iii) 164th Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained in the One Hundr ed 
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Shipping; 
(iv) 165th Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundre d 
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture; and 
(v) 166th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  
Fifty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 

3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
 7.  The meeting adjourned at 5:10 P. M . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 