97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
 TOURISM & CULTURE
NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE
 COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS NINETIETH REPORT ON THE ‘DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORT SECTOR
 WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON NEW MODERN AIRPORTS’
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                              
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE              
5.ANNEXURE                                                                                               
6.MINUTES                                                                                                                                                   
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.
      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.
      Smt. Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  Vacant*
 
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Ramdas  Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Sudam Marandi
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27.  Shri Manabendra Shah
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
                                                           
* Vacancy caused by induction of Smt. Ambika Soni in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 29.1.2006
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the
 Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-seventh Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Ninetieth Report on the ‘Development of Airport Sector with special emphasis on
 new modern airports’.
2.    The Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the
 Parliament on the  23
rd August 2005. 
3.    The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Ninetieth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation on 18th November 2005.
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 22nd February 2006.
 
NEW DELHI ;
February 
22, 2006
Phalguna 3, 1927 (Saka)                                             
                          NILOTPAL BASU     
    Chairman
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
 Tourism & Culture.
 
R E P O R T
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the observations/ recommendations as
 contained in its Ninetieth Report on  “Development of Airport Sector with Special Emphasis on new Modern Airports”, which was presented to both
 the Houses of Parliament on 23rd August, 2005.
 2.         Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 18 th November, 2005 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows: -
(i)         Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
              Para Nos.: 51, 65                                                                                                    Total- 2
(ii)        Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies:
Para Nos.:  Nil                                                                                                       Total- Nil
(iii)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 43, 49, 54, 56, 61                                                                                    Total- 5
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are still awaited:
Para Nos.:  20, 21, 26, 31, 46, 62, 70, 82, 86, 90                                                    Total- 10
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee
 should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the
 Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Ninetieth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry, and
 recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
MODERNISATION AND RESTRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 20)
 
5.         The Committee is constrained to note that the proposal regarding modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports has been
 lingering on for a fairly long period and still the Government has not been able to come up with any concrete plans in this regard.  The Ministry of
 Civil Aviation has also not been able to even firm up the financial requirements for these projects.  The Government has been quoting different cost
 estimates at different stage.  The Committee also notes that the initial figures of Rs.10, 000 crore to Rs.20, 000 crore stated by the Secretary of the
 Ministry were too inflated and also gave the impression that the money was required immediately in one go which in fact was actually required in
 phases spread over 15 to 20 years.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
6.         Union Cabinet took decision in the year 2000 to restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through long term lease.  However, while the process
 went along, it was found that AAI Act needed amendment to enable the process to move through long term lease route. The Government took steps
 to amend the AAI Act 1994.  It took nearly three and half Years to carry the amendment.  Finally the amendment was approved by the Parliament in
 July 2003.  The Union Cabinet in Sept 2003 decided to restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through JV route involving leasing of assets. 
 Accordingly an Empowered Group of Ministers was appointed.  After undertaking extensive due diligence at various levels now the modernization
 and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports is at the final stage.  The technical and financial bids have been received on 14.9.2005 and are at
 evaluation stage. The Government has a well determined mode and plan of the process of modernization of these airports.
 
7.         The delay in this process has been mainly on account of legal problems, in-depth and intense Inter-ministerial consultations as this transaction
 was first of its kind both in terms of scope and complexity.  The airports are to be developed by the Joint Venture Company (JVC) which will
 necessarily have a world class airport operator. Apart from executing the mandated capital expenditure within 2 and 5 years of the effective date, the
 JVC will have to adhere to the initial development plan submitted at the time of bidding and the Master Plan to be submitted to the Govt. within six
 months of the signing of the agreement.


97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 
8.         The variance in cost estimates occurred because they have been furnished at different points of time when the Global Technical Adviser was
 still working on its report. Capital expenditure is to be carried out over a period of 20 years broken into 4 stages of 5 year each and linked with the
 traffic trigger with substantial capital expenditure envisaged in Phase I i.e. 2005 to 2009. The estimates do not include the expenditure to be incurred
 by AAI for modernizing the ATC etc.  It also does not include expenditure which could be incurred by other public agencies for instance, Delhi
 Metro, NHAI, Delhi Water Supply, BSES, etc.  Further, nothing prevents JVC to incur more expenditure if it is warranted by the expected traffic.
 More traffic would mean more revenue and therefore there would be incentive for JVC to enhance capacity to get more traffic. If traffic trigger
 requires early and heavier investment, the JVC is incentivised to undertake the investment accordingly. In the light of the above even the initial
 figures of Rs.10000 to Rs.20000 crore for both the airports may not be unrealistic. This figure is less than the investment incurred at other
 international airports with world class standards. It has been estimated that the capital investment to the extent of Rs.7961 crores and Rs.6131 crores
 will be required for Delhi and Mumbai airports, respectively over a period of 20 years in phases.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
9.         The Committee is not convinced with the reply put forth by the Ministry and observes that clear-cut statistics with regard to modernization of
 airports should be given to the public and the Parliament.  As the proposal regarding modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai Airports
 involves huge expenditure and also determines the future of aviation sector in this country, the exaggerated initial cost estimates indicate poor
 financial planning.  The Committee feels that the unrealistic cost estimates at the planning stage might have swayed the decision in favour of the
 Joint Venture route. 
 (Recommendation at Para 21)
10.       The Committee feels that the process of modernization as explained by the Ministry, is very slow and the target to be achieved is also minimal
 in terms of global standards.  The Committee observes that Airport Authority of India at present has already achieved the target with the present rate
 of investment.  The Committee does not agree with the Ministry of Civil Aviation that resource crunch is the main reason for inviting private sector
 participation for the modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai Airports.  The quantum of investment which is to the tune of Rs.13, 786
 crore, required for modernization of Delhi and Mumbai airports is not on the higher side and that too is required in a manner over a period of 15 to
 20 years.  The Committee feels that the Government can even mobilize the funds required.  This will ensure not only the management control of the
 proposed operators of the airports in the hands of Indian nationals but also result in protecting the safety, security and sovereignty of the country.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 11.      The decision to restructure and modernize airports through PPP route is a widely prevalent public policy tool and is not primarily dictated by
 the resource crunch faced by the Government. The intention is to have world class airport and world class management with the world class airport
 operator under public private partnership. While Government can mobilize the funds such funds are more needed to be used for supporting social
 sector development programmes such as health, education, social welfare, etc. In the airport sector if private investment can come it would be
 endeavour of the Government to facilitate that as the public investment saved here could be used elsewhere where it is more required such as North
 East etc.
 
12.       The airports at Delhi and Mumbai shall be managed by the JVC which will be registered in India under the Companies Act and therefore will
 function under the Indian Companies Act.  This JVC shall have the right to operate and manage the airports as per the transaction agreements singed
 within the ambit of laws of India, e.g., Indian Contract Act, Indian Arbitration Act and other applicable laws. The safety shall continue to be the
 responsibility of DGCA and there is no dilution in its authority. Security shall be the responsibility of State and there is no dilution in its
 responsibility as far as airport operated by JVC is concerned.
 
13.       In the JVC maximum FDI, which is permitted, is only 49%.  Thus, the management control of these airports remain in the hands of Indian
 nationals.  However the management of these airports is sought to be improved by involving world class airport operators in the JVC. Given the
 above the development of metro airports through the JVC route does not, in any way, compromise on safety, security and sovereignty of the country.
 In fact, the ownership of assets remain with the AAI / Govt.
 
14.       As regards performance standards, Government is aiming to achieve average global standard of 3.75
 with the aim of ultimately attaining
 standard of 4 (The highest standard of world being 4.45).  The current standards at these airports are much below the world standards. Earlier, AAI
 did not undertake survey of these airports through IATA.  This has been commissioned from January 2005 on quarterly basis.  As per the latest
 survey from April – June 2005, the average at Delhi and Mumbai airports is 2.94 and 3.06 respectively.  In case of Mumbai, the average has declined
 from 3.20 to 3.06 as recorded from Jan – March 2005 whereas at Delhi, there is a slight improvement.  It may be mentioned that survey of one or two
 quarter is not enough to judge the attainment of standards and linking with investments. In fact, the standards coveredunder IATA survey are directly
 related with the management of facilities. In this respect, AAI’s management leaves much to be desired.  AAI does not have an institutional
 mechanism to take appropriate action / curing of deficiency pointed out in the survey as there is no penalty / liquidated damage imposed on AAI for
 non-attainment of standards as against the JVC which will have penalties for the non-attainment of the same. This could even lead to termination of
 the agreement.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
15.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee is not convinced that the Government cannot
 mobilise the funds for executing the modernisation plan of Delhi and Mumbai airports on its own as the estimated quantum of investment is required
 over a period of 15 to 20 years.   Moreover, the modernisation plan for the Mumbai airport cannot address the situation beyond the year 2014. The
 Committee therefore recommends that the Government should reconsider its plans to privatise Delhi and Mumbai airports under the garb of
 modernisation and instead give a serious consideration to the workable alternate plan suggested by Airports Authority of India Employees Joint
 Forum. The Committee also recommends that the Government should immediately initiate the groundwork for Greenfield Airports in Delhi and
 Mumbai with public-private participation.  
 
16.       As regards performance standards, the Committee is sad to note that even today the Airports Authority of India does not have an institutional
 mechanism to take appropriate action / curing of deficiency, as pointed out in the survey conducted by IATA regarding performance standards, and

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 there is no penalty / liquidated damage imposed on AAI for non-attainment of standards.  It indicates that due to lack of provision of imposing
 penalty/liquidated damage on Airports Authority of India for non-attainment of standards, AAI could not fulfill consumer satisfaction and meet
 international norms and standards. The Committee feels that this needs to be corrected.  In an era of globalisation, a major profit making PSU like the
 Airports Authority of India cannot function in an isolated manner in the aviation sector.  There should not be any compromise in terms of consumer
 satisfaction and overall compliance to international norms and standards.  Both Airports Authority of India and any other private sector entrant
 through JV route should be treated at par.  The Committee fails to understand that if Airports Authority of India lacks adequate mechanism to cure
 deficiencies and is not conforming to international performance standards, then how it is handling all other airports in the country.
 
(Recommendation at Para 26)
 
17.       The Committee notes that the Government intends to attract investment worth Rs.5825 crore spread over a period of 15 years for the
 modernization and restructuring of Mumbai airport.    The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that there is no scope of having a second
 runway at Mumbai airport which could be helpful in terms of air operations.  Further, the passenger traffic movement is also expected to go up from
 14 million in 2004 to 52 million in 2024.  The Committee also understands that by 2012, Mumbai airport would get absolute chocked.  However, the
 development plans of Ministry of Civil Aviation for Mumbai Airports goes beyond 2012 i.e. upto 2019.  The Committee fails to understand as to
 how the huge investment to be made at the airport could be justified when the existing capacity constrains would not permit capacity addition.  The
 Committee is of the opinion that modernization is not merely about the creation of facilities, expansion of the terminal buildings and putting up fancy
 malls at the airports.  It should rather increase the capacity of the airports to handle more flights, by construction of additional runways, which is
 certainly not a probability in the case of Mumbai airport.  The Committee feels that if international flights have to move around on the skies for half-
an-hour to forty-five minutes after having reached the destination, then there could be no commensurate return as far as the investment, increase in
 the number of aircraft and the number of passengers actually traveling to the airport are concerned.  The Committee is of the firm view that investing
 huge money on modernization of Mumbai airport would be waste.  The Committee is of the opinion that there are certain inherent technological
 constrains while reconstructing an existing structure, particularly in the case of Mumbai airport and the option of going in for a new Greenfield
 airport rather than proposed modernization of Mumbai airport will be more prudent.  However, some investment towards augmenting the capacity
 will have to be made to address the immediate exigencies of the situation at least till such time a new Greenfield airport comes into operation.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should rather go in for construction of a new Greenfield airport with much more capacity at
 Mumbai which would require much less investment and the efforts in this direction should begin at the earliest.  In such case both the Greenfield and
 the existing airport can compete with each other.  The Committee is also of the opinion that given the growth of aviation sector in country, the
 existing infrastructure at Delhi airport also possesses that inherent lacuna and is therefore, inadequate to handle the growth being projected for the
 future by the Government.  The Committee recommends that the Government should explore the possibility of having a Greenfield airport in Delhi
 also.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
18.      Global Technical Adviser (GTA)’s report on airfield capacity of Mumbai states as follows:
 
(i)
                  With enhanced taxiways and enhanced ATC procedures, the existing runway could accommodate projected traffic to between 2009
 and 2014.
(ii)                With some increase in average aircraft size, the existing runway, with enhanced taxiway and ATC procedures could accommodate
 projected traffic to beyond 2014.
(iii)               A close spaced parallel runway could accommodate projected traffic levels to about 2019.
(iv)              To achieve the 20 year forecast traffic a wide spaced parallel runway would be required.
(v)                Achievement of high capacity figures is dependent on several factors, including some controlled by others (e.g. ATC, airlines). This
 will occur through gradual development over future years.
 
19.       Setting up of a runway at (iii) above requires relocation of hangars of AI, additional land and removal of obstacles in the approach pathways,
 where heavy public investment will be needed besides practical difficulties. Action at (iv) is also not practical. Action at (ii) above will add capacity
 by 50% and last to meet demand upto 2014 and beyond. Thus, the existing airport will have to cater to the traffic upto 2014. Capacity on the airside
 and terminal will need to be created to cater to the traffic upto 2014 and beyond.  The capacity on the airside will be added by taxiways, ATC
 procedures and terminal expansions, etc.  These facilities will remain at the existing airport.  Hence the investment made on these capacity will not
 be a waste but will be used by the existing airport for future.
 
20.       As regards a Greenfield airport at Mumbai, there is a proposal at planning stage for setting up a second airport linked with the above traffic
 trigger and other constraints.  As regard Delhi, the present airport can be developed to meet traffic requirement upto 80 million passengers. Hence, it
 is felt that there is no need for second Greenfield airport in Delhi immediately. There is a huge difference between the cost of incremental capacity at
 a Brownfield Airport and the cost of creating the same capacity through the Greenfield Airport. As long as the capacity is not optimized at the
 Brownfield airport, foregoing the option of creation of additional capacity at the Brownfield Airport and setting up a Greenfield Airport will not be
 prudent.
 
21.       At Mumbai airport there is still significant scope for optimizing the capacity through physical, technological and managerial improvements. 
 By undertaking improved ATC procedures, taxiways etc. the aircraft movement can increase from present 25-26 to 40-42 per hour i.e. an increase of
 60% (approx.). Parallel or two runways not necessarily generate adequate capacity if well designed taxi ways and parking bays do not co-exist.
 
22.       However there could be different drivers for decision to develop Greenfield Airport and decision could be taken in future based on the then
 available requirements. A Right of First Refusal (ROFR) is proposed to be provided to the existing airport operator at Delhi / Mumbai for the second
 airport subject to the following conditions.
 
(i)
                  The second airport will not be set up before the trigger point in terms of traffic growth has occurred.
 
(ii)
                Approval process for second airport may begin five years or even earlier before the trigger point is likely to be reached.

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 
(iii)               JVC need not be consulted in development of the proposal of the second airport due to conflict of interest.
 
(iv)              The shareholding restriction to which the ROFR is tied may be removed and instead provide that the approval of AAI for change of
 shareholding and airport operator will be required.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
23.       The Committee notes that in the assessment report of the Global Technical Advisor (GTA) on airfield capacity of Mumbai airport, it has been
 stated that with enhanced taxiways and enhanced ATC procedures, the existing runway could accommodate projected traffic to between 2009 and
 2014.  Moreover, with some increase in average aircraft size, the existing runway, with enhanced taxiway and ATC procedures could accommodate
 projected traffic to beyond 2014 and to achieve the 20 year forecast traffic, a wide spaced parallel runway would be required.  In brief, the Ministry
 is of the opinion that the existing airport will cater to traffic upto 2014 and that capacity on the airside and terminal will need to be created to cater to
 traffic upto 2014 and beyond. 
 
24.       The Committee observes that there is a contradiction in the stand of the Ministry as they first agreed that there was no scope for any further
 development on the airside at Mumbai airport since there was no scope of having a second runway at that airport which could be helpful in terms of
 air-operations.  The position now informed by the Ministry is that "There is a huge difference between the cost of incremental capacity at a
 Brownfield Airport and the cost of creating the same capacity through the Greenfield Airport. As long as the capacity is not optimized at the
 Brownfield airport, foregoing the option of creation of additional capacity at the Brownfield Airport and setting up a Greenfield Airport will not be
 prudent".
 
25.       The Committee feels that the Ministry is keeping the Committee half informed as they are now saying that "parallel or two runways not
 necessarily generate adequate capacity if well designed taxi ways and parking bays do not co-exist".   The Committee has not been informed about
 the present scheme of things and the proposed modernization programme to be undertaken in the immediate future at Mumbai/Delhi airports by the
 private sector and how much capacity is estimated to be added and whether there will be newly designed taxi ways and parking bays.  
           
26.       The Committee desires that the Ministry should atleast now apprise it clearly about (a) the traffic and cargo expected to increase in future in
 the normal course on five yearly basis; the capacity addition with modifications in the existing Brownfield airports in Mumbai and Delhi through
 modernization under JV route; (b) the expected increase in traffic/cargo after modernization of Mumbai and Delhi airports; (c) the cost estimation of
 Greenfield airports at Mumbai/Delhi and the capacity of those airports in terms of time period vis-à-vis traffic and cargo to be handled; and (d) the
 difference in the cost of modernization of the existing Brownfield airports and construction of new Greenfield airports. 
 
27.       The Committee is of the opinion that without a proper assessment, it will be myopic to conclude that there is no immediate need of Greenfield
 airports at Mumbai and Delhi.  The Ministry has not even estimated as to when the trigger point will occur in terms of traffic growth to justify the
 new Greenfield airports in these metro cities. It is surprising to note that even at the planning stage, the Ministry is proposing to provide a Right of
 First Refusal (ROFR) for the second airport to the airport operator at Delhi / Mumbai, thereby favouring JV route. The existing plans therefore may
 lead to a situation wherein both the existing as well as the second airports at Delhi/Mumbai will be under the management control of private
 operators.
 
            28.       The Committee is also of the opinion that the Ministry should reconsider its present plan on the modernisation and restructuring of
 Delhi and Mumbai Airports keeping in view the current scenario of the domestic as well as international aviation sector.  The present plan will only
 create monopoly in Delhi and Mumbai.  The Ministry has turned a blind eye to the paradigm shift which is occurring in South East Asian and East
 Asian countries where the focus is on the development of both Greenfield and Brownfield airports together, serving the dual purpose of enhancing
 the capacity and providing healthy competition in the best interests of the aviation sector. 
 
 (Recommendation at Para 31)
 
29.       The Committee is not convinced with the replies submitted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation with regard to revenue neutrality of Airport
 Authority of India after modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports. From the figures furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation,
 it is evident that almost 77 per cent of the profits generated by Airport Authority of India during 2003-04 were from Delhi and Mumbai airports and
 it is these two airports that the Government intends to restructure and modernize through joint venture route. The Committee had commented upon
 this matter in its 88
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Civil Aviation and had made the following recommendations: -
“The Committee understands that the revenue generated by the Government from the profit making airports is used to fulfill the
 developmental needs as well as day-to-day activities of the other airports. The Committee fails to understand as to how the government would
 fulfill the development needs of the other airports after the management of these airports would become difficult in such a scenario. The
 Committee is in favour of modernization of the Mumbai and Delhi airports, but not at the cost of the other airports in the country maintained
 by the Airport Authority of India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should re-look at the modernization process
 of Delhi and Mumbai airports so that the development and maintenance of the other airports in the country is not compromised.”
 
30.       The Committee recommends that the Government may consider its observation enumerated above seriously and review the strategy for
 modernization of Delhi and Mumbai airports. Further, the Committee strongly recommends that the revenue sharing arrangements have to remain
 revenue neutral on a dynamic basis for the Airport Authority of India and the interest of this PSU should be protected even after modernization of
 these two airports.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
31.       Almost 70% of the revenue of Airports Authority of India (AAI) comes from aeronautical revenue of which about 60% of the aeronautical
 revenue comes through RNFC charges and TNLC charges which would continue to be received by AAI at the metro airports as these functions

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 would be retained by AAI. As the capacity of the airports will be enhanced through investment by the JVC there would be growth in the revenue of
 ATC also through increase RNFC and TNLC. Security portion of PSF will also go up. The JVC would be paying concession fee as proportion of
 gross revenue.  This concession fee would again boost up the revenue of AAI. The JVC shall be paying lump sum fee of Rs.300 crore for both
 airports also which could give notional as well as real return adding up the AAI’s revenue. AAI shall also be participating in the equity of the JVC
 and therefore gains through dividend and capital gains (as a shareholder) would also accrue to AAI. There is also saving the opportunity cost as the
 funds would be required only to the extent of 26% in the JVC from AAI (74% shall be private sector contribution).  AAI could thus use the funds
 saved to finance the development of other airports. There will also be saving of significant order under various heads of expenditure as these will be
 borne by the JVC at these airports.
 
32.       If AAI has to finance the entire cost of development of Delhi and Mumbai airports, the development of other airports would suffer. It is also
 relevant to note that AAI has to work on ‘Commercial Principle’ and it must therefore ensure that all its airports are viable. If some airports have to
 be operated on socio-economic considerations then the Government could come out with a suitable support for such airports and thus the profitable
 airports do not have to be denied the development on account of the existence of large number of non-viable airports.  
 
33.       It is expected that with the JV transaction, AAI will be better off as during the period 2006-2024 the present value of cash flow would be
 Rs.1286.5 crores where as if status quo is maintained then there could be a negative present value of cash flow to AAI at Rs.  (-) 998.89 crore.
 
34.       It should also be noted that as per Section 25(2) of the AAI Act, 1994, the Authority has to pay the balance of its annual net profits to the
 Central Government. The accumulated reserves of AAI which are deployed to earn interest are funds which should have been deposited in the
 Consolidated Funds of India which could have facilitated the financing of schemes for socio-economic development.
 
35.       Post restructuring, AAI will not only be able to maintain other airports in the country but also upgrade and modernize these airports.  AAI is
 planning to modernize 35 non-metro airports to world class standards by using reserves including internal reserves.  These reserves can either be
 used at these two airports i.e. Delhi & Mumbai (though very partially) or used for maintenance and modernization of other airports. As per
 estimation of AAI, net profit of AAI will be Rs.231 and Rs.242 crore in the year 2005-06, 2006-07 without Delhi and Mumbai airports and this will
 keep on rising over the period.
 
36.       In the light of above, post-restructuring AAI’s ability to maintain other airports is not jeopardized due to dynamic emerging revenue schemes. 
 AAI as PSU remain empowered to be financially protected.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
37.The Committee notes carefully the assurance given by the Ministry that "AAI will be better off as during the period 2006-2024 the present value
 of cash flow would be Rs.1286.5 crores where as if status quo is maintained then there could be a negative present value of cash flow to AAI at Rs. 
 (-) 998.89 crore" and "post restructuring AAI will not only be able to maintain other airports in the country but also upgrade and modernize these
 airports".  However, the Committee reiterates its observations/recommendations that the Ministry should review its strategy for the modernisation
 and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  
 
GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AT BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD
(Recommendation at Para 43)
 
38.       The Committee observes that the replies of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in the context of award of contracts at Bangalore International
 Airport Limited are evasive and highly unsatisfactory.   The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation was aware that as per the provisions
 of the concession agreement of BIAL, the promoters themselves would be participants in executing contracts.  Since the equity holders are
 themselves the service providers in Bangalore International Airport Limited,  there is certainly a case for conflict of interest involved in Bangalore
 International Airport Limited.  The Committee would like to highlight that it had expressed its apprehensions on the issue during the oral evidence of
 the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation held on the 8
th November, 2004.  However, at that time, the Ministry of Civil Aviation had not
 accepted the observations of the Committee.  Ministry of Civil Aviation had on the other hand, emphasized that there is going to be an open
 tendering and there will be no conflict of interest reflected in the awarding of the contracts.  Now the apprehensions of the Committee have come
 true.  The Committee is of the view that there was complete lack of transparency in the awarding of EPC contracts at Bangalore International Airport
 Limited and that the role of Government of India representatives on the Board of Bangalore International Airport Limited was not above board.  The
 Committee recommends that in view of the facts brought out above, a proper enquiry should be conducted into the entire matter by an independent
 agency.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
39.       This issue has been examined. The following facts may be placed before the Hon’ble Standing Committee for taking a correct perspective of
 the issue:
 
40.      To set up a Greenfield airport project near Bangalore, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed between AAI and KSIIDC on 3
rd
 May 1999. As provided for in the MOU, a Steering Committee comprising of two representatives each of AAI, KSIIDC, MCA, Government of
 Karnataka was set up by Government of Karnataka to oversee the entire tendering process for the selection of a Joint Venture Partner (JVP). M/s.
 IL&FS was appointed as strategic Advisor by the Steering Committee followed by the appointment of M/s. Dua Associates as Legal Advisor.
 
41.       The selection process for the JVP at the level of Government of Karnataka (GOK) commenced in May 1999 through an International
 Competitive Bidding Process, soliciting Expressions of Interest (EOI) from interested parties. Seventeen responses were received and seven
 consortia were short-listed, as per the eligibility criteria in the EOI document. Two consortia withdrew after short-listing and five consortia were
 issued the Request for Proposal (RFP) documents in March 2000.
 The RFP stage was split into two parts. At the end of the first part, two bidders
 were to be short-listed based on detailed technical, commercial and financial data furnished by the bidders, as per the requirements of the RFP

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 documents. Specifically the airport operating experience of the bidding consortium and the airport development plan (specific to the project) were to
 be evaluated.
 
42.       The second part of RFP required these two bidders were to be shortlisted to prepare Detailed Project Report (DPR) with a view to ensuring
 active competition between top two ranked bidders.
 
43.       It may be noted that the entire selection process was on the basis of a progressive assessment with scrutiny of increasing level of details in the
 proposal.  At the final stage, the financial offers were also received that detailed the project cost and also specifically set out the guaranteed
 maximum financial support that the project would require from the State Government.  The transparent global bid process thus resulted in :
 
·
        selecting a consortium that has established skills in financing, constructing, maintaining and operating an international airport;
·        an approved airport development plan including the phasing of such development;
·        a settled project cost’ and
·        a settled guaranteed maximum financial support.
 
44.       The issue of the successful JVP handling the project in terms of getting the EPC Contracts etc. was suitably clarified in the response given to
 the question raised by the bidders, to whom RFP document was issued at GOK level.  Following Questions & Answers thereto shall clarify the issue
 further :
 
“Questions : (raised by bidders)
 
(a) To our understanding the successful consortium will decide on the JVPs and after establishing the JVC, will be awarded the contract by the
 JVC to execute the project according to the terms mentioned in his proposal. The winning consortium will also designate the consortium
 members responsible for the operation of the airport who will also be awarded a contract by the JVC according to the terms of his proposal
(b) One of the items on the indicative list of DPR study components is ‘Procurement of Contractors/Operators’, even though the JVP would
 have at least one (Operator) if not both of these components as part of the consortium. As the selection criteria would enable the Sponsors to
 select well reputed and experienced Bidders through an ICB, it would be counter-productive to the process to expect bid-out of any of these
 components
(c) Are there any limitation to the role of the JVC/JVP with regard to the realization and operation of the project? Can related companies of
 the JVP participate directly in the realization and operation of the project (i.e. as contractor, operator, etc.)? Is an open bidding compulsory?
Answer:   (furnished and approved by Steering Committee)
 
            The Operation and Maintenance responsibilities shall be discharged by the Operator member of the Consortium on terms and conditions
 flowing from the accepted DPR of the selected JVP. Similarly the JVP members can have a first right on the construction responsibilities on terms
 and conditions flowing from the accepted DPR of the selected JVP. Provided that these rights shall be subject to independent review of terms and
 costs, satisfaction of regulating authority (if any), lenders and minority equity partners acting reasonably, following transparent audit and review
 processes as reflected in the JVA.”
 
45.       Prior to the issuing the above reply, the Steering Committee constituted as above also obtained the legal opinion from their legal advisors. 
 The extract of the opinion is reproduced below :
 
QUOTE
“At the outset while it may be noted that the involvement of Government in the venture makes it important that any decision involving expenditure
 public money must generally be carried out through a transparent competitive bidding process, a deviation from the bidding process can be resorted
 to in certain exceptional cases.  The Supreme Court has taken this view in Sri Sachidanand Pandey v. State of West Bengal (AIR 1987 SC 1109). 
 Therefore any decision of the Government to disregard the process of competitive bidding should be properly reasoned.  In view of this, in the event
 of the Promoters choose to let the JVP to undertake and perform the Project, it may be advisable for the promoters to record a sound reasoning in
 their Steering Committee meeting minutes, in order that any challenge to the decision of the Promoters could be adequately met.  Further, it could be
 contended that the procedure adopted for selection of the JVP being in itself a bidding process for the same is a valid ground for not adopting a
 bidding process for the realization and operation of the project.”
 
UNQUOTE
 
46.       Further, the Steering Committee with a view to safeguarding the interest of minority shareholders decided in April 2000 that both AAI and
 KSIIDC would have the right to review and approve the project implementation process and steps including the terms of contract. This proviso was
 to be suitably reflected in the Shareholders Agreement.
 
47.       Considering that a full competitive bidding procedure has been adopted, both in the selection of JVP and the process involved in finalizing the
 project specifications and cost through the DPR stage, it was decided in the Steering Committee meeting held in April 2000, with subsequent
 ratification by Steering Committee meeting held in May 2000, that the JVP should have the freedom to implement and operate the project as per the
 provisions of the DPR and as per clarifications given in the Questions-Answers. The meeting of May 2000 was convened again on the request of
 members of the Steering Committee representing Government of India / Airports Authority of India as they desired the Steering Committee to
 reconsider the issue as they were absent in the meeting of April 2000.  After reconsideration of this issue, the same was duly approved by the
 Steering Committee.
 
48.       The justification for allowing the JVP to implement the project as per the procedure enumerated above was considered acceptable by the
 Steering Committee on account of following reasons:
 
(i)                  The economic regulator to be appointed by the Government of India will be applying the principles of cost recovery.

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
(ii)                These infrastructure projects will also be subjected to detailed due diligence by lenders both in respect of technical as also cost
 aspects before financial closure.
(iii)               The project agreements including EPC  requires the approval of all the shareholders.
(iv)              Independent legal opinion obtained in this regard clearly stated that the procedure adopted for the selection of JVP being itself a
 bidding process, the same is a valid ground for not adopting a bidding process for the realization of operation of the project.
(v)                The bidding process followed, as decided in the Steering Committee meeting held in May 2000, was also required to be appropriately
 brought out in the Cabinet Note [State Cabinet] at the time of seeking approval for the selection of JVP.  It is to be noted that the
 entire evaluation of the bids was placed before the State Cabinet by the GoK in June 2001.  The Cabinet accepted the
 recommendations proposed and authorized the constitution of a Negotiating Committee to discuss the proposal submitted by the
 strategic JVP with a view to obtain further reduction in the project cost and also to bring down the quantum of state support.
(vi)              It must be noted that strategic investors in infrastructure projects associate with such projects to create value by bringing in their
 expertise and through such value addition seek to justify their investments. This issue was clearly pointed out during the pre-RFP
 meeting wherein bidders had unanimously sought clarification on their participation as equity investors holding majority stake and
 additionally being awarded contracts to their consortium members. 
49.       It is clear from the above that when a decision was taken to permit the successful JVP to get EPC contracts, none of the joint venture partners
 was holding equity and the JVC was not in existence.  Hence the issue of conflict of interest between the equity holders and the EPC Contractors was
 non-existent.
50.       After the selection of the JVP, detailed discussions were undertaken by the Negotiating Team constituted by the Government of Karnataka
 (GOK) with the JVP for optimizing the project cost and identifying the quantum and structure of State support for the project cost. After detailed
 analysis and optimization of cost, the Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP) of the Project Cost was arrived at in September 2001.  The finally
 negotiated GMP and the guaranteed maximum state support were again put up to the State Cabinet by the GoK and approved by the State Cabinet in
 October 2001.
51.       Further, keeping in view with the above mentioned provisions, the Shareholders Agreement (SHA) was entered into on 23
rd January 2002,
 after obtaining the approval of the State Cabinet in January 2002.
52.       The selection of EPC Contractors was thus subsumed with the process of selection of the strategic JVP, which process was concluded in
 January 2002 with the execution of the SHA.
53.       The SHA provided that · The company shall enter into appropriate project agreements which inter-alia included EPC contracts with Siemens
 and L&T, who were members of the successful consortium. · These agreements shall be on arm’s length basis by following a transparent audit and
 review process. · Further, the SHA also included provision to the effect that any bids received from private promoters or their affiliates in respect of
 any contract will be evaluated by an Independent Consulting Engineer (ICE) appointed by the   BIAL and the same shall also be subject to detailed
 procurement guidelines, to ensure competitiveness. · BIAL is also a signatory to the SHA and as such is required to fulfill its obligations as provided
 for in the SHA.
54.       The above SHA was taken on record by the Board of BIAL in its 9th meeting held on 15th March 2002. Thus, the provisions of SHA on the
 above lines became the decisions of BIAL.
55.       Following this decision, BIAL was required to enter into project agreements with Siemens, L&T and Zurich Airport, who were the JVPs in
 the JVC.
 
56.       In order to ensure that no conflict of interest situation is given rise to on account of the JVPs being entitled to submit their bids as EPC
 contractors, BIAL thereafter appointed Dorsch consultants, Germany as the Owner’s Engineer to prepare the various technical documents including
 specification documents [describing the employer’s requirements for the complete airport system] and comprehensive set of documents to reflect the
 technical specifications. The progress made in this regard was put up to the Board of BIAL in its meeting held on 7
th May 2002 and 8 th July 2002.
 Subsequently, in the 12 th Board meeting of BIAL held in September 2002, detailed presentations were made on all technical matters and the
 approval of the Board was taken for the employer’s requirement/outline specifications, including deviations. In the same meeting, in-principle
 approval of the Board was also taken for the appointment of ICE as provided for in the SHA for independent review of the specifications, proof
 checks of the designs submitted by the EPC contractors, verification of quantities, establishment of reasonableness of EPC price by undertaking
 benchmarking exercise of the cost against similar projects etc.  Thus, in the process it was ensured by BIAL that the project cost is not bloated.
 Further, the Board also took note of an independent review of the project conducted by the technical advisor appointed by KSIIDC namely Mott
 Macdonald (MMD). MMD had detailed discussions with Owner’s Engineer i.e. Dorsch consultants and various suggestions made by them in respect
 of passenger flow in terminal building, runway length, phasing of construction, collection of additional data etc., were noted by the Board for
 appropriate inclusion in the specifications.
 
57.       In the meeting of the BIAL’s Board held in November 2002, after the approval of the proposal by the Board, M/s.C.R. Narayana Rao
 Associates and M/s. Dorsch Consultants were appointed as On-shore and Off-shore ICEs respectively.  The scope of services to be provided by the
 ICEs, inter-alia, were as under:
 
Study the outline specifications, master plan and the drawing prepared by the Owners Engineers.
Study the draft conditions of the contract as agreed with the EPC contractors
Proof check of the design submitted by the EPC contractors and verification of quantities
Establish the reasonableness of the EPC price based on benchmarking of the cost against similar projects of similar scope and nature
 
58.       Based on the exercise, of negotiations with the above EPC Contractors, an overall reduction of Rs.36 crores was agreed to by the EPC
 contractors and the EPC price bids were finalized accordingly.
 
59.       Following would indicate that a transparent process was            adopted in respect of all issues concerning the award of EPC contract by
 BIAL:-
           
(i)
                  All the five short-listed bidders for the second stage of RFP clearly knew that they would be awarded the EPC contracts.

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
(ii)                The selection process itself was based on international competitive tendering process and included the preparation of DPR by the two top
 ranked finally short-listed bidders.
(iii)               The price quoted by the selected JVP was further reviewed by the negotiating tem in September 2001 and the GMP arrived at.
(iv)              The DPR provisions became the guiding principles for the preparation of BIAL’s requirement.
(v)                The process involved the appointment of Owner’s Engineer for finalizing the technical specifications and drawings.
(vi)              The process involved the appointment of ICEs and as a result competitiveness of the EPC price was ensured through the benchmarking of
 EPC price with the cost for similar projects.  The ICE submitted a very detailed report for the consideration of BIAL management.  This
 exercise resulted in overall price reduction of Rs.36 crores.
It is clear that the conflict of interest situation, if any, was avoided by the above process.
60.       The award of EPC contract to the strategic investors who are holding equity in BIAL is not an unusual feature. Many of the road projects and
 infrastructure projects for concession have been granted as per the information gathered include such provision and many such projects have already
 been implemented. Some of such projects are:
o       Coimbatore bypass road project
o       Watrak Bridge project (Ahmedabad-Vadodara NH)
o       Narmada Infrastructure project
o       GVK Jaipur-Kishangarh Expressway project
o       Ahmedabad-Mehsana Toll Road
o       Second Vivekananda Bridge (Tollway)
o       Dhamra Port Project, Orissa
o       Kakinada Port Project
o       Haldia berth project
61.       The BIAL project is monitored through the provisions of Concession Agreement.  Further, it is clarified that the Concession Agreement
 signed in July 2004 does not have any provision for issues relating to award of EPC contract.  It is to be noted here that the decision to award the
 EPC contracts to the strategic investors was taken during the bid process in 1999/2000 by the Steering Committee and by the Board of BIAL
 subsequently in 2002 while the Concession Agreement was signed in July 2004. As such the decision to award the EPC contracts, as indicated
 above, was taken at the bidding stage.  Further, the provisions with regard to the award of EPC contracts are contained in the SHA entered into in
 January 2002 and not in the Concession Agreement signed in July 2004.
 
62.       It is stated that there was no conflict of interest in terms of the strategic investors holding equity in the company to be the EPC contractors as
 the process itself was undertaken through international competitive bidding and there was total transparency in awarding EPC contracts. The role of
 Government nominees on the Steering Committee and Board of BIAL has been above board as the whole process was through a transparent process.
 
63.       It is further stated that equity holders i.e. Siemens & L&T had already got EPC contract rights in the year 2002 and was not fresh issue in
 2004. While stating before the Hon’ble Committee in November 2004, the reference of the Ministry was that in future EPC contracts will be awarded
 by a competitive process as the EPC contracts in BIAL had already been given to the strategic JVPs partners in terms of the SHA executed in
 January 2002, which in turn was based on the parameters finalized at the bidding stage.  As such, the discussions with the Hon’ble Committee could
 not have referred to the initial phase of the project but only with reference to EPC contracts to be awarded for the subsequent expansion phase. This
 Ministry has issued detailed guidelines in this regard to all State Governments in future.
 
64.       In the conclusion, since the decision to award the EPC contracts to the strategic JVPs was a decision taken at the bidding stage itself and the
 same were extensively discussed by the Steering Committee, who had also taken appropriate legal opinion and the entire selection process was duly
 approved by the State Cabinet and further a well built-in mechanism for independent audit, review and arm’s length principles were followed by
 BIAL based on the clear obligations envisaged in the SHA, this Ministry is of the view that the whole process was transparent.  Further, the decision
 having been taken at the level of State Government, Steering Committee and by the Board of BIAL a JV with majority of 74% private investors
 based on the provisions of the SHA, no such issue emerges that needs to be investigated and hence no enquiry is required.  Moreover, the Ministry
 has already taken steps for future by issuing guidelines for competitive mode of awarding EPC contracts by Greenfield airports. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
65.       The Committee is not convinced by the reply furnished by the Ministry on the Greenfield Airport at Bangalore.   It is clear from the reply that
 the clause regarding the operation of the EPC Contracts by the Joint Venture Partners did not exist in the initial International Bidding Process. The
 issue of EPC contracts was settled between the shortlisted bidders at a later stage that too at the instance of such bidders.  The Committee notes that
 the deviation from the transparent competitive bidding process can be resorted only in exceptional cases.  The Committee finds that the Ministry has
 not justified the existence of exceptional circumstances in the award of EPC contracts at BIAL to Joint Venture Partners (JVPs).  Therefore, it is
 fallacious to contend that the procedure adopted for selection of the JVP being in itself a bidding process, it is a valid ground for not adopting a
 bidding process for the realization and operation of the project.  The Committee is therefore of the opinion that the further procedures evolved in
 respect of EPC contracts do not cure the inherent lacuna in the award of such contracts to JVPs.   Moreover, the justification sought by the Ministry
 on the issue by quoting similar instances of award of EPC contracts to strategic investors in other projects by other Ministries cannot be accepted.  
 The Ministry had earlier denied the existence of the award of EPC contracts to JVPs at BIAL before the Committee and the present justification is
 merely an afterthought, if not an outright attempt to mislead the Committee.  The Committee notes that the Ministry has now issued detailed
 guidelines in this regard to all State Governments for compliance in future.   The Committee however, reiterates its recommendation that a proper
 enquiry should be conducted into the entire matter by an independent agency as to why the provision of awarding EPC by competitive mode was
 missing in the case of BIAL.  
 
(Recommendation at Para 46)
 
66.       The Committee had also taken up this issue in its 88
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Civil Aviation.  In this context

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 the Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made in the report in respect of which the Action Taken Report from the Ministry is
 awaited.:-
“The Committee also recommends that in case of Hyderabad Airport, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should clearly fix the ratio of share holding
 amongst the State Governments, private players and the Airports Authority of India.  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should
 structure a financial model for these airports detailing the total project cost in terms of debt and equity and the ratio in financing.”
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
67.       It has already been decided that Airports Authority of India and State Government will have 13% equity each in the JVC and 74% will be
 contributed by private participation. AAI’s equity contribution will be limited to Rs.50 crores. Financial mode for airport including total project cost
 in terms equity and debt has been decided.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
68.       The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee recommends that it should be apprised about the details of the financial
 modalities adopted in the case of Hyderabad Airport. 
 
CLOSURE OF EXISTING HYDERABAD AIRPORT
(Recommendation at Para 49)
 
69.       In this context, the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Government towards the recommendation made in its 88
th Report and
 hopes that the details of the action taken by the Government would be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.  The recommendation is reproduced
 below: -
 
“The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has decided to shut down the existing airport at Hyderabad for commercial
 operations.  The Committee fails to understand as to why such kind of concessional agreement was signed when the Ministry itself was of the
 opinion that the present terminals could be utilized at least for one more decade.  The Committee also expressed its doubt as to how the Ministry is
 planning to compensate with the losses to be incurred in case the existing terminal at Hyderabad is closed, by developing shopping complexes,
 housing etc. on commercial basis.  The Committee is opposed to this move of the Government for closing the existing airport at Hyderabad for
 commercial flights once the new Hyderabad International Airport Limited is operational and urges the Government to reconsider this decision.”
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
70.       The decision to close down the existing airports for civil operations on commissioning of new international airport at Hyderabad was taken on
 11.03.2000 by the Task Force on Infrastructure under the chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission.  Subsequently, the decision of
 the Task Force was also approved by the Cabinet / Government on 13.04.2000. It was suggested that the existing airport can be used for operations
 of IAF, other armed forces, para military forces, operations or other such purposes or for transportation of dignitaries by Government owned or
 leaded aircraft or for general services other than commercial flights.  While taking the decision, the Cabinet had also noted that the existing
 Hyderabad airport had severe limitations for expansion because of natural and man made obstructions like hill, railway over bridge, chimney, poles,
 buildings etc.  Only 7760 feet length of the existing runway of 9080 feet can be used at present due to obstructions in the approach path.  As a result,
 even A300 type of aircraft can be operated with payload penalty only.  Based on the decision of the Government, a Concession Agreement has been
 signed with the Hyderabad International Airport Limited (HIAL) by the Government of India and it has been provided that the existing airport shall
 not be opened for the use of civilian operations w.e.f. the date on which new airport opening occurs.  The viability of the proposed airport will also
 be subject to closure of existing airport.  Under the circumstances as explained above, there is hardly any scope for reconsideration of the decision to
 close this airport. As regard compensation regarding looses, AAI has submitted a proposal to Government to get share in the Concession Fee payable
 by HIAL to GOI. This Ministry is considering the proposal. Government is also considering alternate uses of this airport including setting up of the
 Civil Aviation Training Centre etc. within the ambit of AAI Act.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
71.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The Committee in its Report on the ATR furnished by the Ministry on the
 recommendations/observations made in the 88
th Report has recommended that the Government should reconsider the decision to close down the
 existing airport at Hyderabad on the commissioning of a new International airport.  The recommendation is reproduced below: -
“The aviation sector in the country has changed dramatically with the low cost carriers gaining ground.   The previously unviable routes are
 now proving to be profitable ones and there is stiff competition amongst the private operators to extend their reach to all parts of the country.  In this
 changed scenario, instead of reassessing its strategy, the Ministry is following the unhealthy policy of creation of monopoly by promoting only one
 airport at different metros, as in the case of Delhi and Mumbai. The Committee also notes that the justification put forward by the Ministry for the
 closure of the existing airport at Hyderabad is contrary to the rationale of the Ministry for rejecting the proposals for Greenfield airports at Delhi and
 Mumbai.  In respect of those two airports, the Ministry has maintained throughout that unless the capacity is not optimized or added in the existing
 Brownfield airport, it is not prudent to set up a Greenfield airport.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Government should reconsider the
 decision to close down the existing airport at Hyderabad on the commissioning of a new International airport.” 
 
ACCORDING MINI RATNA STATUS TO THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 51)
 
72.       The Committee strongly recommends that the status of ‘Mini Ratna’ should be accorded to the Airports Authority of India so that it gets
 adequate opportunity to utilize its professional excellence in the area of development and maintenance of airports in the country.  The status of ‘Mini
 Ratna’ would certainly strengthen the hands of Airports Authority of India by providing more functional autonomy which would in effect also ensure
 a speedy progress of decision-making in financial matters.  However, the Committee also feels that the inhibit factor cited by the Ministry i.e.

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 budgetary support for the maintenance of certain airports in the North-eastern region may be sorted out by generating additional revenue sources for
 bearing this minor expenditure.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
73.       The following criteria have been laid down for declaration of a PSU as a Mini Ratna:
(i)
                  Category-I PSEs:  PSEs should have made profit in the last three years continuously, the pre-tax profit should have bee Rs.30 crores
 or more in at least one of the three years and should have a positive net worth. 
(ii)                These PSEs shall be eligible for the enhanced delegated powers provided they have not defaulted in the repayment of loans / interest
 payment on any loans due to the Government.
(iii)               These Public Sector Enterprises shall not depend upon budgetary support or government guarantees,
(iv)              The Boards of these PSEs should be restructured by inducting at least three Non-Official Directors as the first step before the exercise
 of enhanced delegation of authority provided under DPE’s OM under reference.
 
74.       While AAI fulfils the first two criteria, AAI is receiving budgetary support provided by Government of India for development of airports in
 the North East and certain other crucial areas.  This budgetary support is being provided by the Government primarily because these airports are
 economically not viable but are required to be maintained from the point of view of providing accessibility to these areas on socio-economic grand. 
 AAI Board also does not have non-official Directors at present.  However, Government accepts the recommendation in principle.  The question of
 waiver of condition of dependence of budgetary support in view of the special circumstances where AAI has to maintain certain airports irrespective
 of commercial viability and appointment of non-official directors on the board are under consideration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
75.       The Committee observes that the Government is considering the question of waiver of condition of dependence of budgetary support in view
 of the special circumstances where AAI has to maintain certain airports irrespective of commercial viability and appointment of non-official
 directors on the board.  The Committee hopes that Airports Authority of India will be given the status of 'Mini Ratna' at the earliest so that it gets
 adequate opportunity to utilize its professional excellence in the area of development and maintenance of airports in the country and recommends
 that the process be expedited. 
PROTECTION TO THE INTERESTS OF THE EMPLOYEES OF AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 54)
 
76.       The Committee is of the opinion that due protection must be given to the interests of employees of Airports Authority of India while
 proceeding with the commissioning of new international airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports. The
 Committee recommends that all decisions relating to absorption of employees of Airports Authority of India by other companies should be taken in a
 transparent manner in consultation with the representatives of the Airports Authority of India. The Committee cautions that adequate care should be
 taken to protect the interests of the employees of the Authority and it should be ensured that the existing terms and conditions of service of the
 employees of the Authority are not altered after their absorption into the said companies.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
77.       As regards restructuring of Delhi / Mumbai airports, the JVCs will have an Operation and Employee Support Arrangement with AAI for a
 period of three years whereby AAI employees (other than those pertaining to ATC and CNS departments) posted at the Airport on Effective Date
 continue to provide their services at the Airport. Further the JVC will be required, during the three years period to make offers of employment in
 order to absorb a minimum of 40 % (or such higher percentage as committed by the Bidder) of the existing AAI employee working at the Airport
 excepting those engaged in Communication Navigation Surveillance (CNS), Air Traffic Management (ATM), Security, as reduced for retirements,
 resignations, transfer and death. Employment offers can be made any time during this Employee Arrangement Period but in no event later than three
 (3) months prior to the end date of the Employee Arrangement Period. At the end of this Employee Arrangement Period those employees who do not
 take up the employment offers or who are not made such an employment offer will return to the services of AAI. Additional weightage is provided in
 the evaluation process to Bidders who commit to make offers of employment in order to absorb more than the minimum level of 40%. There will be
 financial penalty, as set out in the OMDA, for any short fall between the 40% or such higher nominated percentage and the result actually achieved.
 
78.       With respect to Greenfield airports of Bangalore and Hyderabad, Government has obtained comfort letters from the JV Companies that they
 would consider taking on deputation / absorption basis the existing employees other than CNS / ATM employees working in connection with
 operation of the existing airports subject to merit, efficiency and company’s requirement, policy and subject to the requirement of maintaining the
 agreed performance standard.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
79.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. In this connection, the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry towards the
 recommendation made in the Report on ATR furnished by the Ministry on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 88
th Report, which is
 reproduced below: -
“The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that there is no assurance of protection of the existing terms and condition of service
 of the employees of Airports Authority of India after restructuring of Delhi/Mumbai airports. With respect to Greenfield airports of Bangalore and
 Hyderabad, the Committee is not satisfied with the reply that Government has obtained comfort letters from the JV Companies that they would
 consider taking on deputation / absorption basis the existing employees other than CNS / ATM employees.  The Committee recommends that
 performance standard appraisal of the employees to be retained in JVCs should be done on fair basis.”
 
CONNECTIVITY OF THE AIRPORTS

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
(Recommendation at Para 56)
 
80.       The Committee is of the opinion that connectivity is an important element in the optimum utilization of the airports. The Committee notes that
 due to problems of capacity and locational constraints, the new airports are being planned outside the city centers. The utilization of the Greenfield
 airports and the existing airports would greatly depend on the kind of connectivity that will be provided to these airports from the city centers. The
 Committee would like to cite the example of Kuala Lumpur airport which is 85 kilometers outside the city but this distance can be covered in just 35
 minutes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation must emphasize upon the respective state Governments to
 provide connecting link to the airport terminals on the same standard and specifications as the expressways so that the approach and exit time to and
 from the airports could be reduced to a large extent. To sum it up, plans for development of Greenfield airports should be holistic looking at technical
 facilities, terminal buildings as well as transport links.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
81.       The JVCs who will be operating the Delhi / Mumbai airports after restructuring will sign State Government Support Agreements with the
 concerned State Government which will inter-alia provide a clause on modernization of the existing access, development of additional modes of
 public transport such as railway / metro etc. in order to keep pace with the increase in traffic, subject to overall town planning for the area, on best
 endeavour basis. Similarly for Greenfield airports also it has been provided that the procedural guidelines for setting up of Greenfield airports also
 includes provision for State Support Agreement with concerned State Governments for provision of land as well as other external infrastructure
 including connectivity. State Support Agreements have already been signed by the concerned State Government for upcoming Greenfield airports at
 Bangalore and Hyderabad.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82.       The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that JVCs who will be operating the Delhi / Mumbai airports after restructuring will sign State
 Government Support Agreements with the concerned State Governments. The Committee reiterates its concern that the State governments in these
 two prime metro cities have their own limitations and it is almost impossible to wipe out traffic hindrances despite Mass Rapid Transport Systems.
 Therefore, it will be prudent to develop Greenfield Airports in these two metro cities also instead of adopting a flawed approach of upgrading the
 present Brownfield airports only, which will get choked within few years and then investing in Greenfield airports.  
 
PARKING SPACE AND INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES AT THE AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 61)
 
83.       The Committee is of the view that with the arrival of new private domestic airlines and expansion of fleet by the existing airlines in the
 country, there is an urgent need to create parking space and other infrastructural facilities at the airports.  TheCommittee is constraint ed to note that
 before giving licenses to new airlines to commence operations, the Government did not deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities
 like, taxiways, additional bays, runways etc required at the airports.  As a result of this, the already congested infrastructure available at the airports
 has come under tremendous stress.  The Committee is of the view that no transparent policy is being followed for allotment of parking space.  The
 Committee recommends that the Government should draw up as a comprehensive assessment of the requirement of infrastructural facility required in
 future. The Naresh Chandra Committee, whose report the Government has used elsewhere in modifying some of its policies, also does not throw any
 light on this aspect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should frame a transparent policy for the allocation and access to
 the existing infrastructure and take immediate steps to ensure that adequate infrastructure and maintenance facilities are made available and allocated
 fairly and rationally amongst all the airlines. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
84.       Airports Authority of India (AAI) has provided the following infrastructure to the airlines:
(i)
                  Check-in counters
(ii)                Office space / ticketing counters
(iii)               Space for parking ground support equipment
(iv)              Space for hangar / allotment of hangar
(v)                Permission of overnight halt at airports
 
85.       As far as the Parking space is concerned, Day parking are being allotted on first cum first basis without making any reservation for any
 specific Airlines.
86.       Night Parking at Non Metro airports are being allotted on the basis of acquisition of aircraft by the respective airlines and approved by the
 Aircraft acquisition Committee.  Aircraft which is proposed to be acquired first is getting priority over the aircraft to be acquired later.
87.       In order to decongest the Metro airports, Airlines are being requested to shift to Non Metro airports for which an incentive scheme has been
 worked out by AAI.
88.       Fresh reviews are made continuously to enhance the existing infrastructures on the airside and city side of the airports to meet the increasing
 demand in terms of fleet augmentation of aircraft as well as passenger facilitation.  AAI has undertaken/planned for upgradation of infrastructures
 and associated facilities at the major and other airports for augmentation of capacity for accommodating additional aircraft. 
89.       The terminal buildings are being planned to be expanded to meet the growing passenger demand as per enclosed Annexure I.
 
90.       At metro airports, major works which are in progress during 2005-06 are enclosed at Annexure II.
91.       Details of major works proposed to be taken up at Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai and Trivandrum Airports during 10
th Five Year Plan
 (2002-2007) are enclosed at Annexure – III.
92.       Expansion of apron at non-metro airports during 2005-07 is given at Annexure IV.
93.       Parking space and infrastructure facilities which are in progress at the airports is given at Annexure V.
94.       Parking Space and Infrastructure facilities at the airports which are in planning stage  is given at Annexure VI.
 

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Government and stresses the fact that before giving licenses to new airlines to commence
 operations, the Government should deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities like, taxiways, additional bays, runways etc required at
 the airports to avoid further load on the already congested infrastructure available at the airports.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
 recommendation that the Government should frame a transparent policy for the allocation and access to the existing infrastructure and take
 immediate steps to ensure that adequate infrastructure and maintenance facilities are made available and allocated fairly and rationally amongst all
 the airlines.
(Recommendation at Para 62)
96.       The Committee is of the view that Delhi and Mumbai Airports are most constrained in terms of infrastructure and that with the growth of civil
 aviation sector in the country, the pressure and strain on these airports is also increasing. There is, therefore, a need for development of alternative
 centers to ease pressure at these airports. In this context, the Committee would like to reiterate the recommendation, made in 88
th Report which
 stated that Ministry of Civil Aviation should take steps for the creation of a eastern hub at Kolkata and southern hub at Chennai. The Committee also
 recommends that the Government should prepare schemes for positive incentives for use of airports other than Delhi and Mumbai for parking and
 greater utilization in terms of levying lesser charges for use of these airports as compared to Delhi and Mumbai so that the airlines are encouraged to
 use other airports also.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
97.       Airports Authority of India has worked out a proposal for providing financial incentives for parking facilities for non-metro airports. This
 proposal provides for concession of 50% of parking charges to be provided to all operators who operate at airports other than metro and notified
 international airports. Airports Authority is also taking steps to modernize the infrastructure of Kolkata airport with a view to promote operations at
 this airport.
 
98.       During the year 2005-06 at Kolkata airport the following works are undertaken:
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Estimated Cost (Rs. In crores)
1. Reconstruction of bay Nos.11 and 12 4.96
2. Strengthening of ‘D’ taxi – track 5.80
3. Construction of Integrated Cargo Complex 49.66
4. Construction of 2 nos. additional in contact parking bays 3.50
5. Construction of 2 nos. additional remote parking bays 4.00
6. Linking of 1
st phase apron with existing taxiway 5.40
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
99.       The Committee notes the reply and finds that the Ministry has not mentioned anything about the recommendations for the creation of an
 eastern hub at Kolkata and southern hub at Chennai.  Further, the reply has not indicated the details of the work undertaken at Chennai airport.  The
 Committee hopes that air hubs at Kolkata and Chennai will be created very soon and airlines should be given positive incentive for use of these
 airports for parking etc. by levying lesser charges.  
(Recommendation at Para 65)
 
100.     The Committee is of the opinion that exercising vigilance over the new airlines coming up in the country and their methods of seeking
 permission for procurement of aircraft and allotment of parking bays at airports is quite essential. The Committee recommends that the role of all
 concerned agencies i.e., Airports Authority of India, DGCA, etc. in this regard should be closely monitored and compliance of all necessary
 regulations ensured.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
101.     Government will ensure that agencies like AAI are monitored to ensure compliance with all necessary regulations.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
102.     The Committee notes the reply. 
 
UNDER UTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, DELHI
(Recommendation at Para 70)                                                                                                          
 
103.     The Committee is constrained to note that on the one hand, the Government has cited resource crunch as the prime reason for inviting private
 sector participation installed at the airports after making huge investments remain idle due to want of trained personnel. Also while the current policy
 of the Government aims at allowing more and more airlines to operate in the country, it has not made it obligatory for them to utilize the modern
 facilities installed at the airports with huge investments for the convenience  of the passengers. The Committee is surprised to note that the three
 private airlines i.e. Jet Airways, Sahara Airlines and Air Deccan have not trained any of their pilots for CAT-III operations and there is no legal
 requirement in the Aircraft Rules and Civil Aviation requirements to make it mandatory for private airlines to train their pilots on ILS CAT-III
 System. The Committee is also not satisfied with the progress achieved with respect to the training of the pilots by the National Carriers viz. Indian
 Airlines and Air India, for utilizing the CAT-III System. The Committee recommends that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the
 extreme foggy conditions, the Ministry should amend ‘Aircraft Rules’ to incorporate a provision for making training of pilots compulsory by the
 private airlines on CAT-III System so that the investment made by the Government on the Installation of the system through the tax payers’ money is
 not underutilized. The Committee hopes that the national carriers and the private airlines will optimally utilize the ILS CAT-III System installed in
 the IGI Airport, New Delhi during the period of poor visibility, which will certainly reduce the hardships faced by the passengers.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT
 

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
104.     Government issues guidelines during every fog period for operations during Low Visibility Conditions, wherein amongst other matters,
 preference is given by Air Traffic Control to CAT-IIIA and CAT-II trained pilots to take off and land during low visibility conditions. Airlines
 request for flight slots to provide the best utilization of their trained pilots in order to make full use of CAT-IIIA system so as to minimize the
 adverse effect of fog. Training of pilots and their authorization by DGCA for use of CAT-IIIA ILS is mandatory before using the system during fog.
 Airlines are being impressed upon to set up training of their pilots in CAT-IIIA ILS operations. As on March 2005, 52 pilots of Indian Airlines and
 56 pilots of Air India are trained and approved for utilization of CAT-IIIA System. It is however felt that making CAT-IIIA training mandatory
 through amendment of Aircraft rules may not be feasible at this stage as the system is installed only at one Airport in the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
105.     The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. In this connection, the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry towards the
 recommendation made in the Report on ATR furnished by the Ministry on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 88
th Report, which is
 reproduced below: -
“The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and feels vindicated by the developments during the fog this winter.  The
 massive disruption of flights into and out of Delhi has highlighted the gross underutilization of the costly ILS CAT-III system installed at Indira
 Gandhi International Airport.  This has resulted in the non-utilisation of the expenditure from the tax payers’ money.  It appears that the different
 airlines resort to diversion of flights instead of using the available infrastructure because it is economical for them to follow such practice rather than
 training the pilots on CAT-III system.   The Committee feels that whatever be the reasons, the passenger facilities should be paramount and they
 should not be put to any hardship.  Moreover, even if IA and AI have trained their pilots and are using the system, the diversion of flights of the
 private carriers gives adverse publicity to the civil aviation sector as a whole.  The Committee feels that there should be some penal provision to
 discourage the diversion of flights due to fog by the private operators or they should be compelled to utilise the ILS CAT-III system. The
 Committeetakes note of the relevant news reports appearing in the print and visual media and the inadequate response of the Ministry thereon. The
 Committee also notes that the Ministry is now waking up to the need for the implementation of the recommendation in the face of severe public
 criticism. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy
 conditions, training of pilots should be made compulsory by the private airlines on CAT-III System.  The Committee further recommends that
 utilization of CAT-II and CAT-III systems by private airlines should be made compulsory by training a fixed minimum proportion of their pilots and
 it should be enforced by the Government strictly.”
DEVELOPMENT OF NON-METRO AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 82)
 
106.     The Committee recommends that the groundwork relating to development of non-metro airports should be completed without losing much
 time and these non-metro airports should not be marginalized.  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should
 expedite the work of appointing technical Advisor and Financial Consultant in order to assess traffic growth and to finalize financial mode etc.  The
 Committee feels that development of non-metro airports will help in improving connectivity as well as firmly linking up newly emerging cities
 having tremendous tourism and business potential with the mainstream.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
107.     The Techno Economic feasibility Reprots have been received for all the 10 Non-Metro Airports (Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Goa, Guwahati,
 Lucknow, Madurai, Jaipur, Mangalore, Trivandrum, Udaipur) from Global Technical Adviser (GTA) & Indian Financial Consultant (IFC).  The
 works pertaining to these 10 Non-Metro airports are being taken up by AAI in a phased manner. The Terminal Building and Associated
 Infrastructure like Car Park / Roads and Air Side works for Phase-I (2006-08) are proposed to be taken up by AAI.  The Land Use Plans
 recommended by GTA / IFC for enhancement of non-aeronautical revenue will be taken up through Bid Process Management (BPM) by engaging a
 Strategic Advisor.  The Land Use Plans will be restricted to passenger related services or related to Aircraft Services or Air Traffic Services.  Other
 works will need respective State Govt. / Local Body clearances.  At some of the airports development works / Land Use Plans will also depend upon
 acquisition of land from Defence / State Govt.
108.     In addition to these 10 Non-Metro airports, AAI has identified 15 more Non-Metro airports – Agatti, Aurangabad, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar,
 Coimbatore, Indore, Khajuraho, Patna, Port Blair, Nagpur, Rajkot, Trichy, Vadodara, Varanasi, Vizag.  The process for appointment of GTA is
 nearing completion to carry out the Techno Economic Feasibility Study (TEFS) for each of these 15 airports.
109.     10 more airports have been identified, which are besides Agartala, Dehradun, Imphal, Ranchi, Raipur for carrying out the TEFS for which
 process has been initiated for appointment of GTA. 
110.     The Consultants will identify the viable development works, specific to each airport, for adoption with options to AAI.
The whole matter of development of Non-metro airport is under consideration of Committee on Infrastructure in the Planning Commission.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
111.     The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the development works will be started expeditiously in the non-metro airports identified by the
 Government. 
 
ENCROACHMENT OF LAND AT AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 86)
 
112.     The Committee notes with concern that there is widespread encroachment at the land of Airports Authority of India at various airports in the
 country.  The Committee regrets that Airports Authority of India has not been able to take due care of its assets as a result of which developmental
 activities at many airports have suffered.  The Committee recommends that Airports Authority of India should take up the matter regarding removal
 of encroachments  with the concerned state governments. The Committee further recommends that the Airports Authority of India should evolve
 some mechanism to take better care of the vast lands at its disposal, so that no further encroachments take place on the lands of Airports Authority of
 India.  The Government should come up with a transparent policy for land utilization and mobilization of resources at airports.  The Committee had,
 in its 69
th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) on the Ministry of Civil Aviation, drawn the attention of the Ministry to an incident wherein a
 portion of land of Malda airport was sold by the previous owner on the basis of forged comments.  The Committee would like to know the steps
 taken to recover the land as well as the present status of the case. 

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
113.     It is stated that for removal of encroachment AAI is in continuous dialogue with State Govt.  Recently, in the month of March / April, 05
 encroachment on approx. 18 acres of land (5 acres at Kranti Nagar and 13 acres at Zari Mari area) have been removed at CSI Airport Mumbai.  To
 prevent further encroachment wherever pockets of land are lying vacant, fencing and / or boundary wall construction have been undertaken /
 provided.  Directives have been issued to REDs / APDs to ensure that no further encroachment takes place and routine inspection of all AAI vacant
 land is undertaken in this regard.  Simultaneously, efforts are also on to utilize the area available for various purposes like for development /
 expansion of airports wherever possible.
 
MALDA AIRPORT
Background
114.     On scrutinizing the available records, it has been found that the alleged land i.e. 1.89 acres in Mouza Maheshmati, J.L. No. 66, Plot No. 4, P.S.
 English Bazaar previously belonged to Shri Sushil Kumar Das and the same was acquired by the State Government Land Acquisition Department for
 Civil Aerodrome, Malda as per the following details:    
 
a) L.A. Case No. 9/V/56-57    = 1.62 acres
b) L.A. Case No. 12/V/55-56  = 0.27 acres
                                                            --------------
                        TOTAL LAND           = 1.89 acres
                                                            --------------
115.     On acquisition, the total amount of compensation was Rs.3372 and 9 Annas was paid to Shri Sushil Kumar Das, son of Shri Panchanan Das,
 which has been certified by Special Land Acquisition Offer (LAO) Malda vide his Memo No. 219 dated 21.2.1994.
116.     Out of the total land (i.e.1.89 acres) 0.90 acres of land has been handed over to refugee Relief and Rehabilitation Department, Government of
 West Bengal, D.M. Malda by National Airports Authority (NAA) vide CHQ letter No. 21012/79/88-5/NAA dated 18.8.1989.  The balance area of
 land is 0.99 acres.  Some portion of the above land, under Plot No. 4 of the Mouza Maheshmati has been utilized by the Railway Department and the
 balance portion of land approx. 0.60 acres, was lying vacant and remained under the possession of NAA (now AAI).  
 117.     In 1993, Shri Sushil Kumar Das disposed off the above said 0.60 acres of land illegally.
Action / Steps taken to recover the land
118.     Airports Authority of India (AAI) has filed a Civil Suit in the Learned Court of the Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Malda being the Suit Case No.
 186 of 2003 (AAI & others Vs. Shri Sushil Kumar Das & others) which is well within the period of limitation.
Present Status of the case
119.     The Hon’ble Court has allowed a temporary injunction against the defendant namely Shri Sushil Kumar Das and fixed the date 16.09.2005 for
 framing of issues.
Departmental Inquiry
120.     The Vigilance Directorate is conducting a departmental inquiry.  Versions / statements of concerned two officers have been obtained and the
 same are being examined and analysed by Vigilance Department.  Presently, the investigation is in progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
121.     The Committee notes the reply and further hopes that all the cases of encroachment are disposed of expeditiously and reiterates its
 recommendation that the Airports Authority of India should evolve some mechanism to take better care of the vast lands at its disposal, so that no
 further encroachments take place on the lands of Airports Authority of India and the airport may be revived for operations.
 
ACQUISITION OF LAND BY AAI FOR AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation at Para 90)
122.     A perusal of the information submitted by Ministry of Civil Aviation reveals that Ministry of Civil Aviation has on certain occasions
 purchased land for developmental works, such as extension of runway, extension of car parking etc. at other airports.  The Committee recommends
 that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should consider purchasing of land required for extension of runway at Gaya airport in similar pattern as they
 have done in many other cases.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
123.     The subject matter of Acquisition of 101 acres of land through Government of Bihar for extension of runway and other allied works at Gaya
 Airport was submitted for consideration of Airports Authority of India (AAI) Board.
124.     The AAI Board meeting held on 24-5-2005 discussed the proposal in detail for acquisition of additional land for operational works at Gaya
 Airport.  The Board felt that since the project is unviable and also since the development of Gaya Airport will be in the benefit of the State, the State
 Government of Bihar should be requested to provide this 101 acres of land free of cost to AAI to undertake the development works.  The Board
 desired that AAI should take up the matter with the State Government through Ministry of Civil Aviation for getting this land free of cost.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
125.     The Committee notes that the Ministry in its reply has not ascertained whether the Airports Authority of India has purchased land from
 various State Governments for developmental works, such as extension of runway, extension of car parking etc., only in those airports which are
 making profit and Airports Authority of India has never purchased land from State Government in case of non-viable airports. It is also a fact that by
 developing this particular airport at Gaya, Airports Authority of India will also earn some revenue.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that some
 via media should be evolved and the Airports Authority of India Board should reconsider its stand to acquire 101 acres of land from the Government
 of Bihar free of cost.
OBSERVATION/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee
 should be furnished to it at the earliest.(Para 3)

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
MODERNISATION AND RESTRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
 
            The Committee is not convinced with the reply put forth by the Ministry and observes that clear-cut statistics with regard to modernization of
 airports should be given to the public and the Parliament.  As the proposal regarding modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai Airports
 involves huge expenditure and also determines the future of aviation sector in this country, the exaggerated initial cost estimates indicate poor
 financial planning.  The Committee feels that the unrealistic cost estimates at the planning stage might have swayed the decision in favour of the
 Joint Venture route.   (Para 9)
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee is not convinced that the Government cannot
 mobilise the funds for executing the modernisation plan of Delhi and Mumbai airports on its own as the estimated quantum of investment is required
 over a period of 15 to 20 years.   Moreover, the modernisation plan for the Mumbai airport cannot address the situation beyond the year 2014. The
 Committee therefore recommends that the Government should reconsider its plans to privatise Delhi and Mumbai airports under the garb of
 modernisation and instead give a serious consideration to the workable alternate plan suggested by Airports Authority of India Employees Joint
 Forum. The Committee also recommends that the Government should immediately initiate the groundwork for Greenfield Airports in Delhi and
 Mumbai with public-private participation.   (Para 15)
 
            As regards performance standards, the Committee is sad to note that even today the Airports Authority of India does not have an institutional
 mechanism to take appropriate action / curing of deficiency, as pointed out in the survey conducted by IATA regarding performance standards, and
 there is no penalty / liquidated damage imposed on AAI for non-attainment of standards.  It indicates that due to lack of provision of imposing
 penalty/liquidated damage on Airports Authority of India for non-attainment of standards, AAI could not fulfill consumer satisfaction and meet
 international norms and standards. The Committee feels that this needs to be corrected.  In an era of globalisation, a major profit making PSU like the
 Airports Authority of India cannot function in an isolated manner in the aviation sector.  There should not be any compromise in terms of consumer
 satisfaction and overall compliance to international norms and standards.  Both Airports Authority of India and any other private sector entrant
 through JV route should be treated at par.  The Committee fails to understand that if Airports Authority of India lacks adequate mechanism to cure
 deficiencies and is not conforming to international performance standards, then how it is handling all other airports in the country. (Para 16)
 
            The Committee notes that in the assessment report of the Global Technical Advisor (GTA) on airfield capacity of Mumbai airport, it has been
 stated that with enhanced taxiways and enhanced ATC procedures, the existing runway could accommodate projected traffic to between 2009 and
 2014.  Moreover, with some increase in average aircraft size, the existing runway, with enhanced taxiway and ATC procedures could accommodate
 projected traffic to beyond 2014 and to achieve the 20 year forecast traffic, a wide spaced parallel runway would be required.  In brief, the Ministry
 is of the opinion that the existing airport will cater to traffic upto 2014 and that capacity on the airside and terminal will need to be created to cater to
 traffic upto 2014 and beyond.  (Para 23)
 
            The Committee observes that there is a contradiction in the stand of the Ministry as they first agreed that there was no scope for any further
 development on the airside at Mumbai airport since there was no scope of having a second runway at that airport which could be helpful in terms of
 air-operations.  The position now informed by the Ministry is that "There is a huge difference between the cost of incremental capacity at a
 Brownfield Airport and the cost of creating the same capacity through the Greenfield Airport. As long as the capacity is not optimized at the
 Brownfield airport, foregoing the option of creation of additional capacity at the Brownfield Airport and setting up a Greenfield Airport will not be
 prudent".(Para 24)
 
           The Committee feels that the Ministry is keeping the Committee half informed as they are now saying that "parallel or two runways not
 necessarily generate adequate capacity if well designed taxi ways and parking bays do not co-exist".   The Committee has not been informed about
 the present scheme of things and the proposed modernization programme to be undertaken in the immediate future at Mumbai/Delhi airports by the
 private sector and how much capacity is estimated to be added and whether there will be newly designed taxi ways and parking bays.     (Para 25)
 
           The Committee desires that the Ministry should atleast now apprise it clearly about (a) the traffic and cargo expected to increase in future in
 the normal course on five yearly basis; the capacity addition with modifications in the existing Brownfield airports in Mumbai and Delhi through
 modernization under JV route; (b) the expected increase in traffic/cargo after modernization of Mumbai and Delhi airports; (c) the cost estimation of
 Greenfield airports at Mumbai/Delhi and the capacity of those airports in terms of time period vis-à-vis traffic and cargo to be handled; and (d) the
 difference in the cost of modernization of the existing Brownfield airports and construction of new Greenfield airports.  (Para 26)
 
           The Committee is of the opinion that without a proper assessment, it will be myopic to conclude that there is no immediate need of Greenfield
 airports at Mumbai and Delhi.  The Ministry has not even estimated as to when the trigger point will occur in terms of traffic growth to justify the
 new Greenfield airports in these metro cities. It is surprising to note that even at the planning stage, the Ministry is proposing to provide a Right of
 First Refusal (ROFR) for the second airport to the airport operator at Delhi / Mumbai, thereby favouring JV route. The existing plans therefore may
 lead to a situation wherein both the existing as well as the second airports at Delhi/Mumbai will be under the management control of private
 operators.(Para 27)
 
           The Committee is also of the opinion that the Ministry should reconsider its present plan on the modernisation and restructuring of Delhi and
 Mumbai Airports keeping in view the current scenario of the domestic as well as international aviation sector.  The present plan will only create
 monopoly in Delhi and Mumbai.  The Ministry has turned a blind eye to the paradigm shift which is occurring in South East Asian and East Asian
 countries where the focus is on the development of both Greenfield and Brownfield airports together, serving the dual purpose of enhancing the
 capacity and providing healthy competition in the best interests of the aviation sector. (Para 28)
 
           The Committee notes carefully the assurance given by the Ministry that "AAI will be better off as during the period 2006-2024 the present
 value of cash flow would be Rs.1286.5 crores where as if status quo is maintained then there could be a negative present value of cash flow to AAI at
 Rs.  (-) 998.89 crore" and "post restructuring AAI will not only be able to maintain other airports in the country but also upgrade and modernize
 these airports".  However, the Committee reiterates its observations/recommendations that the Ministry should review its strategy for the
 modernisation and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.   (Para 37)

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 
GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AT BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD
 
            The Committee is not convinced by the reply furnished by the Ministry on the Greenfield Airport at Bangalore.   It is clear from the reply that
 the clause regarding the operation of the EPC Contracts by the Joint Venture Partners did not exist in the initial International Bidding Process. The
 issue of EPC contracts was settled between the shortlisted bidders at a later stage that too at the instance of such bidders.  The Committee notes that
 the deviation from the transparent competitive bidding process can be resorted only in exceptional cases.  The Committee finds that the Ministry has
 not justified the existence of exceptional circumstances in the award of EPC contracts at BIAL to Joint Venture Partners (JVPs).  Therefore, it is
 fallacious to contend that the procedure adopted for selection of the JVP being in itself a bidding process, it is a valid ground for not adopting a
 bidding process for the realization and operation of the project.  The Committee is therefore of the opinion that the further procedures evolved in
 respect of EPC contracts do not cure the inherent lacuna in the award of such contracts to JVPs.   Moreover, the justification sought by the Ministry
 on the issue by quoting similar instances of award of EPC contracts to strategic investors in other projects by other Ministries cannot be accepted.  
 The Ministry had earlier denied the existence of the award of EPC contracts to JVPs at BIAL before the Committee and the present justification is
 merely an afterthought, if not an outright attempt to mislead the Committee.  The Committee notes that the Ministry has now issued detailed
 guidelines in this regard to all State Governments for compliance in future.   The Committee however, reiterates its recommendation that a proper
 enquiry should be conducted into the entire matter by an independent agency as to why the provision of awarding EPC by competitive mode was
 missing in the case of BIAL.   (Para 65)
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee recommends that it should be apprised about the details of the financial
 modalities adopted in the case of Hyderabad Airport.  (Para 68)
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The Committee in its Report on the ATR furnished by the Ministry on the
 recommendations/observations made in the 88
th Report has recommended that the Government should reconsider the decision to close down the
 existing airport at Hyderabad on the commissioning of a new International airport.  The recommendation is reproduced below: -
“The aviation sector in the country has changed dramatically with the low cost carriers gaining ground.   The previously unviable routes are
 now proving to be profitable ones and there is stiff competition amongst the private operators to extend their reach to all parts of the country.  In this
 changed scenario, instead of reassessing its strategy, the Ministry is following the unhealthy policy of creation of monopoly by promoting only one
 airport at different metros, as in the case of Delhi and Mumbai. The Committee also notes that the justification put forward by the Ministry for the
 closure of the existing airport at Hyderabad is contrary to the rationale of the Ministry for rejecting the proposals for Greenfield airports at Delhi and
 Mumbai.  In respect of those two airports, the Ministry has maintained throughout that unless the capacity is not optimized or added in the existing
 Brownfield airport, it is not prudent to set up a Greenfield airport.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Government should reconsider the
 decision to close down the existing airport at Hyderabad on the commissioning of a new International airport.”  (Para 71)
 
            The Committee observes that the Government is considering the question of waiver of condition of dependence of budgetary support in view
 of the special circumstances where AAI has to maintain certain airports irrespective of commercial viability and appointment of non-official
 directors on the board.  The Committee hopes that Airports Authority of India will be given the status of 'Mini Ratna' at the earliest so that it gets
 adequate opportunity to utilize its professional excellence in the area of development and maintenance of airports in the country and recommends
 that the process be expedited.  (Para 75)
 
PROTECTION TO THE INTERESTS OF THE EMPLOYEES OF AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
79.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. In this connection, the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry towards the
 recommendation made in the Report on ATR furnished by the Ministry on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 88
th Report, which is
 reproduced below: -
“The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that there is no assurance of protection of the existing terms and condition of service
 of the employees of Airports Authority of India after restructuring of Delhi/Mumbai airports. With respect to Greenfield airports of Bangalore and
 Hyderabad, the Committee is not satisfied with the reply that Government has obtained comfort letters from the JV Companies that they would
 consider taking on deputation / absorption basis the existing employees other than CNS / ATM employees.  The Committee recommends that
 performance standard appraisal of the employees to be retained in JVCs should be done on fair basis.” (Para 79)
CONNECTIVITY OF THE AIRPORTS
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that JVCs who will be operating the Delhi / Mumbai airports after restructuring will sign State
 Government Support Agreements with the concerned State Governments. The Committee reiterates its concern that the State governments in these
 two prime metro cities have their own limitations and it is almost impossible to wipe out traffic hindrances despite Mass Rapid Transport Systems.
 Therefore, it will be prudent to develop Greenfield Airports in these two metro cities also instead of adopting a flawed approach of upgrading the
 present Brownfield airports only, which will get choked within few years and then investing in Greenfield airports.  (Para 82)
PARKING SPACE AND INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES AT THE AIRPORTS
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Government and stresses the fact that before giving licenses to new airlines to commence
 operations, the Government should deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities like, taxiways, additional bays, runways etc required at
 the airports to avoid further load on the already congested infrastructure available at the airports.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
 recommendation that the Government should frame a transparent policy for the allocation and access to the existing infrastructure and take
 immediate steps to ensure that adequate infrastructure and maintenance facilities are made available and allocated fairly and rationally amongst all
 the airlines.(Para 95)
            The Committee notes the reply and finds that the Ministry has not mentioned anything about the recommendations for the creation of an
 eastern hub at Kolkata and southern hub at Chennai.  Further, the reply has not indicated the details of the work undertaken at Chennai airport.  The
 Committee hopes that air hubs at Kolkata and Chennai will be created very soon and airlines should be given positive incentive for use of these
 airports for parking etc. by levying lesser charges.   (Para 99)
            The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 102)
 

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
UNDER UTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, DELHI
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. In this connection, the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry towards the
 recommendation made in the Report on ATR furnished by the Ministry on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 88 th Report, which is
 reproduced below: -
“The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and feels vindicated by the developments during the fog this winter.  The
 massive disruption of flights into and out of Delhi has highlighted the gross underutilization of the costly ILS CAT-III system installed at Indira
 Gandhi International Airport.  This has resulted in the non-utilisation of the expenditure from the tax payers’ money.  It appears that the different
 airlines resort to diversion of flights instead of using the available infrastructure because it is economical for them to follow such practice rather than
 training the pilots on CAT-III system.   The Committee feels that whatever be the reasons, the passenger facilities should be paramount and they
 should not be put to any hardship.  Moreover, even if IA and AI have trained their pilots and are using the system, the diversion of flights of the
 private carriers gives adverse publicity to the civil aviation sector as a whole.  The Committee feels that there should be some penal provision to
 discourage the diversion of flights due to fog by the private operators or they should be compelled to utilise the ILS CAT-III system. The Committee
 takes note of the relevant news reports appearing in the print and visual media and the inadequate response of the Ministry thereon. The Committee
 also notes that the Ministry is now waking up to the need for the implementation of the recommendation in the face of severe public criticism. The
 Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy conditions, training
 of pilots should be made compulsory by the private airlines on CAT-III System.  The Committee further recommends that utilization of CAT-II and
 CAT-III systems by private airlines should be made compulsory by training a fixed minimum proportion of their pilots and it should be enforced by
 the Government strictly.” (Para 105)
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NON-METRO AIRPORTS
 
111.     The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the development works will be started expeditiously in the non-metro airports identified by the
 Government.  (Para 111)
 
ENCROACHMENT OF LAND AT AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA AIRPORTS
 
 
            The Committee notes the reply and further hopes that all the cases of encroachment are disposed of expeditiously and reiterates its
 recommendation that the Airports Authority of India should evolve some mechanism to take better care of the vast lands at its disposal, so that no
 further encroachments take place on the lands of Airports Authority of India and the airport may be revived for operations.(Para 121)
 
ACQUISITION OF LAND BY AAI FOR AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT
 
            The Committee notes that the Ministry in its reply has not ascertained whether the Airports Authority of India has purchased land from
 various State Governments for developmental works, such as extension of runway, extension of car parking etc., only in those airports which are
 making profit and Airports Authority of India has never purchased land from State Government in case of non-viable airports. It is also a fact that by
 developing this particular airport at Gaya, Airports Authority of India will also earn some revenue.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that some
 via media should be evolved and the Airports Authority of India Board should reconsider its stand to acquire 101 acres of land from the Government
 of Bihar free of cost. (125)
ANNEXURE I
 
DEVELOPMENT OF TERMINAL BUILDINGS AT MAJOR AIRPORTS
Expansion and modification works have been taken up at Calicut (800 international passengers at a time), Srinagar (950 integrated), (100),
 Bangalore, Hyderabad and planned at Bhopal (400), Ranchi (400), Pune (300), Lucknow (200 international) and Belgaum airports.
 Construction of new terminal buildings at Gaya (500 passengers at a time), Agatti (50), Visakhapatnam (700 integrated), Dibrugarh (400) is in
 progress and works at Varanasi (800 integrated), Udaipur (500), Khajuraho (500), Madurai (500), Trichy (500 international), Mangalore (600),
 Surat (200), Ahmedabad (international 1000 and domestic 1200), Jaipur (500 international), Amritsar International Module 2 (500) and
 Shillong (150) are likely to be taken up during 2005-07.  The work at Chandigarh (400) and Jorhat (300) airports will be taken up subject to
 availability of land. 
ANNEXURE-II
 
MAJOR WORKS IN PROGRESS DURING 2005-2006 AT MUMBAI, KOLKATA,
DELHI & CHENNAI AIRPORTS.
(Rs. in crores)
S. no. Name of Scheme Estimated Cost
 CSI AIRPORT MUMBAI  
1 New bridge across Mithi river for extension of B-3 taxi-track towards 27 beginning.      14.87
2 Construction of 4 nos. international remote parking bays on north of abandoned B-3 taxi- track. 16.27
3 Construction of link taxi track connecting new hangar area with the main runway. 9.26
4 Construction of 4 nos. additional domestic parking bays. 8.45
5 Construction of taxi way parallel to secondary runway 14/32 beginning from 32 upto main runway &
 further extended upto B-3 taxi-track.
17.26
6 Extension and modification of Terminal-1B.  85.66 (Revised)
7 Construction of additional parking bays for domestic apron - 4 bays. 3.85
8 Construction of new additional parking bays SH: Remote international apron (3 bays for NLS AB-380) 13.38
 NSCBI AIRPORT  KOLKATA  
1 Reconstruction of bay nos. 11 & 12. 4.96

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
2 Strengthening of ‘D’ taxi-track. 5.80
3 Construction of Integrated Cargo Complex. 49.66
4 Construction of 2 nos. additional in contact parking bays. 3.50
5 Construction of 2 nos. additional remote parking bays. 4.00
6 Linking of 1st phase apron with existing taxiway. 5.40
 IGI AIRPORT  DELHI  
1 Modification of existing bay no. 37-40 to accommodate B-737-800 type of aircraft. (6 nos bays) 3.29
2 Reconstruction of international apron Ph-I SH: Reconstruction of taxi-track R-2, part of taxi-track R4 &
 damaged slabs of bay nos.  81-85.
6.46
3 Construction of rapid taxi track connecting runway 10/28 and parallel taxi track towards 28 beginning of
 runway 10/28
4.09
4 Construction of 5 nos. additional bays at Domestic Terminal. 5.24
 CHENNAI  INTERNATIONAL  AIRPORT  
1 C/o Apron for Bay No. 35 and hard stand. 4.00
 
ANNEXURE-III
 
DETAILS OF MAJOR WORKS PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN UP AT MUMBAI, KOLKATA, DELHI, CHENNAI & TRIVANDRUM
 AIRPORTS DURING TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2002-2007).
 
S. No Name of Scheme Estimated Cost
 (Rs. in Crores)
Construction
 period       (in
 months)
Remarks
 
CSI AIRPORT MUMBAI
1 Construction of New Domestic
 Terminal Complex (Phase-II).
203.22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1874.00
(New proposal)
24
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36
 
Feasibility report had been submitted to MOCA. Pre-PIB
 meeting was held on 10.07.2000. Revised PIB
 memorandum submitted to MOCA on 16.08.2000. State
 Pollution Control Board has given its clearance in
 October 2000. Ministry of Environment & Forests gave
 its NOC for the project in August 2001. The project with
 an earlier estimated cost of Rs.203.22 crores, was kept on
 hold due to proposed restructuring of airports.
 
With a view to construct an ultra modern Terminal
 Complex to match with world class standards at Mumbai
 Airport with modern facilities like mobile lounges,
 travelators, rapid transport system within the complex
 etc., AAI Board in its 64
th Board meeting held on
 22.01.2003 decided for appointment of firms /
 consortiums (for the estimate amounting to Rs.1874.00
 crores) for providing architectural and engineering
 services for Terminal Complex at Mumbai Airport, by
 call of global tenders. Due to proposed restructuring of
 the airport, the scheme has been kept in abeyance.
2 Extension of B-3 taxi- track
 towards 27 beginning.
5.57 12 Scope of work has been reviewed for Category ‘F’
 requirements. Fresh tender action for revised scope of
 work is being initiated, as the site has been cleared of
 encroachments on 05.03.2005.
3 Modification & extension of the
 existing International Terminal
 Building-2B.
94.10 36 Architectural drawings had been received on 30.07.2003. 
 The Scheme had been kept in abeyance based on the
 directions of MOCA. Requests were sent to MOCA on
 21.07.2003 and 25.09.2003 for grant of approval. In-
principle approval of MOCA has been accorded on
 31.01.2005. Fresh applications for short-listing of
 contractors have been invited and received on 10.01.2005
 at Project unit and are under scrutiny at Hqrs.
4 Resurfacing of secondary
 runway.
9.02 6 Detailed estimate and draft NIT are under scrutiny for
 accord of approval at Hqrs.
5 Modifications to existing bridge
 over Mithi river on main runway
 at 27 beginning.
2.03 12 Based on the clarifications sought and received by
 Structural Design Cell from M/S NCCBM, the detailed
 estimate is under preparation at Project unit.  The final
 calculations of design are under review for the type of
 treatment proposed by NCCBM.
6 Extension of main runway 09/27
 at the 09 beginning for clear
 length of 2000 meters from
 intersection holding of runways.
20.50 10 User requirement to be finalized by Airport unit.
 Architectural drawings are to be issued by Dept. of
 Planning.
7 C/o night parking bays i/c link 20.50 15 Based on the clearance of feasibility by Dept. of

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 taxi-track from runway 14/32 on
 the west of runway 32.
 Operations, the Architectural drawings have been issued
 and submitted for grant of NOC. Estimate approved by
 the board in its 85 th board meeting and press notice for
 inviting applications for shortlisting being issued.
8 Rapid exit taxi tracks at a
 distance of 1700 and 2200 m on
 the main runway.
12.00 10 Proposal has been submitted to ATM Directorate by Dept.
 of Planning. The estimate approved by Board in its 85
th
 Board meeting and press notice for inviting applications
 for shortlisting being issued.
 
NSCBI AIRPORT – KOLKATA
1 Modification of Terminal-2
 (Phase-II).
47.74 24 International Consultant have been appointed. Final
 drawings are yet to be issued. (PDC: March 2007)
2 Extension of secondary runway. 23.00
 
18 Preliminary estimate is under finalization at Hqrs. (PDC:
 March 2007)
3 Resurfacing of Secondary
 Runway
10.00 12 Shortlisting of contractors is under scrutiny at Hqrs.
 (PDC: Dec 2006)
4 Construction of 6 nos. domestic
 parking stand.
10.00 12 Estimate is under scrutiny at Hqrs. (PDC: June 2006)
5 Construction of 2 nos. additional
 aerobridges alongwith
 connecting corridor at Domestic
 Terminal Building
7.00 12 The proposal is at planning stage. (PDC: March 2007)
6 Construction of 1 no. additional
 aerobridge at International
 Terminal Building
3.50 12 The proposal is at planning stage. (PDC: March 2007)
7 Reconstruction of bays no. 42 &
 43
4.77 10 The work is at planning stage.
     
IGI AIRPORT – NEW DELHI
1 Construction of New
 International Passenger Terminal
 Complex (Phase-II).
874.64
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2031.00
(New proposal)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36
Feasibility report alongwith financial appraisal and draft
 PIB memo was submitted to MOCA on 23.06.2000. Delhi
 Pollution Control Board has given its clearance on
 27.04.2000. NOC on environment clearance has been
 given by Ministry of Environment & Forests on
 11.02.2002.  Pre-PIB meeting is yet to be held. The
 project with an earlier estimated cost of Rs.874.64 crores,
 has been kept on hold due to restructuring of airports.
 
With a view to construct an ultra modern Terminal
 Complex to match with world class standards at Delhi
 Airport with modern facilities like mobile lounges,
 travelators, rapid transport system within the complex
 etc., AAI Board in its 64
th Board meeting held on
 22.01.2003 has decided for appointment of firms /
 consortiums (for the estimate amounting to Rs.2031.00
 crores) for providing architectural and engineering
 services for Terminal Complex at Delhi Airport by call of
 global tenders. Due to restructuring of airport, the scheme
 has been kept in abeyance.
2 Modification and Expansion of T-
1B, arrival block, Terminal-1A,
 roads and car park.
92.00 12 MOCA has cleared the proposal to carryout modifications
 of Domestic Terminal – 1B on 04.08.2004. Revised
 Technical– Bid opened on 19.07.05.
3 Construction of parallel runway
 & connecting taxi-track.
507.00 48 Scope of work is under scrutiny. Revised drawings issued.
 Estimate prepared on the basis of revised drawings is
 under scrutiny at Hqrs. MOCA has been requested to
 accord approval for execution.
4 Construction of parallel taxiway
 of runway 09/27 and connecting
 rapid exit taxiway for 09/27 &
 10/28 runway.
48.69 12 Tender is under final stage of award.
5 Construction of remote
 international Apron-4 bays (2
 nos for NLA AB-380 & 2 nos for
 B-747)
16.00 12 Preliminary estimate is under preparation for obtaining
 AA/ES.
     
CHENNAI  INTERNATIONAL  AIRPORT
1 Modification of AIT (Ph-II). 
1) Construction of building
23.47
 
18 Tenders are opened on 07.07.2005 and are under scrutiny.

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
 connecting old & new
 International terminals.
2) Conversion of existing
 international departure hall into
 arrival hall.
2 C/o Shoulders & turning pad for
 runway 12/30.
6.00 6 Tenders are opened on 14.06.2005 and are under scrutiny.
3 Construction of 5 nos. bays and
 link taxi track for private ATO
 hangars
15.00 12 Estimate is under process. Shortlisting of agency are under
 scrutiny.
4 Construction of bays no. 43, 44,
 46 & 47.
5.00 9 Tenders opened on 17.05.2005 and are under scrutiny.
5 Construction of additional 10 nos.
 parking bays.
10.00 12 Estimate is under process.
     
TRIVANDRUM  INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
1 Construction of new International
 Terminal Complex across Chakai
 canal.
165.67 24 State Govt. has acquired land for phase-I development
 (out of 27 acres) and is to be handed over to Airports
 Authority of India on 29.03.2005 through Trivandrum
 Airport Development Society (TRIADS) for construction.
 Ultimately 120 acres of land is to be acquired by Govt.of
 Kerala for the new complex and other infrastructure
 facilities. Earlier TRIADS were implementing the project
 by way of State Govt. orders. The Modalities of
 development process are yet to be formalized.  M/s EIL
 has been appointed for rendering consultancy services for
 obtaining environment clearance on 12.01.2004. Public
 hearing of the project was held on 19.08.2004. Kerala
 state pollution control board has given consent on
 1.12.2004 with the direction to submit application to
 MOEF. Accordingly, the application for environmental
 clearance has been submitted on 16.12.2004 in the office
 of Addl. Director, Ministry of Environment & Forests.
 Meeting with expert committee of MOEF was held on
 17.03.2005. MOEF has directed to submit detailed project
 report and revised EIA. Detailed project report is under
 consideration of AAI Board and same shall be submitted
 to MOEF after approval of AAI Board. Terminal building
 at Trivandrum has been designed through Architectural
 Competition. Architectural consultant has been appointed
 recently and preliminary drawings have been issued.
2 Provision of aerobridge at
 International Terminal including
 civil works.
12.35 18 Competent authority has accorded AA/ES for an amount
 of Rs.1235.41 lacs on 7.01.2005. Detailed estimate is
 under preparation at field unit.
3 Construction of additional
 parking bays.
10.00 12 Work is at planning stage.
 
 
EXPANSION OF APRON AT NON METRO AIRPORTS
DURING 2005-2007
    
Sl. No. Airport Proposed expansion additional parking
 stands
Status
1 Ahmedabad 4e+2b+1f Drawings finalised .
 Estimates under preparation
2 Amritsar 4e CODE+2d CODE Scope of work is being issued
3 Bhopal 2a-320 Work in progress
4 Bhubaneswar 2d+2c CODE Drawings under preparation
5 Calicut 2 d CODE Work in progress
6 Coimbatore 1D+2C code Work is being awarded
7 Dibrugarh 1D+2C code Work is being awarded
8 Goa 2 E code Land acquisition in progress from Navy

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
9 Guwahati 2 C Code Work completion
10 Hyderabad 2 C Code Work awarded
11 Imphal 2 A-320 Work completed
12 Indore 4A320 Drawings finalised .
13 Jaipur 3E+4D+2C=9  Intl. Drawings finalized.
14 Jodhpur 1 A-320 Work is being awarded
15 Khajuraho 1 D+2C code Drawings finalized.
16 Leh 2a-320 Work completed.
17 Lucknow 2d+2c CODE Drawings under preparation
18 Madurai 1D+2C code Work awarded
19 Mangalore 4C+1D code Planned
20 Nagpur 2 D code Planned
21 Patna 2 C Code Planned
22 Portblair 2A-320+2A-320 NOC awaited from Navy
23 Pune 2 C Code NOC awaited from IAF
24 Raipur 2 C Code Planned
25 Rajkot 2 C Code Planned
26 Ranchi 4 C code Remote parking planned
27 Shillong 2 ATR-72 Drawings finalized.
28 Silchar 2 A-320 Work in progress
29 Srinagar 1E+1D code Work in progress
30 Trichy 1D+1C code Work in progress
31 Udaipur 2 C Code Work is being awarded
32 Varanasi 2 d CODE Work is being awarded
33 Vadodara 3 C CODE Drawings finalized.
34 Vishakhapatnam 2 D + 2 C Work in progress
 Total 104 additional stands  
 
Parking Space and Infrastructure facilities at the Airports
 (In progress)
                                                      Works under execution
NO STATION NAME OF PROJECT/SCHEMES
A. NORTHERN REGION
1 LEH EXTENSION OF APRON
2 SRINAGAR EXPANSION OF TERMINAL BUILDING
 A) EXTENSION OF APRON
3 PATHANKOT CONSTRUCTION OF APRON, TAXITRACK & CAR PARKING.
4 CHANDIGARH STRENGTHENING OF APRON
B. SOUTHERN
 REGION
 
1 CALICUT EXPANSION OF APRON AND PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL TAXIWAY
2 COIMBATORE STRENGTHENING OF RUNWAY, TAXIWAY, EXTENSION OF RUNWAY AT 05 END
 AND C/O ISOLATION BAY AND ASSOCIATED WORKS
3 HYDERABAD EXTENSION AND RESURFACING OF RUNWAY, APRON, TAXI-TRACK AND
 CONSTRUCTION OF PARALLEL TAXI TRACK
4 VISAKHAPATNAMCONSTRUCTION OF NEW RUNWAY, APRON, TAXI TRACK, ISOLATION BAY I/C
 SHOULDER AND OTHER ASSOCIATED
 WORKS.                                                                                                                                        
  CONSTRUCTION OF BALANCE PORTION OF RUNWAY, OVERRUN, SHOULDERS
 AND STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING RUNWAY AND OTHER ASSOCIATED
 WORKS.
5 MANGALORE CONSTRUCTION OF NEW RUNWAY, STRENGTHENING OF RUNWAY, EXTENSION
 AND STRENGTHENING OF APRON, TAXI-TRACK, C/O SHOULDERS AND
 ASSOCIATED ELECTRICAL WORKS
6 TRICHY EXTENSION AND STRENGTHENING OF RUNWAY, APRON, ISOLATION BAY,
 STOPWAY, SHOULDERS, DEVP. OF RUNWAY STRIP AND ASSOCIATED ELECT.
 WORKS

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
7 MADURAI EXTENSION AND STRENGTHENING OF RUNWAY AND ALLIED WORKS
C WESTERN
 REGION
 
1 AHMEDABAD CONSTRUCTION OF LINK TAXI-TRACK FROM 05 BIGNING TO APRON I/C
 ASSOCIATED WORKS
2 BHOPAL EXTENSION AND STRENGTHENING OF APRON AND ASSOCIATED WORKS
3 VADODARA STRENGTHENING OF RUNWAY, PROVISION OF SHOULDERS, CONSTRUCTION OF
 ISOLATION BAY WITH LINK TAXIWAY & ASSOCIATED WORKS
D EASTERN REGION 
1 BHUBANESWAR BALANCE WORK FOR EXTENSION OF RUNWAY I/C RESURFACING OF EXISTING
 RUNWAY, GRADING AND DRAINS.
E NORTH-EASTERN REGION
1 GUWAHATI EXTENSION OF APRON/HELICOPTER PARKING BAY
2 SILCHAR EXTENSION OF RUNWAY, ACQUISITION OF LAND AND CONSTRUCTION OF
 BOUNDARY WALL
 
ANNEXURE-VI
 
Parking Space and Infrastructure facilities at the Airports
(In Planning Stage)
 
N
O
STATION NAME OF PROJECT/SCHEMES
A. NORTHERN REGION  
1. DEHRADUN Expansion/upgradation of existing Dehradun Airport for sanctioning the operation of
 AB-320/B-737-800 types for aircraft.
2. JODHPUR Widening & resurfacing of taxiway and apron.
3. JAMMU Extension of runway 18 (towards river)
4. VARANASI Extension of runway
B. SOUTHERN REGION  
1. HUBLI Strengthening of Runway, apron, taxiway
2. BELGAUM Strengthening of Runway, apron, taxiway
3. COIMBATORE Runway extension Phase-II
D. EASTERN REGION  
1. GAYA Extension of runway for A-310
  Strengthening of Taxiway, apron & construction of shoulder, isolation bay and allied
 works.
E. NORTH-EASTERN REGION  
1. DIBRUGARH Extension of runway to 7500 ft. including acquisition of land.
 
M I N U T E S
XIV
FORTEENTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 4.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 22 nd February 2006 in Committee Room '074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library
 Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anil Basu
8. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
9. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
10. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Manabendra Shah

97thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/97threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:10:23]
SECRETARIAT
          
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
(i)
                  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth Report on
 Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Road Transport and Highways;
(ii)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth Report on
 Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Culture;
(iii)               Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth Report on
 Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Shipping;
(iv)              Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh Report on
 Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Tourism;
(v)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth Report on
 Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; and
(vi)              Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Ninetieth Report on the
 ‘Development of Airport Sector with special emphasis on new modern airports’.
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Report with minor modifications.    The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
 nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the current session.
3.         The Committee also decided to meet on 21
st, 22nd, 23 rd, March, 2006 to examine the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the concerned
 Ministries/Departments and on 27th and 28th March 2006 to adopt the draft reports thereon. . 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.
 
 
 