Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its One Hundred Sixty-eighth Report on the Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
 
REPORT NO. 
181
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its One Hundred Sixty-eighth Report on the Directorate
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—11
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 12—13
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 15—18

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-2013)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shri Khagen Das
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri K.J. S.P. Reddy
26. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty First Report  on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee Contained in its  One Hundred and Sixty Eighth
Report on Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and Challenges”.
2. The One Hundred Sixty Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 11
th August, 2011 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred Sixty Eighth Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
2
nd March, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th October, 2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 18, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Asvina 26, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

(iv)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAI – Airports Authority of India
ASMGCS – Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Control System
A TC – Air Traffic Controller
A TM – Air Traffic Management
CAA – Civil Aviation Authority
CARs – Civil Aviation Requirements
CA TC – Civil Aviation Training College, Allahabad
CNS – Communication, Navigations and Surveillance
DGCA – Directorate General of Civil Aviation
FAA – Federatal Aviation Authority
FOP – Flight Operation Plan
GAGAN – GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation
ICAO – International Civil Aviation Organization
IMD – Indian Metrological Department
INRES – Indian Reference Station
INUS – Indian Uplink Station
MoCA – Ministry of Civil Aviation
TRT – Technical Review Committee
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Sixty Eighth Report on ‘Directorate
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and challenges’ of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, which
was presented to the Parliament on the 11
th August, 2011.
2. Action Taken replies were received from the Government on the 2 nd March, 2012 in respect
of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The recommendations made by
the Committee and the Action Taken Replies submitted by the Ministry have been enumerated in
succeeding paragraphs.
3. DGCA is the watch dog body which, directly and indirectly, regulates almost all the
operations critical to aviation safety in the country. Its functions range from formulation of
standards and procedures, conducting inspection, issuing licenses, granting approvals/certificates to
airlines, airport operators, training institutions, aero clubs, aircraft maintenance engineers, pilots,
crew members, ATCs/ENS and ATM facilities. Besides, it is also responsible for looking after legal/
regulatory matters. Coordination/supervision between different civil aviation organizations, national
and international, civil and military air traffic, and investigation of air accidents are also in DGCA’s
mandate. Needless to say, the dimensions and complexity of these functions have become
enormous today when the aviation sector has grown by 160 per cent. The Committee found the
DGCA did neither have the required powers - legal, administrative and financial, nor it has the
adequate manpower, infrastructure and resources for fulfilling its responsibilities adequately and
effectively.
(Para 56 of the 168
th Report)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
4. The Committee’s finding that the DGCA has neither the required powers-legal, administrative
and financial, nor it has the adequate manpower, infrastructure and resources for fulfilling its
responsibilities adequately and effectively has been noted. The Government is in the process of
taking required remedial measures. In this direction, proposal to create Civil Aviation Authority is
being processed. It is expected that once the Authority is formed, it will have adequate legal,
administrative and financial powers and will fulfill the requirements of adequate manpower,
infrastructure and resources effectively.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. The Committee learnt that DGCA had no statutory backing and it was functioning as an
appendage of the Ministry. For anything and everything required to be done by the DGCA, it has
to always look upto the Ministry and the Ministry usually take its own time in taking a decision,
for various reasons.
(Para 57, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6. DGCA is an attached organization of Ministry of Civil Aviation and is the principal regulatory
body in the field of Civil Aviation. DGCA derives its functional powers from the Aircraft Rules 1937
amended time to time. Specific powers under the aircraft rules 1937 have been delegated to various
functionaries vide the Gazette notification S.O. 726 (E), dated 4
th October, 1994.

2
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. The Director-General Civil Aviation, the Committee was informed, was severely handicapped
due to limited administrative and financial powers particularly in situations requiring urgent
attention. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for providing legal backup to the DGCA
for making it more effective and powerful.
(Para 58, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
8. Besides the statutory provision in the Rules, the DGCA has to depend on Government for
aid and according administrative and financial approval as per the existing provisions. The proposed
Civil Aviation Authority would provide adequate legal back up to make it more effective and
powerful with inclusion of administrative and financial powers to meet its functional requirement.
However, the financial support has to be through the mechanism approved by the central
Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
9. The Committee notes that on the issue of strengthening the powers-legal,
administrative and financial of DGCA, the Ministry submitted before the Committee that
creation of Civil Aviation Authority with adequate legal, administrative and financial powers
to fulfill the requirement of adequate manpower, infrastructure and resources was under
process. However, the Committee could not see any progress in strengthening the DGCA
and creating the new authority with required powers.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee was at a loss to find that DGCA had a large number of positions lying
vacant for years together due to prolonged procedure or non-availability of suitable candidates. As
a result, so many positions lapsed making situation from bad to worse. Thus, their number came
down from 250 to 145 posts during 2001-2009, the period when aviation activities grew by leaps
and bounds.
11. This shortage of manpower also includes pilots, aircraft maintenance engineers, air
operation inspectors who play crucial role in oversight function of DGCA such as granting of
approvals/certificates NOCs/licences for various critical activities including deciding airworthiness,
maintenance/repair of aircrafts, standard of training institutes, competence of trainees, skill of
pilots, and so many others. How efficiently DGCA was fulfilling these mandates with a highly
depleted manpower could be anyone’s guess? In such a situation, instances of obtaining Pilots
Licenses on the basis of fake certificates should not come as surprise to anybody.
(Paras 59 and 60, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
12. In view of the rapid growth in the Civil Aviation sector and consequent increase in the
workload of the organization and also to overcome the shortcomings pointed out in the Audit
Report of United Stated Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), a total of 427 Group ‘A’ and 48 Group
‘B’ posts were created in May, 2009. Recruitment to these posts is expected to be completed
in phased manner by 30.04.2012, once preparation of Recruitment Rules for new posts and
revision of existing Recruitment Rules, where required, are completed, in consultation with the
Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Law and the Union Public Service
Commission (UPSC).

3
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13. The Committee finds no justification for imposing a ban by Ministry of Finance on
recruitment of staff for the last ten years in a sector that was undergoing an unprecedented growth
and too crucial to our economic development. Although some steps were taken to recruit more
staff during the last one year, but it took more than 8 years during this crucial period. The
Committee really feels concern about such a state of affairs and it is not convinced by the
explanation given in this regard.
(Para 61, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
14. As the ban was imposed by the Ministry of Finance, no comments can be offered in the
matter. However, Ministry of Finance has approved for creation of 427 Group ‘A’ and 48 Group
‘B’ posts as stated under Para 59-60. The process for preparation/revision of RRs and subsequent
recruitment to the post is under process.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee, while examining the shortage of man power in the DGCA, found the
following vacancies of Group-A post in various directorates of the DGCA (as in the month of
October, 2010):–
Sl. Directorate Sanctioned Present
No. strength staff strength
1. Flying Standard Directorate Group A 43 16
2. Aerodrome Standard Directorate 46 09
3. Airworthiness Directorate 249 64
4. Air Safety Directorate 81 15
5. Air Transport Directorate 09 01
6. Flying Training Directorate 10 Nil
7. Training Licencing Directorate 26 04
8. Airspace and Air Traffic Management Directorate 17 01
16. The vacancies shown against crucial Directorates of DGCA in the Table say it all. A
detailed chart showing the vacancies as on October, 2010 is placed at Annexure. For example,
there were 130 Group A posts of Airworthiness Officers, out of which only 1 officer was in
position in the Directorate of Airworthiness to issue certificates of Airworthiness and supervises
the work of 135 aircraft maintenance organizations which are supposed to carry out the job of
aircraft maintenance in the country. Similarly, against the 43 Group A post of Air Safety Officer,
there was not a single officer in the Air Safety Directorate which conducts the Safety Audit of
the operator, maintenance agency, flying training institutes. The Directorate could conduct only
3 safety audits during 2010, which, the Committee feels, is not at all enough. India is considered
to be one of the world powers in IT Sector. The Committee, however, surprised to note that
there is no officer in Information Technology Division of the DGCA, though 5 posts of Group
A officers, have been sanctioned.
(Paras 62 and 63, ibid)

4
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
17. The vacancy position indicated in the table reflects acute shortage of regular manpower. In
order to ensure functional efficiency in DGCA, various positions have been filled temporarily as
given below:
(i) 86 numbers of officer on short term contract.
(ii) 9 numbers as seconded officers.
18. In addition to above, DGCA has given various projects to ICAO experts to ensure the safety
and future requirement of DGCA. These experts are stationed at DGCA office. Under, EU-India
project, DGCA get experts from EU to assist in development and implementation of various
international regulations, which ensure the safety standard at par with international standard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee would like to know the status of preparation of recruitment rules for
new posts and revision of existing recruitment rules to address the shortage of man power
in the DGCA. The Committee hopes that the shortcomings pointed out in the Audit Report
of United States Federal Aviation Authority in respect of human resources in DGCA have
been completely addressed by the Government before the next audit takes place.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. The Committee is surprised to find that the Directorate of Licensing responsible for issuing
licenses to airline pilots is working with just four Group A officers against the sanctioned strength
of 26 officers. It was brought before the Committee that there is a large-scale corruption prevailing
in the DGCA for issuing various kind of licenses, especially for pilots. When taken up with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation, it did not accept the charges of corruption. It, however, informed about
several reforms in procedure for issuance of various licenses including medical certificates. The
Committee finds that the recent instances of corruption being reported in the Media about the
issuance of licenses to pilots on the basis of fake documents, without clearing requisite tests/
fitness, amply proves the existence of criminal connivance between the officers of the DGCA,
flight training Institutes, and flight instructors with the touts. That such a thing was going on
within the DGCA shows that its in-house supervisory and vigilance system was very weak.
(Para 64, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
21. The Vigilance division in the DGCA has been separated from the administration division and
made an independent entity; and is presently functioning under a Chief Vigilance Officer, who is
representative of Central Vigilance Commission. Various measures have been taken to strengthen the
vigilance mechanism in DGCA. In this exercise, surveillance cameras have also been installed at
various points in the campus of DGCA.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the entire licensing system of DGCA needs to
be streamlined and made transparent by making it available in the public domain. The corruption
of all forms should be eliminated from the functioning of DGCA and its various offices. There
should be a separate body either a Directorate in DGCA or an outside agency for keeping strict
vigil in this regard so that such instances do not recur at all.
(Para 65, ibid)

5
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
23. With the reforms already in place to streamline the Licensing Directorate, the process for
issue of pilot license has been introduced. The system is also being strengthened in order to issue
license in a time bound manner. DGCA has also introduced online Pilot License (October 2011 session
onwards). To prevent the human error and interference, DGCA has started conducting online
examination of pilot. In this system, candidate registers himself on computer at his location and based
on the inputs, DGCA conducts online examination. This examination covers both CPL and ATPL.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee notes that the recent reports of the Central Vigilance Commission on
the performance of higher-level officials of DGCA exposes the inefficient functioning of
vigilance division there. The Committee hopes that the remedial action taken by DGCA will
strengthen its vigilance mechanism and the licensing system a transparent but effective one.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee recommends that Government should take steps to ensure that the best
talent in aviation sector is attracted for managing the affairs of the DGCA. The Committee observes
that due to differences in government and market salaries, DGCA has not been able to attract
competent/qualified personnel.
(Para 66, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
26. There is a lot of disparity in terms of remuneration in the private sector in Aviation industry
vis a vis the government remuneration. In order to attract best talent from the aviation sector, this
gap needs to be narrowed, which can be addressed by the proposed Civil Aviation Authority (CAA).
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee recommends that number of officers/staff of DGCA should be as per
DGCA’s requirement for ensuring adequate aviation safety and security. The Committee feels that
the recruitment process started by the DGCA should be completed on a fast track basis. The
Committee also recommends that for this the de-linking of recruitment process from UPSC needs
to be considered seriously. The Committee would like to know response in this regard.
(Para 67, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
29. The recommendation of the Committee that number of officers/staff of DGCA should be
as per the requirement to ensure adequate aviation safety and security has been noted. While all
efforts are made by DGCA/MOCA to expedite the recruitment process against the various vacancies
and the newly crated posts by having regular interaction with other concerned Ministries/Authorities
viz. UPSC, Ministry of Law and Department of Personnel and Training etc. It is a time consuming
process. However, this process cannot be dispensed with. Recruitment to the newly created posts
and other existing posts basically need appropriate recruitment rules which are framed on the basis
of the existing DoPT’s guidelines and in consultation with Ministry of Law before it is cleared by

6
UPSC. Thereafter, it is notified in the Gazette. The physical recruitment process viz. issue of
advertisement, holding of interviews, recommendation for appointment is done by UPSC, which
ensures legally correct and unbiased selection of competent candidates. The Committee’s
recommendation to de-link the recruitment process from UPSC may not be in order. However, once
the recruitment rules for all the posts are notified, the Ministry will try to impress upon UPSC to
conduct necessary examination/interview at the shortest possible time. However, even post-UPSC
recommendation, the final appointment of candidates is dependent on receipt of police verification
report and medical examination report in respect of the candidates, a time frame for which cannot
be specified as it is dependent on various state authorities and medical authorities with whom
regular liaison is maintained by the DGCA.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that
Government should actively consider the delinking of recruitment process from UPSC to fill
the vacancies in DGCA so that inordinate delay in selection process is minimized.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee learnt that some times Airlines due to pressure tend to adopt shortcuts and
thereby safety is ignored. The technical clearances are given to the aircrafts with minor defects
to take off so that their normal schedules are not disrupted and airlines are not put to loss. At times
technical personnel including pilots are put under pressure not to oppose the technical deficiencies,
especially in case of chartered flights and those under the State governments flying VIPs. In view
of so many accidents due to this, country has lost several precious lives including those of VIPs.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that such technical personnel/pilots be provided adequate
legal/administrative protection to decline to fly in the absence of technical, weather and other
clearances.
(Para 68, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
32. The Aircraft Rules 1937 at present prescribe the duties of Pilot in Command in Rule 141,
wherein he is responsible for the operation and safety of the aircraft, passengers and for
maintenance of flight discipline. The Sub Section 3 clearly indicates that the “Pilot in Command
shall have final authority as to the disposition of the aircraft while he is in command. However,
this needs to be emphasised by the Pilot in Command and they are required to be given procedure
for implementation of this rule.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33. Lack of adequate Air Traffic Controllers is another cause for concern who are eyes and
ears of air traffic in the sky. The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening of Air Traffic
Control system which is overstrained due to obvious reasons. The Airports Authority of India
should start the process of recruiting required number of ATCs on priority so that the over-worked
ATCs could give their best.
(Para 69, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
34. Following steps has been taken by AAI:
(i) Action has been taken to augment the strength of ATC on priority.

7
(ii) In the year 2011, 340 Jr. Executive (ATC) has been recruited. Out of which 290
candidates have joined.
(iii) After completion of training, 172 candidates were posted at stations and remaining 118
are under training at CATC, Allahabad, HTC Hyderabad and NIATAM, Gondia.
(iv) Recruitment of 200 Jr. Executive (ATC) for the year 2012 is under process.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. Apart from that, the Airports Authority of India may be requested to strengthen the ATC
operations by replacing the outdated equipments specially the radars by installing the advanced
satellite based navigation systems in all the airports. Indian Meteorological Department may be
requested for providing meteorological radars at the airports so that air services are not affected
adversely due to cancellation, diversion and rescheduling of air services.
(Para 70, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
36. Following steps has been taken by AAI for strengthening ATC operation:
Navigation
37. GAGAN, Indian Satellite based Navigation system is being implemented to support en-route
navigation, Performance Based Navigation procedures and Approach procedures with vertical guidance.
Surveillance
38. MSSR Radars have been installed at Chennai, Bhopal, Bellary, Porbander and Vizag.
Installation of MSSR at Jharsaguda and Katihar is in progress. Advanced Surface Movement
Guidance and Control Systems (ASMGCS) have been installed at Delhi, Hyderabad, Mumbai,
Kolkata, Chennai and Bangalore airports. ADB-B installation for 14 locations viz. Jaipur, Lucknow,
Calicut, Agartala, Trivandrum, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Nagpur, Mangalore, Coimbatore, Cochin,
Varanasi, Amritsar and Portblair is under progress.
ATS Automation
39. New integrated ATS automation system has been commissioned at Chennai. ATS Automation
systems are being installed at 38 Airports.
Radar Integration
40. Successful integration of nine Radars (two at Chennai, Bangalore HAL, Trivandrum,
Vishakhapatnam, Bellary, Hyderabad and Mangalore) has been completed in the Chennai ATS
automation system. Radar integration project at Mumbai and Delhi is being undertaken.
MET Radars
41. IMD has already provided DWRs at Delhi, Hyderabad, Chennai, Nagpur, Agartala, Lucknow
and Patna. It is expected to commission above radars at Mohanbari and Mumbai shortly. IMD is
in the process of covering more areas by these weather radars in a phased manner.
42. The Committee recommends that the Government should take immediate steps to implement
satellite aided navigation systems and weather predictions, since India is a forerunner in space
technology and one of the best reservoirs of scientific and technical manpower.
(Para 71, ibid)

8
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
43. AAI has already taken steps to implement satellite based navigation system jointly with ISRO
through GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN).
Current Status of the Project :
44. GAGAN development programme is proceeding as per the planned schedule. Final phase of
Operations (FOP) is in progress. All ground segments comprising of 15 Indian Reference Stations
(INRES), Two Indian Uplink Stations (INLUS) and one Indian Master Control Centre (INMCC) are
functional and integrated with GSAT-8. GAGAN Signal-in-Space is available and is being evaluated
for operational standards. Technical assistance from MITRE of USA for certification has
commenced. Technical Review Team (TRT) has been assembled under DGCA and is functioning
for certification activities. PDC for commissioning of GAGAN is June, 2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
45. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that the DGCA
in coordination with Airports Authority of India will strengthen the Air Traffic Control and
Air Navigation Systems appropriately to ensure safe and secured travel for air travelers.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
46. The Committee feels that the time has come to strengthen the DGCA by giving it adequate
financial and administrative autonomy. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that there is
a proposal to form a Civil Aviation Authority. However, it is not clear to the Committee whether
the proposed authority would be parallel authority to DGCA or it will subsume the functions of
DGCA. If the idea is to create a separate parallel authority, the Committee is of the view that it
will be mere duplication of work and thus multiplication of agencies should be discouraged. If the
proposed authority will subsume the DGCA, it should be amply clarified by the Government the
extent to which the functions of the DGCA will be taken over by the proposed authority.
47. The Committee is of the view that creation of an independent authority for accident
investigation on an urgent basis will instill confidence in the minds of travelling public.
48. The Government should also come forward to publicize the reports of various inquiry
committees set up so far to investigate accidents and the follow-up action taken on such reports
so that the air travelers could easily know the dos and don’ts for a safer air journey. The
Committee does not say that with the establishment of Civil Aviation Authority, the Indian skies
would become safer. It, however, may take care many of the problems that DGCA is currently
facing and which have been clearly brought out in this Report. In UK there is independent audit
organization, Air Accident Investigation Board and Australian Transport safety Board in Australia
which can be guiding models for this purpose.
(Paras 72, 73 and 74, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
49. Details of the proposed Authority and its functions are already under process in the Ministry
of Civil Aviation.
50. An Independent Aircraft Accident Investigation Committee has been set up at Minister, Civil
Aviation (MoCA) level and separated from DGCA. As far as Accident/ Serious Incidents are
concerned, rules governing the above are under process. The reports of the investigation are
published on MoCA/DGCA website after the approval by MoCA.

9
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised on
the status of framing of new rules/regulations governing the investigation of accidents/
serious incidents by DGCA.
CONCLUSION
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee appreciates the immediate steps taken by DGCA to address the
shortcomings pointed out by various audit teams since 1997. It, however, means that we were
carrying on with these shortcomings before 1997. We woke up only after international agencies
started pointing them out. And what have we done for compliance? We have hurriedly laid down
plethora of guidelines, procedures, manuals, documents, etc. and taken some interim measures with
a view to meeting the compliance deadlines to avoid serious implications that India would have
faced, had it been downgraded on aviation safety scale. The larger question, however, still remains
unanswered. Is the DGCA capable of supervising, inspecting and coordinating the implementation
of newly laid down procedures, manuals, etc., when it was not able to implement and oversee even
the existing ones?
 (Para 75, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
53. DGCA has created a Surveillance Division within the DGCA Hqs., which is responsible for
developing the annual surveillance programme for DGCA covering all the regulations of DGCA,
which are required to be complied by the operator. The surveillance programme is developed with
the help of relevant Director to ensure that all the activity under his supervision being audited/
checked every year or alternate year. This surveillance programme is further developed by taking
the observation from the previous year. Further, regulatory audit is also being carried out of the
entire operator by a dedicated team. The surveillance programme for the year 2012 has already
been placed on DGCA Website, which will cover all the airlines, maintenance organizations, State
Government and foreign carriers.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee was informed that DGCA takes appropriate measures to ensure that the
operators rectify the deficiencies found during the course of surveillance, in a time bound manner.
Punitive action is initiated by DGCA in case of serious lapses, which reveal indiscipline,
complacency or negligent behaviour. Lapses on the part of an operator and personnel (Engineers,
pilots and approved persons) result in stringent action by DGCA in the form of warnings,
suspensions, cancellation of licences and approvals.
(Para 76, ibid)
56. Much in the face of such a claim by the Government, increasing instances of violations of
safety norms, manipulation in obtaining various licenses and existence of sub-standard training
institutes are indicative of serious malaise in the system. The Committee feels that the existing
procedures and regulations need to be revisited with a view to minimizing the chances of any kind
of manipulation. The Committee feels that with such things happening, the possibility of connivance

10
of some people from within cannot be ruled out. We need to have a specialized agency to take
stern action against the guilty. Message should go loud and clear that India is strict in its procedure
and no laxity by anybody would be tolerated, if we were to regain the confidence of the travelling
people.
(Para 77, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
57. The Committee’s views have been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee feels that considering the large number of existing operators, maintenance
agencies, flying training institutes etc. the new ones being set up, the frequency of various kind
of inspections and audits undertaken by the DGCA may not be too frequent to have a deterrent
effort. The Committee recommends that all such operators/ agencies, institutes may be subjected
to safety audits within a fixed time frame to ensure that they are following all the regulations,
guidelines etc. Strict penalties be prescribed for any manipulation, corruption, etc. in the agencies
responsible for this.
(Para 78, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
60. The Committee’s views have been noted for compliance .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
61. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee would like to have the
details of action taken by DGCA on erring airline operators and flying training institutes during the
last year and the remedial action taken by those firms.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee noted that during the year 2010 most of the Airlines operating in the country
had been overcharging the passengers by increasing the air fares unreasonably. The Committee
recommends that an investigation may be conducted against all airlines and the excess amount they
have collected by way of exorbitant passenger fares may be identified and those airlines found
guilty may be penalized. The Committee also recommends that in future all the airlines may be
asked to increase their fares only with the approval of DGCA. The recent initiative taken by DGCA
asking the airlines to display the fares in their respective websites has not received much response
from the travelling public. A transparent formula for pricing the air tickets may be evolved and
implemented within three months.
(Para 79, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
63. DGCA plays a monitoring role and so far as tariff charged by Airlines is concerned, DGCA
invariably ensures that all the airlines display the fares of various categories the number of seats
against that alongwith.

11
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
64. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that DGCA should
ensure that the airlines operators do not to indulge in unfair trade practices in fixing air fares
during festival and other peak seasons much to the discomfort of the travelling public.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee had taken up the subject for examination more than a year ago on the
presumption that the DGCA was severely handicapped in fulfilling its mandate and is not able to
cope up with the growth of the civil aviation industry. The Committee feels sad to see its
apprehensions coming true by the recent instances of obtaining pilot licences on fake documents
and undue clearances/approvals given in some cases to training and maintenance institutions on
extraneous considerations. Connivance of officials of the DGCA, including senior ones, in these
activities is, in fact, the worst thing that can ever happen in the area of aviation security that puts
life of lakhs of gullible passengers to grave risk. Apart from this, recent disclosure about what has
been going on in Directorate General of Civil Aviation has brought irreparable loss to our image in
world aviation scenario. The Government must do whatever it can to see that such things do not
happen again and strictest possible action be taken against those involved, directly or indirectly.
(Para 80, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
66. The Government had set up a Committee to review the existing examination system and the
recommendations of the Committee are being implemented. DGCA has developed Question Bank for
the pilot examinations for facilitating handling of on-line examinations. Now, after developing
sufficient Questions Banks, DGCA has started conducting on-line examination which needs preference
of manuals. This will help prevent all bad practice and a fair examination will be conducted. Further,
the results of the examinations are also being issued within the shortest possible time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
67. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
68. The Committee only hopes that the proposed Civil Aviation Authority, if set up, will be able
to prevent such things happening  again.
(Para 81, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
69. The Committee’s views have been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee has been informed
that the proposed Civil Aviation Authority will function as regulator with dedicated powers
and not like the existing arrangement where a lot has to be depend on the Ministry of Civil
Aviation for discharging its duties and responsibilities. The Committee on perusal of the
replies to some of the recommendations observes that Action Taken Replies are linked with
setting up of Civil Aviation Authority. The Committee, therefore, decides that the matter
of regulation of civil aviation sector, if necessary, will be taken up for examination after
setting up of Civil Aviation Authority.

12
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes that on the issue of strengthening the powers-legal,
administrative and financial of DGCA, the Ministry submitted before the Committee that
creation of Civil Aviation Authority with adequate legal, administrative and financial powers
to fulfill the requirement of adequate manpower, infrastructure and resources was under
process. However, the Committee could not see any progress in strengthening the DGCA
and creating the new authority with required powers. (Para 9)
The Committee would like to know the status of preparation of recruitment rules
for new posts and revision of existing recruitment rules to address the shortage of man
power in the DGCA. The Committee hopes that the shortcomings pointed out in the Audit
Report of United States Federal Aviation Authority in respect of human resources in
DGCA have been completely addressed by the Government before the next audit takes
place. (Para 19)
The Committee notes that the recent reports of the Central Vigilance Commission
on the performance of higher-level officials of DGCA exposes the inefficient functioning of
vigilance division there. The Committee hopes that the remedial action taken by DGCA will
strengthen its vigilance mechanism and the licensing system a transparent but effective
one. (Para 24)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 27)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that
Government should actively consider the delinking of recruitment process from UPSC to fill
the vacancies in DGCA so that inordinate delay in selection process is minimized.
(Para 30)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that the DGCA
in coordination with Airports Authority of India will strengthen the Air Traffic Control and
Air Navigation Systems appropriately to ensure safe and secured travel for air travelers.
(Para 45)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised on
the status of framing of new rules/regulations governing the investigation of accidents/
serious incidents by DGCA. (Para 51)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 54)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 58)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee would like to have
the details of action taken by DGCA on erring airline operators and flying training
institutes during the last year and the remedial action taken by those firms. (Para 61)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that DGCA
should ensure that the airlines operators do not to indulge in unfair trade practices in fixing
air fares during festival and other peak seasons much to the discomfort of the travelling
public. (Para 64)
12

13
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 67)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee has been informed
that the proposed Civil Aviation Authority will function as regulator with dedicated powers
and not like the existing arrangement where a lot has to be depend on the Ministry of Civil
Aviation for discharging its duties and responsibilities. The Committee on perusal of the
replies to some of the recommendations observes that Action Taken Replies are linked with
setting up of Civil Aviation Authority. The Committee, therefore, decides that the matter
of regulation of civil aviation sector, if necessary, will be taken up for examination after
setting up of Civil Aviation Authority. (Para 70)

MINUTES

16

17
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th October, 2012 in Room No. 074,
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
6. Dr. Kruparani Killi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered and adopted the draft reports on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its (i) One Hundred Sixty Eighth
Report on the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)- Issues and Challenges; (ii) One
Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on the Helicopter Operations in India; (iii) One Hundred Seventy
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Civil Aviation; and (iv) One Hundred
Seventy Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, with minor modifications.
17
*** Relate to other matters.

18
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.