 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
305
_ 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
Ninety Fourth Report on the subject ‘Development and 
Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites - Challenges 
and Opportunities’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
Ninety Fourth Report on the subject ‘Development and 
Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites - Challenges 
and Opportunities’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-72 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   73-79 
    6.  
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES 80-81

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Ninety 
Fourth Report on the subject ‘ Development and Conservation of Museums and 
Archaeological Sites - Challenges and Opportunities’. 
2. The Two Hundred and Ninety Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  26th July, 2021 
to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninety Fourth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 16th 
December, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held  on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
3D Three Dimensional 
ACP Annual Conservation Programme 
ACWHM Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters  
AM Allahabad Museum 
AMASR Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
AR Augmented Reality 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATN Action Taken Notes 
AWS Automatic Weather Station 
BHS Built Heritage and Sites  
CABA Central board for Archaeology  
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General 
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television 
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CEP Cultural Exchange Programme  
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPM Centrally Protected Monuments 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DEO Data Entry Operator  
DG Director General 
DMCS Development of Museum and Cultural Spaces  
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DRC Documentation Research Centre  
FY Financial Year 
GIA Grants-in-aid 
GSR General Statutory Rules 
HCM Honourable Culture Minister 
HIA Heritage Impact Assessment 
HQ Headquarter 
ID Identity Document 
IIHC Indian Institute of Heritage and Conservation 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IITF Incredible India Tourist Facilitation  
INA Indian National Army 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
IWMM Indian War Memorial Museum 
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
LED Light-Emitting Diode 
MoC Ministry of Culture 

iv 
 
MoEF Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MPLADS Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
MR Mixed Reality 
MTS Multi Tasking Staff 
NCF National Culture Fund  
NCSM National Council of Science Museums  
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority 
NEERI National Environmental Engineering Research Institute 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Arts  
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NIT National Institute of Technology  
NM National Museum 
NMA National Monuments Authority  
NMI National Museum Institute 
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NRLC National Research Laboratory For Conservation Of Cultural 
Property 
NSC Nehru Science Centre 
OLED Organic Light-Emitting Diode 
PM Prime Minister 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
QR Quick Response 
SC Standing Committee 
SJM Salar Jung Museum 
SLCC State Level Coordination Committee  
SPA Schools of Planning & Architecture 
SPoCS Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science  
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
USA United States of America 
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
UT Union Territory 
VEM Virtual Experiential Museum 
VIP Very Important Person 
VITM Visvesvaraya Industrial and Technological Museum 
VR Virtual Reality  
WHS World Heritage Site 
WII Wildlife Institute of India 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety Fourth Report on 
‘Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites - Challenges and 
Opportunities’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 26th July, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 16th December, 2021 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the 2 94th Report. The replies 
have been categorized as follows:— 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:  4.6, 4.10, 4.11.1, 4. 11.5, 4.11.23, 4.11.29, 4.11.31 , 4.11.35, 
4.11.37,  4.11.39, 4.12.4, 4.12.5, 4.13.9, 5.6.15, 5.6.16, 5.6.20, 5.7.15 , 5.7.24, 
5.7.25, 5.7.29, 5.7.32, 5.7.36, 5.7.37, 5.7.41, 5.7.45, 5.7.48, 5.7.49, 5.7.56, 5.7.57, 
5.7.61, 5.8.2, 5.8.10, 5.8.13, 5.8.18, 5.8.20, 5.8.28, 6.1.2, 6.3.3, 6.4.3, 6.5.1, 
6.12.3 
Total:  40 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Commit tee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:   4.11.3, 4.11.13, 4.11.16, 4.11.18, 4.11.22 , 4.11.42, 4.13.2, 
4.13.3, 4.13.5, 4.13.10, 4.13.11 , 4.13.14, 5.6.4 , 5.6.14, 5.6.18 , 5.6.25, 5.6.27, 
5.6.36, 5.6.39, 5.7.10, 5.7.17, 5.7.27, 5.7.28, 5.7.30, 5.7.33, 5.7.40, 5.8.1, 5.8.4, 
5.8.7, 5.8.9, 5.8.11, 5.8.14, 5.8.16, 5.8.22, 5.8.26, 5.8.30, 5.8.37, 6.1.5, 6.2.3, 
6.3.3, 6.3.12, 6.6.1, 6.7.3, 6.8.2, 6.11.1 
Total:   45 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  4.5, 4.11.10, 4.11.21, 4.11.28, 4.11.34, 4.12.2, 4.12.8, 4.13.12, 
4.13.16, 5.6.5, 5.6.8, 5.6.10, 5.6.12, 5.6.13, 5.6.24, 5.6.29, 5.7.9, 5.7.11, 5.7.23, 
5.7.55, 5.8.10B, 5.8.24, 5.8.32, 5.8.35, 6.1.3,  6.3.9, 6.8.3, 6.9.3, 6.10.1  
Total: 29  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:   Nil  
Total:   Nil 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSERVATION OF MUSEUMS: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
 1. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry for the upgradation of the 
security infrastructure, Reception Halls, Auditorium etc., with the latest technology. and 
desires that the betterment of the Galleries may be completed at all the Museu ms within a 
fixed timeframe. The Committee strongly recommends that the Museums in India should be 
adequately equipped with conservation labs, storage facilities, written and graphic records, 
documentation facilities, modern photography techniques etc. 
(Para 4.6)  
Reply of Ministry  
 
1.1 National Museum:  National Museum has recently upgraded reception area, CCTV 
infrastructure and auditorium with latest technology. NM has also upgraded 6 halls with latest 
technology. Remaining galleries and storage spaces are being upgraded in phased manner. 
NM has also recently upgraded its Conservation Laboratory. NM has also created digital 
infrastructure for safekeeping on digital record.   
1.2 Indian Museum: - Indian Museum, Kolkata has made the following progress 
pertaining to the upgradation of security infrastructure –  
 CISF personnel have been deployed at the Indian Museum. 
 The Security Surveillance system is operational and is being upgraded further in phases 
within the limitations of fund availability. 
 Door Frame Metal Detectors and Hand Held Metal Detectors are being utilised for 
frisking of visitors. 
 For the convenience of visitors, online ticketing facility has been introduced. 
In addition, approval has been accorded by the Board of Trustees for construction of a new 
building to house modern storage facility of artefacts in the reserve collection of the Museum 
and for setting up of a state -of-the-art conservation and preservation laboratory.  This work 
has been initiated through CPWD.  
1.4 NCSM: - NCSM has 25 centres functioning in different parts of the country. Annual 
action plans are made for the upgradation/ modernization and addition of new galleries using 
latest digital display technolog ies. However, funds are required to take up such works in a 
phased manner. The Central Research & Training Laboratory in Kolkata , which provides 
catalytic support to several institutions in terms of display technologies , requires funds in a 
phase manner to enhance the R&D capability. 

3 
 
1.5 Allahabad Museum: - The security infrastructure of Allahabad Museum has been 
upgraded with round the clock CCTV monitoring. The Conservation Lab of Museum is 
functional and very efficient in functioning. All the record of Museum are being digitalised. 
1.6 Salar Jung Museum: - Salar Jung Museum is already equipped with Security 
Infrastructure, Auditorium and Lecture Halls with latest Audio/video technologies. Salar Jung 
Museum is also equipped with full fledged Conservation Lab and Photography Department, a 
Modern Library and Ma nuscript Library and Digitization equipment and adequate Storage 
facility for Reserve Collections. 
1.7 NGMA: - The National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi is already equipped with 
Security Infrastructure, Auditorium and Lecture Halls with latest Audio/vi deo technologies. 
NGMA, New Delhi is also equipped with full -fledged Conservation Lab.  An Art Reference 
Modern Library and Manuscript Library and Digitization equipment and adequate Storage  
facility for Reserve Collections. 
1.8 ASI:- ASI has its own Science branch which is well equipped with latest equipment/ 
technology. As and when required, antiquities from the museums under ASI are sent for 
preservation/ conservation. All museums under ASI have documented the antiquities in site 
museum documentation registers. These have also been digitized by the museum in -charges. 
Besides, most of the museums under ASI are well equipped with security instruments such as 
CCTV, burglar alarms, fire-fighting system, etc., along with manual frisking staff.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes the general view of the experts/stakeholders that the present 
state of museums under the Ministry leaves much to be desired. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may prepare action p lans in consultation with the best experts 
in this field, for each museum for the short -term as well as the long -term, and monitor the 
progress made to follow these plans. 
 
(Para 4.10)  
 Reply of Ministry  
 
2.1 Salar Jung Museum: - Action plans have been prepared by SJM for the Short term 
and Long term perspectives upto 2024. However, due to the Pandemic conditions, the action 
plans could not be moved. 
2.2 NGMA:- Action plans have been prepared by NGMA for the Short term and Long 
term perspectives upto 2024.   However, due to the Pandemic conditions, the action plans 
could not be moved. 
2.3 ASI:- Museums under ASI plan their annual works program considering various  
reforms mentioned in 14 points museum reforms such as security/ safety of antiquities, daily 
maintenance, better display techniques, change of textual panels, etc. The action plan 
prepared by the MOC in this regard will be strictly followed in ASI site museums. 

4 
 
 
Challenges:- 
Innovation and Design 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with a robust 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that a comprehensive Museum Policy is in place and is put 
to implementation at each of the museum under it. 
(Para 4.11.4)  
Reply of Ministry  
3.1 A Programme Monitoring Cell has been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary for effective implementation of the Schemes being 
administered by various Divisions of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee feels that once internal resources are raised, it would be easy for the 
Ministry to approach the Finance Ministry to supplement its efforts to complete any 
undertaken projects. 
(Para 4.11.5)  
Reply of Ministry  
4.1 Each museum under the Ministry of Culture is striving to raise the Internal Revenues 
wherever possible. 
 
Audience Engagement 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Ministry, in its written submission apprised the Committee about the installation 
of QR code based mechanism to allow interactivity in two of its Museums - National Museum, 
Delhi; Victoria Memorial, Kolkata. The Committee notes that QR codes provide link to a web 
page which will display an online map of the Museum so that visitors do not have trouble 
reaching any particular section of the Museum, showcasing the detailed history of the 
artefacts and interesting facts about the Museum. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
introduce QR codes in all its Museums for an interactive experience which would especially 
appeal to young visitors. Making wifi available in every Museum would be crucial for 
ensuring an enriching experience for the visitors. 

5 
 
(Para 4.11.23)  
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 National Museum has already installed QR code based Audio Guides for more than 
200 objects. These QR codes are also available in NM Website for universal access. 
5.2 NGMA: Museum will implement and provide QR codes to visitors at entry point of 
Galleries.  
Museum will also make efforts for availability of Wi -fi. Mobile app/ Audio Guide based on 
QR Codes. 
5.3 NCSM: - QR codes for downloading information about the exhibition/  galleries/ 
facilities have been introduced in some of the centres under NCSM. Wi -Fi system to be 
provided subject to availability of funds.  
5.4 Other museums such as Indian Museum, Allahabad Museum & Salar Jung Museum 
are in process of implementing this.  
5.4 ASI:- Arrangements are being made to provide information on museums under ASI 
through the ‘Indian Heritage’ app. Museums under ASI are in secluded locations or in the 
monuments/ near monuments where provision of Wi -Fi is limited. Except for museums 
involving security reasons, Wi-Fi facilities are being provided in site museum/ monuments. 
 
Funding 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee further recommends that efforts may be made to encourage voluntary 
donations for the purpose of development and conservation of the Museum and its artefacts. 
This can be done by making the tickets pay -as-you-wish, setting a minimum price that  needs 
to be paid for an entry ticket and suggesting a higher amount to help the Museums generate 
funds for its operations. An option may also be provided to interested people to contribute 
towards the maintenance of any given artefact for a certain time p eriod. The possibility of 
providing special tours of Museums before and after public hours, by charging higher ticket 
prices may also be explored. The Committee suggests that Museums across India should look 
into the issue of charging higher fees to foreig n nationals and analyzing the possible impact 
of lowering the same on the footfall received and revenue generated by the Museums, 
targeting the maximization of both the footfall and the revenue.  
(Para 4.11.29)  
 Reply of Ministry 
6.1 Salar Jung Museum : Efforts will be made for voluntary donations and providing 
special tours for a group before and after Public hours by charging higher on entry tickets. 

6 
 
The foreign visitors to the Museum are very minimal. Hence, there may not be much 
variation in the revenue from Foreigners by reducing the price. 
6.2 Indian Museum : Indian Museum shall place this matter before the Finance 
Committee and Board of Trustees for further deliberations and recommendations of the 
Trustees. However it may be appropriate to place on  record that Indian Museum has already 
implemented higher entry fee for foreigners. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee is of the view that Museums may be encouraged to enter into 
partnerships with the private sector to sponsor their exhibitions, and also through 
contribution under Corporate Social Responsibility. The Committee understands that the 
condition of Indian Museums can be improved to a large extent if sufficient funds are made 
available. The Committee would also like the Ministry to look  into the administration, 
functioning and revenue models of successful international Museums in developing countries 
and emulate the best practices with modifications suiting to the Indian context. 
(Para 4.11.31) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 Indian Museum : Indian Museum shall place this matter before the Finance 
Committee and Board of Trustees for further deliberations and recommendations of the 
Trustees. 
7.2 NCSM: NCSM has collaborated with agencies including Science Museum Group 
London to fully support travellin g exhibition on “Superbugs: The End of Antibiotics?” and 
“Hunt for the Vaccine”. Private agencies are being approached for sponsorship and 
contributions under CSR. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee observes that out of the abovementioned grant of Rs. 72.51 crores 
under the Museum Grant Scheme from FY 2015 -16 to FY 2019 -20, Rs. 35 crores i.e. 48% of 
the total amount, has been allocated to just 2 States – Nagaland and Andhra Pradesh. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take steps to ensure equitable allocation of 
the financial aid to State Governments under the Museum Grants scheme. The Committee 
desires the Ministry to ask all States to submit their proposal for this scheme and ensure that 
at least one Museum gets this grant in each State. The Committee further recommends that 
the Ministry may allocate some funds to National Museums with the specific purpose to lend 
technical and conservational assistance to State controlled Museums, when needed.  
(Para 4.11.35) 

7 
 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted. 
Safety and security of Museum artefacts 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee takes note of several media reports pointing out theft of antiquities 
and artefacts, involving the participation of organized international mafia, This, according to 
the Committee is a major cause of concern in safeguarding the artefacts in o ur country. The 
Committee underlined the need of security of artefacts deployed at the different National 
Museums across the country to ensure the safety of our valuable antiquities and artefacts. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may come up with a set of rules to 
ensure certain level of safety and security across all the National Museums. Needless to 
mention, installation of CCTV systems, armed personnel, burglar alarm systems, etc. in the 
museums are must and therefore the budgetary requirements, alongwith provisions thereof 
within strict timeline be made for compliance of security requirements. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to explore the usage of blockchain technology for digital 
cataloguing of Museum artefacts, so as to mai ntain permanent, unalterable records of the 
artefacts. The Committee hopes that this would also deter the possible connivance of the 
Museum staff with organized art smuggling groups.  
(Para 4.11.37)  
 Reply of Ministry. 
9.1 National Museum:  NM has fully operational CCTV system and CISF security 
system for safe guarding its objects. NM has also been doing digital cataloguing of its 
objects; about 40% is already completed. 
9.2 NGMA: The Security measures mentioned by the Committee are already available in 
the NGMA, New Delhi. The NGMA, New Delhi is equipped with CCTV Surveillance 
system with 274 Cameras, Armed Personnel i.e., guarded by Ex-servicemen. There is no theft 
reported in the NGMA, New Delhi for the last 30 years. Museum had digitized 80% artefacts 
and uploaded to the national website www.museumsofindia.gov.in. 
9.3 Salar Jung Museum : The security measures mentioned by the Committee are 
already available in the Salar Jung Museum. The Museum is equipped with CCTV 
Surveillance system with 330 Cameras, Armed Personnel i.e., guarded by CISF, Burglar 
Alarm System etc. There is no theft reported in the Museum for the last 30 years. Museum 
had digitized 95% artefacts and uploaded to the national web site 
www.museumsofindia.gov.in. 
9.4 Allahabad Museum: The process of digital cataloguing is going on in AM and there 
is CCTV round the clock surveillance system. 

8 
 
9.5 Indian Museum: Indian Museum takes note of the observations made by the Hon’ble 
Committee. As a precautionary measure, Standard Operating Procedure on security measures 
pertaining to various activities of the Museum have been framed in consultation with CISF 
deployed at Indian Museum and being implemented. It may also be appropriate to place on 
record that Indian Museum is presently using JATAN software developed by C -DAC for 
digitisation of artefacts and the digitised data is being regularly shared with C -DAC for 
uploading on the server. Recommendations for use of Blockchain technology for digital 
cataloguing of artefacts may be taken up by the Ministry with C -DAC which will be at the 
backend and will not disturb the existing system being followed by the users at the fron tend 
for uploading digital images and meta-data. 
9.6 NCSM: NCSM has installed CCTV cameras in all the units under NCSM for such 
surveillance and safety and security of installations in the science centres. 
9.7 ASI: - The security aspect is given primary preference while approving the annual 
works program of Archaeological Site Museums under ASI, as per 14 -point museum reforms 
identified by the Ministry of Culture. Museum attendants/ Gallery attendants are deputed 
inside the galleries to look after the antiquities and visitors. CISF is deployed at sites with 
high visitor flow i.e., in Red Fort (Delhi) and Taj Mahal (Agra). Armed Security guards from 
State police are guarding the periphery of the museums. Different privat e agencies are 
deputed both inside and outside the site museums. Electronic and Mechanical Surveillance/ 
Security systems like CCTV with recording facilities, Hooter system, Burglar Alarm, Infrared 
Alarm System, Motion Sensors, Door frame Metal Detector, H and-held Metal Detectors, etc. 
are also in place in various museums. It is pertinent to mention  that, as per available record, 
no theft case has been reported in the Archaeological Site Museums under ASI for the last 
five years. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take urgent measures to ensure 
that an effective disaster management plan is in place across all the museums to ensure the 
physical safety of the precious antiquities in times of natural calamities. 
(Para 4.11.39) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 National Museum : NM has already prepared a Disaster Management Plan, it has 
been agreed upon by NDMA. Submitted to MoC for approval. 
10.2 NGMA: The NGMA, New Delhi had already prepared Disaster Management Plan 
and sent to the Ministry. 
10.3 Salar Jung Museum : The museum has already prepared Disaster Management Plan 
and sent to the Ministry. 

9 
 
10.4 Allahabad Museum : AM has implemented disaster management plan and actions 
have been done for preserving antiquities. 
10.5 Indian Museum: Indian Museum has prepared a Standard Operating Procedure to 
mitigate any disaster in consultation with CISF. Training of Indian Museum employees in 
disaster management will be taken up with the help of CISF in the coming days for the safety 
of this historic museum. 
10.6 NCSM: Already NCSM has adopted the Disaster Management Plan for Museums in 
all the units of NCSM. 
10.7 ASI: - Disaster Management plan as part of site management plan has been 
formulated for most of the World Heritage monuments. Fur ther, the Disaster Management 
Plan formulated by the National Museum, Delhi would be examined for implementation in 
site museums of ASI. 
 
Opportunities:- 
Addressing the dearth of Human Resources in Museology 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee feels that the issue of shortage of human resources in the field of 
museology in the country can only be resolved by long -term planning and introducing 
students to this field at a young age. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may request the Ministry of Human Resource Development to include an 
introductory course on museology in the curriculum at the senior secondary school level. The 
Committee further recommends that schools should be persuaded by the Ministry to arrange 
at least one Museum visit per year for students at every level. Such visits should include a 
brief behind-the-curtains overview of the process of conservation of Museum artefacts and 
Museum curation. Doing so would instill a sense of respect for our rich c ultural heritage and 
the efforts that go behind preserving the same stimulate the curiosity of students, and 
encourage them to pick up careers in the field of museology and conservation of historical 
artefacts. The Committee observes that the establishment of the Indian Institute of Heritage is 
a step in the right direction and will help tackle the issue of dearth of human resources in the 
field of museology in a significant way. The Ministry should hire curators who have exposure 
in international best standards of Museum curation. 
(Para 4.12.4) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 NGMA: The NGMA, New Delhi allows free entry to the students with School ID.  
The NGMA, New Delhi also conducts tours to the Students who visit the Museum with prior 

10 
 
appointment. The NGMA, New Delhi also allows the students to do research on Museum 
artefacts.  
11.2 Salar Jung Museum : Museum allows free entry to the students with School ID. 
Museum also conducts tours to the Students who visit the Museum with prior appointment. 
Museum also allows the students to do research on Museum artefacts and also visits to the 
conservation lab. 
11.3 Indian Museum : As per the JATAN digitization record , the number of artefacts of 
Indian Museum already digitised as of 15.09.2021 are 50,850. Once these objects are 
uploaded in the JATAN software and shared with C -DAC, the objects are then uploaded on 
the http://www.museumsofindia.gov.in/repository/collection/Museum portal for public 
viewing. 
11.4 NCSM: NCSM has developed several virtual galleries and walkthroughs which are 
uploaded on the website for easy access. Efforts have been taken to adopt Collection  
Management Policy in NCSM especially for scientific artefacts. Digitization of S & T 
artefacts/objects available in the centres is underway. 
 
Expanding National Council of Science Museums across all States 
Recommendation/Observation 
 12. The Committee feels that Science Museums are the gateway to the domains of both 
Science as well as Museums for school kids in India. They help develop scientific temper 
among the upcoming generations of the country. The Committee observes that the present 
network of the National Council of School Museums† leaves a lot of scope for expanding the 
presence of the Regional Level Centres of the NCSM throughout the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should establish Regional Level Centres of the 
NCSM in all the States, so as to ensure school kids from all over the State get a chance to 
visit these Centres and help develop a scientific outlook in their lives. 
(Para 4.12.5) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 NCSM: The Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science ( SPoCS) for setting up new 
science cities/centres/Innovation hubs/Digital planetarium has been recently revised and 
approved by MoC. 4 Science centres at Palampur (H imachal Pradesh), Kottayam (Kerala), 
Gaya (Bihar) and Kokrajhar (Assam) are likely to be ope ned in 2021 -22. Works are in 
different stages for development for another 3 science cities at Guwahati (Assam), Patna 
(Bihar) & Dehradun (Uttarakhand) and seven (07) science centres at Almora (Uttarakhand), 
Udaipur (Rajasthan), Rajahmundry (A ndhra Pradesh), Ambala (Haryana), Ujjain (M adhya 
Pradesh), Srinagar (J ammu & Kashmir) and Mayabunder (A ndaman and Nicobar  Islands). 
Approval has also been accorded for setting up of Science Centres at Jabalpur (M adhya 
Pradesh), Ajmer (Rajasthan), Kanyakumari (T amil Nadu ) and Bikaner (Rajasthan) in the 
country and are likely to be taken up when all the commitments are received from the State 

11 
 
Govt. As per the policy adopted by the Ministry, all new science centres except Palampur 
Science Centre, which is the first in the s tate of Himachal Pradesh, will be handed over to the 
State Govt./UTs for operation and management. 
Miscellaneous 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee is constrained to note that only 300-400 paintings out of the collection 
of 17,000 paintings,  are presently being showcased in the National Museum at Delhi. The 
Committee desires to be increased progressively to showcase at least 25% of the paintings. 
(Para 4.13.9) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 National Museum : Due to space constraints, the display cannot be increased. 
However, NM is organizing special exhibition and onine exhibitions on paintings collection 
and another 150 -200 paintings will be accessible to visitors. NM has also uploaded about 
5200 paintings on Museum Portal for online viewing. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES 
Challenges:- 
Encroachment and Vandalism 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to strive towards prevention of vandalism and 
encroachment at archaeological sites and monuments fraught with safety and security 
problems, particularly those in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir, Chhatisgarh, North -Eastern 
States etc., in close coordination with local law and order authorities. The Committee desires 
the Ministry to take necessary actions to ensure that strict penal provisions are in place to 
deter incidents of vandalism and defacing of monuments. 
(Para 5.6.15) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 State Level Coordination Committee (SLCC) has already been constituted in the State 
of Chhattisgarh, Assam, Meghalaya, and Jammu & Kashmir. The States which have not set 
up a State Level Coordination Committee yet, have been requested to form a SLCC. In this 
regard, Archaeological Survey of India is making correspondence continuously with these 
states to constitute State Level coordination Committee. However, few states had held the 
meeting to address the flagged issues of ASI.   

12 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee takes serious note of the growing incidents of demolition of several 
temples of immense cultural importance by anti -social elements in certain States. The 
Committee is of the firm view that such incidents s hould be prevented at any cost and exhorts 
the Ministry to ensure a foolproof mechanism to arrest such incidents and protect our 
cherished cultural heritage. The Committee underlines the need for an infallible procedure 
prescribing close coordination among st the Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Home Affairs 
and the State Governments. 
(Para 5.6.16)  
 Reply of Ministry  
15.1 ASI protected Monuments are generally safe from vandalism due to security 
apparatus in place. However, to further strengthen this apparatus, a policy and detailed SoPs 
are being developed. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee recommends that ASI may undertake a physical security audit for all 
the monuments under its ambit and estimate the financial requirements for installing CCTV 
security systems at all the monuments and sites under its control. Thereafter, a plan may be 
devised to install such systems at the earliest so as to deter and punish vandals. 
(Para 5.6.20) 
Reply of Ministry  
16.1 Yes, this will be done and used as input for the security policy. 
 
Opportunities:- 
Increased focus on scientific research based conservation 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee is concerned to note the apprehensions of the experts/stakeholders 
regarding the focus laid by A SI on carrying out scientific research for the conservation 
processes followed by it across the country. The Committee recommends that ASI may review 
the functioning of its Science Branch, provide it with better funding and ensure that all the 
conservation processes employed at the Centrally protected monuments are backed by well -
documented scientific research. The Committee further recommends that modern technology 
such as photogrammetry, 3D laser scanning, blockchain technology etc. may be explored and 

13 
 
utilized, wherever possible, to improve the documentation of the monuments since quality 
documentation at present would allow quality scientific research in the coming future. The 
documentation should be made freely available on the internet, so as to encour age the 
scholar community to study the monuments and contribute to their conservation. 
(Para 5.7.15) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 The recommendation is noted for compliance. 
 
Involvement of Communities 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee agrees with the  view that making information regarding conservation 
efforts being undertaken by ASI, available on its website as well as physically at the 
monument would allow the participation of experts and local communities. Further, there 
should be a provision to allow members from the local community to have unlimited access to 
the heritage site in their vicinity at a discounted price and to also allow them to set up kiosks 
and souvenir shops as such. Doing so within a defined limit, would help inculcate a sense of 
responsibility and belongingness to the monuments among the local community, which will 
go a long way in safeguarding the monuments for the generations to come.  
(Para 5.7.24) 
Reply of Ministry  
18.1 For this purpose, a mobile app by the name ‘Indian Heritage’ is being developed by 
ASI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may approach the Ministry 
of Education to consider the inclusion of knowledge of local archaeological monuments and 
sites in the assessment of history courses in school. A thorough understanding of the 
historical and cultural significance of historical sites at a young age would go a long way in 
developing a sense of respect and responsibility for the same among the citizens.  
(Para 5.7.25) 
Reply of Ministry  
19.1 Such a proposal is welcome and can be pursued. ASI will give all possible assistance. 

14 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee urges upon ASI to showcase local craftsmanship at its archaeological 
sites and monuments, in order to build a connect with the local community as well as to 
provide them with a platform to showcase their talent. The Committee further recommen ds 
that the Ministry may strive to organize events/ competitions/ social media drives to spur civil 
society engagement for conserving our archaeological cultural heritage.  
(Para 5.7.29) 
Reply of Ministry  
20.1 ASI is working on involving local/ traditional craftsman in conservation activities.  
 
Setting standards for archival research 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee further recommends that ASI must ensure that proper procedures are 
followed in storage and maintenance of all archival r ecords pertaining to the centrally 
protected monuments. Documentation related to conservation works carried out at 
monuments should be preserved carefully, possibly in coordination with the National 
Archives of India, since the information would be helpful  in taking informed decisions 
regarding conservation of the monuments in the future.  
(Para 5.7.32) 
Reply of Ministry  
21.1 Archival database related to Centrally Protected Monuments is being maintained at 
regional level. The direction of the Committee is noted to establish a centralized archival 
database. 
 
Revamping the digital presence of archaeological sites/ monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee observes that most websites of the Ministry of Culture – especially 
indiaculture.nic.in, asi.nic.in and asimustsee.nic.in, look quite outdated and non -intuitive. 
The Committee thus feels the need for having information on archaeological sites and 
monuments through a one-stop, modern, easy-to-read, multi-platform solution for enthusiasts 
of Indian culture and heritage, and it is long overdue. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry may revamp its digital presence and come up with such a user -oriented 
solution.  

15 
 
(Para 5.7.36) 
Reply of Ministry  
22.1 It is submitted that the existing website https://www.asimustsee.nic.in, was primarily 
developed to create awareness amongst visitors on Centrally Protected Monuments/Sites 
(CPMs) under ASI and is currently being used as online e -ticketing portal. However,  with 
respect to recommendation/ observations of the Committee, it is intimated that ASI is in the 
process of revamping and upgrading its existing website i.e., https://www.asi.nic.in and also 
developing ‘Indian Heritage’ smartphone application.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely coordinate with the 
Ministry of Tourism and provide the facility of booking tickets for the archaeological sites/ 
monuments and Museums on the Incredible India application and website as well. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Culture may work with the Ministry of 
Tourism to highlight its cultural events and programmes through the Incredible India 
application and web portal too, since information regarding the same would be of sig nificant 
interest to tourists visiting a certain place. Ministry of Culture may also prepare a database 
of important State -controlled Museums and archaeological sites and coordinate with the 
Ministry of Tourism to ensure that they are also highlighted as t ourist attractions on the 
Incredible India web portal and smartphone application.  
(Para 5.7.37) 
Reply of Ministry  
23.1 National Mission of Monument & Antiquities (NMMA) is engaged in preparing a 
database of unprotected Built Heritage &  Sites (BHS) of the country. So far, Mission has 
documented 1.84 lakh BHS.  
23.2  The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. ASI shall be sharing 
the link of ASI official website https://www.asi.nic.in and online ticket booking link for 
incorporating in the website and mobile application of Incredible India.  
23.3 Further, ASI is in the process of developing ‘Indian Heritage’ smartphone application 
containing information of all Centrally Protected Monuments and Sites under ASI. It will also 
incorporate information of State Protected Monuments/Museums in a phased manner to 
highlight them as major tourist attractions. 
 
Inclusion of Monuments in UNESCO World Heritage Sites List 
Recommendation/Observation 

16 
 
24. The Committee further recommends that the National Monuments Authority may 
prioritize the preparation of Heritage Byelaws for the monuments which are either already in 
the UNESCO WHS list or are in the tentative WHS list.  
(Para 5.7.41) 
Reply of Ministry  
24.1 Regional Directors of ASI, notified as Competent Authority for preparation of 
Heritage Bye-laws, have already been directed to speed up the work. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely coordinate with the 
concerned State Departments  and assist them in the protection of State -protected 
sites/monuments, especially in cases wherein there are plans to include the sites/monuments 
in the World Heritage Sites list. The Ministry should be proactive in offering help to State 
Governments for p reparation of dossier that is sent to UNESCO for inclusion of State 
protected sites/monuments.  
(Para 5.7.45) 
Reply of Ministry  
25.1 As recommended by Committee, MoC/ASI coordinates with several ministries, State 
Govt. and various agencies in identifying and proposing different sites and monuments for 
World Heritage List. ASI, being nodal agency for World Heritage matters, provides 
necessary technical assistance as and when required. 
 
Preparation of database of archaeological sites/monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry of Culture does not maintain a 
central database of monuments under the control of State Governments. The Committee 
wonders how the Ministry can decide upon whether a certain monument/site should be 
included in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments, if it does not have any information 
regarding the monuments present in the country. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may collect this information from all State/UT Governments, alongwith informati on 
regarding encroachment of such monuments/sites, and compile a Central Database of 
Monuments/Sites that exist in the country. This will present a thorough picture of the state of 
the historical monuments across the country and help the Ministry in its po licy decisions in 
the future.  

17 
 
(Para 5.7.48) 
Reply of Ministry  
26.1 As per the direction of the Committee , the list of State protected monuments has been 
prepared. ASI is also working on an app called Indian Heritage, to continuously update 
Central database of Central and State protected monuments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee further recommends that important historical monuments and sites 
such as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalam village, Adoni Taluka; Kethavaram Rock Arts and 
Belum Caves in Kurnool etc., be included in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments, give n 
their historical significance. Steps may be taken to improve the connectivity of such important 
monuments and sites so as to increase the footfall to these monuments.  
(Para 5.7.49) 
Reply of Ministry  
27.1 The Kethavaram rock paintings and Belum  Caves in Kurnool District (Andhra 
Pradesh) are State protected monument under the control of Department of Archaeology and 
Museum, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh. No proposal has been received from State Govt. to 
include these monuments in the list of Centrally Protected Monument. However, ASI has 
sought the consent of State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh by a letter dated 12.02.2021 and 
subsequent reminder dated 6.10.2021 for their views for the Central protection of 
Kethavaram rock paintings, response to which is awaited. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons for the 
inability of National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities to complete its task of creation 
of a National Register on Built Heritage & Sites as well as on Antiquities. The Committee is 
concerned to note that in the absence of such a Central database, many monuments would go 
missing without any knowledge of them having existed in the first place. Concrete measures 
must be taken to ensure that a database is prepared at the earliest and that the list thus 
prepared is categorized into the different levels of protection that must be extended to them.  
(Para 5.7.56) 
Reply of Ministry  
28.1 NMMA has taken new initiative to rectify this lacuna through different actions based 
on decentralization of the documentation  process, such as:  
(1) Identification, nomination of Documentation Research Centres (DRCs)  

18 
 
(2) Yong Archaeologist & Internship Programme.   
28.2 NMMA has already published a rolling advertisement seeking applications fr om 
Educational/Heritage organizations and State Archaeology Departments to be declared as 
Documentation Research Centres (DRCs) for documentation of antiquities and built heritages 
in the entire country.  In response to this advertis ement, various organization and State 
Archaeology Department have submitted proposals.  NMMA has taken up each issue, 
scrutinized them and forwarded these applications for the approval of the Competent 
Authority for entering into Memoranda of understanding  with concerned DRCs.  These 
proposals are currently under submission.   
28.3 The NMMA website is under modification & a pro posal for its total overhaul is 
already under submission.  
28.4  Performance Audit in their report stated about 92 missing / untrace able monuments. 
However, ASI has taken extensive survey through field offices and it was observed that only 
24 monuments are reported as untraceable. The said information has already been provided to 
Parliament in reply to various Parliament questions.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the financial requirements 
for carrying out such an exercise across the nation and request the Ministry of Finance to 
grant special allocation for the same. ASI/NMMA should supervise this process with t he 
Department of Archaeology of State Governments and develop a mechanism to seek the 
participation of local municipal bodies, local communities, history and archaeology students 
and the likes. A specialized software may be prepared to capture important de tails such as 
photos and location of the sites/antiquities and it must have provisions to avoid duplicacy in 
the database. The use of latest technologies such as 3D Laser Scanning, LiDAR, 
photogrammetry etc. may be made in sync with the blockchain technolo gy to ensure that 
tamper-proof records of the undocumented precious historical heritage are created.  
(Para 5.7.57) 
Reply of Ministry  
29.1 Same as reply furnished to para 5.7.56 above. 
Drafting Excavation and Exploration Policy 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. The Committee recommends that a Draft Excavation and Exploration Policy may be 
framed at the earliest and inputs may be taken from the experts in this field in this regard. 
The Committee further recommends that ASI may consider opening up the field of excavation 
to more educational institutions and professionals and seek the engagement of local 

19 
 
communities and civil society groups. The Committee is concerned to note that only a 
minuscule part of the budget available with the ASI is allocated for explora tion and 
excavation. Further, the Ministry may take steps to ensure enhanced allocation for the 
purpose of excavation and exploration.  
(Para 5.7.61) 
Reply of Ministry  
30.1 In the above regard, it is submitted that there is already a “National Policy on 
Archaeological Exploration and Excavation” approved by the HCM on 9.3.2015.  Presently, 
it is being revised/ updated. ASI (as per or) on the recommendation of the Standing 
Committee of Central board for Archaeology (SC of CABA) issues licenses(s)/ Permission(s) 
for exploration and excavation in the country to field offices of ASI itself, State Departments 
of Archaeology, Universities ( Central, State and Deemed) and affiliated c olleges and 
registered/ accredited/ affiliated Research societies/  bodies/ institutions/ organizations for the 
respective field season (i.e., from the month of October to September of the following years. 
Sufficient funds are being allotted for excavation and exploration. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee feels that preparation of Heritage by -laws for all the monuments 
across the country forms a crucial part of the protection of monuments envisaged by the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 
2010. In this regard, the Committee may be briefed about the roadblocks being faced by the 
National Monuments Authority, the proposed solutions to the same and the time line being 
targeted for laying the Heritage by-laws for all the monuments.  
(Para 5.8.2) 
Reply of Ministry  
31.1 As per Section 20E(1) of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010, the Regional Directors of Archaeological 
Survey of India (ASI) notified as the competent authority for preparation of Heritage bye -
laws, in consultation with Indian National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage (INTACH), or 
such other expert Heritage bodies as may be notified by the Central Government, shall 
prepare Heritage bye -laws in respect of each protected monument and protected ar ea. The 
roadblocks or constraining factors in the preparation of Heritage bye -laws of all the Centrally 
Protected Monuments and areas were discussed in detail during a meeting chaired by the 
Hon’ble Culture Minister (HCM) on 2 nd November, 2021. The decisio ns taken for 
overcoming these roadblocks or constraining factors given the volume of work involved, are 
detailed below:- 

20 
 
(i) Regional Directors are to be empowered with sufficient Manpower for preparing 
Heritage bye-laws: The Ministry is examining a proposal to provide additional Conservation 
Architects, Surveyors and Data Entry Operators (DEOs) to the Regional Directors, to be 
engaged on outsourcing basis, to fast track the process of preparation and vetting of Heritage 
bye-laws. 
(ii) Additional number of appropria te agencies/ institutions may be empanelled for 
preparation and consultations of Heritage bye -laws: The Ministry is examining a proposal 
for notifying all the Indian Institutes Technology (IITs), National Institutes of Technology 
(NITs) and Central Universities having Departments of Architecture or Archaeology or 
Research Centres for safety of Heritage Structures besides all Schools of Planning & 
Architectures (SPAs) , for notification as expert Heritage Bodies within the meaning of 
section 20E (1) of the AMASR Act ibid. In addition, other agencies/ institutions active in the 
area of Heritage conservation are also being considered for similar notification.   
(iii)Fixing of a negotiated standard of rate for preparation of each Heritage bye -law: The 
Ministry is examining a proposal for fixing a standard rate payable to a notified expert 
Heritage body for preparation of Heritage bye -laws to cover the expenses of the institutions 
in this exercise. 
(iv) Creation of posts of in -house Hindi Translators in National Monum ents Authority: A 
proposal is being prepared by the National Monuments Authority for creation of 2 posts of 
in-house Hindi Translators in National Monuments Authority for streamlining the work 
relating to Hindi Translation of Heritage bye -laws for the purp ose of laying them in both 
houses of Parliament. 
31.2 The Ministry feels that once the above proposed arrangement are in place, the 
preparation of Heritage bye -laws of all the remaining 3635 Centrally Protected Monuments 
and Areas could be laid in both house of Parliament within the next 3 years. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. One important issue that was raised during the deliberations of the Committee was 
the need for underwater archaeological exploration, being given the much needed priority. 
The need for reviving underwater archaeological sites in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil  Nadu 
and Odisha was highlighted during the meeting of the Committee. The Committee is 
disappointed to note that the Underwater Wing of ASI is defunct since a decade.  
(Para 5.8.10) 
Reply of Ministry  
32.1 ASI is reviving its Underwater  wing. An Additional Director General level officer 
posted recently is an Underwater archaeology expert. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

21 
 
33. The Committee recognizes the need for developing such places/sites into tourist spots. 
The Committee desires the Ministry to take note of the need to allocate funds for the Damerla 
Rama Rao Art Gallery in Rajahmundry, which has pieces of art which are centuries old.  
(Para 5.8.13) 
Reply of Ministry  
33.1 Noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. Too many visitors at an historical site can have negative effects on its physical 
characteristics and integrity, as well as the ecological characteristics of the associated 
spaces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may conduct a detailed study into 
the negative impact of high tourist activity at Centrally protected monuments that attract high 
footfall. The study may explore solutions to minimize such negative impact and to figure out a 
number of visitors that can be allowed at the site while ens uring there is no lasting damage 
caused to the monument and the associated spaces.  
(Para 5.8.18) 
Reply of Ministry  
34.1 In this regard, carrying capacity is being worked out to determine the effective footfall 
in a monument. This exercise has been carried out with the help of NEERI for Taj Mahal, 
Agra. Same may be done for other monuments if need is felt.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee feels that having a Statement of Significance for each Centrally 
protected monument would go a long way in making ASI staff as well as tourists more aware 
and appreciative of its cultural and historical significance. The information may also be 
uploaded on the ASI website so as to benefit scholars as well as tourists who might be 
researching before planning a trip to the place.  
(Para 5.8.20) 
Reply of Ministry  
35.1 The remarks of the Committee are duly noted. The information provided in the 
existing official website of ASI is being reviewed and revised with more information and 
significance about the Centrally Protected Monument/Site and is also being included in the  
‘Indian Heritage’ smartphone application. 

22 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee recommends that a robust mechanism may be put in place to ensure 
that detailed assessment exercise is conducted for all Centrally protected monuments 
periodically. The assessment may be utilized to come up with short-term and long-term action 
plans for development and conservation of the sites.  
(Para 5.8.28) 
Reply of Ministry  
36.1 Short term and long -term conservation policies are in place and are implemented as 
per the availability of funds. The mechanism needs strengthening and same is being done. 
 
 
ISSUES COMMON TO MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
MONUMENTS 
Partnering with the private sector for development and conservation of Museums  and 
archaeological sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
37. In view of the fund crunch faced by the Ministry of Culture for development and 
conservation of Museums and archaeological sites/monuments across the country, the 
Committee feels that it is imperative for the Ministry to seek  the participation of private 
sector in order to have the necessary investment needed to make our Museums and 
archaeological sites/monuments at par with international standards, while ensuring the 
employment of best possible preservation practices to keep our cultural heritage safe and 
preserved for the future generations. The Ministry may come up with possible schemes to 
partner with the private sector in development and conservation of our cultural heritage via 
PPP mode, test these on a pilot basis and roll out the successful ones on large scale.  
(Para 6.1.2) 
Reply of Ministry  
37.1 NCSM: Efforts are being made by NCSM to sponsor the exhibitions/galleries by 
PSUs and private sector. 
37.2 ASI: Efforts are being made to identify the sites/monuments and estimated cost for 
conservation /development of public amenities . Further, these monument/sites would be 
undertaken under PPP, subject to availability of suitable donor. Conservation and 

23 
 
development of the various monuments is being carried through Nationa l Culture Fund 
(NCF). 
Re-examination and updation of Acts and Laws pertaining to Museums and 
Archaeological Sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to review the heritage laws in light of 
contemporary times and come up with suitable amendments, wherever necessary, to ensure 
that they are more realistic, transparent and do not cause unnecessary inconvenience to bona 
fide citizens. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may come up with a 
legislative framework to enable and encourage the participation of municipalities and village 
panchayats in heritage conservation and management, especially in case of m onuments that 
are not included in the list of Centrally protected/ State protected monuments.  
(Para 6.3.3) 
Reply of Ministry  
38.1 The Ministry of Culture may review the existing laws and Acts pertain ing to 
Museums and Archaeological sites  and necessary amendments may be made in consultation 
with Law Department. Amendment in AMASR Act, 1958 is under consideration. The role of 
local municipalities and village Panchayats is included in State List of 7 th Schedule of 
Constitution of India where upkeep and maintenance of unprotected monuments is taken up 
by the local authorities as the subject of ancient and historical monuments other than those 
declared by the Parliament to be of national importance, is part of State List. 
 
Weekly/ Biweekly cultural evenings at Museums/ Centrally protected monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
39. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should organize weekly / biweekly 
cultural programmes such as lectures, traditio nal dance and music programmes, film 
screenings, book discussions, traditional art melas etc. at Museums and archaeological sites, 
in close coordination with the Ministry of Tourism and concerned departments of State 
Governments. The Committee feels that t he Ministry of Culture’s database of local artistes 
would be of immense help towards this initiative and would give a boost to both domestic and 
foreign tourism. Organizing participative programmes from time to time would also tend to 
make Museums/ sites v isits a fun and learning experience for the visitors. The Ministry 
should tap its pool of artistes and local talent in such programmes. The same should be 
advertised through social media in order to reach out to the target audience in a cost -
effective manner. Due caution must be exercised by the Ministry to ensure that any events 
organized at a Museum or an archaeological site are not in any way detrimental to the site or 
any artefacts.  

24 
 
(Para 6.4.3) 
Reply of Ministry  
39.1 NGMA: NGMA, New Delhi is conducting temporary exhibitions, Lectures etc., on 
important occasions.  
39.2 Salar Jung Museum : The Museum is conducting temporary exhibitions, Lectures 
etc., on important occasions. Recently a programme on Yoga was conducted on the Occasion 
of International Yoga Day. 
39.3 Allahabad Museum : AM regularly organises cultural programmes involving local 
tourists by which visitors footfall increases. 
39.4 Indian Museum : Indian Museum, Kolkata, being the oldest and largest museum in 
Asia, has been engaged in developing its foundations in a broader scale by promoting 
tangible and intangible heritage. Indian Museum organizes several lectures, talks,   workshops 
and multi-cultural activities throughout the year.  
39.5 NCSM: All the units under NCSM organize a numb er of educational programmes 
such as science seminars, science dramas, science & engineering fairs, science film festivals, 
workshops, training and science demonstrations etc. for public in general and students in 
particular both onsite and online. 
39.6 ASI: In order to attract visitors, museums under ASI plans and organises various 
activities on World Heritage Day and Museum Day. ASI extends all cooperation and support 
to Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism Departments when they organize cultural programs 
to attract tourists. 
 
Taking action on feedback from visitors 
Recommendation/Observation 
40. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may set up a robust mechanism to 
collect feedback from domestic as well as foreign tourists who visit a Museum or 
archaeological site/monument. Technology may be utilized to permit the tourists to easily 
leave their feedback regarding the experience they had in their visit to a Museum/ 
archaeological monument. Working on first hand feedback from the visitors will lead  the 
Ministry into improving tourist experience in the future, while also leaving a positive imprint 
about Indian culture and heritage among those who visit.  
(Para 6.5.1) 
Reply of Ministry  
40.1 National Museum : NM is obtaining feedback from visitors through its websites as 
well as through social media profiles. Measures are being taken based on feedback received. 

25 
 
40.2 NGMA: NGMA, New Delhi had kept a Visitors Book  at the Exit Gates. VIP visitors 
are given a special Visitors Book to record the comments  on the visit of museum and 
suggestions if any. Also, Museum placed provision in website to get feedback from 
individual visitors to record their comments and invite their suggestions for improvement of 
the Museum. 
 
40.3 Salar Jung Museum : The Museum had kept a Visitors Book at the Exit Gates. VIP 
visitors are given a special Visitors Book to record the comments on the visit of museum and 
suggestions, if any. Also, Museum placed provision in website to get feedback from 
individual visitors to record their comments and invite their suggestions for improvement of 
the Museum. 
40.4 Allahabad Museum : Feedback From the visitors is regularly collected in AM by 
which AM increases its efficiency level. 
40.5 Indian Museum: Indian Museum has a feedback option in its w ebsite for its visitors 
to comment and express their grievances or changes that are required. Suitable on -site 
arrangement shall also be taken up as part of the modernisation work. 
40.6 NCSM: Collection of feedback from visitors is regularly practiced in N CSM units. 
This has helped in identifying the deficiencies in various visitor’s facilities and improvement 
thereupon. 
40.7 ASI: Visitor books have been kept in all the museums under ASI to receive feedback 
from visitors. The provision of submitting feedback / comments from both domestic and 
international tourists about their visit to any Centrally Protected Monument, Site or Museum 
is being incorporated in its official website being revamped / upgraded. 
Measures to compensate private owners of listed  historic buildings to conserve them in 
the face of the rising land values 
Recommendation/Observation 
41. The Committee agrees with the view that private owners of listed historic buildings as 
well as people having residential property properties within prohibited/ regulated/ buffer 
areas should be provided with certain compensation/ incentives to encourage their 
participation in the conservation and protection of the historical sites. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that wherever feasible, the Minis try may act on the suggestions made 
by INTACH in this regard.  
(Para 6.12.3) 
Reply of Ministry  
41.1 This will be discussed with INTACH by ASI. 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSERVATION OF MUSEUMS: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES 
 
Challenges:- 
Innovation and Design 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that Indian Museums in general need to work a lot on their 
presentation, design  and marketing. Doing so would help the Museums to attract not only 
art/history aficionados but also other visitors which will help in increasing the revenue of the 
Museums. This increased revenue can be used to spur innovation and improve design 
standards across the Museums. Experiences and good practices from Museums, both Indian 
and international, excelling in terms of innovation and design should be utilized for 
improving the same in Museums where it is lacking. 
(Para 4.11.3)  
Reply of Ministry  
 
1.1 National Museum: National Museum has recently revamped visitor’s facility and 
installed many digital immersive kiosks, 270 projection systems etc. The auditorium has also 
been rebuilt for showing orientation films to visitors.  NM website has also been rev amped 
for making users friendly. These will enhance visitors’ experience in the museum. The 
presentations of the permanent galleries are also getting improved.     
1.2 NGMA: The Galleries of NGMA are on par with International Standards. All the key 
personnel have been trained both in International and National Museums/ Laboratories and 
making their effort to present best part of the Collections in the   NGMA, New Delhi . Audio 
Guides/Mobile app and 3D Projection Mapping is being introduced. 
1.3 Indian Museum:- Indian Museum, Kolkata is irrefutably one of the most important 
cultural institutions with a rich history of its own. Over the last 207 years, the museum has 
been the caretaker of numerous priceless artefacts and objects of art, archaeological, and 
anthropological importance. Visitors from across the globe visit the museum and are 
enthralled with the kind of collection housed here. Keeping this aspect in mind, and as stated 
above, recuration of nine galleries with the approval of the Board of Trustees ha s been taken-
up in the first phase with an objective to enhance content and use of modern design in the 

27 
 
presentation of artefacts. The newly curated galleries shall also be supplemented by digital 
technologies to provide layered information to attract all s ections of the society. This work 
once completed is expected to generate more footfall through proper publicity and marketing 
efforts and is expected to enhance revenue generation for the Museum.  
1.4 Salar Jung Museum: The Galleries are being on par with International Standards. 
All the key personnel have been trained both in International and National Museums/ 
Laboratories and making their effort to present best part of the Collections in the Salar Jung 
Museum. Audio Guides/Tours are being introduced. 
1.5 ASI:- In order to attract visitors, museums under ASI plan and organize activities like 
drawing/ essay competitions, gallery tours, exhibitions, etc. Special activities for children are 
organized by the museums to celebrate Museum Day, Hindi Pakhwada, Independence Day, 
Republic Day, etc. ‘Indian Heritage’  mobile app is also being created to popularise museums 
and monuments under ASI. Besides, marketing strategies like advertisement in newspaper, 
radio and in Metro rails have been adopted by the ASI for popularising special exhibitions. 
ASI is also using its Facebook and other social media avenues to popularise various 
activities. As most of the site museums under ASI are located within protected areas under 
ASI, hence, the ticketing for monuments and site museums are planned together. 
 
Human Resources 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that there is an urgent need for carrying out extensive training 
programmes for the museum staff working across the country. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may enhance the budgetary allocation for this purpose and ensure tha t the 
museum staff is well -trained and sensitized regarding the cultural importance of the 
antiquities under their care. The training programmes may be conducted by renowned 
experts from the field in an engaging manner. 
(Para 4.11.13)  
Reply of Ministry  
2.1 To improve training needs, a premier institute, Indian Institute of Heritage and 
Conservation (IIHC) is being set up.  
2.2 ASI: - Museums under ASI are headed by the Archaeologists who are well trained in 
excavations/ explorations and handling antiquit ies. In the past, International, and national 
training programs have also been attended by site museum in-charges. 
Conservation and Preservation Practices 
Recommendation/Observation 

28 
 
3. The Committee feels that a lot needs to be done in terms of implementing the best 
possible conservation and preservation practices in our Museums. The Committee 
recommends that the Museums should be encouraged to study the efficacy of age -old 
traditional conservation practices and modify them suitably in order to e nsure that all the 
Museum artefacts stay in the best possible state. Collaborations with international 
institutions with respect to training and capacity building exercises should be held 
periodically for the Museum staff. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure 
that the curricula of the academic institutions imparting knowledge of conservation practices 
in India, including the upcoming IIHC, includes the global best practices for conservation 
and preservation of historic artefacts. 
(Para 4.11.15)  
Reply of Ministry  
3.1 National Museum: National Museum  has recently upgraded its Conservation 
Laboratory and equipped it with State of the Art Technology and practices. NM is also 
collaborating with NMI (IIHC) for introduction latest and best practices on conservation. 
3.2 NGMA: National Gallery of Modern Arts ( NGMA) has sent one Curator 
(Restoration), Deputy Curator ( Restoration) and one Technical Restorer  to Holland for 
training in Conservation. 
3.3 Salar Jung Museum : - One Asst. Curator and one Conservation Asst were sent to 
NRLC Lucknow for training in Conservation. 
3.4 NCSM: - NCSM strives to adopt the best practises to conserve and preserve the S&T 
objects in accession and on display. Experts are consulted for such conservation & 
preservation as and when required. 
3.5 Indian Museum :- Considering the fact that Indian Museum has already initiated 
development of a state-of-the-art preservation and conservation laboratory along with storage 
facility for the reserve collection of the Museum . Efforts to implement the recommendations 
and dir ections to introduce best possible conservation and preservation practices shall be 
made while creating this facility so that in the long run this new facility can be utilised as a 
training facility for museum personnel across India. 
3.6 Allahabad Museum: - Allahabad Museum has a very good conservation unit which 
conserves the artefacts, painting, coins etc 
3.7 ASI: - Science Branch practices old and new methods of conservation and 
preservation of the museum artefacts so that they stay in the best possible state. Collaboration 
with national/international institutions including IIH with respect to training and capacity 
building of Chemists would be beneficial. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

29 
 
4. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may devise a policy to ensure 
periodical review the state of artefacts of the Museums and, on a case -to-case basis, do away 
with those which are beyond the point of salvaging by way of donating them to academic 
institutions or by auctioning them to collectors. This wou ld also help the Museums to focus 
on the artefacts which are in good shape and preserve them in best possible way for years to 
come. The Committee would also like the Ministry to encourage the Museums under its ambit 
to collaborate with State Government ow ned Museums from time to time to share their 
preservation expertise with them.  
(Para 4.11.16) 
Reply of Ministry  
4.1 Periodic assessment of objects in various museums is carried out which includes 
detailing of condition of assets. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take the necessary steps to ensure 
that a coordinated, integrated and consistent approach to conservation and development of 
museums is followed across the various museums functioning under it. 
(Para 4.11.18)  
Reply of Ministry  
5.1 The observations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
Audience Engagement 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to tie up with both domestic as well as 
international Museums to exchange and loan artefacts on rotational basis, so as to have fresh 
attractions from time to time. The Committee is of the view that the Museums should ensure 
that their entire collection of artefacts is displayed to the audience by implementation of a  
well thought -out, pre -planned rotation schedule, physically as well as on the Museum 
websites, and also by giving advertisements both in print and electronic media, which will 
also help to increase the overall footfall. This would also enable visitors to know beforehand 
what to expect from their visit, and provide them an overall improved visitor experience. 
(Para 4.11.22)  
Reply of Ministry  
 

30 
 
6.1 NGMA: NGMA every year collaborates with national as well as international 
museums and organizes exhibitions on exchange basis. NGMA has more than 17000 art 
objects in its permanent collection and it is not possible to display entire collection keeping in 
mind the theme of the exhibitions and availability of space.  However the artworks are being 
rotated from time to time through curated exhibitions. Moreover, virtual exhibitions of our 
collections have been put on our social media for garnering greater reach, hav ing more 
artworks for people to enjoy and also to enable art lovers to enjoy the artworks even without 
having to physically visit the gallery. Apart from this, through JATAN - a digital initiative of 
MOC, almost the entire collection of NGMA is available online at Museums of India website. 
6.2 Salar Jung Museum: The Museum is displaying 16000+ objects/antiques in its 38 
Galleries. Salar Jung Museum is famous for single man’s largest collection across the world.  
In terms of Salar  Jung Museum Act, 1961, no collection from Salar Jung could be spared on 
loan out of India and within the Country.  However, the artefacts donated/acquired by the 
Museum can be spared to other Museums in India subject to approval from the Board. The 
Galleries in the Museum are designed and made to suit the particular set of prime objects and 
the same are displayed in each one of the galleries. It is practically not possible to rotate the 
prime objects as there are limited objects available in the collection s, for instance, Silver, 
Sculptures, Jade, Ivory, Western Paintings, Clocks, Glass collections etc. Wherever it was 
possible to rotate the objects, the same are being rotated.  In addition, number of objects are 
rotated from the Reserve collection for disp lay on the eve of special occasions and 
Exhibitions conducted by the Museum.  About 4 ,275 objects are rotated in the Galleries from 
2014-15 to 2019-20 and about 1,065 objects were displayed in the 33 Temporary Exhibitions 
conducted by the Museum in the sam e period. The Museum also encourages local talent and 
artistes/private collections to exhibit their works/ collections by organizing the temporary 
exhibitions.  Museum will implement and provide QR codes to  visitors at entry point of 
Galleries. Museum will also make efforts for availability of Wi-fi. 
6.3 NCSM: - NCSM has organised Travelling exhibitions in various countries as detailed 
below: 
 ‘India: A Festival of Science’ in USA (1985-1989) 
 ‘Science & Technology in India’ in USSR (1987) 
 ‘India: A Glimpse of Science’ in France (1990- 1991) 
 ‘India: A Glimpse of Science’ in Bulgaria (1991) 
 ‘India: A Glimpse of Science’ in China (1994) 
 ‘India: A Tradition in Science & Technology and Culture’ in Bangladesh (1998) 
 ‘India: A Festival of Science’ in Bhutan (2003) 
 ‘India: A Culture of Science’ in Trinidad & Tobago (2012) 
 ‘India: A Culture of Science’ in Guyana (2012) 

31 
 
 ‘Cricket Connects’ in South Africa (2014) 
 ‘The Rise of Digital India’ in Indonesia, Malaysia (2015) 
 ‘Life on the Silver Screen: The Fascinating Story of Indian Cinema’ in Indonesia (2015) 
 ‘The Rise of Digital India’ in Colombo (2016) 
 ‘Cricket Connects’ in U.K. (2017) 
6.4 Indian Museum: - Indian Museum has , in the past , participated in international 
exhibitions along with other museums of the country under t he banner of the Ministry of 
Culture. Indian Museum will continue to participate in the future and also host such travelling 
exhibitions as and when such opportunity arises. Incidentally, Indian Museum jointly with 
Goethe Institute, Kolkata , is presently a rranging an exhibition titled Bauhaus Imaginista, a 
specially curated exhibition on the Bauhaus movement received from Goethe Institute, 
Germany jointly with several art collections of Indian Museum. Indian Museum has also 
uploaded a few thematic exhibitions in its website jointly with Google Art & Culture. 
Observations of the Committee are noted for implementation. 
6.4 Allahabad Museum: - Allahabad Museum has done many tie ups in past with state 
museum and international museum for exchange of  artefacts on loan basis. The process 
would also continue in future. Museum will also make efforts for availability of Wi-fi. 
6.5 ASI: - Temporary loan of antiquities from museums under ASI are given to domestic 
and international museums for exhibitions, as per ‘Policy/ Guideline for Lending of 
Antiquities/ Art Treasures to Institutions/ Museums Abroad and within the Country’ .  
Further, inf ormation on the collection of two museums under ASI - Goa and 
Nagarjunakonda, is available on the portal ‘museumsofindia’ through JATAN software. In 
addition, information on the museums under ASI is available on the website of the 
Archaeological Survey of India 
 
Miscellaneous  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by the Ministry to modernize and 
upgrade the Museum facilities at various Museums under its administrative control. 
(Para 4.13.2) 
Reply of Ministry  
7.1 National Museum: NM has recently upgraded its museum infrastructure especially in 
the domain of museum lightings, security, display systems etc. 
7.2 NGMA: While renovating the galleries, all International standards are being 
followed.  

32 
 
7.3 Salar Jung Museum: As far as Salar Jung Museum is concerned, Museum renovated 
24 galleries out of 38 galleries and plans to complete the rest of 14 galleries in the next 4 
years. While renovating the galleries, all International standards will be followed. 
7.4 Indian Museum : Indian Museum , under the guidance of Secretary, Culture , has 
initiated upgradation of nine galleries. Simultaneously, air -conditioning of the galleries, 
installation of modern fire detection and fire prevention related installations have been 
initiated through CPWD. Construction of a new building to house the a rtefacts which are not 
on display, along with a modern preservation and conservation laboratory has been initiated 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee takes note that a Museum of the Word is planned in the National 
Library, Kolkata and desires that it may be finalized soon. 
(Para 4.13.3)  
Reply of Ministry  
8.1 National Library, Kolkata had signed an agreement with M/s Dronah  for preparation 
of Conceptualization, Planning, Content Development, Designing and Curatorial Work for 
the proposed project at Belvedere House. The Competent Authority has granted the 
administrative approval on entire project of 'Museum of Word' of Rs.41.26 cr. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry, in coordination with the State 
Government of Tripura, has plans to create a State Gallery of Modern Art at Pushpabanta 
Palace at Agartala, besides funding and guiding them in the matter of curation. 
(Para 4.13.5)  
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 The proposal of the State Government has been considered in the Expert Committee 
Meeting of the Museum Grant Scheme held in December 2021 and recommended for funding 
as per guidelines of the scheme. The DPR has been submitted by the State Govt. of Tripura 
and is being examined. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

33 
 
10. The Committee is constrained to note that only 300 -400 painting out of the collection 
of 17,000 paintings, are presently being showc ased in the National Museum at Delhi. The 
Committee desires to be increased progressively to showcase at least 25% of the paintings. 
(Para 4.13.9) 
Reply of Ministry  
10.1 National Museum : Due to space constraints, the display cannot be increased. 
However, NM is organizing special exhibition and on line exhibitions on paintings collection 
and another 150 -200 paintings will be accessible to visitors. NM has also uploaded about 
5200 paintings on Museum Portal for online viewing. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee takes note of the Sindhu Valley Civilization Gallery proposed to be 
taken up in the National Museum, Delhi, with the collaboration of ASI. The Committee 
welcomes the initiative taken by the Ministry to bring the artefacts and antiquities, whi ch ASI 
has excavated from various sites of Rakhigarhi, Sanauli, Lothal, Kalobangan etc.. The 
Committee applauds the initiative taken up by the Ministry to set up a Jewellery Gallery at 
the National Museum in Delhi. 
(Para 4.13.10)  
Reply of Ministry   
11.1 Noted. No special comments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee welcomes the innovative initiatives taken to set up new Galleries in 
Indian Museum and other Museums and hopes that these initiatives would fructify in near 
future. 
(Para 4.13.11)  
Reply of Ministry  
12.1 Indian Museum : Indian Museum is organizing an exhibition  Bauhaus 
Imaginista jointly with Goethe Institute, Kolkata. The exhibition  'Bauhaus Imaginista'  shall 
orchestrate the international impact and reception history of the Bauhaus and include four 
chapters exploring the pedagogy of the Bauhaus and its multifaceted history both within and 
outside Europe. The exhibition shall include 200 photos in postcard format, posters, 
slideshows of different events worldwide, video documentaries,  interviews, etc. Painting 
from the collection of Indian Museum shall also form part of this exhibition. 
 
12.2 Indian Museum has completed major renovation of three halls for setting up of 
NGMA Eastern Chapter as part of 75 th Independence Day celebration o f India. New 

34 
 
exhibitions from NGMA collection shall invoke a sense of importance of the tangible and 
intangible cultural heritage of our country. Indian Museum has already started working on the 
recuration of nine galleries. This work is expected to be completed by 2022-23 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee desires that the work at all these museums may be completed at the 
earliest. 
(Para 4.13.14)  
Reply of Ministry  
13.1 Ministry has been regularly taking up the matter with State Gov ernments/concerned 
museum authorities for early completion of these museums. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES  
Challenges:- 
Conservation Problems 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee takes note of the various problems faced by the Ministry/ASI with 
regard to the conservation of the monuments/sites, and recommends that the Ministry should 
be proactive in solving these problems since this form a formidable threat to the maintenance 
and conservation of the archaeological monuments and sites. Given the budget any 
constraints care should be taken to ensure optimum utilization of funds and working out 
innovative, cost -effective solutions to meet th e challenges related to conservation of the 
archaeological sites. 
(Para 5.6.4)  
 Reply of Ministry  
14.1 Conservation: The challenges related to conservation of monuments depend on the 
nature and technique of their construction, usage of material, inherent  constructional defects 
if any besides the location hazards. 
14.2 The main causes of decay are as following: 
i. Climate factor 
ii. Biological and Botanical factor 
iii. Natural Disasters and 
iv.  Manmade causes 
14.3 Conservation is one of the major tasks of ASI. The monume nt and sites are 
maintained and restored by special repair and annual repair plan for which funds are allocated 

35 
 
as per the requirement of the monument and sites. Some of the monuments are conserved 
under the National Culture Fund (NCF) and Civil Deposits s cheme for which funds are 
provided from outsource agencies, private partners and States/Departments. 
 
Encroachment and Vandalism  
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recommends that a dedicated cell be set up under ASI with mandate to 
identify, monitor and follow up action on the incidents of encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country. The cell may seek active participation of local 
communities residing near the CPMs and encourage them to report any such incidents to the 
Ministry at the earliest.  
(Para 5.6.14)  
Reply of Ministry  
15.1 A Division (Monument -I) exists for this monitoring in ASI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee is happy to note that ASI is working on a Security Policy for all the 
Centrally Protected Monuments. The Committee recommends that the Security Policy may be 
formulated and implemented at the earliest.  
(Para 5.6.18)  
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 The work is in progress. 
 
Lack of funds  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee is of the  view that adequate funds allocation to the Ministry will not 
only help develop and preserve the rich cultural heritage of India, but also act as an 
investment for propelling the growth of tourism sector in India. The present budget allocation 
to the Ministry, in the opinion of the Committee is insufficient for developing and conserving 
Museums and archaeological sites and falls short to meet the financial needs of India’s 
cultural heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make  a 
strong case for higher fund allocation and would also urge the Ministry of Finance to be 
considerate to preserve our rich cultural heritage. 

36 
 
(Para 5.6.25)  
Reply of Ministry   
17.1 Noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee feels that given the limited budget available with ASI, it is imperative 
to ensure that schemes such as Adopt -a-Heritage are implemented in way to maximize their 
impact on the state of maintenance and conservation of the heritage sites. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends  that the Ministry of Culture may coordinate with the Ministry of 
Tourism and expand the scheme to permit the conservation works by private organizations, 
under close supervision of the ASI.  
(Para 5.6.27)  
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 ASI is participating in such endeavours/schemes with Ministry of Tourism 
 
Human Resources at ASI  
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee agrees with the view that efforts must be made to ensure that ASI 
officials are from a diverse professional background, since the same would allow ASI to take 
more well-informed decisions regarding the development and conservation of archaeological 
sites. The Committee recommends that ASI may take steps to gauge the need for creation of 
posts of officials of div erse expertise and if needed, to seek expertise on a consultancy basis 
so as to ensure optimal utilization of the constrained budgets available with ASI for carrying 
out conservation works.  
(Para 5.6.36)  
Reply of Ministry  
19.1 ASI is an organization having experts from different backgrounds such as 
Archaeologist, Engineer, Chemist and Architect. Experts are hired on consultancy basis also.  
 
Scarcity of Artisans 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee recommends the Ministr y to organize training camps and short -term 
courses to enhance the competencies of artisans required for working on the monuments. 

37 
 
Master artisans/craftsman may be employed to pass on their skills to young artisans at these 
training camps and courses. The Committee sees no reasons as to why people would not be 
interested in attending such training camps/ courses as long as they are aptly incentivized 
and enough employment opportunities are created. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
work on this aspect so that our valuable monuments do not suffer damages because of lack of 
artisans.  
(Para 5.6.39)  
Reply of Ministry  
20.1 ASI is working towards this direction. 
 
Opportunities:-  
Promotion of Tourism and Business  
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee feels that there should be greater synergy between the Ministry of 
Culture and Ministry of Tourism to collectively work on policies/initiatives aiming to 
strengthen capacities of tourist guides, develop basic facilities for tourists at tourist sp ots, 
organize special events and exhibitions to attract tourists etc. The Committee is of the view 
that the combined expertise of both the Ministries would go a long way in supplementing 
each other’s initiatives and also result in better experience for the  tourists visiting the 
Museums and archaeological sites in India.  
(Para 5.7.10)  
Reply of Ministry  
21.1 So far as guides are concerned, ASI acknowledges Regional Tourist Guides licensed / 
approved by Ministry of Tourism, Government of India. Further, the scheme being operated 
by Ministry of Tourism i.e. Incredible India Tourist Facilitation (IITF) Certification is also 
supported by ASI. The MoC/ ASI is working in tandem with MoC for providing basic 
amenities at monuments through the scheme like Adopt a Heritage, Adarsh Monument, 
Iconic Sites, etc. Furthe r, State Tourism Department s are also encouraged to provide 
amenities in the monuments by entering MoUs. The facilities include toilets, benches, 
drinking water, signages, pathways etc. 
 
Involvement of Communities 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The background note furnished by the Ministry lists promotion of business by training 
local archaeologists and specialists in conservation and site management as an opportunity. 

38 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps that have been taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
(Para 5.7.17)  
Reply of Ministry  
22.1 Young Archaeologist program has been approved by the Ministry for ASI. ASI has 
also initiated an internship for involving students and archaeologists 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee feels that having a dedicated senior personnel for forging 
partnerships with universities, local bodies, State Governments as well as Archaeology 
Departments of foreign countries would help laying an enhanced focus on benefitting from 
the knowledge and participation of these entities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
ASI may create a special unit dedicated to this task, headed by a senior ranking officer.  
(Para 5.7.27)  
Reply of Ministry  
23.1 A special unit called Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) cell exists in ASI and a 
Senior Director level officer looks after this cell. Cell has several MoUs with Foreign 
Universities.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee recommends the Ministry to run ad campaigns akin to the Atithi Devo 
Bhava – Incredible India ad campaign, to make communities more aware, proud and 
protective of the cultural heritage in their vicinity. A feeling of ownership, responsibility and 
pride would also help in bringing do wn the instances of vandalism at archaeological sites 
and monuments. The Committee recommends that social media campaigns may be utilized 
for the same. 
(Para 5.7.28)  
 Reply of Ministry  
 24.1 This is being done by ASI HQs and Circle offices regularly. It will be further 
strengthened.  
  
Training the communities for the purpose of developing local guides 

39 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop regional training centers 
at places where there are several archaeological sites and Museums. Besides, the Ministry 
may also arrange language classes for local shopkeepers and vendors in areas with hig h 
tourist influx. By resorting to this, the local businesses will prosper and will also make 
tourists more secured and comfortable. 
(Para 5.7.30)  
Reply of Ministry  
25.1 ASI recognizes the IITF program of the Ministry of Tourism (Q 54) for training of 
guides. 
Setting standards for archival research 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee feels that the Ministry should vigorously pursue digitization of 
archaeological artefacts so as to create a central database of the same for research and 
archival purposes. Such a central database would also permit academicians and scholars in 
the upcoming IIHC and other such institutions, not only in India but internationally as well, 
to learn about our cultural heritage in detail without needing physical access.  
(vi) Revamping the digital presence of archaeological sites/ monuments:  
(Para 5.7.33)  
Reply of Ministry  
26.1 Pertaining to the collection in site museums of ASI, it is submitted that the 
information on the collection of two museums under ASI - Goa and Nagarjunakonda is 
available on the portal ‘museumsofindia’ through JATAN software. In addition, information 
on the museums under ASI is available on the website of the Archaeological Survey of India. 
The detailed information on museums for the visitors is being prepared by a portal namely 
‘Heritage Atlas’. 
Inclusion of Monuments in UNESCO World Heritage Sites List 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee takes note of the extensive suggestions given by the stakeholder with 
regard to UNESCO World Heritage Site (WHS) nominations. The Committee may be 
apprised of the efficacy of the Advisory Committee set up by the Ministry in this regard. The 
Ministry may take all necessary steps to ensure that a well -thought-out strategy is evolved 
and implemented to maximize the chances of nomination of more monuments and sites to the 
UNESCO World Heritage Site list. Inclusion of more monuments by way of minor boundary 
modifications of the existing WHS may also be explored.  

40 
 
(Para 5.7.40)  
Reply of Ministry  
27.1 The Ministry appoints Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters (ACWHM) to 
assist ASI in scrutinizing proposal related to World Heritage Nomination dossiers. The 
ACWHM under chairpersonship of DG, ASI comprises several ex -officio members from 
MoC, MoEF,  WII etc., and a few individual experts. ACWHM has proved to be useful 
instrument in guiding the MoC/ASI for various WH matters as well as in doing a gap analysis 
of various types of heritage sites, namely, cultural/natural/mixed so as to be decided to be 
included for a proposed World Heritage Sites. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee is pleased to note the renovation of Red Fort, which consists of British 
Barracks of olden times has been taken up by the Ministry. The Committee takes  special note 
of the installation of permanent exhibition on Netaji, the rebellion of 1857, and paintings, at 
the Red Fort.  
(Para 5.8.1)  
Reply of Ministry  
28.1 Four museums namely 1857 - India’s War of Independence; Netaji Subhash Chandra 
Bose and INA; Azaadi-Ke-Diwane; and Yaad -e-Jallian have been organised by ASI in the 
barracks of Red Fort. These museums were inaugurated by the Hon’ble PM in 2019. 
28.2 Conservation: Further, maintenance and conservation of the said Museum building 
are taken care from time to time in future. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Ministry in projects around 
pilgrimages, remote border areas and the Ladakh region.  
(Para 5.8.4)  
30. One Member of the Committee voiced concern about media reports that the original 
work was being distorted in the name of maintenance and repairing work of the Lord 
Jagannath Temple. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps 
to allay such fears.  
(Para 5.8.7)  
Reply of Ministry  

41 
 
30.1 Conservation of monuments is done as per the approved National Conservation 
Policy. All interventions done in Shree Jagannath  Temple are minimum and necessary to 
ensure structural stability and retrofitting of the historic structure. These are reversible in 
nature. All interventions have been done in consultation with the temple committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee is constrained to note that the constraints of manpower and funds, 
quite often play spoilsport in the proper upgradation and development of sculpture sheds into 
Museums. 
(Para 5.8.9)  
Reply of Ministry  
31.1 Indian Museum : Due to acute shortage of manpower, Indian Museum is not being 
able to function smoothly and developmental work is being greatly affected. It is expected 
that the recruitment process shall commence shortly to resolve this longstanding problem. 
Adequate fund allocation by the Min istry shall also be required to undertake the 
modernisation work initiated by Indian Museum. 
31.2 ASI: ASI is working on sculpture sheds development into museums as per the 
feasibility. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee is dismayed to note that even though funds are available with ASI, 
proper work is not being done at Raigarh project, which is also funded by the State 
Government, as per the guidelines of ASI. The Committee emphasizes the need to speed up 
the work being done at the Raigarh Fort, which is also called as the ‘Gibraltar of the East’.  
(Para 5.8.11)  
Reply of Ministry  
32.1 All attempts are made to speed up the works. Committee’s recommendations are 
being compiled with. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. One Member of the Committee raised the issue of cracks being caused in Yaganti 
Temple, due to blasting for mining. The Committee emphasizes upon the need for ASI to work 

42 
 
in tandem with the concerned State Governments to ensure that archaeological site s and 
historical structures are maintained and preserved in good condition. 
(Para 5.8.14)  
Reply of Ministry  
33.1 ASI ensures coordination with State Governments as and when required for 
conservation and development of the monuments and sites, and for monitoring the buffer 
areas. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the provisions of the 
concerned legislation in this regard, are enforced strictly.  
(Para 5.8.16) 
Reply of Ministry  
34.1 Noted for compliance 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee feels that visitors should experience the heritage sites in the purest 
possible form, and thus, utmost care should be taken to ensure that any structures built to 
provide facilities at such sites are  in sync with the historic character of the site and do not 
disfigure its view and aura. The Committee, therefore, recommends that signage, ticket 
counters, toilets, interpretation counters etc., should be designed in consideration of the site 
in question,  and approved by an expert committee comprising archaeologists and heritage 
architects. 
(Para 5.8.22) 
Reply of Ministry  
35.1 ASI ensures that any proposed interventions for visitor facilities keep in mind the  
architectural character of a monument and its authenticity in sync with the intervention.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee is deeply concerned to note the observations made by Aga Khan Trust 
for Culture regarding approval granted by NMA on the basis of HIA commissioned by the 

43 
 
developer itself. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be put in place to 
ensure that the HIA required for approval of development projects should be conducted by a 
specialist NGO or academic institute, who is not associated with the developer itself. 
(Para 5.8.26)  
Reply of Ministry  
36.1 The National Monuments Authority (NMA) in its 133 rd Meeting  held on 29 th 
February, 2016 had decided that the NOC cases having total build up area (Existing + 
Proposed) above 5 ,000 sq.m , shall provide the Archaeological Impact Assessment for the 
proposed site as per the format prescribed by NMA. The assessment shall be carried out by 
an Institution/ a body by associating experts from the discipline of Archaeology and Heritage 
conservation. In the context of parameters for Archaeological Impact Assessments, it was 
also decided that in respect of NOC cases pertaining to World Heritage Monuments / Sites, 
the Site Management Plans or guidelines available with ASI shall be considered before 
issuing NOC. For the Monuments and Archaeological sites included in World Heritage Site 
Tentative list, comments of ASI shall be obtained on desirability of allowing construction and 
also the potential of archaeological sites before consideration of issuance of NOC by NMA. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
37. The Committee recommends that ASI may work on the revival of historical water 
bodies across the country. Besides helping in collecting rainwater during rainy season, the 
revived water bodies will act as a tourist attraction as well. The Committee urges upon ASI to 
explore partnering with the Ministry of Jal Shakti in this regard. 
(Para 5.8.30) 
Reply of Ministry  
37.1 The recommendation has been noted for revival of water bodies and will be taken up 
in the years to come. Rainwater harvesting, however, is already in progress on the 
monuments across the country. Water bodies are major components of monuments. ASI 
maintains a number of water bodies across the country satisfactorily. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to address the 
problems pointed out in the above-mentioned CAG Report. 
(Para 5.8.37) 
Reply of Ministry  

44 
 
38.1 The problems/ queries raised in the CAG Report regarding museums were addressed/ 
answered in timely manner. 
 
ISSUES COMMON TO MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
MONUMENTS 
Partnering with the private sector for development and cons ervation of Museums and 
archaeological sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
39. The Committee suggests that the maintenance of various archaeological sites and 
monuments be outsourced to private agencies and in order to attract funds from such 
individuals/agencies, an incentive, such as display boards in the name of such individual 
agency at the sites, may be provided. 
(Para 6.1.5) 
Reply of Ministry  
39.1 It is already in force through NCF and programs like Adopt-a-Heritage of Ministry of 
Tourism. 
 
Effect of pollution on Museum artefacts and Archaeological Sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
40. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct researches to devise 
technological solutions to curb the ill -effects of air pollution on our cu ltural heritage. 
Different effects of the pollutants lingering in the air on different types of surfaces and 
materials should be studied and the solutions devised to prevent or minimize the same should 
be shared with State Government archaeology department s and Museums as well. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should seek higher budgetary allocation to 
fund researches since the process of conservation of monuments and artefacts is as much 
science as it is an art.  
(Para 6.2.3) 
Reply of Ministry 
40.1 National Museum : NM is constantly monitoring its objects for possible damaging 
effect due to air pollution. NM has a full-fledged Conservation Laboratory for this purpose. 
40.2 NGMA: NGMA, New Delhi has already conducted survey by an Independent 
Agency to check the Pollution levels and its effects on the Artefacts. As per the report, there 
is no effect on the Museum Artefacts. 

45 
 
40.3 Salar Jung Museum : Salar Jung Museum has already conducted survey by an 
Independent Agency to check the P ollution levels and its effects on the Artefacts. As per the 
report, there is no effect on the Museum Artefacts. Museum has also taken several steps to 
arrest the pollution, as the Museum is situated on the South bank of Musi River and a main 
Road from Central Bus Stand to High Court. 
40.4 Allahabad Museum : The conservation unit of AM is very good and it is expert in 
preserving wide range of artefacts, stone sculpture, modern painting, coins etc. 
40.5 ASI: Conservation: As per the recommendations, due care will be taken for 
conservation of the monuments and artefacts effected by pollution and higher budget 
allocation is being made for the same. Science Branch has been monitoring the air pollutants 
in the vicinity of same monuments like Taj Mahal, Agra; Bibi -ka-Maqbara, Aurangabad etc.  
Air Pollution Laboratory, Taj Mahal, Agra is especially established for monitoring of air 
pollutants. The Branch has also installed the automatic weather station (AWS) in many of the 
World Heritage Monuments. 
 
Re-examination and updation of Acts and Laws pertaining to Museums and 
Archaeological Sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
41. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with the necessary 
legislative framework to ensure that conservation plans are in place at all Centrally 
protected monuments and for making Heritage Impact Assessment compulsory for major 
development projects. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to revise its National Policy to 
encourage transformation and reuse as an alternate to demolish and rebuild, since the same 
would allow many more historical sites to be preserved in a better shape instead of t hem 
disappearing or getting demolished over time.  
(Para 6.3.12) 
Reply of Ministry  
41.1 Conservation of Protected Monuments/Sites is an ongoing process, taken up 
according to guidelines provided under Conservation Policy, which also specifies preparation 
of Conservation plans for monuments or sites as the case may be. As such, there appears no 
need for new legislative framework. Heritage Impact Assessment for major development 
projects near protected monuments is specified in AMASR Act, 1958 and it is stil l in vogue 
and National Monuments Authority take s cognizance of the recommendation of HIA from 
such proposed major developmental projects. 
 
Review of the tendering process for awarding conservation contracts 
Recommendation/Observation 

46 
 
42. It has come to th e notice of the Committee that in some cases, the projects are 
awarded to such contractors who have little to no experience in the field of conservation, who 
later hire sub -consultants and end up doing more harm than good, to the monuments/ 
artefacts invol ved. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
thoroughly review the tendering process it adopts for awarding conservation contracts of 
archaeological sites/monuments and Museum artefacts and to have provisions in place to 
ensure tha t tenders are not awarded to the lowest bidder, but to a contractor who has 
considerable experience and expertise in the required skillset. 
(Para 6.6.1) 
Reply of Ministry 
42.1 NGMA: The NGMA, New Delhi has its own vast Restoration Laboratory to restore 
the art works. The NGMA, New Delhi does not award the conservation contract.  
42.2 Salar Jung Museum : A Tender Committee consist ing of Officers has been formed 
internally to decide the award of contract, and wherever it is possible, the best and 
experienced tenderer is awarded the Contracts. 
42.3 ASI: While Inviting tenders , it has specific conditions of experience in conservation 
for award of tenders so as not to engage inexperienced contractors for taking up conservation 
works at ASI monuments. 
 
Lending assistance to important State Protected Archaeological Monuments and 
Museums 
Recommendation/Observation 
43. The Committee observes that the development and preservation of archaeological 
sites and Museums often does not run high in the priorities of State Governments. This often 
leads to neglect, and thus irreparable damage is caused to the State protected archaeological 
monuments as well as Museum artefacts. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should have a mechanism in place to identify instances of gross neglect of maintenance and 
preservation of important archaeological sites and Museums and prod the S tate Government 
Department concerned to take action to rectify the same. In cases of exigent needs, ASI may 
proactively provide technical assistance to such monuments and Museums. The Committee 
suggests that the Ministry may, from time to time, consider th e inclusion of the State 
protected archaeological monuments and Museums which are more than 100 years old, in 
the list of Centrally protected monuments and National Museums. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may lend assistance to State Go vernments to enable 
introduction of online ticketing to archaeological sites and Museums under their purview.  
(Para 6.7.3) 

47 
 
Reply of Ministry  
43.1 Conservation: ASI is rendering technical assistance to State Government monuments 
whenever the request is received from them. As and when State Government approaches, ASI 
provides necessary guidelines for introduction of online ticket of Archaeological Sites and 
Museums to the concerned State Government.  
 
Coordination with different Ministries and State Governments 
Recommendation/Observation 
44. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should strictly ensure that there is close 
co-ordination between/amongst the Ministry of Culture and the concerned State 
Departments. The Committee desires the Ministry to come up with well-defined procedures to 
allow the State Departments to seek guidance and technical expertise from the various 
organizations under the Ministry. Regular meetings may be held with the concerned officials 
of the State Governments, at least onc e in 3 months, and the Report thereon, should be 
submitted to the Central Government and also to this Committee. The Committee should be 
updated periodically about the outcome thereof. The Committee also recommends that if the 
Ministry feels that any Amend ment of the concerned legislation is needed, the Ministry may 
ensure that the Amendment is fructified, by piloting a Bill in this regard. 
(Para 6.8.2)  
Reply of Ministry  
44.1 Hon’ble Minister of Culture periodically takes meetings with the Culture Ministe rs of 
the State Governments for monitoring of the different cultural projects. State representatives 
also visit Hon’ble Minister of Culture and Secretary (Culture).  
 
Hiring well trained professional staff for maintenance of archaeological sites and 
Museums 
Recommendation/Observation 
45. One Member of the Committee underscored the imminent need for the infusion of 
professionalism into the identification, maintenance, and preservation of archaeological sites 
and in the maintenance of Museums. The Commi ttee endorses this view and strongly 
recommends that the Ministry should give due attention to ensure that professionally trained 
people are engaged in all such activities. The Committee urges the Ministry to give emphasis 
to branding and social media presence.  
(Para 6.11.1) 

48 
 
Reply of Ministry  
45.1 National Museum : NM has been engaging professionals on contractual basis for 
various project based activities of museum. 
45.2 NGMA: As far as NGMA, New Delhi is concerned,   NGMA, New Delhi is active in 
Social Media and online presence. 
45.3 Salar Jung Museum : As far as Salar Jung Museum is concerned, Museum is active 
in Social Media and online presence. 
45.4 Allahabad Museum : AM has very good presence in social media platforms such a 
Twitter, facebook etc. 
45.5 ASI: ASI has its own in-house part of professionals such as archaeologists, engineers, 
scientist, conservation architects, horticulturists, etc.  vested with the identification, 
maintenance and preservation of monuments and site museums. In addition, partnership with 
nationally renowned institutions helps in taking expert opinion, as and when required.   
 
  

49 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSERVATION OF MUSEUMS: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that the Museums of any given country exhibit the richness 
of its culture, giving the visitors a sneak peek into the cultural heritage and history of the 
nation, besides being a major attraction for tourists, both domestic and foreign. In view of 
the significant role played by Museums in showcasing th e art and culture of the country, the 
Committee desires that a comprehensive action plan needs to be devised to bring a modern 
look and feel to the Museums, and ensure that the collections available are periodically 
rotated to provide a refreshing experience for visitors. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
put up a monitoring mechanism in place to make sure that the deliverables are achieved by 
all the Museums within a strict timeline. 
(Para 4.5)  
Reply of Ministry  
 
1.1 Indian Museum – Indian Museum is one of the 5 iconic museums where up -
gradation work has commenced in various galleries. A total of nine galleries under 
Archaeology & Anthropology have been taken up for recuration with new design and suitable 
digital intervention to suppl ement the artefacts on display.   The primary focus of this 
modernisation activity is to encourage and strengthen the cultural spirit of the visitors and to 
promote Indian Diaspora through our devotion to upholding the tangible and 
intangible heritage of th e country and as well as of the world culture. In addition , 
three halls have been renovated and upgraded with LED projection lighting, air -
conditioning and CCTV installation for creating the Eastern Chapter of National 
Gallery of Modern Art. These new activities will provide opportunity to provide a 
modern look and  feel of the galleries and scope to periodically rotate the collections 
to sustain interest in the visitors and consequential footfall. In addition , all nine 
galleries under modernisation shall be air -conditioned to control the temperature and 
humidity for proper protection of artefacts from fluctuating weather conditions. Installation of 
modern fire detection, fire prevention and firefighting installations have been initiated 
through CPWD. 
1.2 National Council of Science Museums  (NCSM): -  NCSM has develop ed 
exhibitions on the S&T heritage of the country at national level centres consisting of visual 
panels, dioramas, replicas and interactive multimedia.  

50 
 
1.3 Allahabad Museum: - Allahabad Museum is upgrading its infrastructure and 
modernising its galleries. Exhibitions are planned to showcase rich cultural heritage from the 
reserve collection of the museum. 
1.4 Salar Jung Museum: -  Salar Jung Museum has taken up the project of re -
organisation of Galleries from 2008 onwards. So far , about 24 Galleries out of 3 8 Galleries 
have been re -organised phase -wise and the balance 14 galleries are proposed to be re -
organised in a phased manner. I n addition to this, Museum is set to open the new Islamic Art 
Gallery,  a unique Gallery among the Museum s in India, to showcase  the Islamic Art and 
Culture in India,  valuable manuscripts etc. Further, Museum also planned an Inter activity 
Centre for Children, Which is expected to complete by Dec, 2021.  
1.5 NGMA:- The National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi has taken up the Project of 
re-organisation of Galleries from 2009 onwards. 38 Galleries have been re -organised phase-
wise and in 2019 , Jaipur House was renovated and added further 4000 sqft area. Further this  
year, it is proposed to renovate the Permanent Gallery. It is further proposed for renovation 
with new art facilities.  
1.6 ASI:- Some of the museums under ASI are being upgraded/ refurbished with latest 
technologies such as Augmented Reality/ Virtual Reality (AR/ VR), projection mapping 
along with improved display, lightings, captions/ introductory panels. Recently upgraded 
museums at the Red Fort, Delhi and; Mahatma Gandhi Museum, Aga Khan Palace, Pune, 
include modern display techniques. Virtual Experiential Museum, Man Mahal at Varanasi 
has been created using latest multimedia technology such as projection mapping,  AR/ VR. 
ASI is planning to upgrade more museums using such technologies to provide a better visitor 
experience.  As per 14 -point museum reforms created by the MoC, all museums under ASI 
have been informed to follow rotation policy of the display from the reserve collection.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.7 The Committee observes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not 
provide any information on putting a monitoring mechanism in place to make sure that 
the list of deliverables issued by the Ministry to the Museums under its administrative 
control, are achieved by all such Museums within a strict timeline . The Committee 
desires to know the specific action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
 
 
Challenges:- 
Human Resources 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee believes that tackling the issue of dearth of human resources requires 
long-term planning and solutions beyond the availability of budget. The Committee takes 
cognizance of the list of deliverables issued by the Ministry to address the issue of lack of 
human resources and role envisaged for the upcoming Indian Institute of Heritage and 

51 
 
Conservation (IIHC) in solving this issue. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
formulate, in advance, its document indicating  the present as well as future human resource 
needs of the Indian Museums sector for consideration  of the IIHC. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may develop plans for establishing regional centres of IIHC in 
the future, to enable interest ed youth to pursue their interest in museology and cultural 
heritage preservation. 
(Para 4.11.10)  
 Reply of Ministry  
2.1 The observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2 The Committee may be apprised as to whether  the present and future human 
resource needs of the Indian Museums sector have been documented by the Ministry for 
consideration of the IIHC. 
 
 
 
Audience Engagement 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee feels that audience engagement is one of the most crucial challenges 
faced by the Indian Museums. The Committee is of the view that the Museum administrators 
need to make the optimum use of the available funds to spur engagement, interest and  
curiosity among the visitors as part of its audience engagement activities. The Committee 
would like the Museums to strive to develop certain galleries as Augmented Reality/ Virtual 
Reality powered galleries for showcasing immersive stories of the past to  the visitors. The 
Committee further recommends that the Museums should optimally utilize social media and 
target hyperlocal marketing to drive visitors to the Museums. Guided tours should be 
promoted in museums for both domestic and international visitors . The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may come up with a rating system for all the museums under it, 
wherein museums are rated based on several parameters – with audience engagement being 
one of the important parameters. This would encourage the museum staff to perform better. 
(Para 4.11.21)  
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 National Museum: NM has been in the forefront of absorption of new technology. 
Following are the efforts of NM in this regard 
1. Virtual Experiential Museum on Ajanta ( The only experiential museum in India with 
AR/VR technology) 
2.  3D scanning of objects 

52 
 
3. Online Exhibitions using AR/VR platform 
Digital Immersive Experience for visitors using multi touch table, OLED, hologram, touch 
kiosk, projection system etc. 
3.2 NGMA: The NGMA, New Delhi already has a trained museum Guide for the 
audience. The NGMA, New Delhi curated Online Exhibitions. The NGMA, New 
Delhi also posted on Social Media (Facebook, Twitter etc.) about the Museum artefacts . 
Illumination, 3D projection Mapping, Mobile app and Audio guide app are being introduced. 
3.3 Salar Jung Museum : The Museum trained Private Guides by conducting 3 days 
training Programme. The Museum curated Online Exhibitions in Google Art Project. The 
Museum also  posted   on Social Media (Facebook, twitter etc.,) about the Museum artefacts. 
3.4 Indian Museum: - While physical distancing and confinement due to COVID 
pandemic were affecting the way we live, Indian Museum had found creative ways to adapt 
to the circumstances and continue to remain connected with its visitors by organising online 
activities under the banner  “Stories of World Cultures”.  Stories of World  Cultures was 
broadly divided into three major categories: 
 ACADEMIC – various notable professors and renowned academicians had given 
lectures and talks related to Museum studies. 
 CULTURAL – noteworthy and significant dignitaries had graced their presence in this 
online venture of Indian Museum through dance, song, music, instrumental, and etc. 
 CHILDREN – Indian Museum has taken sp ecial initiatives to engage students with the 
museum through story -telling, crafts with kids, poetry, etc. Differently -abled children 
were also greeted and welcomed in every children's activities of the museum.  
    While online activities will be continue d by the Museum, audience engagement during 
their physical presence in the Museum will also be taken up through AR, VR & MR 
based digital technologies as part of the modernisation activity. 
3.5 Allahabad Museum:- AM is under process of establishing a digit al gallery showing 
freedom struggle. 
3.6 NCSM: NCSM has setup galleries/exhibitions in its units where AR/VR has been 
used for immersive experience. VEM at Varanasi and Ajanta Caves have been set up in Man 
Mahal, Varanasi and National Museum, New Delhi in collaboration with INTACH and IIT, 
Mumbai respectively. Social media are extensively used in NCSM for informing and 
attractive audiences , specially for online activities. Guided tours are conducted in NCSM 
units. NCSM in the past has ranked its units based  on various parameters. Audience 
engagement is one of the parameters 
3.7 ASI: - The focus has been made on multimedia technology viz. to provide AR/VR, 
projection mapping along with improved display, lightings, textual description of antiquity 
and introductory panels. Public awareness program including participation of local residents, 
visitors and students are being frequently organized to aware masses about the museums and 
its activities.  Some interaction programs and lecture on antiquities and local arc haeological 
sites are being also organized for the school and college students to make them aware about 

53 
 
the museums and sites. The information of some of the objects and museum are also provided 
in the Ministry/ASI portal too.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 The Committee observes from the replies furnished by various Museums that 
not all Museums seem to be making use of social media to attract more footfall. The 
Committee recommends that urgent action needs to  be taken to utilize the reach of 
social media in order to increase the footfall at various museums across the country. 
The Committee further notes that the Ministry has not furnished any comments 
regarding coming up with a rating system to rate museums ac ross on the country on 
various useful parameters . The Ministry may work on introducing such rating system  
so as to encourage museum staff to perform better. 
 
Funding 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on devel oping effective 
revenue model for the museums and employ innovative means like donation drives, seeking 
CSR funds and sponsorships etc. to raise funds for the development, maintenance and 
upgradation of Museums. Visitors may also be encouraged to share their Museum experience 
on social media to generate interest among their peers which will result in increased footfall, 
thereby earning the Museums extra revenue. 
(Para 4.11.28)  
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 National Museum : Both online and off line visitors of NM /NM websites are 
regularly participating in Social Media programmes. NM is also running various Social 
Media programmes to generate interest. Details are available in NM website and various NM 
social media profiles. 
4.2 NGMA: Museum earlier tried to seek funding from Corporates and other companies 
in the City but  got poor/no response.  Any CSR funds/ funds from MPL ADS would help the 
museum for development. 
4.3 Salar Jung Musuem : Museum earlier tried to seek funding from Corpora tes and 
other companies in the City but got poor/no response. Any CSR funds/ funds from MP LADS 
would help the museum for development. 
4.4 Allahabad Museum : Museum plans to increase revenue by organising multiple 
cultural activities on paid basis. 
4.5 NCSM: Noted and implemented in some of the centres. Several exhibitions such as 
Aerospace Hall in Nehru Science Centre, Mumbai, Bell Hall of Electronics at VITM, 

54 
 
Bangalore, Nuclear Power Gallery in NSC, Mumbai and NSC, Delhi etc. have been set up 
with funds fro m PSUs and under CSR. Social media pages of the units under NCSM are 
regularly updated to get the feedback and many online programmes are live telecasted on 
YouTube and Facebook pages of NCSM & units for engaging audiences specially youth. 
Efforts are being made for more developmental activities through CSR funding.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.6 The Committee notes from the reply of some Museums that attempts were made 
to seek fund s from Corporates and companies but received a very poor response. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the proposals made by the 
Museums to attract CSR funds and assist the Museums in making attractive proposals 
so as to garner better response from Corporates. The Committee further recomme nds 
that the Museums may request Members of Parliament to contribute to the 
development of museums from their MPLADS funds. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee feels that the sum of Rs. 72.51 crores provided by the Ministry to State 
Museums across the country under the Museum Grant Scheme from FY 2015 -16 to FY 2019-
20, is a paltry amount covering only a few Museums while a large number of museums are 
still craving for such assistance. The Committee desires the Ministry to allocate more funds 
to the State Governments for the purpose of development of State Museums and encourage all 
the States to come up with proposals to upgrade the Museums under their control under the 
Museum Grant Scheme. The Committee also calls upon the Ministry to come up with a list of 
deliverables for the State Museums to provide better experience to the visitors across the 
country.  
(Para 4.11.34) 
Reply of Ministry  
5.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Committee desires to know the action taken by the Minist ry with regard to 
allocation of more funds to State Governments for development of State Museums and 
also for coming up with a list of deliverables to the State Museums. 
 
Opportunities:- 
Digitization of Museums  
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee appreciates the meticulous work done by several national Museums 
across the country in setting up of virtual galleries and digitization of the artefacts present in 

55 
 
the Museums, along with the relevant details for  these items which would serve not only 
research scholars of historical artefacts, but also the art -loving community. The digitized 
artefacts would ensure permanent record of artefacts which in turn would help in keeping a 
check on pilferage of Museum arte facts. The Committee recommends that the software may 
be introduced across the national Museums on priority. The Committee further recommends 
the Ministry to provide assistance to the State Government Museums for implementing the 
JATAN software.  
(Para 4.12.2) 
Reply of Ministry  
6.1 NGMA: The NGMA, New Delhi already uploaded the artefacts in the Jatan Software. 
The Master Accession Registers are also digitized and store. 
6.2 Salar Jung Museum: Salar Jung Museum already uploaded the artefacts in the Jatan  
Software. The Master Accession Registers are also digitized and store. 
6.3 ASI:- Antiquities of two museums under ASI - Nagarjunakonda and Goa are already 
available on the museum sofindia portal through JATAN. Antiquities of most of the other 
museums under  ASI are digitised through the National Mission on Monuments and 
Antiquities (NMMA) portal.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.4 The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to 
provide assistance to the State Government Museums for implementing the JATAN 
software for digitization of artefacts and antiquities present at these Museums. 
 
Developing ASI Site Museums across the country 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee feels that development of site museums at more ASI sites across the 
country would serve as another attraction for tourists, while helping preserve the site -related 
antiquities by employing museum staff dedicated to the purpose. The Committee recommends 
that ASI may c halk out a plan for development of more site museums at sites with high 
footfall and work out a revenue generation plan to support their maintenance costs. In this 
regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may pursue the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate the funds generated by museums and monuments to the Ministry itself, so 
as to boost the development and conservation of museums and historical sites across the 
country.  
(Para 4.12.8) 
Reply of Ministry  

56 
 
7.1 ASI:- During the last six years, five new museums under ASI have been opened 
which are - Archaeological Site Museums at Piprahwa (Kapilvastu), Shivpuri and Lalitagiri; 
Gallery of Confiscated and Retrieved Antiquities, Purana Qila, Delhi; Virtual Experiential 
Museum, Man Mahal, Varanasi. During last two years, the upgradation/ refurbishment of five 
museums of ASI was done which are - ‘1857- India’s First War of Independence’, B1 
Colonial Building, Red Fort, Delhi; ‘Yaad -e-Jallian’, B2 Colonial Building, Red Fort, Delhi; 
‘Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and INA’, B3 Colonial Building, Red Fort, Delhi; ‘Azaadi-ke-
Diwane’, L4 Colonial Building, Red Fort, Delhi; and Museum on Mahatma Gandhi, Aga 
Khan Palace, Pune. The upgradation of six museums under ASI is in process whic h are - 
Archaeological Museum, Red Fort (Mumtaz Mahal) and IWMM in L5 Colonial Building, 
Red Fort; Archaeological Site Museums at Bodhgaya, Nalanda, Sarnath and Dholavira. 
Besides above, several new museums under ASI are under process to boost visitors’ fo otfall. 
These are -Rakhigarhi, Hastinapur, Adichanallur, Shibsagar; Children’s Museum at Siri Fort 
in Delhi, and Epigraphy Museum.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.2 The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry has approached the 
Ministry of Finance to seek allocation of funds generated by the museums and 
monuments to the Ministry itself . If so, the Committee may be apprised of the response 
furnished by the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
 
Miscellaneous 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee underlines the need for development of the Museum and old 
manuscripts at the Gagron Fort at Jhalawar, Kolvi Buddhist Caves, Jain temples at Ujjain 
and Kota, and Fort of Shahabad and desires that the old manuscripts are available via audio, 
video etc. 
(Para 4.13.12)  
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 Ministry of Culture operates a Museum Grant Scheme under which financial 
assistance is provided to State Governments, Voluntary Institutions, Societies and Trusts 
registered as a society under the Indian Societies Act of 1860 (XXI) or a similar legislation of 
the state governments for setting up of new museums and development of existing museums . 
A proposal in this regard needs to be received from the organization as per scheme 
guidelines.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a proactive approach in 
this regard and request the concerned organizations to prepare and submit proposals 
for the development of the Museum at the Gagron Fort at Jhalawar , Kolvi Buddhist 
Caves, Jain temples at Ujjain and Kota and Fort of Shahabad. 
 

57 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into this aspect and furnish its reply 
thereon, in its ATN. 
(Para 4.13.16)  
Reply of Ministry  
9.1 Ministry of Culture operates a Museum Grant Scheme under which financial 
assistance is provided to State Governments, Voluntary Institutions, Societies and Trusts 
registered as a society under the Indian Societies Act of 1860 (XXI) or a similar legislation of 
the state governments for setting up of new museums and development of existing museums . 
If any such proposal is received for development of Padmanabhapuram Palace in Kerala to 
National level museum, the same will be examined as per the guidelines.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the concerned 
organization to prepare and submit a proposal to the Ministry for development of 
Padmanabhapuram Palace in Kerala. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES 
Challenges:-  
Conservation Problems 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may devise a well -defined plan 
to ensure at least a bare minimum level of protection and conservation of monuments outside 
the protection of both Central and State Governments, to encourage local municipal bodies 
and local population. The Committee further recommends that ASI may develop a mechanism 
to share its technical expertise in conservation with concerned State Government 
Departments as well as local bodies by way of training and capacity building programmes.  
(Para 5.6.5) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 For bare minimum protection and maintenance of a monument/site, the works are 
being undertaken under the Annual repair plan wherein almost all the mon uments and sites 
are taken up. Where, there is a specific repairs and conservation work required for a 
monuments/site, those kinds of works are attended under Special repair plan for which 
special provision of funds are provided. The Institute of Archaeology of ASI is entrusted with 
organizing training and workshops on the conservation and preservation of the monuments 
and ancient sites.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2 The Committee may be apprised as to whether the works being undertaken 
under the Annual repair plan cover those monuments and sites which are not present in 

58 
 
the list of Centrally Protected Monuments and State Protected Monuments. I n case  
such monuments are  presently not covered at all, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may include repair works of urgent nature for such monuments under its 
Annual repair plan. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee recommends that ASI may work out detailed Conservation and 
Management Plans for all the centrally protected monuments on an urgent basis. A Site 
Inspection Register may also be maintained for each of the monuments and steps may be 
taken to disseminate knowledge about the national policy for conser vation among the ASI 
staff, officials of State Governments, as well as other agencies involved in carrying out 
conservation works at archaeological monuments across the country.  
(Para 5.6.8) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 Presently, only a few sites/monuments (mostly world heritage sites) are having 
Conservation/Management plan. The site inspection of the monument is a routine job of the 
field officers and the officers of the Headquarter. During the site inspection, the officer 
furnishes an Inspection Note covering all points related to the monument. On the basis of that 
ACP (Annual Conservation Programme) is prepared for each monument. The conservation 
policy is already on ASI website.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.2 The Com mittee notes that only a few sites/monuments are having a 
Conservation/ Management plan at present and reiterates its original recommendation 
that ASI may prepare such a plan for all Centrally Protected Monuments. Further, the 
reply furnished by the Minist ry does not clarify whether the site inspection of all 
monuments is carried out periodically. The Committee therefore reiterates its 
recommendation that a Site Inspection Register may be maintained and periodically 
updated for all Centrally Protected Monuments. 
 
Urbanization around Centrally Protected Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee desires the Ministry to coordinate with all infrastructure Ministries 
and Departments to ensure compliance of the prohibited area and regulated area limits 
prescribed under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 at 
the DPR stages of projects planned in the vicinity of all Centrally Protected Monuments. The 
Committee recommends that extensive research may be conducted to explore ways and 

59 
 
means to protect our archaeological sites and monuments from the ill -effects of severe air 
pollution in urban centres.  
(Para 5.6.10) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 Since 2010 onward s, ASI has been regularly informing all the districts and local 
authorities about the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 
and its amendments in 2010. A letter has also been addressed to all concerned Secretaries in 
Union and State Governments in this regard.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for 
conducting research to explore way s and means to protect our archaeological sites and 
monuments from the ill-effects of air pollution in urban centres. 
 
Encroachment and Vandalism  
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the efficacy of the powers 
it presently has to deal with encroachments in and around monuments and propose suitable 
amendments to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 1958 and 
Rules 1959, and Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 with a 
view to adequately empower the Estate Officer for tackling the issue of encroachment of 
Centrally protected monuments. In the event of non -cooperation from local law enforcement 
agencies in dealing with encroachment around monuments, the matter  may be taken up at 
higher levels on priority basis to evolve the much needed accountability mechanism for the 
same. Awareness drives may carry out on social media to create a sense of belonging among 
the local populace so that they remain more vigilant to wards protecting our monuments and 
heritage from malevolent elements of the society.  
(Para 5.6.12) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 For removal of encroachment, action is taken as per provisions of the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 195 8 and Rules, 1959. Demolition 
Orders, accordingly, are issued and such encroachments removed through District 
Administration. Further, in every case, State Government’s higher officers are also informed. 
The Act is effective in removal of encroachments at places. Awareness drives are regularly 
carried out by ASI through its field offices on various occasions such as World Heritage 
Week, Gandhi Jayanti, World Heritage Day, Swachchhata Pakhwada , etc. Also, a Mobile 
App is being developed by ASI to prepare a database of all the heritage monuments/ sites and 
buildings across the country.  

60 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2  The Committee reiterates that the Ministry may examine the efficacy of the 
powers it presently has to deal with encroachments in and around monuments and 
propose suitable amendments to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act 1958 and Rules 1959, and Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 with a view to adequately empower the Estate Officer for tackling 
the issue of encroachment of Centrally protected monuments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee is of the view that boundary wall is a bare minimum security 
requirement and helps clearly demarcate the limits of the archaeological site. It, therefore, 
desires the Ministry to target the construction of boundary walls around all Centrally 
Protected Monuments in the country within a fixed time line. The Committee believes that 
doing so would have a noticeable preventive effect on encroachment of monuments across the 
country.  
(Para 5.6.13) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Most of the Monuments of the ASI are notified in pre-Independence period and at that 
point of time only name of monument is mentioned in the notification while details of area 
and plot numbers are not mentioned. In such cases , ASI finds difficulties in marking the 
protected limit of the monument and providing of boundary wall around the monument/site. 
However, in the rest of the monuments/sites boundary wall has been provided.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reason given by ASI for not being able to 
provide boundary walls for monuments where only name of the monument is 
mentioned in the notification and ASI faces difficulties in ma rking the protected limit of 
the monument. The Committee recommends that urgent action may be taken to finalize 
the protected limits of all such monuments so that at least boundary walls can be 
constructed for their protection urgently. 
 
Lack of funds  
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recommends that ASI may introduce pay -as-you-wish ticketing at all 
ticketed monuments across the country, while still keeping certain minimum amount as fee. 
Informing visitors about the developmental work they could fuel at the archaeological  sites 
with their donations will certainly drive many people to contribute to the same. The 
Committee also suggests the Ministry to consider introduction of special tours at 
archaeological sites and monuments before and after regular hours, charging a high er fee 

61 
 
for a more isolated and sombre experience at the monuments. Further, ASI should explore 
forge partnerships in the form of sponsorship and CSR contributions, with the private sector.  
(Para 5.6.24) 
Reply of Ministry 
15.1 Pay as you wish ticketing at all ticketing monuments across the country: 
The technical feasibility of the pay-as-you wish at all ticketing monuments across the country 
of ASI will be examined. Further, the current rates are minimal rates charged from the 
visitors and more reduction in the same may not be feasible.  
15.2 Donations by Visitors: 
The corpus donations by Corporate sectors (CSR) is already in vogue through Nat ional 
Culture Fund (NCF). 
15.3 Special Tours 
It is submitted that as per AMASR Act of 1958, the monuments/sites remain open from 
sunrise to sunset and hence special exclusive tours may not be feasible. However, provision 
for night viewing is available at s elected monuments for exclusive and somber experience to 
the visitors.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.2 The Committee notes that the special tours before and after regular hours are 
not feasible because as per AMASR Act, 1958, monuments/sites can remain open only 
from sunrise to sunset. The Committee recommends that a suitable amendment may be 
brought into the Act in order to permit flexibility in timings till it can be kept open in 
order to open more avenues for prospects of revenue generation and boost tourism of 
every monument. 
 
Human Resources at ASI  
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee is dismayed to note that almost 29 percent of the sanctioned staff 
strength of ASI is lying vacant. Given the large number (3692) of monuments under the 
protection of ASI and the support ASI provides to archaeological departments of State 
Governments, even the sanctioned staff strength seems inadequate. The Committee is of the 
view that continuing vacancies reflects the lack of intent on part of ASI to fulfil its mandate to 
protect and preserve the archaeological monuments across the country. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to take immediate steps to ensure the recruitment of the required 
personnel in Archaeological Survey of India. The Committee woul d also like the Ministry to 
look into the reasons for such large number of vacancies in ASI and take corrective measures 
to overcome the shortage of staff.  

62 
 
(Para 5.6.29) 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 Only 5% posts are vacant in promotional posts. Around 29 -30% posts are vacant, 
recruitment for which is done by SSC/UPSC. Same is being followed by ASI with these 
recruitment bodies.  Recently 41 lapsed posts have been revived and 758 new posts have been 
created.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.2 The Co mmittee is concerned to note that a  large number of vacancies are 
existing in ASI at present. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not furnished any 
convincing reply for existence of  such large number of vacancies. The Ministry may 
take immediate concrete action to fill the existing vacancies in ASI at the earliest so as to 
permit it to fulfil its mandate effectively. 
 
Opportunities:-  
Promotion of Tourism and Business  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee is of the view that developing garden spaces present ly associated with 
monuments, having souvenir shops, interpretation centres, well -designed signage, good 
waste management techniques and engaging the local community to play a bigger role in 
development of archaeological sites, would provide a much better ex perience to tourists 
visiting these sites and would certainly help in tapping the vast potential of increasing the 
tourism prospects and revenue generated by these sites. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry/ ASI may take concrete steps i n this regard, in close 
coordination with the Ministry of Tourism.  
(Para 5.7.9) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 ASI has already taken steps to create space for tourist amenities like illumination, 
cafeteria, interpretation Centre and signage and the same will be encouraged for all 
monuments having good number of footfalls.  ASI is also a partner in “Adopt a Heritage” 
project of Ministry of Tourism.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
17.2 The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by ASI for developing 
garden spaces presently associated with the monuments. The Committee feels that 
doing so would not only help beautify the monument as a whol e, but also put a check on 
the encroachment of such nearby area that is being developed as a green space. 
 

63 
 
Model Conservation Process 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with a model 
conservation process for archaeological artefacts and sites across the country. This would 
not only bring consistency in the process followed by both centrally protected and State 
protected monuments but also act as a benchmark for the private contractors hired by ASI/ 
State Government departments for carrying out conservation works.  
(Para 5.7.11) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 Conservation of the Monument is a process of continuous learning from the 
monuments and sites. On this basis , Conservation Manual was published in 1923, and a 
Works Code in 1979. ASI has also recently published its Conservation polic y wherein all 
parameters of the conservation and experience of work done in past has been incorporated.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
18.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI may periodically update the 
Conservation Manual and Works Code so as to document new knowledge and 
experiences gained by ASI in the field of conservation and preservation of monuments 
and artefacts. The concerned State Government Departments may also be notified of all 
such updates made, so that they can benefit from the experiences of ASI. 
 
 
 
Involvement of Communities 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to institutionally 
integrate municipalities and village panchayats in heritage conservation and management 
work, and if needed, a separate body may be created to regulate the framework for the same.  
(Para 5.7.23) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 In the country we have 5 types of heritage property as below; 
a: World Heritage and Centrally Protected monument- Maintained by ASI. 
b: State protected monument- Maintained by State department of Archaeology. 
c: Those heritage/monument –maintained by District/Municipal heritage committee. 

64 
 
d:Those neither with ASI nor with State dept- maintained by Local committee/Trust. 
e: Those heritage/monument- not maintained by any agency/committee.  
19.2 As per the provision of the AMASR Act, ASI undertakes regular maintenance and 
conservation work on the monument and sites under its jurisdiction only. ASI strives to 
integrate local governance and communities wherever possible.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
19.3 The Committee desires to know about the specific actions taken by ASI in order 
to integrate local governance and communities for protection and preservation of 
historical sites and monuments. 
 
Preparation of database of archaeological sites/monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee further notes that there are many monuments across the country 
which are not under any sort of protection, whether Central/State or private protection. This 
clearly suggests that a large number of monuments of cultural and historical significance are 
unexplored as of yet and suffer irreparable damage with each passing day. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry/ASI may conduct a n extensive survey to identify such 
monuments across the country, add them to the Central Database of Monuments/Sites that 
exist in the country, categorize them, and come up with ways to at least provide a bare 
minimum level of security to the same, in coo rdination with the local municipal bodies and 
local residents.  
(Para 5.7.55) 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 National Mission on Monuments & Antiquities (NMMA/ASI) is preparing a database 
of unprotected Built Heritage & Sites of the country. NMMA has taken initiative to start 
primary survey of all Built Heritage & Sites in the country through You ng Archaeologist & 
Internship programme. The proposal of temporary engagement of 20 Young Archaeologist at 
the NMMA has been approved by the Competent Authority and an advertisement has been 
floated.  The selection process is currently ongoing.  Upon selection , these young 
archaeologists will be engaged for documentation of antiquities and BHS in Circles/Branches 
of the ASI, located at various parts of the country. In ternship programme has already been 
started by the ASI and fresh interns are being posted at various Circle s & Branches to carry 
out this task. Survey to identify Monuments/ Sites and Ancient Remains is a continuous 
process undertaken by ASI through field offices. The database related to buil t heritage 
including monuments which are not under any sort of protection , is maintained by NMMA.  
ASI, through field offices , organizes cultural awareness programmes every year in order to 
spread awareness among the public to preserve and protect the rich cultural heritage. So far as 
security of the monuments  is concerned , a combination of CISF, private security guards, 

65 
 
office staff (MTS/Attendants) is put in place. Involvement of local municipal bodies and local 
residents is an area for exploration for ASI to be incorporated in its security policy.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
20.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may recruit a higher number of 
Young Archaeologists at the NMMA as opposed to the 20 Young Archaeologists that 
are presently being recruited. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may give 
top priority to the exercise for identification of unprotected monuments and sites  across 
the country and personnel and budgetary requirements for such exercise may also be 
met. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee commends the coordinated efforts being made by ASI and the State 
Government of Maharashtra to carry out conservation of Raigad Fort. India is home to a 
large number of historic forts which are unique in the terms of their history as well as t heir 
cultural significance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may replicate such 
joint efforts with other State Governments to ensure that the historic forts as well as other 
archaeological sites are developed for tourism purposes.  
(Para 5.8.10B) 
Reply of Ministry 
21.1 The forts are well being taken care of by ASI, by its own allotted funds as well as the 
funds given by the State Government.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
21.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that ASI may replicate such joint 
efforts with other State Governments  in the country in order  to ensure that the historic 
forts as well as other archaeological sites are developed for tourism purposes. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee recommends that ASI may experiment with the ticket pricing for both 
domestic as well as international tourists, with the aim to maximizing the revenue generated 
by such visits as well as allowing the maximum feasible number of people to enjoy visiting the 
site. As a part of t his attempt, ASI may consider granting special discount to young 
international tourists as well as offering weekly passes to both foreign and domestic 
travellers to entice them to visit and appreciate more historical sites during their trip.  
(Para 5.8.24) 

66 
 
Reply of Ministry 
22.1  The present online e -ticketing portal of ASI does not have provision for monthly / 
weekly ticket or pass facility. However, a visitor can book online e -ticket for visit to any 
monument maximum a week in advance. Further, the aspect  of offering monthly / weekly 
passes to both domestic and international tourists requires a deliberate examination and study 
and will be appropriately considered by ASI. 
22.2 To attract more footfall, ASI is already offering discount to both domestic and 
international tourists when they opt to pay through any mode of cashless payment.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
22.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not furnished  any information 
pertaining to the recommendation made by the Committee to con sider granting special 
discount for entry tickets  to young international tourists. The Committee may be 
apprised of the response of the Ministry in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee is surprised to note that less than 10% of monuments in the Centrally 
Protected Monuments list have been added to the list since 1947. The Committee feels that 
given the size of our country as well as its rich historical heritage, many more monuments 
should be under the protection of ASI. The Commi ttee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
the Ministry may thoroughly consider important State -protected monuments as well as 
monuments outside the protection of both Central and State Governments, for inclusion in the 
list of Centrally Protected Monuments . 20th Century buildings of historical significance may 
also be considered for inclusion in the CPM list during this exercise.  
(Para 5.8.32) 
Reply of Ministry 
23.1 Since, 1947 ASI has protected 1109 monuments/sites which are much more than 30% 
of the total number of 3693 CPMs. ASI already has quite a large number of Centrally 
Protected Monuments. The protection of the Monuments is a continuous process. The 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) conducts archaeological exploration to identify ancient 
sites and monuments for Central protection.  Furthermore, the Constitution of India has 
already divided the jurisdiction over the archaeological sites and cultural heritage under three 
lists, viz. Union List (Sites/monuments declared by the Central Act as of national 
importance), States List (Sites/monuments declared as protected other than those declared by 
the State Act) and Concurrent List (both centre and state have their jurisdiction  upon). In this 
context, it is mentioned that as & when any proposal /request is received from the State Govt. 
or even from public , ASI examines and approves, if found suitable. Along with this, ASI is 
ready to provide all technical support, if State governments request for the same.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
23.2 The Committee notes that as and when any proposal/ request is received from 
the State Government or from the public for inclusion of a monument as Centrally 

67 
 
Protected Monument, ASI examines and approves the proposal, if it is found suitable. 
The Committee feels that the approach of State Governments towards protection and 
preservation of historical monuments is often lethargic  and therefore, ASI must also 
proactively consider taking up important historical monuments presently in neglected 
state of conservation, for inclusion in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee recommends that ASI may take necessary steps to ensure well-planned 
illumination of historical monuments, wherever feasible, since the same would act as a major 
attraction for night -time tourism. The Committee further recommends that urgent steps may 
be taken to ensure that the ASI monuments are easily accessible by differently-abled visitors.  
(Para 5.8.35) 
Reply of Ministry 
24.1 The proposals of illumination of CPMs by ASI, received from State tourism 
departments/agencies are examined at ASI HQs level and based on feasibility, the proposals 
are approved. ASI also provided illumination in certain monuments. With regard to 
accessibility various measures such as tactile Pathways, ramps, wheelc hairs, Braille, films in 
sign language, toilets for differently abled are put in place.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
24.2 The Committee recommends that ASI may analyze the  positive impact of 
illumination of monuments on the footfall received by such monuments and on the basis 
of the same, ASI may take a proactive approach towards illumination of more Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country. 
 
ISSUES COMMON TO MUSEUMS AND ARC HAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
MONUMENTS 
Partnering with the private sector for development and conservation of Museums and 
archaeological sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has come up with the idea of 
identifying some start -ups, who will then incubate the idea and then put it out for main -
streaming of investment, in respect of iconic heritage structures identified in the cou ntry, by 
the Ministry. The Committee appreciates the proposal mooted by the Ministry to create a 
Section 8 company which will actually monitor and execute all these projects and it will be 
self-sustaining. No money will be provided by the Government. The company, for the purpose 

68 
 
of viability gap funding, will take some money from the Central Government which the 
Ministry already has for schematic assistance to the Museums.  
(Para 6.1.3) 
Reply of Ministry 
25.1 Earlier Development of Museum and Cultural Spaces (DMCS) was supposed to have 
been created as a Section 8 Company. However, the post of CEO, DMCS stands abolished 
since 08.10.2021.  The proposals related to DMCS are not active as of now.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
25.2 The Committee desire s to be apprised of the reasons behind abolishing the post 
of CEO, DMCS and the fate of the proposals that were being worked upon by DMCS 
for development of Museums and Cultural Spaces. 
 
Re-examination and updation of Acts and Laws pertaining to Museums and 
Archaeological Sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake an exhaustive review of 
the Indian Museum Act, 1910 and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 1958 and come up with s uitable amendments, in consultation with the Ministry 
of Law & Justice. The Committee further recommends that the blanket ban on construction 
works within the prohibited area of 100 meters around the monument, should be reviewed in 
consultation with expert s and stakeholders, and suitable amendments may be proposed to 
ensure a balance between developmental works and heritage conservation. It should be 
ensured that prohibitions are still in place against.  
(Para 6.3.9) 
Reply of Ministry 
26.1 Amendment in AMASR Act, 1958 is under process. Several workshops have been 
organized to consult the stake holders.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
26.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake review of the 
Indian Museum Act, 1910 in order to ensure that the legislation in place suffices the 
present day requirements for development of museums across the country. The 
Committee further reite rates its recommendation that the blanket ban on construction 
works within the prohibited area of 100 meters around all Centrally Protected 
Monuments, should be reviewed in consultation with experts and stakeholders. 
 
 Coordination with different Ministries and State Governments 

69 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 114 of its 289th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Culture and strongly recommends the 
Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of Railways; Road Transport and Highways and 
concerned State Departments to make necessary improvements in rail and road connectivity 
at important Museums and archaeological sites/monuments in the country.  
(Para 6.8.3) 
Reply of Ministry 
27.1 NGMA: The NGMA, New Delhi is situated at New Delhi the capital of India and is 
well connected with local transportation, Rail, Road and Air etc.   
27.2 Salar Jung Museum : Salar Jung Museum is situated at Hyderabad ,  capital city of 
State Government of Telangana and is well connected with Rail, Road and Air. Display 
Boards are being displayed at the Railway Stations, Bus Stations, Air Port. Tourism 
Department is in touch with the Salar Jung Museum. 
27.3 ASI: Almost all the Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) are well connected.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
27.4 The Committee is of the view that there is a lot of scope for improvement of 
connectivity to museums and monuments/ sites across the country. Having robust 
connectivity to our museums and archaeological monuments/ sites is crucial for 
attracting more tourists to such places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  the 
Ministry/ ASI may carry out an exercise to identify projects that can enhance the 
connectivity to the various museums and historical monuments/ sites across the country 
and the projects thus identified should then be communicated to the relevant Minis try/ 
Department for implementation. 
 
Allocation of funds generated from Museums and ASI, to the Ministry of Culture 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee notes that at present, the revenue generated by the Museums and 
Archaeological Sites/Monuments under the Ministry of Culture, by way of sale of entry tickets 
etc., is deposited to Consolidated Fund of India. Given the scarcity of funds available with 
the Ministry of Culture, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may request 
that the re venue so generated should be allocated to the Ministry itself for the purpose of 
development and conservation of Museums and archaeological sites/monuments. This would 
also encourage the autonomous organizations under the Ministry of Culture to come up wit h 
innovative ways of revenue generation and result in better development and upkeep of the 
cultural heritage of the country.  
(Para 6.9.3) 

70 
 
Reply of Ministry 
28.1 Salar Jung Museum : The revenue generated internally by the Museum shall be 
utilized for maintenance purposes. 
28.2 NCSM: NCSM generates internal revenue from various user charges to meet the 
deficit under GIA General budget  head which is used for upkeep and maintenance of the 
facilities, conduction of science centre activities and payment of statutory charges, 
engagement of contractual manpower for security, upkeep and maintenance of the garden and 
the premises etc. 
28.3 ASI: The proposal for allocating the revenue generated from Centrally Protected 
Monuments, Sites and Museums to ASI was earlier processed but the case was turned down 
by the Ministry of Culture on the basis of Article 266(3) of the Constitution of India which  
inter alia states that ‘ No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India of a state shall be 
appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided 
in this Constitution’ . Therefore, the receipts collected by ASI cannot b e directly utilized by 
the organization on preservation and maintenance activities, without valid appropriation duly 
approved by the Parliament.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
28.4 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider amending/ 
modifying the existing Legislation/ Rules so that the receipts collected by ASI are not 
deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India but into a special fund dedicated to the 
protection and preservation of historical monuments  and sites.  The Committee feels 
that doing so would bridge the gap between the budgetary requirements of ASI and 
actual allocation made to it, to some extent. 
 
Lowering the fees charged for filming at Centrally Protected Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 124 of its 289th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Culture that the prices charged by the 
Ministry for filming at archaeological sites/monuments and Museums, outside the period 
notified in the ASI notification mentioned above, are very high. Films and videos featuring 
the archaeological monuments and Museums showcase the richness of our cultural heritage 
to both domestic and foreign viewers alike and act as a free tool for  publicity of the 
monuments and Museums, thus propelling their tourism prospects. In light of this, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to opt for a pay -as-you-wish payment model, wherein 
the filming company seeking the permission can pay the amount that  it can afford to pay. The 
Ministry may also ensure that there are no delays in grant of permission for filming at the 
monuments while putting in place enough safeguards to ensure that the filming activities do 
not cause any harm to the monuments and/or the archaeological artefacts.  

71 
 
(Para 6.10.1) 
Reply of Ministry 
29.1 NGMA: The shooting at NGMA is free. 
29.2 Allahabad Museum: The recommendations of the committee would be placed before 
appropriate authority for further necessary action. 
29.3 Indian Museum : As suggested ‘pay -as-you-wish payment model’, shall be placed 
before the Finance Committee for approval to attract more filming within the Indian Museum 
premises. 
29.4 NCSM: No charges are levied by NCSM for photography and videography in the 
science centres. 
29.5 ASI: In case of museums under ASI, photography using small handy cameras, 
mobile, etc. is open for all. However, prior permission for  using  camera  free -of-charge  
(with  multiple  lenses,  tripod/  monopods/ large  photography  bag)  for  academic  purposes  
shall  be  granted  by  the  concerned  in -charge  of  the  Circle/  Mini  Circle,  etc. “Filming”  
[as  defined  in  the  Ancient  Monuments  and  Archaeological  Sites  and  Remains Act,  
1959 ]  permission  for  academic  and  commercial  purposes  are  granted  by  the concerned  
Officer  in -charge  of the  Circle/ Mini Circle, etc. with a fee of Rs.50,000/ -. The  fee  may  
be  exempted  in  case of  Central  and  State  agencies  carrying  out  filming  by  their  own  
resources  and  not  on contract.  The Director -General, ASI, will be the competent authority 
to grant such exemptions.  Rule 44 of the AMASR Rules 1959 empowers DG, ASI to grant a 
licence for filming a Centrally Protected Monuments / Sites on payment of Rs.1,00,000/ - for 
World Heritage Monuments / Sites and Rs.50,000/- for other monuments / sites. 
29.6 ASI has revised the prices for film shooting vide Gazette Notification No.GSR -391 
(E), dated 31st March, 2016 considering the factor like  
 the observations of the CAG Report,  
 considerable increase in the per-capita income of the country and  
 need for increase in the revenue generation. 
 Huge amount of money being spent in film making 
Keeping in view budget of a normal film, Rs.1.00 Lakh (for World Heritage Sites) and Rs.50 
thousand for other monuments is being charged, which is a meagre amount.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
29.7 The Committee does not agree with ASI’s view regarding Rs. 1.00 lakh and Rs. 
50 thousand filming charges being meagre amount s. The Committee is of the view that 
films being shot on low budget can find these charges to be prohibitive and thus 
disallow them from featuring our historical monuments and heritage. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that ASI should review the filming charges pr esently being 
charged, in light of the prohibitive effect of the same on low -budget movies and the 
opportunity for promotion of historical sites and monuments thus lost by ASI. 

72 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
 
-NIL- 
 
***** 
 

73 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSERVATION OF MUSEUMS: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES 
 The Committee observes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not 
provide any information on putting a monitoring mechanism in place to make sure that 
the list of deliverables issued by the Ministry to the Museums under its administrative 
control, are achieved by all such Museums within a strict timeline . The Committee 
desires to know the specific action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
(Para 1.7) 
 
Challenges:- 
Human Resources 
 The Committee may be apprised as to whether the present and future human 
resource needs of the Indian Museums sector have been documented by the Ministry for 
consideration of the IIHC. 
(Para 2.2) 
 
Audience Engagement 
 The Committee observes from the replies furnished by various Museums that 
not all Museums seem to be making use of social media to attract more footfall. The 
Committee recommends that urgent action needs to  be taken to utilize the reach of 
social media in order to increase the footfall at various museums across the country. 
The Committee further notes that the Ministry has not furnished any comments 
regarding coming up with a rating system to rate museums across on the country on 
various useful parameters . The Ministry may work on introducing such rating system  
so as to encourage museum staff to perform better. 
(Para 3.8) 
Funding 
 The Committee notes from the reply of some Museums that attempts were made 
to seek fund s from Corporates and companies but received a very poor response. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the proposals made by the 

74 
 
Museums to attract CSR funds and assist the Museums in making attractive proposals 
so as to garner better response from Corporates. The Committee further recomme nds 
that the Museums may request Members of Parliament to contribute to the 
development of museums from their MPLADS funds.  
(Para 4.6) 
 The Committee desires to know the action taken by the Minist ry with regard to 
allocation of more funds to State Governments for development of State Museums and 
also for coming up with a list of deliverables to the State Museums.  
(Para5.2) 
Opportunities:- 
Digitization of Museums  
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to 
provide assistance to the State Government Museums for implementing the JATAN 
software for digitization of artefacts and antiquities present at these Museums.  
(Para 6.4) 
Developing ASI Site Museums across the country 
 The Co mmittee desires to know whether the Ministry has approached the 
Ministry of Finance to seek allocation of funds generated by the museums and 
monuments to the Ministry itself . If so, the Committee may be apprised of the response 
furnished by the Ministry of Finance in this regard.  
(Para 7.2) 
Miscellaneous 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a proactive approach in 
this regard and request the concerned organizations to prepare and submit proposals 
for the development of the Museum at the Gagron Fort at Jhalawar, Kolvi Buddhist 
Caves, Jain temples at Ujjain and Kota and Fort of Shahabad.  
(Para 8.2) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the concerned 
organization to prepare and submit a proposal to the Ministry for develop ment of 
Padmanabhapuram Palace in Kerala.  
(Para 9.2) 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES 
Challenges:-  

75 
 
Conservation Problems 
 The Committee may be apprised as to whether the works being undertaken 
under the Annual repair plan cover those monuments and sites which are not present in 
the list of Centrally Protected Monuments and State Protected Monuments. I n case  
such monuments are presently not covered at all, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may include repair works of urgent nature for such monuments under i ts 
Annual repair plan.  
(Para 10.2) 
 The Committee notes that only a few sites/monuments are having a 
Conservation/ Management plan at present and reiterates its original recommendation 
that ASI may prepare such a plan for all Centrally Protected Monuments. Further, the 
reply furnished by the Ministry does not clarify whether the site inspection of all 
monuments is carr ied out periodically. The Committee therefore reiterates its 
recommendation that a Site Inspection Register may be maintained and periodically 
updated for all Centrally Protected Monuments.  
(Para 11.2) 
Urbanization around Centrally Protected Monuments 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for 
conducting research to explore way s and means to protect our archaeological sites and 
monuments from the ill-effects of air pollution in urban centres.  
(Para 12.2) 
Encroachment and Vandalism  
  The Committee reiterates that the Ministry may examine the efficacy of the 
powers it presently has to deal with encroachments in and around monuments and 
propose suitable amendments to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act 1958 and Rules 1959, and Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 with a view to adequately empower the Estate Officer for tackling 
the issue of encroachment of Centrally protected monuments.  
(Para 13.2) 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reason given by ASI for not being able to 
provide boundary walls for monuments where only name of the monument is 
mentioned in the notification and ASI faces difficulties in marking the protected limit of 
the monument. The Committee recommends that urgent action may be taken to finalize 
the protected limits of all such monuments so that at least boundary walls can be 
constructed for their protection urgently.  
(Para 14.2) 

76 
 
Lack of funds  
 The Committee notes that the special tours before and after regular hours are 
not feasible because as per AMASR Act, 1958, monuments/sites can remain open only 
from sunrise to sunset. The Committee recommends that a suitable amendment may be 
brought into t he Act in order to permit flexibility in timings till it can be kept open in 
order to open more avenues for prospects of revenue generation and boost tourism of 
every monument.  
(Para 15.2) 
Human Resources at ASI  
 The Co mmittee is concerned to note that a  large number of vacancies are 
existing in ASI at present. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not furnished any 
convincing reply for existence of  such large number of vacancies. The Ministry may 
take immediate concrete action to fill the existing vacancies in ASI at the earliest so as to 
permit it to fulfil its mandate effectively.  
(Para 16.2) 
Opportunities:-  
Promotion of Tourism and Business  
 The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by ASI for developing 
garden spaces presently associated with the monuments. The Committee feels that 
doing so would not only help beautify the monument as a whol e, but also put a check on 
the encroachment of such nearby area that is being developed as a green space.  
(Para 17.2) 
Model Conservation Process 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI may periodically update the 
Conservation Manual and Works Code so as to document new knowledge and 
experiences gained by ASI in the field of conservation and preservation of monuments 
and artefacts. The concerned State Government Departments may also be notified of all 
such updates made, so that they can benefit from the experiences of ASI.  
(Para 18.2) 
Involvement of Communities 
 The Committee desires to know about the specif ic actions taken by ASI in order 
to integrate local governance and communities for protection and preservation of 
historical sites and monuments.  

77 
 
(Para 19.3) 
Preparation of database of archaeological sites/monuments 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may recruit a higher number of 
Young Archaeologists at the NMMA as opposed to the 20 Young Archaeologists that 
are presently being recruited. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may give 
top priority to the exercise for identification of unprotected monuments and sites across 
the country and personnel and budgetary requirements for such exercise may also be 
met.  
(Para 20.2) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that ASI may replicate such joint 
efforts with other State Governments  in the country in order  to ensure that the historic 
forts as well as other archaeological sites are developed for tourism purposes.  
(Para 21.2) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not furnished  any information 
pertaining to the recommendation made by the Committee to consider granting special 
discount for entry tickets  to young international tourists. The Committee may be 
apprised of the response of the Ministry in this regard.  
(Para 22.3) 
 The Committee notes that as and when any proposal/ request is received from 
the State Government or from the public for inclusion of a monument as Centrally 
Protected Monument, ASI examines and approves the proposal, if it is found suitable. 
The Committee fee ls that the approach of State Governments towards protection and 
preservation of historical monuments is often lethargic  and therefore, ASI must also 
proactively consider taking up important historical monuments presently in neglected 
state of conservation, for inclusion in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments.  
(Para 23.2) 
 The Committee recommends that ASI may analyze the  positive impact of 
illumination of monuments on the footfall received by such monuments and on the basis 
of the same, ASI may take a proactive approach towards illumination of more Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country.  
(Para 24.2) 
ISSUES COMMON TO MUS EUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
MONUMENTS 

78 
 
Partnering with the private sector for development and conservation of Museums and 
archaeological sites 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons behind abolishing the post 
of CEO, DMCS and the fate of  the proposals that were being worked upon by DMCS 
for development of Museums and Cultural Spaces.  
(Para 25.2) 
Re-examination and updation of Acts and Laws pertaining to Museums and 
Archaeological Sites 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake review of the 
Indian Museum Act, 1910 in order to ensure that the legislation in place suffices the 
present day requirements for development of museums across the country. The 
Committee further reite rates its recommendation that the blanket ban on construction 
works within the prohibited area of 100 meters around all Centrally Protected 
Monuments, should be reviewed in consultation with experts and stakeholders.  
(Para 26.2) 
 Coordination with different Ministries and State Governments 
 The Committee is of the view that there is a lot of scope for improvement of 
connectivity to museums and monuments/ sites across the country. Having robust 
connectivity to our museums and archaeological monuments / sites is crucial for 
attracting more tourists to such places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry/ ASI may carry out an exercise to identify projects that can enhance the 
connectivity to the various museums and historical monuments/ si tes across the country 
and the projects thus identified should then be communicated to the relevant Ministry/ 
Department for implementation.  
(Para 27.4) 
Allocation of funds generated from Museums and ASI, to the Ministry of Culture 
 The Committee recommen ds that the Ministry may consider amending/ 
modifying the existing Legislation/ Rules so that the receipts collected by ASI are not 
deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India but into a special fund dedicated to the 
protection and preservation of historical monuments and sites.  The Committee feels 
that doing so would bridge the gap between the budgetary requirements of ASI and 
actual allocation made to it, to some extent.  
(Para 28.4) 
Lowering the fees charged for filming at Centrally Protected Monuments 
 The Committee does not agree with ASI’s view regarding Rs. 1.00 lakh and Rs. 
50 thousand filming charges being meagre amount s. The Committee is of the view that 

79 
 
films being shot on low budget can find these charges to be prohibitive and thus 
disallow them from featuring our historical monuments and heritage. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that ASI should review the filming charges presently being 
charged, in light of the prohibitive effect of the same on low -budget movies and the 
opportunity for promotion of historical sites and monuments thus lost by ASI. 
(Para 29.7) 
***** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
  
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider  and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
80

 
 
(i) *   *   *   * 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report on the subject 
‘Development and Co nservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites - 
Challenges and Opportunities’. 
(iii) *   *   *   * 
(iv) *   *   *   * 
(v) *   *   *   * 
(vi) *   *   *   * 
B.        *   *   *   * 
(i)         *   *   *   * 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *i   *   *   * 
 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
                                                           
* Relates to other matters 
81