 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED 
Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Protection of 
Monuments in India 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker, 
(P resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Protection of 
Monuments in India  
 
resented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th  June, 20 22 
to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
324 
REPORT   
Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Protection of 
22 ) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT  
 
Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Protection of 
Monuments in India 
 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available  

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-26 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   27-39  
6. MINUTES        40-44 
7. ANNEXURES        45-60 
      
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. *1vacant 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 
                                                             
1 *Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 4th May, 2022 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty Fourth Report on ‘Issues relating to Untraceable 
Monuments and Protection of Monuments in India’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture; Director 
General, Archaeological Survey of India; and other senior officials of A rchaeological Survey 
of India, on the subject on 18th May, 2022.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture and 
Archaeological Survey of India for placing before the Committee , the material and 
information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the 
Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
May, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
May 31, 2022                                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Jyaistha 10, 1944 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAT Antiquities and Art Treasurers Act 
AD Anno Domini (After the death of Jesus) 
ADG Additional Director General 
AMASR Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 
ASAE Assistant Superintending Archaeological Engineer  
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CISF Central Industry Security Force 
CPM Centrally Protected Monument 
DFMD Door Frame Metal Detector 
DFO District Forest Officer 
DGR Directorate General Resettlement 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DSAE Deputy Superintending Archaeological Engineer  
FIR First Information Report 
HBL Heritage Bye-Law 
HCM Hon'ble Culture Minister 
HHMD Hand Held Metal Detector  
HP Himachal Pradesh 
HQ Headquarters 
IB Intelligence Bureau 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
LED Light Emitting Diodes 
MIS Management Information System 
MoC Ministry of Culture 
MTS Multi-Tasking Staff 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NMA National Monuments Authority  
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NOO Not On Original 
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre 
NVMS Network Video Management System 
PC Personal Computer 
PTZ Pan Tilt Zoom 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
RFP Request For Proposal 

iv 
 
SA Superintending Archaeological 
SIS Security and Intelligence Services 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
TB Terabyte 
TV Television 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
WB West Bengal 
XBIS X-Ray Baggage Inspection System 
 
 
 
 

1 
REPORT 
India has a glorious and diverse cultural history which is beautifully showcased by the 
multitudinous historical monuments spread across the country representing its tangible cultural 
heritage. These historical monuments are a living reminder of the past a nd the guardian pillars of 
India‟s cultural splendour.  India ranks sixth in the world with 40 UNESCO World Heritage Sites 
of which 32 are cultural sites. India‟s heritage sites are an amalgamation of different styles and 
influences of various dynasties, r eligions, traditions and customs and vary from rock cut 
architecture, temple architecture, tombs, forts, palaces, minars, stupas to the monument 
complexes at Hampi, Mahabulipuram and Khajuraho.  The range and diversity of India‟s 
tangible cultural heritage is truly mind-boggling.  
2. Historical monuments act as the focal point of attraction for tourists, both domestic and 
international, and thus directly contribute to the economic growth of the country. However, while 
the iconic Taj Mahal, the Red Fort, the Qutub Minar, Fatehpur Sikri, the Ajanta and Ellora caves,  
Konark Sun Temple, Hawa Mahal, and other such renowned monuments are on every tourist‟s 
bucket list,  there are countless equally stunning masterpieces of great historical importance and 
cultural significance which languish in obscurity with even locals being unaware of their 
importance and sadly in some cases, even their existence.  As such, it is of paramount 
importance to ensure the protection of historical monuments across the country and the s ame is 
also reflected in Article 49 of the Constitution of India which states the following: 
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance.— 
It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object 
of artistic or historic interest, 1[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to 
be of national importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, 
disposal or export, as the case may be. 
3. Given the importance of preserving historical monument s across the country, it is a 
matter of grave concern that several Monuments of National Importance under the protection of 
Archaeological Survey of India (Ministry of Culture) have become untraceable over the years  
due to rapid urbanization, submerged by reservoirs, dams, difficulties in tracing in remote 
locations, dense forests, non-availability of their proper location etc. Besides, the present state of 
                                                
1 Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for ―declared by parliament by law‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 

2 
preservation and protection of even the more famous and better maintained historical monuments 
in the country often leaves much to be desired. These relics and guardians of our glorious history 
which for centuries have withstood invasions, battles, bloodshed, destruction and the vagaries of 
climate are now falling victim to pollution, negligence, apathy a nd encroachments. It is in this 
backdrop that the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture decided to take up the subject „Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and 
Protection of Monuments in India‟ for detailed examination and Report thereon. 
4. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture; Director General, 
Archaeological Survey of India; and other senior officials of ASI on the subject in its meeting 
held on 18th May, 2022. 
5. The primary mandate of Ministry of Culture is preservation and conservation of ancient 
cultural heritage and promotion of tangible and intangible art and culture. The Ministry manages 
all the Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) of national importance, through  the 
Archaeological Survey of India. The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to the Committee, 
informed that there are 3693 Centrally Protected Monuments and 4508 State Protected 
Monuments in the country. (Annexure-A) 
6. Established in 1861 and an att ached office of the Ministry of Culture, the Archaeological 
Survey of India (ASI) is engaged in protection, preservation and conservation of 3693 Centrally 
Protected Monuments/Sites of national importance including 24 World Heritage Property, 52 site 
museums on site, spread all over India which are directly under the ASI. The excavations of 
archaeological sites in the country are permitted in accordance with the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. 
7. The Ministry, in its backgr ound note on the subject, stated that the CAG in its 2013 
Report on “Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities” 
submitted to Parliament on 23.8.2013 had reported that 92 monuments are missing. However, 
vigorous efforts to locate/identify the reportedly untraceable monuments based on verification of 
old records, revenue maps and referring published reports were carried out by the respective field 
offices of Archaeological Survey of India. The exercise gave fruitful resul ts and many 
monuments were traced out. The status of these 92 monuments/sites is as below: 

3 
Number of monuments/sites which physically exist: 42 
Number of monuments/sites affected due to rapid urbanization: 14 
Number of monuments/sites exist submerged under reservoir/dam: 12 
Number of monuments/sites which are untraceable: 24 
8. The list of 24 untraceable monuments is placed at Annexure -B.  The Ministry stated that 
information about these 24 untraceable monuments was provided to the Parliament in reply to 
Lok Sabha Unstarred Question  No. 5913 answered on 10.4.2017.  The Ministry further informed 
that the untraceable monuments were the protected monuments, under the ASI, whose exact 
location and condition could not be determined and that this situati on arose because of various 
factors, such as rapid urbanization, non -availability of proper details about their location in the 
gazette notification, difficulties in tracing in remote locations, dense forests, etc. Such 
monuments which could not be traced on ground for a considerable time because of multiple 
factors, despite the strenuous efforts of ASI through its field offices, were referred as 
Untraceable monuments. The Ministry further stated that the chances of tracing such monuments 
with the help of s cientific tools and archival records cannot be ruled out.  Furt her, field 
explorations and periodic surveys are being conducted from time to time by the field offices of 
ASI and with the help of old revenue records, revenue maps and published reports, thes e 
monuments may also be traced out. Section 35 of the AMASR Act, 1958 has the provision to 
issue notification for such monuments which has ceased to be of national importance. However, 
this exercise of removing these 24 untraceable monuments has not been i nitiated by the ASI as 
there are chances that some of these monuments can be traced out in near future. 
9. The Committee observes that the performance audit of the CAG had included a 
joint physical inspection, along with ASI, of 1655 monuments and sites out of the 3678 
CPMs and sites spread nationwide.  The 24 monuments which are reported to be 
untraceable are from this sample of 1655 monuments.  The Committee has perused the list 
of 24 untraceable monuments submitted by the Ministry and it is perturbed to find that the 
Barakhamba Cemetery in the very heart of the Capital city is among the untraceable 

4 
monuments.  If even monuments in the Capital city cannot be maintained properly, it does 
not bode well for monuments in remote places in the country. Upon query of the 
Committee, the Ministry has informed that no further study of the remaining monuments 
has been undertaken for ascertaining how many more monuments are missi ng from the 
total number of 3693  CPMs.  The Committee is perturbed to note that having found out 
that at leas t 24 monuments are untraceable out of the sample of monuments studied, no 
further surveys were conducted for the remaining monuments, even nearly a decade after 
the original study.   
10. The Committee acknowledges the steps taken by ASI to retrace the monu ments that 
were deemed to be missing by CAG in its 2013 Performance Audit but feels that the same 
reflects at the questionable state of protection and preservation of monuments, with ASI 
being unaware of the physical untraceability of several of the Centra lly Protected 
Monuments under its ambit.  The Committee recommends that the ASI immediately 
undertake a survey of the remaining CPMs which were not inspected in the CAG Audit 
survey and ascertain whether there are any other missing monuments in the country  apart 
from the 24 monuments of the original survey.   The Committee further recommends that a 
physical survey of all the Centrally Protected Monuments must mandatorily be carried out 
by ASI from time to time as per a fixed time schedule. Digital log books may be maintained 
which may contain  textual and photographic/video record of the state of physical 
preservation of the monument, exact location coordinates and clearly demarcated 
prohibited and regulated areas in the vicinity of the monument. These digita l records may 
be made easily accessible to the general public to avoid any ambiguities and details may 
also be published regarding the date on which the last survey was conducted, due date for 
the next survey and the contact details of the ASI officials in -charge of maintaining and 
protecting the monument.   
11. The Committee further notes that out of the 92 monuments declared “missing” by 
the CAG, 42 monuments have been identified due to efforts made by the ASI and out of the 
remaining 50 monuments, 14 are  affected by rapid urbanisation, 12 are submerged by 
reservoir/dams while the location of the remaining 24 is untraceable.  The Committee feels 
that the distinction made by the Ministry regarding the monuments lost to 
urbanisation/reservoirs and 24 monumen ts which are untraceable is an academic 
distinction since monuments lost to urbanisation/reservoirs are as irrecoverable as the ones 

5 
which are presently untraceable with scant hop e of being found in future.  Moreover, the 
fact that the ASI had been unable to prevent the loss of the 14 monuments to urbanisation 
and 12 to reservoirs/dams and only located them after the study by CAG suggests that the 
ASI had no cognisance of these mon uments prior to the study. The number of monuments 
lost from public viewing must therefore be held to be 50 taking into account those lost to 
urbanisation or reservoirs.  The ASI has assured that the remaining 42 of the 92 
monuments exist physically but th e Committee would like to know whether these 
monuments exist in their entirety and undamaged or whether the ASI has only managed to 
locate some remains and ruins of such monuments.   
12. The Ministry has stated that there is no term called ―Missing Monumen ts‖ in the 
AMASR Act and the term only came into existence as it was used by the Audit team on 
their Report. The  Committee opines that the AMASR Act provides for the preservation 
and protection of ancient historical monuments and it would have been inconsi stent to 
include the concept of ―Missing Monuments‖ in the Act.  That the situation warrants the 
use of such phrases only serves to underline the apathy of the Ministry and ASI regarding 
the preservation of our historical monuments.  The Ministry has also stated that the 
exercise of removing the untraceable monuments under Section 35 of the AMASR Act has 
not been initiated by the ASI as there are chances that some of these monuments shall be 
traced out in near future. The Committee observes that Section 35 of the AMASR Act, 
1958 has the provision to issue notification only for such CPMs which have as per the 
opinion of the Central Government have ceased to be of national importance. The 
monuments which have become ―untraceable‖ have become so due to official apathy and 
may not have ceased to be of national importance had they been existing.  The situation of a 
―Missing Monument‖ cannot be automatically equated with loss of its histori cal 
importance.  The Committee recommends that the Untraceable Monuments may not be 
removed from the list of Centrally Protected Monuments by taking recourse to Section 35 
as that Section provides the exclusion only of such monuments which have in the opin ion of 
the Central Government ceased to be of national importance.   In  fact, there is the danger 
that in case of such removal, there would be no imperative to find the untraceable 
monument and it would be well and truly lost to posterity. Since untraceabl e monuments 
also cannot continue to be on the Protected list, the Committee recommends that the list of 

6 
Untraceable Monuments may be maintained as such and if necessary, the AMASR Act may 
be amended to include this terminology.   
13. The Committee observes  that the CAG audit had pointed out that the Ministry 
through the ASI had not conducted a comprehensive survey/review to identify monuments 
which were of national importance for inclusion in the list of CPMs.  Similarly, there were 
no efforts to identify t hose monuments which had lost the stature of national importance 
over a period of time.  The Committee is dismayed to note that even a decade after the 
CAG Audit Report,  the Ministry and the ASI are yet to conduct a comprehensive survey 
to identify monume nts which are of national importance or of those which had lost their 
stature of national importance. The Committee urges the Ministry and ASI to conduct 
surveys to include monuments of national importance and also those which have lost their 
importance over time.  This would ensure that the resources of the Ministry and ASI are 
utilised  in a justified manner for deserving monuments  and are not diverted to protecting 
those which are no longer of national importance.  
14. The Committee further recommends t hat the Ministry of Culture and ASI should 
undertake a survey of all the 3693 Centrally Protected Monuments to ensure that they are 
in existence and to provide adequate maintenance and protection.  
15. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI 
to ensure that more monuments do not go missing in the future. In its written reply, the Ministry 
informed the Committee that the provisions of AMASR Act and Rules are being implemented so 
that no illegal construction or en croachment takes place near the monument/site of national 
importance. Apart from this, round-the-clock watch and ward by security personnel, both private 
and CISF and ASI staff, are being provided at the monuments and sites. Further, periodic 
inspection shall also be carried out.  
16. In the meeting of the Committee held on the subject on 18 th May, 2022, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Culture informed that the Ministry is in the process of coming up with an amendment 
to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and that detailed 
consultations are being held with about 15 Ministries and State Governments. He informed the 
Committee that one of the changes being brought through this amendment is to remove the limit 
of 100 meters and 200 meters as prohibited and regulated area for all CPMs and have monument-

7 
wise limits instead, depending on the historical, cultural importance, geographic location of the 
monument, etc. 
17. The Committee feels that a thorough review of the AMASR Act in consul tation with 
all stakeholders and State Governments, is the need of the hour. The Committee, therefore, 
appreciates the process initiated by the Ministry of Culture to amend the AMASR Act. The 
Committee agrees with the view that having the same limits for a ll monuments for 
prohibited area and regulated area for restricting/regulating construction -related activities 
near the monument, is not a practical approach as the requirement for such limitations 
could vary a lot depending on various factors specific to each monument. The Committee, 
therefore, feels that the upcoming amendment which provides for such monument -specific 
prohibited and regulated areas is much needed and hopes that once the amendment is 
passed, all necessary steps are taken to ensure that the  monument-specific limits are 
decided upon for each Centrally Protected Monument at the earliest.  The Committee notes 
that the ASI would be surveying all 3693 monuments while delineating monument specific 
protected and regulated limits and desires that a R eport of the survey may be submitted to 
the Committee. However, the provisions of the Act may be strictly adhered to in terms of 
the prohibited areas around the monument and even Government officials violating the 
provisions should be prosecuted. 
18. The Committee reiterates the following recommendation made in para 39 of its 
311th Report on ‗Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments‘:  
The Committee fails to see why a person living in the Regulated Area of a CPM sho uld 
be required to seek permission from the Competent Authority under the AMASR Rules 
for carrying out innocuous maintenance activities such as filling of cracks, 
whitewashing, replacement of windows etc. The Committee feels that such uncalled -for 
interference makes lives harder for people living nearby the monuments and could 
slowly cause feelings of anguish towards the monument itself. Given the large number 
of monuments across the country and the limited budgetary resources available with 
the Government,  it is pertinent that people residing near the monuments are 
encouraged to look after the monuments and protect them. Besides, placing such 
unnecessary curbs and implementing them is a wastage of limited Government 

8 
resources and turns the focus away from w here it should be - actually protecting and 
preserving the monument itself. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may undertake a thorough review of the AMASR Act and Rules and omit any 
provisions that provide for seeking permissions for m inor works where the same is not 
actually needed and streamline the process for applying for permission in case where 
the same is actually needed. Steps may urgently be taken to make it possible for the 
entire process for seeking permission for constructio n activities in prohibited and 
regulated areas, to be completed online so as to not cause any hassle to bona fide 
residents living near the monuments. 
Assessment of security requirements at Centrally Protected Monuments 
19. The Committee sought to know from the Ministry, details regarding any audit conducted 
to gauge the requirements for security guards and CCTV cameras etc. at Centrally Protected 
Monuments across the country and the budgetary requirements/budget shortfall for posting the 
required number  of security guards at Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) across the 
country.  The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that a meeting chaired by 
the Director General, ASI on 06.12.2021 on enhancement of security surveillance of Central ly 
Protected Monument s under ASI was held with IIT, Delhi. Pursuant to this, the Security 
Assessment for Centrally Protected Monuments is being done in collaboration with Indian 
Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi. It was further stated that the deploymen t of security guards, 
surveillance, budgetary requirements etc. shall be reviewed for implementation once the report 
submitted by IIT, Delh i. The Ministry also informed that prior to the meeting with IIT, Delhi, a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Additi onal Secretary (Culture) had also assessed the 
details of security arrangements in ASI during a meeting held on 21.07.2014. 
20. With regard to a query made by the Committee regarding the number of Centrally 
Protected Monuments where security guards are pos ted and the number of such monuments 
where no security personnel is present, the Ministry informed the Committee that t he Security 
requirement of ASI Monuments, Sites and museums was reviewed by the Committee chaired by 
AS(C) and based on this Committee‟s recommendation a requirement of approximately 7,000 
personnel was worked out for providing security at all monuments and sites.   The security 
personnels are deployed at 248 locations i.e. monuments/sites/museums.  The requirement was 
restricted to 2578 Se curity Personnel due to budgetary constraints. In addition to above, 596 

9 
CISF personnel (317 at Red Fort, Delhi and 279 at Taj Mahal, Agra) have also been deployed for 
Security of above World Heritage Sites.  The deployment details of security personnel as well as 
approx monthly expenditure occurred on Security is given at Annexure-C. 
21. The Committee sought to know from the Ministry regarding the budgetary allocation for 
protection and safeguarding of Centrally Protected Monuments for the last 5 years. The  details 
furnished by the Ministry in this regard, are given at Annexure-D. 
22. The Committee is concerned to note that out of the 3693 Centrally Protected 
Monuments, securi ty guards are posted at only 248  CPMs/sites/museums i.e. less than  
about 6.7 percent of the total number of CPMs. The Committee notes with dismay that out 
of the total requirement of 7000 personnel for protection of Monuments , the Govern ment 
could provide only 2578 security personnel at 248 locations due to budgetary constraints. 
The Committee observes that budgetary constraints should not be an excuse for not 
providing security guards to protect our rich cultural heritage. It is the bounden  duty of 
the Government of the day to protect our cultural heritage sites. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that budget may be provided by the Government to appoint 7000 personnel 
for protection of the Monuments or as per the study conducted by IIT, Delhi. In view of 
this worrying state of affairs, the Committee is of the strong view that the budgetary 
allocation available with the Ministry/ASI for safeguarding our Centrally Protected 
Monuments needs a serious relook. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI 
may conduct an urgent thorough assessment of the security requirements and budgetary 
allocation required for the same and a strong case may be made to the Ministry of Finance 
requesting allocation of additional funds for this purpose so as to ensure a basic st ate of 
protection for all Centrally Protected Monuments across the country to preserve them for 
generations to come. The Committee also recommends that the local Panchayats and police 
may be involved in safeguarding the monuments and if necessary, the AMAS R Act may be 
amended in this regard.  
23. It has also come to the notice of the Committee that various important historical 
monuments and sites such as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalam village, Adoni Taluka; 
Kethavaram Rock Arts and Belum Caves in Kurnool etc . which, although not under the 
list of Centrally Protected Monuments, are of high historical significance but devoid of any 
security guards and proper road connectivity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 

10 
the Ministry may urgently make provisions f or posting security guards at these sites and 
adequate measures may be taken for promotion of tourism at the same, in coordination 
with the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Culture may coordinate with 
the Ministry of Road Transport & Highw ays and State Public Works Department to 
ensure proper road/highway connectivity to these important historical sites in order to 
allow tourists to reach these sites. 
24. In response to a query regarding the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI to tackle 
encroachment of Centrally Protected Monuments, the Ministry, in its written reply, informed the 
Committee that as and when construction activities are noticed/reported in the 
prohibited/regulated area, the Superintending   Archaeologist issues a notice to the owner under 
rule 38 of the provisions of   the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules, 
1959 for   removal of unauthorized building. Simultaneously, help from the local police   is also 
sought by lodging a complaint and by registering  an FIR. On receipt of a report from the field 
office, the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India, issues a notice to the erring party in   
pursuance of sub -section 19(ii) and sub -rule 38(i) of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remai ns Act, 1958, and Rules, 1959 respectively for   removal of such unauthorized 
construction within a specified period.  A copy of the notice issued by the Director General is 
also sent to the District Collector with the request to demolish the illegal const ruction.  In this   
regard the assistance in containing and removing encroachments is sought from   the respective 
State Government and where there are no fruitful results,   action is initiated by filing cases in the 
court of law. 
25. The Committee takes note of the existing framework and recommends that in the 
upcoming amendment of the AMASR Act being worked upon by the Ministry, strong 
provisions may be incorporated for fixing accountability of concerned Government officials 
to ensure that necessary step s are taken timely for tackling encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments. The concerned officials should be liable to be prosecuted in case of 
gross negligence of their duties with regard to tackling encroachment of CPMs. The 
Committee further recomme nds that the Ministry may examine the powers given to 
District Forest Officers (DFOs) under The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and consider 
granting similar powers to ASI officials in order to effectively curb the issue of 
encroachment of Centrally Protected Monuments 

11 
26. In response to whether there is a provision of regular meetings between the Ministry and 
the State Governments to monitor progress made in tackling encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments, the Ministry stated that State Level Co -ordination Committee meetings 
are conducted periodically at the level of Secretary (Culture) of respective State Government 
27. As regard to its future plans for tackling the issue of encroachment of CPMs, the Ministry 
informed the Committee about the following plans: 
Formation of State Level Co-ordination Committee, in the States wherever not formed so 
far, taking matters with the State Level Co -ordination Committee for removal of 
encroachments, regular inspection of monuments and sites by Field office rs of ASI and 
conducting Cultural awareness programs by involving locals, etc. are proposed to be 
taken up by ASI so that such vital issues are suitably handled. 
28. The Committee feels that State Level Co -ordination Committees are a necessary 
instrument f or coordination between the Ministry of Culture and respective State 
Governments for resolving important issues such as removal of encroachment of 
monuments. The Committee may be apprised of the number of States where such State 
Level Co -ordination Committ ee has not been formed so far and the steps taken by the 
Ministry in order to ensure the formation of these Co-ordination Committees. 
29. The Committee desired to know from the Ministry whether any system is in place to 
monitor blatant neglect of historical State Protected Monuments by the State Governments and if 
there are any provisions for providing financial assistance for preservation and protection of any 
State Protected Monuments. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that 3.33 
Crores B.E.  has been allotted to ASI for the conservation and preservation of unprotected 
monuments during the current Financial Year i.e. 2022-23 and that  ASI is making full efforts for 
conservation and preservation as per available resources and capability of Circle offices of ASI. 
30. The Committee notes that a mere Rs. 3.33 crores budgetary allocation has been 
made to ASI for the conservation and preservation of unprotected monuments during the 
current financial year 2022 -23. The Committee strongly feels that this amount seems to be 
grossly insufficient given the large number of unprotected historical monuments in the 
country, as well as a large number of State Protected Monuments which often face gross 
neglect by the respective State Governments. The Committee is of the view that the 
protection and preservation of historical monuments other than those already under the 

12 
protection of Central and State Governments, should also be looked after by the 
Archaeological Survey of India, at least to a basic extent.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may allocate a special budget for protection, preservation 
and restoration, wherever necessary, of unprotected/neglected historical monuments across 
the country. 
31. In response to a query made by the Committee regarding whether the Ministry has taken 
any steps to involve local bodies such as Panchayats and Municipalities for protection of 
historical monuments in the country, the Ministry informed the Committee that Cultural 
Awareness Programmes are being conducted by involving local bodies to protect the monuments 
for the posterity. 
32. The Committee further enquired from the Ministry regarding whether the Governm ent 
will empower the local bodies to provide security guards to the unprotected monuments, both 
Central and State, in t heir locality. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee 
that no such proposal has been received by Archaeological Survey of India in the matter so far. 
33. The Committee notes that no proposal exists at present wit h ASI for empowering 
local bodies to provide security guards to the unprotected monuments. The Committee 
feels that given their proximity and cultural ties w ith local monuments, local bodies are 
best suited to look after the protection of historical monuments especially those whi ch are 
not under the list of Centrally Protected M onuments (CPMs). Empowering local bodies to 
provide security guards at such monuments for their protection can go a long way in 
ensuring that these monuments are preserved in their present state for generations to 
come. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that provisions to empower the 
local bodies for the protection of historical monuments and to make them accountable may 
be incorporated in the amendment of the AMASR Act that is being worke d upon by the 
Ministry. 
34. The Ministry  informed the Committee that ASI had entered into an Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) to plot all the 
monuments/sites of national   importance indicating their protecte d , prohibited and regulated 
area boundaries on NRSC -Bhuvan Portal. However, the application of this portal is limited to   
providing NoC for construction -related activities by the National Monuments Authority (NMA) 
and Competent Authorities. 

13 
35. The Committee feels that there is a scope for using satellite imagery to monitor the 
Centrally Protected Monuments  (CPMs) across the country for encroachment and any 
illegal construction activities in the prohibited and regulated areas of the same. Satellite 
imagery should also be used to try and trace the monuments which are untraceable at 
present and to ensure that no existing CPM s become  untraceable in the future. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may approach ISRO and, if feasible, sign a 
Memorandum of Understanding with ISRO to utilize ISRO satellite imagery for the above  
mentioned purposes. 
 
Vacancies in ASI 
36. The Ministr y informed the Committee that about 2500 vacancies of Monument 
Attendants exist in ASI, out of which 2000 vacancies have already been reported to SSC under 
Direct Recruitment. Besides, three posts of Director at Zonal Cultural Centres were vacant and 
recruitment process was ongoing.  
37. Committee notes that s ince Monument Attendants are responsible for day to day 
cleaning of the monuments as well as its security,  2500 vacancies in this cadre is an 
incredible number and shows that most of the monuments are  not being secured or 
maintained on a day to day basis.   The Committee feels that while the ASI presents its staff 
shortage as one of the reasons for its apathy in maintaining monuments, it appears that the 
delay in filling up vacancies is one of the main  reasons for the pathetic state of monuments 
in the country . The Committee recommends that vacancies of Monument Attendants and 
Guards should be filled up on a war footing so that none of the CPMs is left unguarded and 
unmaintained. The Committee desires t o be informed about the recruitment status of 
Monument Attendants. The Committee does not find any reason that vacancies should be 
allowed to accumulate in thousands before action for recruitment is taken. Vacancies at 
higher levels may also be filled up a t the earliest. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may take immediate and effective action to appoint the  remaining 500 vacancies 
of Monument Attendants . The Committee recommends that the ASI may also explore the 
idea of appointing ex-servicemen to guard the monuments..    

14 
38. With regard to vacancies existing in ASI, the Committee reiterates the following 
recommendation made in para 35 of its 315 th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of 
the Ministry of Culture: 
…The Committee feels that the vacancy details reflect a very pathetic state of 
affairs in all the organizations of the Ministry. In the Archaeology Cadre of 
ASI, against the total sanctioned strength of 420, the vacant positions are 166, 
similarly in the Conservation Cadre, against the total strength of 918, there is a 
mammoth vacancy of 452 positions. The situation is not any better in other 
Cadres of ASI or other organisations of the Ministry. The Committee thus finds 
it difficult to understa nd how the Ministry can ensure the efficiency of its 
organizations and manage to meet the present human resource needs of the 
respective organisations, leave alone there being any scope for new initiatives 
by the organisations. The Committee strongly recom mends that the Ministry 
may set up a foolproof mechanism in place to ensure that the staffing 
requirements of all its organizations are met at all times, so as to enable them to 
carry out their mandate in letter and spirit. 
 
Permitting Religious Activities in Religious Historical Monuments 
39. The Committee sought to know from the Ministry the rules/guidelines at present 
regarding permitting religious activities like worshiping in religious historical monuments which 
are Centrally Protected Monuments. The M inistry, in its written reply, informed the Committee 
that as a matter of convention and decisions taken by the Cabinet on previous occasions, 
religious observances are not allowed in the monuments which were   not under the religious use 
at the time of their protection. 
40. The Committee feels that several historical monuments across the country hold 
immense religious significance to a large number of people and allowing  
pujas/worship/certain religious activities at such monuments can fulfill legitimate 
aspirations of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may explore the 
possibility of permitting pujas/worship/certain religious activities at historical Central ly 
Protected Monuments of religious significance, subject to the condition th at it can be 

15 
established that such activities would not have any detrimental effect on the state of 
conservation and preservation of the monument. 
 
OTHER OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
41. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Tourism along with the Mi nistry of 
Culture and ASI has promoted the concept of ―Adopt a Heritage‖ projects which aims to 
develop monuments, tourist and heritage sites across India, by inviting corporate entities, 
public sector companies, NGOs and individuals to  take up the responsibility of 
development and maintenance of tourist facilities and amenities at heritage sites .  The 
Committee appreciates the initiative of the Ministries and ASI as a step in the right 
direction and opines that the coronavirus pandemic has showed that the government 
cannot depend on ly on income from mass tourism to maintain historical monuments. The 
Committee recommends that the public may similarly be involved in maintenance and 
development of lesser known monuments through heritage walks and tours, local heritage 
festivals and promotion of niche tourism. The assistance of NGOs and societies like 
INTACH may be taken for tracing missing monuments. There are many monuments which 
are central to local folklore and legends and incorporating the assistance of local 
Panchayats/Municipalities in preservation of monuments in their localitie s would prove to 
be beneficial both in promoting tourism and stirring up the interest of people in their 
history and culture.  
42. The Committee finds that the website of ASI is poorly designed with many features 
as yet inoperative and a general lack of information on the work of the ASI as well as the 
built cultural heritage of India.  The Committee recommends that the A SI highlight the 
CPMs and the lesser known monuments o n its websi te and stimulate the interest of the 
public regarding their maintenance as well as raise the profile of Missing Monuments 
among the general public.   
 
Action taken by the Ministry on certain recommendations made in the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Performance Audit of Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities (Report No. 18 of 2013) 

16 
43. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding the action taken by it on certain 
recommendations made in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities (Report No. 
18 of 2013). The recommendations made by CAG, the reply  furnished by the Ministry regarding 
action taken on the same and the recommendations/observations of this Committee on the same 
are as follows: 
 43.1 CAG Recommendation: 
43.1.1 The ASI should make a provision for inspection of each protected monument by 
an officer of suitable level periodically. The ASI should publish the state of each 
monument being protected by it on the basis of detailed inspection note and photographic 
evidence collected during such inspection on a regular basis. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.1.2 Regular inspection of Officers at Circle level, SA, Dy.SA, DSAE, ASAE and 
other staff are being carried out and inspection notes are drawn accordingly. Periodically, 
Regional Directors and Officers from ASI Headquarter also visit the monuments fo r 
extending guidelines to subordinate officer and assess the condition of monuments. 
Works done according to the inspection report are published in the ASI-Annual Review. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.1.3 The Committee is dismayed to note  that the CAG Audit had found that no 
Inspection Notes were available without which it is impossible to ascertain when a 
particular site was last visited.  The Committee notes that the Ministry and ASI 
have informed that Inspection Notes are now regularly drawn and works done are 
published in the ASI-Annual Review.  The Committee recommends that the Annual 
Review or Reports of the ASI may be prominently displayed on the website of the 
ASI for information of the general pub lic. The Committee may be apprised of the 
periodicity of such inspection by ASI officials for the various Centrally Protected 
Monuments and whether photographic evidence is collected alongside inspection 
notes. The Committee recommends that the ASI may categorize the monuments into 
different classes of importance and the periodicity for official inspection of such sites 
may then be decided upon.  

17 
 
43.2 CAG Recommendation: 
43.2.1 It is inevitable that changes would be carried out in the protected monuments if 
they are to be also used as offices and residences. For these exceptions, the ASI should 
prepare detailed guidelines and get the Act revised appropriately. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.2.2 Adoptive use of monuments in modest manner and to the minimal exte nt is 
stipulated under Conservation Policy of ASI. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.2.3 The Committee may be apprised of detailed guidelines, if any, issued by the 
Ministry/ASI under the AMASR Act in this regard. 
 
43.3  CAG Recommendation: 
43.3.1 The notification is an important document which not only provides a legal status 
for centrally protected monument but also defines the area of the site. This document is 
crucial for establishing encroachment or unauthorised construction at the site.  The ASI 
should maintain a centralised database of all notifications and records related to the 
sites which should be readily available with the ASI HQ. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.3.2 A special drive is undertaken to possess centralized database of all Gazette 
Notification. To that effect, an exclusive cell is being working on in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.3.3 The Committee is unhappy to note that the recommendation of the CAG 
nearly a decade back for a centralized datab ase of the most important document of 
notification of the CPMs has still not been carried out.  
 
43.4 CAG Recommendation: 

18 
43.4.1 There should be no room for ambiguity and difference in factual information 
related to the monuments. The ASI should collect the MIS data from its Circles on each of 
the protected monuments and place it in public domain after reconciling the 
discrepancies. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.4.2 Noted for compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.4.3 The Committee notes  that it has been 9 years since the publication of the 
CAG Report. The Committee may be apprised of the specific action taken by the 
Ministry to address ambiguities in factual information related to the monuments by 
publishing correct, discrepancy -free inf ormation regarding the same in public 
domain. 
 
43.5  CAG Recommendation: 
43.5.1 The Ministry should come up with a strategy to ensure time bound completion of 
heritage by-laws for all protected monuments and their speedy approval. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.5.2 Till date seven (07) Heritage Bye -Laws (HBLs) covering 33 Centrally Protected 
Monuments and protected areas have been laid in both Houses of Parliament including 
two (02) HBLs pertaining to Chaunsath Jogini Temple and Vishnu Varaha Temple in 
Madhya Pradesh, which were laid in both Houses of Parliament during the previous 
Winter Session and Budget Session. In addition, 101 HBLs covering 126 Centrally 
Protected Monuments and protected areas have been discussed in NMA. Out of these 101 
HBLs, 88 HBLs cov ering 111 Centrally Protected Monuments and protected areas have 
been uploaded on NMA website, inviting suggestions and comments from the public.  
The roadblocks or constraining factors in the preparation of Heritage bye -laws of all the 
centrally protected  monuments and areas were discussed in detail during a meeting 
chaired by the Hon‟ble Culture Minister (HCM) on 2 nd November, 2021. The decisions 

19 
taken for overcoming these roadblocks or constraining factors given the volume of work 
involved, are detailed below:-  
(i) Additional number of appropriate agencies/ institutions to be empanelled for 
preparation and vetting of Heritage bye -laws: The Ministry of Culture in exercise of the 
powers vested under Section 20E(1) of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 (as amended in 2010), has notified an additional 30 
(thirty) expert heritage bodies vide Gazette of India notification dated 09.02.2022, for fast 
tracking the process of framing of heritage bye-laws.  
(ii) Preparation of Heritage B ye-Laws: It has been decided that the draft heritage bye -
laws will henceforth be prepared by these notified heritage bodies and the role of 
Regional Directors of ASI will be of vetting such HBLs and then forwarding them to the 
NMA. The Ministry of Culture is in the process of finalizing a standard Request for 
Proposal (RFP) document to be used by the Regional Directors of ASI for obtaining 
proposals from notified expert heritage bodies in their jurisdiction for awarding of work 
of preparation of Heritage by e-laws on least cost method. This revised strategy is 
expected to expedite the process of preparation of HBLs.  
(iii) Regional Directors are to be empowered with sufficient Manpower: Since HBLs are 
now to be prepared by the notified heritage bodies, the es timated costs to be incurred for 
hiring of qualified staff (viz. Conservation Architects, Surveyors etc.) in the offices of the 
Regional Directors will decrease since their role is now limited to supervising and vetting 
the draft HBLs. Revised staff requirements for the offices of Regional Directors are being 
examined by the Ministry of Culture.  
(iv) Heritage Consultation: The preparation of draft heritage bye -laws will henceforth be 
the responsibility of the notified heritage bodies. Once the preparation of HBLs has been 
delegated to the Heritage Bodies, a separate Heritage consultation will not be necessary. 
However, of the 101 Heritage Byelaws received and discussed in NMA, only one has 
been consulted with a Heritage body by the competent authority,  and heritage 
consultations of the rest remain outstanding. It is now proposed that the Heritage 
consultations in respect of these HBLs shall be done through the enlarged list of notified 
heritage bodies at a negotiated rate. The revised proposal is being sent to the Ministry of 
Culture for approval.  

20 
(v) Creation of posts of in -house Hindi Translators in National Monuments Authority: A 
proposal for creation of one post of in -house Hindi Translator in National Monuments 
Authority for streamlining the work relating to Hindi translation of Heritage bye -laws for 
the purpose of laying them in both houses of Parliament, is being examined by the 
Ministry of Culture in accordance with guidelines of Department of Expenditure on the 
subject. Simultaneously, the process fo r engaging 2 (two) consultants for handling the 
work of Hindi translation of Heritage bye -laws, as an interim arrangement, has been 
initiated by the National Monuments Authority after approval of Ministry of Culture. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.5.3 The Committee records its displeasure with the slow progress of the work of 
preparation of Heritage Bye Laws. 
 
43.6  CAG Recommendation: 
43.6.1 The Ministry should develop a separate project for maintenance and security of 
World Heritage Sites. There should be proper assessment of funds, security and 
conservation requirements. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.6.2 World Heritage Section: The maintenance, security and conservation of World 
Heritage sites under ASI are looked after as for other Centrally Protected Monuments. A 
Security Cell has been established under the Monument Section. Details and status may 
be provided by Security Cell and Conservation Section.  
Conservation Section: 370 Crores B.E. is allotted to ASI for current Financial Year i.e. 
2022-23. ASI is making Annual Plan for the conservation & Preservation of Protected 
Monuments including providing pub lic amenities and development works as per need of 
the monument. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.6.3 The Committee feels that while all Centrally Protected Monuments are of 
unique cultural importance, World Heritage Sites are amongst the mo st important 
Centrally Protected Monuments and therefore, their maintenance and security 

21 
requirements deserve special attention. The Committee recommends that due  and 
appropriate budgetary allocation may be made for the protection and maintenance 
of World Heritage Sites and special monitoring mechanism may be put in place for 
the same. 
 
43.7  CAG Recommendation: 
43.7.1 The Ministry should develop a Comprehensive Conservation Policy and update its 
manuals and works code. The ASI should make it mandatory to maintain log books for 
each protected monument with detailed documentation of all conservation efforts. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.7.2 Archaeological Survey of India is already having National Policy for 
Conservation, 2014 and Manuals and works code. The u pdating of the same has been 
taken up under the guidance of Competent Authority.  As far as maintaining log books is 
concerned, necessary instructions have been issued to each circle for adhering in good 
spirit. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.7.3 The Committee recommends that the conservation policy may be updated 
from time to time, incorporating necessary changes and new developments in the 
field of archaeological and historical conservation into the policy. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the monitoring mechanism in place to ensure that log books 
are being maintained for each protected monument with detailed documentation of 
all conservation efforts. 
 
43.8  CAG Recommendation: 
43.8.1 There should be detailed guidelines on management of ‘living’ monuments. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.8.2 The need is felt for such guidelines. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 

22 
43.8.3 The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for 
framing of such guidelines. 
 
43.9  CAG Recommendation: 
43.9.1  Documentation on ‘non-living’ monuments should be properly maintained 
to curb instances of unauthorised possession and use. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.9.2  The need is felt for the documentation of non-living monuments in view of 
prevention of misuse. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.9.3  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry 
for such documentation on non -living monuments, in view of the fact that the CAG 
Report highlighted the need for this about 9 years ago. 
 
43.10  CAG Recommendation: 
43.10.1 The ASI should develop a centralised and digitised data base of antiquities 
to document all details of antiquities stored at different locations. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.10.2 Noted for action. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.10.3 The Committee is surprised to note the reply furnished by the 
Ministry, after 9 years have passed since the CAG Report was laid before the 
Parliament. The Committee may be apprised of the specif ic action taken  by the 
Ministry in this regard, at the earliest. 
43.11  CAG Recommendation: 
43.11.1 There is a need for a more concerted approach for retrieval of Indian art 
objects stolen or illegally exported to other countries. The ASI, as the nodal agency for 

23 
this purpose needs to be more proactive and vigilant in its efforts and the Ministry needs 
to develop an aggressive strategy for the same. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.11.2 Kindly see the data on the Antiquities which are retrieved during last three 
years.  
1. Year 2020- 8 Antiquities  
2. Year 2021-159 Antiquities  
3. Year 2022-till 30th April -29 Antiquities  
Data shows that ASI is proactive for the retrieval of Antiquities of Indian origin 
from foreign countries. A number of retrieval cases are in pipeline and under progress. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.11.3 The Committee notes that the number of antiquities retrieved are 
scant in comparison to the huge number of antiques smuggled out from country . 
The Committee recommends the ASI and Ministry may give wide publicity to the 
theft of antiquities as soon as it t akes place through newspaper ad vertisements etc. 
because such publicity will act as deterrent to buyers who may otherwise not know 
that it is stolen property.  
43.11.4 The Committee notes that the number of antiquities retrieved are not 
even the tip of the  iceberg in comparison to the huge number of antiques smuggled 
out from country.   One of the reasons for the vulnerability of Indian antiques for 
smuggling is the lack of database on the antiques in different parts of the country.  
This drawback has not b een rectified even after the CAG pointed it out nearly a 
decade before. The stolen idols and antiques are auctioned at auctions organized by 
global auction houses but again as pointed out by the CAG, the ASI never 
participates or collects information on Indian antiques put on sale in global auctions 
as there is no explicit provision in the AAT 1972.  The Antiquities Act also does not 
have any penal provisions which could be a deterrent.   The Committee recommends 
the ASI and Ministry may give wide publicity  to the theft of antiquities as soon as it 

24 
takes place through newspaper advertisements etc. because such publicity will act as 
deterrent to buyers who may otherwise not know that it is stolen property.  
 
43.12  CAG Recommendation: 
43.12.1 The Ministry should take immediate steps to resolve manpower shortages 
especially in the crucial cadres engaged in Conservation related works. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.12.2 The vacancies in Conservation cadre are being reported to UPSC/SSC. 
Letter for NOC has already been sent to DoPT (Surplus Cell). 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.12.3 The Committee recommends that ASI should factor in the time it 
takes for the recruitment process on average, and report anticipated human 
resource requirements in advance so that vacancies do not remain unfilled for years 
on account of slow recruitment by UPSC/SSC. 
 
43.13  CAG Recommendation: 
43.13.1 There should be regular monitoring of existing encroachment cases by the 
Ministry at the highest level. Encroachment by State Government agencies or other 
Government of India agencies should be sorted out in a time bound manner by raising 
the matter at higher levels. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.13.2 For removal of encroachment, action is taken as per provisions of the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 
by the Circle offices of ASI. Further Demolition Orders are issued for its removal 
through District Administration. In every case, State Government‟s higher officers are 
also informed for effective action. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 

25 
43.13.3 The Committee recommends that fixed timelines should be put in 
place for carrying out effective action on -ground to tackle encroachments at the 
earliest and any delays may immediately be taken up at higher levels. 
Accountability may be fixed on both Central/State officials for time -bound action 
for removal of encroachment at Centrally Protected Monuments. 
 
43.14  CAG Recommendation: 
43.14.1 There should be a security plan for each monument, taking into account 
its location, area, structure, footfall and other vulnerabilities. This exercise should be 
performed in house by the ASI to ensure coverage of ground level realities. 
 Reply of the Ministry: 
43.14.2  A meeting chaired  by the Director General, ASI on 06.12.2021 on 
enhancement of security surveillance of Centrally Protected Monument under ASI was 
held with IIT, Delhi. Pursuant to this, the Security Assessment for Centrally Protected 
Monuments is being done in collaborati on with Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), 
Delhi. The deployment of security guards, surveillance, budgetary requirements etc shall 
be reviewed for implementation once the report submitted by IIT, Delhi. Prior to this 
meeting, A Committee under the Chai rmanship of Additional Secretary (Culture) also 
assessed the details of security arrangements in ASI during the meeting held on 
21.07.2014. 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee: 
43.14.3  The Committee is concerned to note that out of the 3693 Centrally 
Protected Monuments, security guards are posted at only 248 CPMs/sites/museums 
i.e. less than about 6.7 percent of the total number of CPMs. The Committee notes 
with concern that out of the total requirement of 7000 personnel for protection of 
Monuments, the Government could provide only 2578 security personnel at 248 
locations due to budgetary constraints. The Committee observes that budgetary 
constraints should not be an excuse for not prov iding security guards to protect our 
rich cultural heritage. It is the bounden duty of the Government of the day to 

26 
protect our cultural heritage sites. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
budget may be provided by the Government to appoint 7000 pers onnel for 
protection of the Monuments which may be later altered as per the study conducted 
by IIT, Delhi. In view of this worrying state of affairs, the Committee is of the strong 
view that the budgetary allocation available with the Ministry/ASI for safe guarding 
our Centrally Protected Monuments needs a serious relook. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry/ASI may conduct an urgent thorough assessment of 
the security requirements and budgetary allocation required for the same and a 
strong case may be  made to the Ministry of Finance requesting allocation of 
additional funds for this purpose so as to ensure a basic state of protection for all 
Centrally Protected Monuments across the country to preserve them for generations 
to come. 
 
***  

27 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
The Committee observes that the performance audit of the CAG had included a joint 
physical inspection, along with ASI, of 1655 monuments and sites out of the 3678 CPMs 
and sites spread nationwide.  The 24 monument s which are reported to be untraceable are 
from this sample of 1655 monuments.  The Committee has perused the list of 24 
untraceable monuments submitted by the Ministry and it is perturbed to find that the 
Barakhamba Cemetery in the very heart of the Capit al city is among the untraceable 
monuments.  If even monuments in the Capital city cannot be maintained properly, it does 
not bode well for monuments in remote places in the country. Upon query of the Committee, 
the Ministry has informed that no further st udy of the remaining monuments has been 
undertaken for ascertaining how many more monuments are missing from the total number of 
3693 CPMs.  The Committee is perturbed to note that having found out that at least 24 
monuments are untraceable out of the samp le of monuments studied, no further surveys were 
conducted for the remaining monuments, even nearly a decade after the original study.   
(Para 9) 
The Committee acknowledges the steps taken by ASI to retrace the monuments that were 
deemed to be missing by C AG in its 2013 Performance Audit but feels that the same 
reflects at the questionable state of protection and preservation of monuments, with ASI 
being unaware of the physical untraceability of several of the Centrally Protected 
Monuments under its ambit.  The Committee recommends that the ASI immediately 
undertake a survey of the remaining CPMs which were not inspected in the CAG Audit 
survey and ascertain whether there are any other missing monuments in the country apart 
from the 24 monuments of the original survey.   The Committee further recommends that a 
physical survey of all the Centrally Protected Monuments must mandatorily be carried out 
by ASI from time to time as per a fixed time schedule. Digital log books may be maintained 
which may contain text ual and photographic/video record of the state of physical 
preservation of the monument, exact location coordinates and clearly demarcated 
prohibited and regulated areas in the vicinity of the monument. These digital records may 
be made easily accessible t o the general public to avoid any ambiguities and details may 
also be published regarding the date on which the last survey was conducted, due date for 

28 
the next survey and the contact details of the ASI officials in -charge of maintaining and 
protecting the monument.   
(Para 10) 
The Committee further notes that out of the 92 monuments declared ―missing‖ by the 
CAG, 42 monuments have been identified due to efforts made by the ASI and out of the 
remaining 50 monuments, 14 are affected by rapid urbanisation, 12  are submerged by 
reservoir/dams while the location of the remaining 24 is untraceable.  The Committee feels 
that the distinction made by the Ministry regarding the monuments lost to 
urbanisation/reservoirs and 24 monuments which are untraceable is an acad emic 
distinction since monuments lost to urbanisation/reservoirs are as irrecoverable as the ones 
which are presently untraceable with scant hope of being found in future.  Moreover, the 
fact that the ASI had been unable to prevent the loss of the 14 monum ents to urbanisation 
and 12 to reservoirs/dams and only located them after the study by CAG suggests that the 
ASI had no cognisance of these monuments prior to the study. The number of monuments 
lost from public viewing must therefore be held to be 50 taki ng into account those lost to 
urbanisation or reservoirs.  The ASI has assured that the remaining 42 of the 92 
monuments exist physically but the Committee would like to know whether these 
monuments exist in their entirety and undamaged or whether the ASI has only managed to 
locate some remains and ruins of such monuments.   
(Para 11) 
The Ministry has stated that there is no term called ―Missing Monuments‖ in the AMASR 
Act and the term only came into existence as it was used by the Audit team on their Report. 
The Committee opines that the AMASR Act provides for the preservation and protection 
of ancient historical monuments and it would have been inconsistent to include the concept 
of ―Missing Monuments‖ in the Act.  That the situation warrants the use of su ch phrases 
only serves to underline the apathy of the Ministry and ASI regarding the preservation of 
our historical monuments.  The Ministry has also stated that the exercise of removing the 
untraceable monuments under Section 35 of the AMASR Act has not b een initiated by the 
ASI as there are chances that some of these monuments shall be traced out in near future. 
The Committee observes that Section 35 of the AMASR Act, 1958 has the provision to issue 
notification only for such CPMs which have as per the op inion of the Central Government 

29 
have ceased to be of national importance. The monuments which have become 
―untraceable‖ have become so due to official apathy and may not have ceased to be of 
national importance had they been existing.  The situation of a ― Missing Monument‖ 
cannot be automatically equated with loss of its historical importance.  The Committee 
recommends that the Untraceable Monuments may not be removed from the list of 
Centrally Protected Monuments by taking recourse to Section 35 as that Se ction provides 
the exclusion only of such monuments which have in the opinion of the Central 
Government ceased to be of national importance.   In fact, there is the danger that in case 
of such removal, there would be no imperative to find the untraceable m onument and it 
would be well and truly lost to posterity. Since untraceable monuments also cannot 
continue to be on the Protected list, the Committee recommends that the list of Untraceable 
Monuments may be maintained as such and if necessary, the AMASR Act may be amended 
to include this terminology.   
(Para 12) 
The Committee observes that the CAG audit had pointed out that the Ministry through the 
ASI had not conducted a comprehensive survey/review to identify monuments which were 
of national importance for inclusion in the list of CPMs.  Similarly, there were no  efforts to 
identify those monuments which had lost the stature of national importance over a period 
of time.  The Committee is dismayed to note that even a decade after the CAG Audit 
Report,  the Ministry and the ASI are yet to conduct a comprehensive sur vey to identify 
monuments which are of national importance or of those which had lost their stature of 
national importance. The Committee urges the Ministry and ASI to conduct surveys to 
include monuments of national importance and also those which have lo st their importance 
over time.  This would ensure that the resources of the Ministry and ASI are utilised  in a 
justified manner for deserving monuments  and are not diverted to protecting those which 
are no longer of national importance.  
(Para 13) 
The Co mmittee further recommends that the Ministry of Culture and ASI should 
undertake a survey of all the 3693 Centrally Protected Monuments to ensure that they are 
in existence and to provide adequate maintenance and protection.  
(Para 14) 

30 
The Committee feels that a thorough review of the AMASR Act in consultation with all 
stakeholders and State Governments, is the need of the hour. The Committee, therefore, 
appreciates the process initiated by the Ministry of Culture to amend the AMASR Act.  The 
Committee agrees with the view that having the same limits for all monuments for 
prohibited area and regulated area for restricting/regulating construction -related activities 
near the monument, is not a practical approach as the requirement for such l imitations 
could vary a lot depending on various factors specific to each monument. The Committee, 
therefore, feels that the upcoming amendment which provides for such monument -specific 
prohibited and regulated areas is much needed and hopes that once the amendment is 
passed, all necessary steps are taken to ensure that the monument -specific limits are 
decided upon for each Centrally Protected Monument at the earliest. The Committee notes 
that the ASI would be surveying all 3693 monuments while delineating monument specific 
protected and regulated limits and desires that a Report of the survey may be submitted to 
the Committee. However, the provisions of the Act may be strictly adhered to in terms of 
the prohibited areas around the monument and even Governme nt officials violating the 
provisions should be prosecuted. 
(Para 17) 
The Committee reiterates the following recommendation made in para 39 of its 311 th 
Report on ‗Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments‘:  
The Committee fails to see why a person living in the Regulated Area of a CPM should 
be required to seek permission from the Competent Authority under the AMASR Rules 
for carrying out innocuous maintenance activities such as filling of cracks, 
whitewashing, replacement of windows etc. The Committee feels that such uncalled-for 
interference makes lives harder for people living nearby the monuments and could 
slowly cause feelings of anguish towards the monument itself. Given the large number 
of monuments across the country and the limited budgetary resources available with 
the Government, it is pertinent that people residing near the monuments are 
encouraged to look after the monuments and protect them. Besides, placing such 
unnecessary curbs and implementing them is  a wastage of limited Government 
resources and turns the focus away from where it should be - actually protecting and 

31 
preserving the monument itself. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may undertake a thorough review of the AMASR Act an d Rules and omit any 
provisions that provide for seeking permissions for minor works where the same is not 
actually needed and streamline the process for applying for permission in case where 
the same is actually needed. Steps may urgently be taken to make  it possible for the 
entire process for seeking permission for construction activities in prohibited and 
regulated areas, to be completed online so as to not cause any hassle to bona fide 
residents living near the monuments. 
(Para 18) 
Assessment of security requirements at Centrally Protected Monuments 
The Committee is concerned to note that out of the 3693 Centrally Protected Monuments, 
security guards are posted at only 248 CPMs/sites/museums i.e. less than about 6.7 percent 
of the total number of CPMs. The Committee notes with dismay that out of the total 
requirement of 7000 personnel for protection of Monuments, the Government could 
provide only 2578 security personnel at 248 locations due to budgetary constraints. The 
Committee observes that budg etary constraints should not be an excuse for not providing 
security guards to protect our rich cultural heritage. It is the bounden duty of the 
Government of the day to protect our cultural heritage sites. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that budget may be provided by the Government to appoint 7000 personnel 
for protection of the Monuments or as per the study conducted by IIT, Delhi. In view of 
this worrying state of affairs, the Committee is of the strong view that the budgetary 
allocation available with the Ministry/ASI for safeguarding our Centrally Protected 
Monuments needs a serious relook. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI 
may conduct an urgent thorough assessment of the security requirements and budgetary 
allocation required for the same and a strong case may be made to the Ministry of Finance 
requesting allocation of additional funds for this purpose so as to ensure a basic state of 
protection for all Centrally Protected Monuments across the country to preserve them for 
generations to come. The Committee also recommends that the local Panchayats and police 
may be involved in safeguarding the monuments and if necessary, the AMASR Act may be 
amended in this regard.  
(Para 22) 

32 
It has also come to the notice of the Committee that various  important historical 
monuments and sites such as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalam village, Adoni Taluka; 
Kethavaram Rock Arts and Belum Caves in Kurnool etc. which, although not under the 
list of Centrally Protected Monuments, are of high historical signific ance but devoid of any 
security guards and proper road connectivity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may urgently make provisions for posting security guards at these sites and 
adequate measures may be taken for promotion of tourism at the same, in coordination 
with the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Culture may coordinate with 
the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and State Public Works Department to 
ensure proper road/highway connectivity to these important hi storical sites in order to 
allow tourists to reach these sites. 
(Para 23) 
The Committee takes note of the existing framework and recommends that in the 
upcoming amendment of the AMASR Act being worked upon by the Ministry, strong 
provisions may be incorporated for fixing accountability of concerned Government officials 
to ensure that necessary steps are taken timely for tackling encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments. The concerned officials should be liable to be prosecuted in case of 
gross negligen ce of their duties with regard to tackling encroachment of CPMs. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may examine the powers given to 
District Forest Officers (DFOs) under The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and consider 
granting similar powe rs to ASI officials in order to effectively curb the issue of 
encroachment of Centrally Protected Monuments. 
(Para 25) 
The Committee feels that State Level Co -ordination Committees are a necessary 
instrument for coordination between the Ministry of Culture  and respective State 
Governments for resolving important issues such as removal of encroachment of 
monuments. The Committee may be apprised of the number of States where such State 
Level Co -ordination Committee has not been formed so far and the steps tak en by the 
Ministry in order to ensure the formation of these Co-ordination Committees. 
(Para 28) 

33 
The Committee notes that a mere Rs. 3.33 crores budgetary allocation has been made to 
ASI for the conservation and preservation of unprotected monuments during  the current 
financial year 2022 -23. The Committee strongly feels that this amount seems to be grossly 
insufficient given the large number of unprotected historical monuments in the country, as 
well as a large number of State Protected Monuments which ofte n face gross neglect by the 
respective State Governments. The Committee is of the view that the protection and 
preservation of historical monuments other than those already under the protection of 
Central and State Governments, should also be looked after by the Archaeological Survey 
of India, at least to a basic extent.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may allocate a special budget for protection, preservation and restoration, 
wherever necessary, of unprotected/neglected historical monuments across the country. 
(Para 30) 
The Committee notes that no proposal exists at present with ASI for empowering local 
bodies to provide security guards to the unprotected monuments. The Committee feels that 
given their proximity and cultural ties with local monuments, local bodies are best suited to 
look after the protection of historical monuments especially those which are not under the 
list of Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs). Empowering local bodies to provide 
security guards at such monuments  for their protection can go a long way in ensuring that 
these monuments are preserved in their present state for generations to come. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that provisions to empower the local bodies 
for the protection of historica l monuments and to make them accountable may be 
incorporated in the amendment of the AMASR Act that is being worked upon by the 
Ministry. 
(Para 33) 
The Committee feels that there is a scope for using satellite imagery to monitor the 
Centrally Protected Mon uments (CPMs) across the country for encroachment and any 
illegal construction activities in the prohibited and regulated areas of the same. Satellite 
imagery should also be used to try and trace the monuments which are untraceable at 
present and to ensure  that no existing CPMs become untraceable in the future. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may approach ISRO and, if feasible, sign a 

34 
Memorandum of Understanding with ISRO to utilize ISRO satellite imagery for the above 
mentioned purposes. 
(Para 35) 
Vacancies in ASI 
Committee notes that since Monument Attendants are responsible for day to day cleaning 
of the monu ments as well as its security, 2500 vacancies in this cadre is an incredible 
number and shows that most of the monuments are not being secured or maintained on a 
day to day basis.   The Committee feels that while the ASI presents its staff shortage as one 
of the reasons for its apathy in maintaining monuments, it appears that the delay in filling 
up vacancies is one of the main reasons fo r the pathetic state of monuments in the country . 
The Committee recommends that vacancies of Monument Attendants and Guards should 
be filled up on a war footing so that none of the CPMs is left unguarded and unmaintained. 
The Committee desires to be inform ed about the recruitment status of Monument 
Attendants. The Committee does not find any reason that vacancies should be allowed to 
accumulate in thousands before action for recruitment is taken. Vacancies at higher levels 
may also be filled up at the earli est. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
take immediate and effective action to appoint the remaining 500 vacancies of Monument 
Attendants. The Committee recommends that the ASI may also explore the idea of 
appointing ex-servicemen to guard the monuments. 
(Para 37) 
With regard to vacancies existing in ASI, the Committee reiterates the following 
recommendation made in para 35 of its 315 th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of 
the Ministry of Culture: 
…The Committee feels that the vacancy details reflect a very pathetic state of 
affairs in all the organizations of the Ministry. In the Archaeology Cadre of 
ASI, against the total sanctioned strength of 420, the vacant positions are 166, 
similarly in the Conservation Cadre, against the total strength of 918, there is a 
mammoth vacancy of 452 positions. The situation is not any better in other 
Cadres of ASI or other organisations of the Ministry. The Committee thus finds 
it difficult to understand how the Mi nistry can ensure the efficiency of its 

35 
organizations and manage to meet the present human resource needs of the 
respective organisations, leave alone there being any scope for new initiatives 
by the organisations. The Committee strongly recommends that th e Ministry 
may set up a foolproof mechanism in place to ensure that the staffing 
requirements of all its organizations are met at all times, so as to enable them to 
carry out their mandate in letter and spirit. 
(Para 38) 
Permitting Religious Activities in Religious Historical Monuments 
The Committee feels that several historical monuments across the country hold immense 
religious significance to a large number of people and allowing pujas/worship/certain 
religious activities at such monuments can fulfill le gitimate aspirations of the people. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may explore the possibility of permitting 
pujas/worship/certain religious activities at historical Centrally Protected Monuments of 
religious significance, subject to the con dition that it can be established that such activities 
would not have any detrimental effect on the state of conservation and preservation of the 
monument. 
(Para 40) 
OTHER OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Tourism along with the Ministry of Culture 
and ASI has promoted the concept of ―Adopt a Heritage‖ projects which aims to develop 
monuments, tourist and heritage sites across India, by inviting corporate entities,  public 
sector companies, NGOs and individuals to take up the responsibility of development and 
maintenance of tourist facilities and amenities at heritage sites.  The Committee 
appreciates the initiative of the Ministries and ASI as a step in the right di rection and 
opines that the coronavirus pandemic has showed that the government cannot depend only 
on income from mass tourism to maintain historical monuments. The Committee 
recommends that the public may similarly be involved in maintenance and developme nt of 
lesser known monuments through heritage walks and tours, local heritage festivals and 
promotion of niche tourism. The assistance of NGOs and societies like INTACH may be 
taken for tracing missing monuments. There are many monuments which are central to 

36 
local folklore and legends and incorporating the assistance of local 
Panchayats/Municipalities in preservation of monuments in their localities would prove to 
be beneficial both in promoting tourism and stirring up the interest of people in their 
history and culture.  
(Para 41) 
The Committee finds that the website of ASI is poorly designed with many features as yet 
inoperative and a general lack of information on the work of the ASI as well as the built 
cultural heritage of India.  The Committee recommen ds that the ASI highlight the CPMs 
and the lesser known monuments on its website and stimulate the interest of the public 
regarding their maintenance as well as raise the profile of Missing Monuments among the 
general public.   
(Para 42) 
Action taken by th e Ministry on certain recommendations made in the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Performance Audit of Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities (Report No. 18 of 2013) 
The Committee is dismayed to note that the CAG Audit had found that no Inspection Notes 
were available without which it is impossible to ascertain when a particular site was last 
visited.  The Committee notes that the Ministry and ASI have informed that Inspection 
Notes are now regularly drawn and w orks done are published in the ASI -Annual Review.  
The Committee recommends that the Annual Review or Reports of the ASI may be 
prominently displayed on the website of the ASI for information of the general public. The 
Committee may be apprised of the peri odicity of such inspection by ASI officials for the 
various Centrally Protected Monuments and whether photographic evidence is collected 
alongside inspection notes. The Committee recommends that the ASI may categorize the 
monuments into different classes of importance and the periodicity for official inspection of 
such sites may then be decided upon.  
(Para 43.1.3) 
The Committee may be apprised of detailed guidelines, if any, issued by the Ministry/ASI 
under the AMASR Act in this regard. 
(Para 43.2.3) 

37 
The Committee is unhappy to note that the recommendation of the CAG nearly a decade 
back for a centralized database of the most important document of notification of the 
CPMs has still not been carried out.  
(Para 43.3.3) 
The Committee notes that it has been 9 years since the publication of the CAG Report. The 
Committee may be apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry to address 
ambiguities in factual information related to the monuments by publishing correct, 
discrepancy-free information regarding the same in public domain. 
(Para 43.4.3) 
The Committee records its displeasure with the slow progress of the work of preparation of 
Heritage Bye Laws. 
(Para 43.5.3) 
The Committee feels that while all Centrally Protected Monuments are of unique cultural 
importance, World Heritage Sites are amongst the most important Centrally Protected 
Monuments and therefore, their maintenance and security requirements deserve special 
attention. The Committee recommends that due and appropriate budgetary allocation may 
be made for the protection and maintenance of World Heritage Sites and special 
monitoring mechanism may be put in place for the same. 
(Para 43.6.3) 
The Committee recommends that the conservation policy may be updated from time to 
time, incorporating necessary changes and new developments in the field of archaeological 
and historical conservation into the policy. The Committee desires to be apprised of the 
monitoring mechanism in place to ensure that log books are being maintained for each 
protected monument with detailed documentation of all conservation efforts. 
(Para 43.7.3) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for framing of 
such guidelines. 
(Para 43.8.3) 
 

38 
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry  for such 
documentation on non -living monuments, in view of the fact that the CAG Report 
highlighted the need for this about 9 years ago. 
(Para 43.9.3) 
The Committee is surprised to note the reply furnished by the Ministry, after 9 years have 
passed since the CAG Report was laid before the Parliament. The Committee may be 
apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry in this regard, at the earliest. 
(Para 43.10.3) 
The Committee notes that the number of antiquities retrieved are scant in comparison t o 
the huge number of antiques smuggled out from country. The Committee recommends the 
ASI and Ministry may give wide publicity to the theft of antiquities as soon as it takes place 
through newspaper advertisements etc. because such publicity will act as de terrent to 
buyers who may otherwise not know that it is stolen property.  
(Para 43.11.3) 
The Committee notes that the number of antiquities retrieved are not even the tip of the 
iceberg in comparison to the huge number of antiques smuggled out from country .   One of 
the reasons for the vulnerability of Indian antiques for smuggling is the lack of database on 
the antiques in different parts of the country.  This drawback has not been rectified even 
after the CAG pointed it out nearly a decade before. The sto len idols and antiques are 
auctioned at auctions organized by global auction houses but again as pointed out by the 
CAG, the ASI never participates or collects information on Indian antiques put on sale in 
global auctions as there is no explicit provision in the AAT 1972.  The Antiquities Act also 
does not have any penal provisions which could be a deterrent.   The Committee 
recommends the ASI and Ministry may give wide publicity to the theft of antiquities as 
soon as it takes place through newspaper advertisements etc. because such publicity will act 
as deterrent to buyers who may otherwise not know that it is stolen property.  
(Para 43.11.4) 
The Committee recommends that ASI should factor in the time it takes for the recruitment 
process on average, and rep ort anticipated human resource requirements in advance so 

39 
that vacancies do not remain unfilled for years on account of slow recruitment by 
UPSC/SSC. 
(Para 43.12.3) 
The Committee recommends that fixed timelines should be put in place for carrying out 
effective action on -ground to tackle encroachments at the earliest and any delays may 
immediately be taken up at higher levels. Accountability may be fixed on both 
Central/State officials for time -bound action for removal of encroachment at Centrally 
Protected Monuments. 
(Para 43.13.3) 
The Committee is concerned to note that out of the 3693 Centrally Protected Monuments, 
security guards are posted at only 248 CPMs/sites/museums i.e. less than about 6.7 percent 
of the total number of CPMs. The Committee notes with concern that out of the total 
requirement of 7000 personnel for protection of Monuments, the Government could 
provide only 2578 security personnel at 248 locations due to bu dgetary constraints. The 
Committee observes that budgetary constraints should not be an excuse for not providing 
security guards to protect our rich cultural heritage. It is the bounden duty of the 
Government of the day to protect our cultural heritage sit es. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that budget may be provided by the Government to appoint 7000 personnel 
for protection of the Monuments which may be later altered as per the study conducted by 
IIT, Delhi. In view of this worrying state of affairs, the Committee is of the strong view that 
the budgetary allocation available with the Ministry/ASI for safeguarding our Centrally 
Protected Monuments needs a serious relook. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry/ASI may conduct an urgent thorough asse ssment of the security requirements 
and budgetary allocation required for the same and a strong case may be made to the 
Ministry of Finance requesting allocation of additional funds for this purpose so as to 
ensure a basic state of protection for all Centrally Protected Monuments across the country 
to preserve them for generations to come. 
(Para 43.14.3) 
***** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

40 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Monday, the 18 th May, 2022 in the Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           -               Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses: - 
*     *     * 
 

41 
 
 *     *     * 
2.   *     *     * 
3.   *     *     * 
4.   *     *     * 
5.   *     *     * 
6.   *     *     * 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(The Committee reassembled after a lunch break) 
  
 Witnesses:- 
 
Ministry of Culture 
i. Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary; 
ii. Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India; 
iii. Shri Janhwij Sharma, Additional Director General, Archaeological Survey of India; and 
iv. Shri T.J. Alone, Joint Director General, Archaeological Survey of India. 
7.   The Chairman welcomed Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Director General, 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and other senior officers from the Ministry and ASI to the 
meeting of the Committee. He asked the Ministry to apprise the Committee about t he 
circumstances under which the 24 monuments became untraceable, steps being taken by the 
Ministry to ensure that no historical monument goes missing in future, existing mechanism to 
prevent rapid urbanization from adversely affecting historical monuments  and the shortcomings 
thereof, efforts made by the ASI to inspect the remaining Centrally Protected Monuments to 
ascertain if there are any more missing monuments, progress made by the Ministry in its major 
schemes and projects for protection of monuments in the year 2022 and the budgetary constraints 
faced thereof, funding and assistance provided for the preservation and protection of Centrally 
Protected Monuments as well as State Protected Monuments, and steps being taken to address 
the shortage of skille d manpower in maintenance and protection of historical monuments. He 
queried whether the ASI has a reliable database of the exact number of protected monuments in 
India and asked the Ministry/ASI to give details of the number of security personnel posted 
across the country for protection of historical monuments as against the actual requirements and 

42 
 
the additional budgetary requirements for the same. He also queried whether local governments 
were involved in providing protection to the monuments in their area of jurisdiction? 
8.  The Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that as per the Performance Audit 
Report of the C&AG submitted to the Parliament on August 23, 2013, 92 monuments were 
reported missing, due to factors such as rapid urbaniza tion, unavailability of proper location 
details in the gazette notification, difficulties in tracing in remote locations, dense forest etc. 
However, out of these 92 monuments, 42 monuments /sites exist physically, and about 14 have 
been affected by urbaniz ation, 12 have been submerged due to dam/reservoir constructions,  and 
only 24 are still untraceable. The Secretary also informed that the process of amendments to the 
AMASR Act was in full swing and one of the major amendment was that the protection and 
regulation limits would now specific to each monument, depending on its historical and cultural 
importance and other factors.   A special cell has been set up in the ASI to survey all protected 
monuments to delineate the limits.  
9.   Queries and issues were raised by the Members regarding preservation of stolen statues, 
encroachment and safety of the monuments etc. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the 
Committee that the Ministry keeps the record of details of returned and recovered statues and 
that the Ministry has also published a comprehensive report on the excavation of the town of 
Dwarka. 
10.   The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the 
Committee. The Chairman directed them to furnish written replies  to queries/points/issues raised 
by him and the Members of the Committee. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
11.  *      *     * 
12.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.   The meeting adjourned at 3:59 P.M. 

43 
 
XXII 
TWENTY SECOND MEETING 
  
          The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 31 st May, 2022 in Committee 
Room ‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           -    Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Tapir Gao 
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
9. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
11. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B, Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director  
             Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of t he 
Committee. He informed them that  agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  two 
draft reports on the subjects: - (i) Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Protection of 
Monuments in India; and (ii)  *    *1    *.  
2.   The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes.   The Committee authorised the Chairman 
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 

44 
 
to make necessary corrections in the report and present the reports to the Hon' ble Chairman 
during the intersession period. 
3.     *      *     * 
 Witnesses: - 
*     *     * 
  
         *     *     * 
2.      *     *     * 
3.      *     *     * 
4.      *     *     * 
5.      *     *     * 
6.      *     *2     * 
7.      *     *     * 
8.      *     *     * 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9.    *     *     * 
10.  *     *     * 
11.         The meeting adjourned at 1.06 P.M. 
  
                                                                                                                       
   
 
                                                           
2 * Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES

 
ANNEXURE - A 
Abstract of Monuments/Sites under Central and State Protection 
 
Sl No. Name of   State and U. T. No. of   Centrally 
Protected 
Monuments/Sites 
No. of State   Protected 
Monuments/Sites 
1.   Andaman and Nicobar   Island (U. 
T.) 
- - 
2.   Andhra Pradesh  135 280 
3.   Arunachal Pradesh  03 08 
4.   Assam  55 126 
5.   Bihar  70 54 
6.   Chhattisgarh  46 58 
7.   Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli (U.T.)  
11 - 
8.   Goa  21 51 
9.   Gujarat  203 317 
10.   Haryana  91 39 
11.   Himachal Pradesh  40 08 
12.   Jammu & Kashmir (U.T.)    56 55 
13.   Jharkhand  13 03 
14.   Karnataka  506 799 
15.   Kerala  29 183 
16.   Ladakh (U.T.)  15 02 
17.   Lakshadeep (U.T.) - - 
18.   Madhya Pradesh  291 526 
19.   Maharashtra 286 376 
20.   Manipur  01 63 
21.   Meghalaya  08 04 
22.   Mizoram  01 81 
23.   Nagaland  04 - 
24.   N.C.T. Delhi 173 19 
25.   Odisha  80 214 
26.   Puducherry (U.T.)  07 - 
27.   Punjab  33 94 
28.   Rajasthan  163 385 
29.   Sikkim 03 - 
30.   Telangana  08 346 
31.   Tamilnadu  412 96 
32.   Tripura  08 02 
33.   Uttar Pradesh  743 161 
34.   Uttarakhand  43 47 
35.   West Bengal 135 109 
TOTAL 3693 4508 
  
45

 
ANNEXURE-B 
 
  LIST OF MONUMENTS/SITES WHICH ARE UNTRACEABLE 
  
Assam 
1. Guns of Emperor Sher Shah, Sadia, Tinsukia  
Arunachal Pradesh  
2. The Ruins of Copper Temple, Paya, Lohit  
Haryana  
3. Kos Minar, Mujesar, Faridabad 
4. Kos Minar, Shahabad, Kurukshetra 
Uttarakhand  
5. Kutumbari Temple, Dwarahat, Almora 
Delhi  
6. Bara Khamba Cemetery, Delhi 
7. Inchla Wali Gumti, Mubarakpur Kotla  
Madhya Pradesh 
 8. Rock Inscription, Satna  
Maharashtra 
9. Old European Tomb, Pune 
10. One Buruj, Agarkot  
Rajasthan 
11. Inscription in Fort, Nagar, Tonk 
12. 12th Century Temple, Baran 
 Uttar Pradesh 
13. Ruins of three small linga temple circle 1000 AD,   Ahugi, Mirzapur 
14. Three sites with megaliths on the western and north   eastern toes of the 
hill, Chandauli 
15. Tablet on treasury building, Varanasi 
16. Telia Nala Buddhist ruins, Varanasi 
17. A Banyan grove containing traces of ancient   building, Amavey, Ballia 
18. Closed Cemetery, Katra Naka, Banda 
19. Gunner Burkill‟s Tomb, Mehroni, Lalitpur  
20. Three Tomb, Lucknow-Faizabad Road, Lucknow  
21. Cemeteries at miles 6 and 7, Jahraila Road, Lucknow 
22. Cemetery at Gaughat, Lucknow 
23. Large ruined site called Sandi-Khera, Pali,   Shahabad, Hardoi 
West Bengal 
24. Ruins of fort,    Bamanpukur, Nadia 
  
46

 
ANNEXURE-C 
 
DETAILS OF CISF AND PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS (SIS) DEPLOYED ON 
VARIOUS CENTRALLY PROTECTED MONUMENTS OF ASI 
 
 
 The deployment details of security personnel as well as approx monthly expenditure 
occurred on Security is as follows: 
 
Eastern Region 
S. No. Name of 
Circle 
Name of 
Monument/Sites/Museums/ 
Establishments of ASI 
Authorized 
Manpower 
Remar
ks 
Guard 
Arme
d 
Guard 
1 
Bhubhneshw
ar 
Sun Temple, Konark 22 8  
2 Udaygiri&Khandagiri Caves, 
Bhubneshwar 0 4  
3 Rajarani Temple, Bhubneshwar 3 4  
4 Ratnagiri Monuments, Ratnagiri 6 4  
5 Lalitagiri Monuments, Lalitgiri 6 0  
6 
Museums 
Archaeological Site Museum, 
Konark 4 6  
7 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Ratnagiri 4 3  
8 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Lalitgiri 4 3  
Total 48 32 80 
9 
GUWAHATI  
Ahom Raja Palace, 
GarhgaonDistt, Sibsagar 6 0  
10 Karenghar of Ahom Kings, 
Sibsagar 4 0  
11 Ranghar Pavilion, Jaisagar 4 4  
12 Bisnudol, Joysagar 3 0  
13 Remains of Fort 
Dimapur,Nagaland 3 0  
14 Group of Four Maidams 
Charaideo, DisttSibsagar 0 4  
15 Museums Archaeological Site Museum, Sri 
Surya Pahar 4 4  
Total 24 12 36 
16 
KOLKATA 
Cooch Behar Palace, Koch Bihar 10 4  
17 Dargah of Jafar Khan Ghazi 
Masjid Triveni, Hooghly (WB) 
6 3  
47

 
18 Bihnupur Group of Temples, 
Bishnupur 
24 8  
19 Museums Koch Bihar Palace Museum, Koch 
Bihar 0 4  
20  Archaeological Site Museum, 
Tamluq 0 3  
Total 40 22 62 
21       
RAIGANJ Hazarduari Palace, Murishidabad 24 5  
22 
 
Rajpath Site Gosanimari 2 0  
23 Rabdentse the Ancient Capital of 
Sikkim 2 0  
24 Coronation throne at Narbugang 2 0  
25 Dubdi Monastry 2 0  
26 Museums Hazarduari Palace Museum, 
Murishidabad 0 8  
Total 32 13 45 
27 
PATNA 
Remains of Patliputra, Kumrahar 
Patna 0 4  
28 Ancient site of Vaishali, Kolhua 4 0  
29 Excavated remains at Nalanda 20 8  
30 Ruins of Vikramshila, Antichak 4 4  
31 Sher Shah Suri's Tomb, Sasaram 20 4  
32 
Museums 
Archaeological Site Museum, 
Bodh Gaya 14 4  
33 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Nalanda 4 4  
34 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Vaishali 0 4  
35 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Vikramshila 4 4  
Total 70 36 106 
36 
SARNATH 
Old Fort (Shahi Fort), Jaunpur 8 4  
37 Lord Cornwallis Tomb, Ghazipur 3 0  
38 Observatory Man Singh (Man 
Mahal) Varanasi 3 0  
39 Excavated remains at Sarnath 8 8  
40 
Museums 
Archaeological Site Museum, 
Sarnath 4 7  
41 Virtual Experimental Museum at 
observatory Man Mahal 6 0  
Total 32 19 51  
42 
RANCHI 
Ancient site at Banisagar 6 0  
43 Shiv Temple at Lohagarh 6 0  
44 Jama Masjid at Hadaf, Distt. 
Sahibganj 3 0  
48

 
45 Palace and Temple Complex 
Navratangarh, Gumla 3 0  
Total 18 0 18  
46 
AIZAWAL  
Sculptures and Rockcut relic of 
UnakutiTirtha, North Tripura 13 0  
47 Ancient remains Baxanagar, West 
Tripura 4 0  
48 Manhirs and Caves at Vangchhia, 
Mizoram 5 0  
Total 22 0 22 
Grand Total 286 134 420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49

 
 
WESTERN REGION 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Circle 
Name of Monument/Sites/Museums/ 
Establishments of ASI 
Authorized 
Manpower Remar
ks Guar
d 
Armed 
Guard 
1 
AURANGA
BAD 
Ajanta Caves 42 0   
2 Ellora Caves 50 0   
3 Bibi ka Maqbara, Aurangabad 19 0   
4 Daulatabad Fort, Aurangabad 4 0   
5 Aurangabad Caves, Aurangabad 3 0   
6 Pandelena Caves, Aurangabad 8 0   
Total 126 0 126  
7 
JAIPUR 
  
Deeg Palace, Deeg 7 1   
8 ASI AKBARI MASJID AMBER 
                        3 0   
9 Krishna Vilas Distt. Baran 4 0   
10 RanthamboreFort,Madhopur 6 0   
11 Chand Baori at Abhaneri 3 0   
12 ASI HarshnathMandir Sikar 2 3   
13 Shiva Temple, Neelkanth, (Alwar) 4 3   
14 Aabhaneri / Neelkanth 8 0   
15 Bhangarh Fort 15 0   
16 Various Monuments at Kota 12 0   
17 MUSEUM  Archaeological Site Museum, Kalibangan 4 3   
 Total  68 10  78 
18 
JODHPUR 
Chittaurgarh Fort, Chittaurgarh 24 12   
19 AnasagarBaradari, Ajmer 9 0   
20 Kumbhalgarh Fort, Kumbhalgarh 12 8   
Total  45 20 65  
21 
MUMBAI 
Elephanta Caves 32 0   
22 Kanheri Caves, Kanheri 19 0   
23 Shaniwarwada, Pune 16 0   
24 Agakhan Palace, Pune 10 0   
25 Lenyadri Caves 4 0   
26 Karla Caves 12 0   
27 Bhaja Caves 12 0   
28 Raigad Fort, Raigad 16 0   
29 Kolaba Fort 4 0   
30 Sholapur Fort 4 0   
31 Fort & Old Portuguese Remains 
BasseinDistt. Palghar 4 0   
32 Lohagarh Fort 4 0   
33 Kondiote Caves 4 0   
50

 
34 Janjira Fort 3 0   
35 Shiva Temple, Ambernath 8 0   
 
 Total   152 0  152 
36 
Nagpur 
Circle 
Old High Court, Buildings. 2 0   
37 Gaimukh Temple & Tank Lonar 6 0   
38 Ancient Buddhist remains, Mansar 6 0   
39 Group of Temples, Markanda 3 0   
 Total  17 0 17  
40 
VADODAR
A 
ChampanerPavagadh W.H Site 24 8   
41 Sun Temple, Modhera 12 4   
42 Rani ki Vav, Patan 18 8   
43 Monuments at Ahmedabad 12 0   
44 
MUSEUM  
Archaeological Site Museum, Lothal 4 4   
45 Archaeological Site Museum, Dholavira 8 0   
Total 78 24 102 
46 
RAJKOT 
Ashokan Rock Edicts, Junagadh 3 0  
47 Buddhist Caves, Junagadh 3 0  
48 Baba Pyara Caves,  & Khaprakhodia 
Caves, Junagadh 3 0  
Total 9 0  9 
Grand Total 495 54 549  
 
 
51

 
Northern Region 
S. No. Name of 
Circle 
Name of 
Monument/Sites/Museums/ 
Establishments of ASI 
Authorised 
Manpower CISF 
Remar
ks 
Guar
d 
Armed 
Guard 
1 
Agra 
Agra Fort 45 6 -  
2 FathehpurSikri Monuments 45 8 -  
3 Akbar Tomb, Sikandara, Agra 19 0 -  
4 Mariam's Tomb, Sikandara, Agra 3 0 -  
5 ItimadudDaulah, Agra 14 4 -  
6 Ram Bagh, Agra 2 0 -  
7 Mehtab Bagh, Agra 2 0 -  
8 Taj Mahal, Agra 25 0 279  
9 
MUSEUM  
Taj Museum, Agra 4 0 -  
10 Archl Site Museum, FatehpurSikri 4 0 -  
Total 163 18 279 460 
11 
CHANDIGAR
H 
Sheikh Chilli's Tomb, Thanesar 2 3 -  
12 Suraj Kund 3 0 -  
13 BudhawalaNala, Faridabad 0 3 -  
14 Masque of sarai Ala Vardi Khan 
Gurgaun 1 2 -  
15 Baoli  Gaus Ali Shah Farukha 
Nagar Gurgaun 1 2 -  
16 Jal Mahal, Narnaul 2 0 -  
17 Suraj Kund Masonary Tank, F/bad 3 0 -  
18 Agroha Mount, Agroha 2 0 -  
19 Ruined Quila, Hansi 2 0 -  
20 
Firoz Shah 
Palace,Tehkhana&Gujari Mahal, 
Hissar 
2 0 - 
 
21 Hamayaun Mosque &Lat of 
Firozshah, Faridabad. 2 0 -  
22 Ancient Mound No. I,II,III & V, 
Rakhigarhi 2 0 -  
23 Mohd. Momin&Hazi Jamal Tomb, 
Nakodar 2 0 -  
24 Bhatinda Fort., Bhatinda (Pb) 4 0 -  
25 Sirsa Monument 0 4 -  
Total 28 14 - 42 
26 
DELHI 
JantarMantar, Delhi 8 2 -  
27 Khan I Khana, Delhi 3 0 -  
28 PuranaQila, Delhi 22 9 -  
29 Sultanghari Tomb, Delhi 3 0 -  
30 Tughluqabad Fort, Delhi 20 2 -  
52

 
31 KotlaFeroz Shah, Delhi 12 2 -  
32 Safdarjung Tomb, Delhi 17 3 -  
33 Red Fort, Delhi 50 0 317  
34 Humayun's Tomb, Delhi 41 6 -  
35 QutabMinar, Delhi 55 9 -  
36 HauzKhas Monuments, Delhi 30 2 -  
37 AgarsenkiBaoli 2 0 -  
38 Nafaj Khan Tomb 2 0 -  
39 Kashmiri Gate, Delhi 10 0 -  
40 
MUSEUM  
Archl Site Museum, PuranaQila 1 0 -  
41 Arch Site Museum, Red Fort, Delhi 21 0 -  
42 Archl Site Museum, Salimgarh 2 0 -  
43 Indian War Memorial Museum, 
Red Fort, Delhi 1 0 -  
44 SwatantrataSangramSangrahalaya, 
Museum Red Fort, Delhi 2 0 -  
Total 299 35 317 651 
45 
SHIMLA 
Kangra Fort, Kangra 0 4 -  
46 Rock Cut Temple, Masroor 0 4 -  
47 Kangra Fort Museum, Kangra 4 0 -  
48 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Ropar 0 3 -  
49 Shiv MandirBaijnathKangra 4 0 -  
50 Hidimba Temple , Kullu (HP) 4 0 -  
Total  12 11 - 23 
51 
SRINAGAR 
Ancient Palace complex at 
Ramnagar 3 4 -  
52 Ancient Temple at Martand, 
Anantnag 3 0 -  
53 Avantiswamin Temple, Pulwama 3 0 -  
54 Group of Temple at 
Narang,Ganderwal 3 0 -  
55 Ancient Fort & Samadhi at 
Ramnagar 3 0 -  
56 Group of Temples at Kiramchi 0 4 -  
Total  15 8 - 23 
57 MINI CIRCLE 
LEH Ancient Palace at Leh 8 0 -  
Total  8 0 - 8 
58 
DEHRADUN  
Archaeological Site Museum, 
Jageshwar 0 6 -  
59 Baijnath Temple DistBageshwar 
(Uttrakhand) 0 4 -  
60 Group of Temple Jageshwar , 
DisttAlmora (Uttrakhand) 4 0 -  
53

 
61 Shiv Temple Lakhamandal, 
Dehradun (Uttrakhand) 2 2 -  
Total 6 12 - 18 
62 MEERUT Hastinapur 5 0 -  
Total 5 0 - 05 
Grand Total 536 98 596 1230 
 
Southern Region 
S. 
No. Name of Circle Name of Monument/Sites/Museums/ 
Establishments of ASI 
Authorised 
Manpower Remar
ks Guard Armed 
Guard 
1 
BANGALORE 
Dariya Daulat Bagh, Sriragapatna 22 5   
2 Keshava Temple, Somanathpur 0 4   
3 Tipu Sultan Palace, Bangalore 0 4   
4 Chitradurga Fort, Chitradurga 11 7   
5 Chinnakeshava Temple, Bellure 3 0   
6 Hoyasaleswara Temple, Halebidu 3 0   
7 Fort Manzarabad, Sakelespur 3 0   
8 Fort Kavledurga 3 0   
9 Fort  Madhugiri 3 0   
10 Tipu Sultan Palace 9 3   
11 Medikeri Fort 3 3  
12 MUSEUM  
Archaeological Site Museum, 
Halebidu 4 3   
13 Tipu Sultan Museum, Srirangpattnam 4 3   
Total  68 32 100 
14 Channai Group of Monuments, Mamallapuram 22 8   
15 Fort, Gingee 0 8   
16 MUSEUM  Fort St George Museum, Chennai 4 3   
Total 26 19 45 
17 
Tiruchirapalli  
Fort, Thirumayam 3 0   
18 Fort, Dindigul 3 0   
19 Moovarkoil, Kodumbalur 3 0   
20 Rock Cut Jain Temple, Sittannavasal 4 0   
21 Natural Cavern with inscription 
Eladipattam, Sittannavasal 0 4   
Total  13 04  17 
22 
DHARWAD 
Durga Temple Complex, Aihole 6 4   
23 Jaina&Vaishnava Caves, Badami 16 4   
24 Group of Monuments, Pattadakal 23 8   
25 Gol Gumbaz, Bijapur 23 4   
26 Ibrahim Rouza, Bijapur 3 0   
27 Temple and Sculpture Shed, Lakkundi 0 4   
54

 
28 
MUSEUM  
Archaeological Site Museum, Aihole 4 0   
29 Archaeological Site Museum, Badami 4 3   
30 Archaeological Site Museum, Bijapur 4 3   
Total  83 30  113 
31 
GOA 
Churches of Vehla, Goa 20 4   
32 Archaeological Site Museum, Velha 
Goa 4 4   
Total  24 8 32  
33 
HAMPI 
CIRCLE 
World Heritage site, Hampi 56 12   
34 Bellary Fort, Bellary 11 0   
35 Excavated Site, Kanganhalli 8 4   
36 Bidar Fort 20 4   
37 MUSEUM  Archal Site Museum, Kamlapur 
(Hampi) 4 3   
Total  99 23  122 
38 
HYDERABAD 
Charminar, Hyderabad 8 0   
39 Golconda Fort, Hyderabad 32 8   
40 Fort, Warangal 3 8   
Total  43 16  59 
41 
AMARAVATI 
Maha Stupa and remains, Amaravathi 2 4   
42 Reconstructed monuments at 
Nagarjunakonda 8 4   
43 Four Rock Cut Hindu Temple, 
Undavalli 3 0   
44 The Caves Buddhist monuments, 
Guntupalli 3 0   
45 Rani Mahal Fort, Chandragiri 3 4   
46 Reconstructed monuments at Anupu, 
Nagarjunakonda 8 0   
47 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Amaravati 4 4   
48 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Chandragiri 0 3   
49 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Kondapur 0 3   
50 Archaeological Site Museum, 
Nagarjunakonda 4 4   
Total 35 26  61 
51 
THRISSUR 
Bekal Fort, Pallikkare 0 4   
52 Mattancherry Palace 0 4   
53 MUSEUM  
Mattancherry Palace Museum, 
Mattancherry 0 4   
Total 0 12 12  
Grand Total 391 170 561  
 
55

 
 
 
Central Region 
S. No. Name of 
Circle 
Name of Monument/Sites/Museums/ 
Establishments of ASI 
Authorised 
Manpower Remar
ks Guard Armed 
Guard 
1 
BHOPAL 
Buddhist Caves, Bagh 3 0   
2 The Palace in the Fort, Burhanpur 4 0   
3 Hoshangs Shah's Tomb, Mandu 3 0   
4 Royal Palaces, Mandu 0 4   
5 Roopmati Pavilion, Mandu 4 0   
6 Buddhist monuments, Sanchi 30 0   
7 Gwalior Fort, Gwalior 16 4   
8 Bhimbetka 20 0   
9 Bhojsala 8 0  
10 Sculpture shed Chanderi 3 0   
11 Group of Monuments 
Kadwaha,Chanderi 3 0   
12  Shiv Mandir, Asirgarh, Burhanpur 3 0   
13 Shiv Temple Bhojpur, Raisen 3 0   
14 Bujamandal, Distt. Vidisha 4 0   
15 Raisen Fort, Raisen 3 0   
16 Chanderi Fort 3 0   
17 
MUSEUMS 
Archl Site Museum, Chanderi 4 3   
18 Archaeological Site Museum, Gwalior 4 3   
19 Archaeological Site Museum, Sanchi 4 6   
20 Shiv Puri Museum 7 0   
Total 129 20 149 
      
21 
JABALPUR  
Ajaigarh Fort & Temple, Panna 3 0   
22 Western Group of Temples, Khajuraho 30 12   
23 ChousathYogani Temple, Bheraghat 3 0   
24 Rang Mahal Palace, Hatta, Damoh 3 0  
25 Dulhadev Temple, Khajuraho 3 0   
26 Shiv Temple Kodal, Damoh 3 0  
27 Shiv Temple Nohta, Damoh 3 0   
28 MUSEUM Archaeological Site Museum, 
Khajuraho 4 7   
Total 52 19  71 
29 
LUCKNOW 
Sahet Mahal, Saravasti 16 2   
30 Residency Lucknow, Lucknow 8 8   
31 Garhwa Fort, Sheorajpur, Allahabad 12 0  
56

 
32 MUSEUMS 
1857 Memorial Museum, Residency, 
Lucknow 4 4  
33 Achaeological Site Museum, Kapilvastu 0 2  
Total 40 16 56 
34 
JHANSI 
Kalinjer Fort, Kalinjer 16 0   
     
35 Jhansi Fort, Jhansi 0 8   
36 Rani Mahal, Jhansi 0 4   
Total 16 12  28 
37 RAIPUR Laxman Temple, Sirpur 12 4   
Total 12 4  16 
Grand Total 249 71 320  
57

 
SUMMARY 
Region CISF Pvt. Guard Pvt. Armed 
Guard 
              Total 
Eastern Region - 290 137 427 
Western Region - 495  54 549 
Northern Region 596 602 104 706 + 596 =1302 
Southern Region - 406 170 576 
Central Region - 249   71 320 
Grand Total 596 2042 536 2578 + 596 =3174 
 
Not on Original (NOO) 
 
PROPOSED DEPLOYMENT  OF CISF AFTER COMPLETION OF PRE INDUCTION 
FACILITIES 
 
Region/Circle/Monuments Present SIS Guard 
 Armed Unarmed 
Total 
Proposed CISF 
Strength 
Eastern Region/ Bhubaneswar 
Circle 
    
(i) Sun Temple Konark 22 08 30 109  
Western Region/Aurangabad 
Circle 
    
a) Allora Caves 50 0 50 124 + Adm 
200=45
7 
b) Bibi –Ka-Maqbara 19 0 19 49 
c) Daulabad Fort 04 0 04 84 
Total 95 08 103 566 
 
 
APPROX. MONTHLY EXPENDITURE ON DEPLOYMENT OF CISF AND PRIVATE SECURITY 
GUARDS 
 
S.N
o. 
Deployment details Appx. Monthly 
expenditure 
Remarks 
1. CISF Unit Red Fort, Delhi Rs. 2.85 Crores  
2. CISF Unit Taj Mahal, Agra (UP) Rs.  2.51 Crores  
3. Private Security Guards (SIS 
Guards) 
Rs.  8.63 Crores  
 Total Rs.13.99 Crores  
 
 
  
58

 
ANNEXURE-D 
 
 
THE DETAILS OF EXPENDITURE INCURRED ON DEPLOYMENT OF CISF &  PRIVATE 
SECURITY GUARDS  AT VARIOUS CENTRALLY PROTECTED MONUMENTS OF ASI 
DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS W.E.F. 2017-18 TO 2021-22.   
 
        Amount In Rs.  
Sl.No. Year-wise Expenditure incurred 
1. 2017-18 Rs.97,40,18,265/- 
2. 2018-19 Rs.117,60,72,191/- 
3. 2019-20 Rs.117,89,78,991/- 
4. 2020-21 Rs.158,04,55,397/- 
5. 2021-22 Rs.155,69,25,213/- 
  
        *****
59

60 
 
ANNEXURE-E  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENTRELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
18th May, 2022 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
i. Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary; 
ii. Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India; 
iii. Shri Janhwij Sharma, Additional Director General, Archaeological Survey of India; and 
iv. Shri T.J. Alone, Joint Director General, Archaeological Survey of India. 
**** 