 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New 
December, 
THREE HUNDRED 
Commission of Railway Safety 
 (Presented to the Hon’ble 
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker, 
(P resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 
(Laid  on  the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December,  2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
Commission of Railway Safety  
 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 20 22 
to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December , 2022)  
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
323 
REPORT   
22 ) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT  
 
Commission of Railway Safety 
 
 (Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-20 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   21-27  
    6. MINUTES         28-33 
  7. ANNEXURE         34 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. *1vacant 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
                                                             
1 *Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 4th May, 2022 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty Third Report on ‘Commission of Railway Safety’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Chairman & CEO, Railway Board; Member, 
Infrastructure, Railway Board; Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety; CRS, Western Circle; 
CRS, Southern Circle; CRS, North Eastern Circle; CRS, South Eastern Circle; Co mmissioner 
of Metro Rail Safety; Chief Signal & Telecom Engineer; and Senior Officers of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and Railway Board, on the subject on 18th May, 2022.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, Commission of Railway Safety and Railway Board for placing before the 
Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for 
clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
May, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
May 31, 2022                                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Jyaistha 10, 1944 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AC Air Conditioned  
ACRS Additional Commissioner of Railway Safety 
ATP Automatic Train Protection 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BG Broad Gauge 
BPAC Block Proving Axle Counter 
CA Civil Aviation 
CCRS Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CGIR Chief Government Inspector of Railways 
CMRS Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety 
CPC Central Pay Commission 
Cr.PC Code of Criminal Procedure 
CRS Commission/ Commissioner of Railway Safety 
DFCCIL Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited 
DS Deputy Secretary 
EC Eastern Circle 
FOB Foot Over Bridge 
GIR Government Inspector of Railways 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GRP Government Railway Police 
HMCA Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviation 
ICF Integral Coach Factory 
IR Indian Railways 
IRSOD Indian Railway Schedule of Dimensions  
ISO International Organization for Standardization  
JS Joint Secretary 
LC Level Crossing 
LHB Linke Hofmann Busch 
LHS Limited Height Subway 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
NC Northern Circle 
NEC North Eastern Circle 
NF North Frontier Circle 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
RDSO Research Designs and Standards Organisation 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
RPF Railway Protection Force 
RRSK Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh  

iv 
 
RS Railway Safety 
RUB Road Under Bridge 
SC Southern Circle 
SCC South Central Circle 
SEC South Eastern Circle 
TCAS Train Collision Avoidance System  
UMLC Unmanned Level Crossing 
US Under Secretary 
WC Western Circle 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 The Commission of Railway Safety which is  under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviati on, Government of India, deals  with the matters pertaining to safety of 
rail travel and train operations and is charged with certain statutory function s laid down in the 
Railways Act, 1989. These functions are inspectorial, investigatory and advisory in nature. The 
Commission functions  according to certain rules framed under the Railways Act , 1989  and 
executive instructions issued from time to time. The most important duty of the Commission is to 
ensure that any new railway line to be opened for passenger traffic should conform to the 
standard and specifications prescribed by the Ministry of Railways and the new line is safe in all 
respects for carrying the passenger traffic. This is also applicable to other works such as gauge 
conversion, doubling of lines and electrification of existin g lines etc. The Commission also 
conducts statutory inquiries into serious train accidents and makes recommendations for 
improving safety on the railways in India. 
  
2. The Railway Board in the Ministry of Railways is the safety controlling authority and i s 
responsible for laying down and enforcing safety standards for the Indian  Railways. The main 
task of the Commission of Railway Safety is to direct, advise and caution the Railway  Board 
through its inspectorial,  investigatory and adviso ry functions and thereby assisting  them in 
ensuring that all stipulated measures are taken and standards a re adhered to and implemented as  
regards the soundness of rail construction and safety in train operation. 
 
3. Since Railway safety is of paramount importance to all and in view of the civilian 
fatalities in train accidents during the recent past, the Committee decided to study the functioning 
of Commission of Railway Safety. Since Commission of Railway Safety is under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Civi l Aviation, the Committee asked the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation to furnish a background note on the functioning of Commission of Railway Safety 
for consideration. Questionnaires were also sent to the Ministry  of Civil Aviation and Railway 
Board to seek info rmation on the subject . The C ommittee heard the views of the Chairman & 
CEO, Railway Board; Member, Infrastructure, Railway Board ; Chief Commissioner of Railway 
Safety; CRS, Western Circle; CRS, Southern Circle; CRS, North Eastern Circle; CRS, South  
Eastern Circle ; Commissioner of Metro Rail Safety; Chief Signal & Telecom Engineer; and 

2 
 
Senior Officers of Ministry  of Civil Aviation and Railway Board, on the subject, in its meeting 
held on 18th May, 2022.  
 
Brief History 
4. In British Era, the construction and  operation of railways were entrusted to private 
companies. Consulting engineers were appoint ed by the British Govt.  to exercise effective 
control over them. But later on, the government undertook the construction of Railw ays 
themselves, then the consulting engineers were designated as Government Inspectors. In 1883, 
their position was statutorily recognized. The power of safety controlling authori ty remained 
with Railway Board and Inspectorate office was placed under them. 
 
5. In 1939, the Pacific Locomotive Committee, set up in connection with the Bihta disaster, 
recommended that Railway Inspectorate should be separated from the Railway Board, on the 
principle that those responsible for the inspection of Railways should be  independent of the 
Authority administering the Railways, as contemplated in Section 181(3) of the Government of 
India Act, 1935. These recommendations were approved by the Legislative Assembly in 1939, 
Council of State in 1940 and accepted by the British Government of India. Accordingly in May 
1941, Railway Inspectorate was separated from the Railway Board. Post of Chief Government 
Inspector of Railways (CGIR), through whom Government Inspectors of Railways  (GIR) would 
report to Government, was created. La ter on Inspectorate office was placed under the 
Department of Communication and now it is under Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA).  On 
01.11.1961, Chief Government Inspector of Railways was re -designated as Commissioner of 
Railway Safety (CRS) and Government Inspectors of Railways, as Additional Commissioners of 
Railway Safety (ACRS).  From June, 1979 designation of Commissioner of Railway Safety was 
changed to Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety (CCRS) and ACRS, to CRS. 
 
Functioning of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
6. Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety who is also a CRS, apart from CRS duties, 
advises Central Government in all matters relating to Railway Safety, recruitment of officers, 
postings and promotions, budget and expenditure etc. Chief Commissioner deals with:- 

3 
 
a. Reports of inspections of new lines, doubling, gauge conversion and electrification done 
by Commissioners of Railway Safety are sent to CCRS office which is then forwarded to 
Railway Board for obtaining the sanction of the Central Government; 
b. The first three reports of statutory inquiries (both preliminary and final) into accidents 
which is done by a newly appointed Commissioners, are to be sent to CCRS for scrutiny 
before forwarding it to Railway Board; 
c. Scrutiny of Railway’s propo sals, if any, regarding condonation of infringement to Indian 
Railway Schedule of Dimensions ( IRSOD) received from CRS’s office and if found in 
order then the same is forwarded to Railway Board with suitable stipulations; 
d. Scrutiny of Railway’s proposals regarding introduction of new rolling stock or increase in 
the speed of existing rolling stock received from RDSO (Research Designs and Standards 
Organisation) and if found in order then the same is forwarded to Railway Board 
with/without suitable stipulations; 
e. Similarly any condonation of infringement to IRSOD (Indian Railway Schedule of 
Dimensions) is case of rolling stock is also sanctioned by Railway Board on 
recommendation of CCRS; 
f. Examination of Railway Board’s proposals for amendments of General Rules,  Rules for 
Opening of a Railway, Schedule of Dimensions etc. in consultation with Commissioners 
and convey the views of the Commission to Railway Board, whenever so referred;  
g. Preparation of the Annual Report on the activities of Commissioners of Railway s afety; 
and 
h. Any other work/duty assigned by Central Government with respect to Railway Safety. 
 
Recruitment, Duties and Functions of the Commissioners of Railway Safety 
7. Commissioners of Railway Safety are recruited from amongst officers of Indian Railways 
but they do not revert back to Railways and are absorbed in the Commission of Railway Safety 
under Ministry of Civil Aviation.   The duties of Commissioner of Railway Safety (CRS)  as 
detailed in Section 6, Chapter-III of The Railways Act, 1989 are as under:-, 

4 
 
a. To inspect new railways    with   a view to determine whether they    are fit to be opened 
for the public carriage of passengers, and to report thereon to the Central Government as 
required by or under this Act; 
b. To make such periodical or other inspections of any railway or of any rolling stock used 
thereon as the Central Government may direct; 
c. To make inquiry under this Act into the cause of any accident on a Railway; and 
d. To discharge such other duties as are conferred on him by or under this Act. 
 
8. The Committee was also informed that in exercise of the powers conferred under the 
Railways Act, 1989, the Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules, 1998 are framed 
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Railway (Notices of and Inquir ies into Accidents) 
Rules, 1998 are framed by the Ministry of Railways.  
 
Organizational Structure 
9. The Commission of Railway Safety , works  under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. It is headed by the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety who acts 
as a Principal Technical Advisor to Central Government (Ministry of Railways) in safety related 
matters with which Commission is concerned. 
  
10. There are nine Commissioners of Railway Safety (CRS) located at different places acros s 
the country looking after the works of different Zonal Railways and their offices are called Circle 
Offices. Each Circle Office has 9 to 11 office staff . In each Circle, there is one post of Deputy 
Commissioner of Railway Safety (Dy.CRS) and they are fro m different disciplines of Indian 
Railways (IR). At present, Dy. CRS post in- 
o NEC, SCC and SEC Circles are for Civil Engineering 
o CC Circle is from Electrical Engineering and 
o NC, EC, NFC, WC and SC circles are from Signal & Telecom Engineering. 
o In addition to above one post of Dy. CMRS is there to assist the CMRS. 

5 
 
11. A post of Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety (CMRS) at New Delhi and a Deputy 
Commissioner of Metro railway Safety (Dy.  CMRS) along with support staff for the assistance 
of CMRS is also sanct ioned at CMRS office, New Delhi.  There are two wings in the office of 
CCRS i.e. Railway Safety Wing and Technical Wings.  In the Railway Safety wing, there is one 
Deputy CRS (General) to assist CCRS in day to day official working as well as for maintaining 
the interface with the Ministry of Railways (MoR) and Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA).  
 
12. In Technical Wing, there are four Deputy CRS of various disciplines (Mechanical, Signal 
& Telecommunication, Electrical Engineering and Transportation) to assist  CCRS and CRS as 
and when required on technical matters. This wing works as think tank and maintaining the 
institutional memory / strength of the Commission of Railway Safety. To assist Technical Wing, 
the requisite staff / officers are posted. 
 
13. The Committee was also informed that Deputy CRS are not statutory authorities and they 
come from Ministry of Railways on deputation basis and go back after completion of their 
deputation period. 
 
Role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
14. Commission of Railway Safety functions under the administrative control of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. As per the scheme envisaged at the time of separation of Railway Inspectorate 
from Railway Board, a post of Chief Government Inspector was created with headquarter  with 
Government of India in the Department of Communication to advise the government on matters 
concerning Inspectorate (CRS) and Government Inspector made subordinate to him. The Chief 
Commissioner of Railway Safety has been enjoying functional autonomy in technical matters 
while the role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation is limited to administrative, establishment a nd 
financial issues. In fact, Railway Safety  (RS) Section, which is associated with Chief 
Commissioner of Railway Safety, acts as an administ rative section for the Commission of 
Railway Safety in the Ministry. In matter s relating to technical functions of the Commission, it 
submits file to CCRS for final disposal and in matters relating to establishment, administrative, 

6 
 
financial and Parliament , the file is routed through U nder Secretary/Director/Joint 
Secretary/Secretary/ Minister. 
 
15. In cases of investigation of serious railway accidents, file is submitted to Secretary by 
CCRS directly on two occasions for information viz. (a) after submission of preliminary 
investigation report by Commissioner of Railway Safety (b) After completion of all action on 
final report of the Commissioner (after receiving the comments of Railway Board on final 
reports of the Commissioners). 
 
16. The Committe e notes that presently the  powers of the CRS are derived  from the 
Railways Act, 1989.  The Committee also notes that in exercise of the powers conferred 
under the Railways Act , 1989, the Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules, 
1998 are framed  by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Railway (Notices of and 
Inquiries into Accidents) Rules, 1998 are frame d by the Ministry of Railways. Further 
though the CRS functions under the administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
the Commission ers of Railway Safety are recruited from amongst officers of Indian 
Railways on absorption basis and the Deputy CRS work in the Commission on deputation 
basis. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation provides 
administrative, establishment and financial support to the CRS. The Committee is of the 
opinion that the involvement of two Ministries viz, Ministry of Railway and Civil Aviation, 
leads to avoidable confusion in the command structure of the CRS and there is an urgent 
need to free the CRS from the undue influences of both the Ministries. 
 
17. The Committee notes that the Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety come from 
Ministry of Railways on deputation basis and go back to the Ministry after completion of 
their deputation period. The Committee notes that the Deputy CRS is one of the senior 
most officers in the circle offices and comes second in hierarchy after the CRS. The 
Committee feels that such an important post should not be filled up on deputation basis, as 
the incumbent may not be inclined to give suggestions/ recommendations in his Repo rts 
against the Ministry of Railways, to which he originally belongs and would be sent back 
after his deputation period is over. The Committee recommends that the officers of the 

7 
 
rank of Deputy CRS should be appointed in the Commission on absorption basis,  just like 
the CRS and it should not be a deputation post. The Committee is of the firm view that 
appointing Deputy CRS on absorption basis will ensure grant of full autonomy which 
would make the Commission more independent and effective. 
 
18. The Committe e is of the opinion that  to ensure the impartial working of the 
Commission of Railway Safety, it is essential that the Commission works outside the 
control of both the Ministries of Railways and Civil Aviation. In order to make the 
functioning of the Commission more effective, it is strongly felt that the Commission should 
be provided greater powers  and independence. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Commission of Railway Safety should be made an autonomous statutory body  on 
the lines of many other independent regulatory bodies. CRS should have independent 
technical manpower and autonomy with  respect to administrative, establishment and 
financial issues.  
 
19. The Committee was informed that though the CRS  works under the Administrative 
control of Ministry of Civil Aviation , however re garding opening of new infrastructure under  
provision of Railways Act, 1989 (section-22(3)), Ministry of Railway is having absolute power 
in accepting/rejecting/modifying any conditions proposed by the Commission.   
 
20. However, in order to resolve any issue whether there is having difference of opinion 
between Zonal Railway and the Commissioner, a mechanism has been jointly formulated by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Railway Board. As per this mechanism, any such  unresolved 
issue at the Zonal level is referred to CCRS.  CCRS, after examining the issue, shall 
communicate his opinion to CRS and Railway Administration concerned, which shall be 
considered as the opinion of the Commission for Railway Safety. The cases where CCRS does 
not agree with Railway Administration, the CCRS shall submit the report with his opinion to 
Central Govt., for decision of the Central Govt. as per Section 22(2) and 22 (3) of "The Railways 
Act, 1989 ". 

8 
 
21. As suggested by Ministry of Civil  Aviation, Ministry of Railways has also advised 
General Managers of the zonal Railways to hold bi -monthly meeting with Commissioners of 
Railway safety.  All the important issues are deliberated and discussed during the meeting.  
 
22. The Secretary, Minist ry of Civil Aviation  has further advised Ministry of Railways 
that  in case of any disagreement between Commission of Railway Safety and Ministry of 
Railways (MoR), the matter shall be jointly decided by the Secretary, Civil Aviation, and 
Chairman Railway  Board.  Thus, Ministry of Civil Aviation plays an active role in raising 
important issues of Commission with Ministry of Railways and getting them resolved. 
 
23. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding fixing of responsibilities between the two 
Ministries, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed that as  such no difficulty is faced in fixing of 
responsibility which is clearly spelt out in the Railways Act , 1989  and jurisdiction has been 
accordingly defined in related Rules like Op ening Rules, General Rule etc.  However, any 
unilateral change by Ministry of Railways in such rules ha s a bearing on functioning of the 
commission must be avoided and changes must only be brought about in consultation with the 
Commission of Railway Safety. 
  
24. The Committee notes that as per the existing scheme , the Ministry of Railways have 
full power and authority to amend the provisions of the Railways Act, 1989.  However, the 
Committee notes with serious concern that Ministry of Railways brings about unilateral 
change in such rules, codes and manuals, withou t consulting the CRS which has a bearing 
on jurisdiction of the Commissioners. The Committee also notes that the Railways Act , 
1989 also gives absolute power to Ministry of Railways in accepting/reg ulating/modifying 
any condition proposed by CRS.  The Committee notes that the CRS is the Principal 
Technical Advisor to the Ministry of Railways, in safety related matters and is of the firm 
opinion that the views of the CRS should  mandatorily be taken into account in such cases. 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Railway s should avoid 
unilateral changes in Rules, Codes & Manuals  which affects Railway Safety without 
consulting CRS . If any, changes are made it should be based on consens us between 
Ministry of Railway; Ministry of Civil Aviation and the CRS.  The Committee also 

9 
 
recommends that a complete review of the procedure adopted for amending  provisions in 
the Railways Act, 1989 may be done to include the suggestions of CRS. 
 
25. In response to another query regarding the  percentage/ratio of recommendations on rail 
safety and other issues made by CRS to Railway Board that have been accepted , the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation presented the following details.   
 
26. Commission submits accident reports to Ministry of Railways within the prescribed time 
frame (30 days for preliminary and 180 days for final report)  after conducting detailed inquiry 
along with recommendations to avoid such accidents in future and system improvement. Railway 
Board, after due deliberations on the report and recommendations, submits Action Taken Report 
(ATR) to Commission with para -wise remarks against each recommendation indicating which 
recommendations are accepted/not accepted/partially accepted or under co nsideration. As such 
no time line for submission of ATR is defined and normally ATR is received quite late from 
Railway Board. Status of the ATRs received during last 5 years is as under:- 
 
 
Year 
No. of ATRs 
received 
during the year 
Recommendations 
covered in 
those ATRs Accepted 
Partially 
Accepted 
Under 
Consideration 
Not 
Accepted 
2017-18 8 113 99 4 3 7 
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
2019-20 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
2020-21 14 143 117 5 NIL 21 
2021-22 9 100 89 3 1 7 
Total 31 356 305 12 4 35 
 
26.1. Thus, 89% of recommendation s of the CRS have been  are fully or partially accepted 
during last 5 years and 11% have not been accepted or are under consideration.   
 

10 
 
27. The Ministry of Civil Aviation also brought to notice of the Committee that the following 
15 ATRs are still pending with Railway Board with oldest accident being of year 2013-14:- 
 
 
Year 
Numbers of Accidents Report 
submitted to MoR whose ATR is 
pending 
Numbers of Recommendations pending 
ATRs 
2013-14 1 7 
2014-15 1 19 
2015-16 3 28 
2016-17 Nil Nil 
2017-18 2 19 
2018-19 2 5 
2019-20 4 43 
2020-21 2 14 
Total 15 135 
 
28. The Committee appreciates that almost 90% of the recommendations of the CRS 
are accepted by the Ministry of Railways during the last five years.  However, t he  
Committee notes with concern that while a time frame  has been defined for the 
Commission to submit accident reports to Ministry of Railway viz 30 days for preliminary 
and 180 days for final accident reports, but no time frame has been  defined for the 
Ministry of Railway to submit its Action Taken Reports and due to which generally the 
ATRs are received quite late. The Committee  also expresses its concern that 15 ATRs are 
still pending in the Railway Board  from Ministry of Railway with the oldest accident being 
of the year 2013 -14 which implies a delay of more than 8 years. The Committee is of the 
opinion that such an inordinate delay in submission of ATRs makes the whole effort of 
accident investigations fruitless. The Committee therefore feels that there is an urgent need 
to streamline the procedure of submitting ATRs to the Commission by Railway Board. The 
Committee recommends that there should be a fixed time frame for submission of ATRs by 

11 
 
the Railway Board as well, in order to make the process of inve stigating the causes of the 
accident and taking effective measures to avoid the recurrence of such accidents and 
resultant loss to property and human lives.  
 
29. The Committee was informed by t he Commission of Railway Safety that they have 
pointed out many instances where rules were amended by Ministry of Railway s without 
consulting the CR S, even when provisions to such consultations exist. Some of the cases given 
by them are reproduced below: 
i. Rules and regulations are defined for passenger trains but n o such regulation exists for 
Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited ( DFCCIL) or goods train. 
Recently there have been 3 accidents on DFCCIL where damages appear to be much 
higher than the threshold limit of Rs. 2 crore but no intimation wa s given to the 
Commission. Commission has already made a reference to Railway Board regarding this 
issue but neither any action has taken nor any reply has been received so far. 
It was also pointed out  to the Committee  that 80% alignment of DFCCIL is parallel to 
Passenger lines of Railway which poses serious threat for passenger safety in case of 
accidents on DFCCIL lines.   Railway Board has issued directives that DFCCIL network 
may be utilized for running of passenger trains in case of exigency which does not have 
any specific duration. Thus as per present codal provisions, all lines where passenger 
trains are proposed to be run, should be inspected and authorised by CRS.  Hence, 
DFCCIL lines should also be opened only a fter statutory inspections by CRS  and t his 
issue has also been taken up with MoR. 
ii.  In 2018, MoR has amended Rules for Opening without considering the opinion of 
the Commission of Railway Safety. One of the important amendment s was the 
conferment of power to condone infringements to IR Schedule of Dimension to the 
Commissioners. Earlier this power was vested with MoR with the recommendation of 
CRS and CCRS. The safety implications of  this amendment were also pointed out to 
Ministry of Railway. The Commission is still of the  opinion that this amendment is not in 
the interest of safety and safety must have precedence over  expediency. Hence, the 
earlier system should be restored.  

12 
 
30. The Committee was also  informed that CRS inquires only 8 -10% of accidents under 
Section 113 of Railways Act, 1989. Other accidents are inquire d by Railways itself and r eports 
of such accidents are not required to be submitted to the Commission for appreciation and further 
comments, if any.  
 
31. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the disregard shown by the Railway 
Board towards the recommendations/suggestions of CRS, which has specifically been set 
up to provide technical guidance on matters relating to Railway safety.  The Committee 
specifically notes that no rules/regulations exist for DFCCIL or  goods trains and no 
intimation was given to CRS regarding the accidents  on DFCCIL routes. Further, though 
the CRS has taken up the issue with MoR, no action  has been taken by them till date.  The 
Committee also notes that in 2018, MoR has amended Rules without considering the 
opinion of CRS. Besides, it also expresses its concern  at the fact that only 8 -10% of 
accidents are enquired by CRS, while rest of the accidents are enquired by Rai lways itself 
and in such cases the reports are not even referred to CRS for comments. 
 
32. The Committee is of the firm view that the recommendations made by the 
Commission of Railway Safety should receive utmost importance from the Ministry of 
Railways. The Committee takes exception to the fact that, on certain occasions, the 
Ministry of Railways neither consults the Commission of Railway Safety before amending 
rules or rejecting  a recommendation nor furnishes reasons for not accepting the 
recommendations made by the Commission of Railway Safety . The Committee therefore 
recommends that CRS  should be invari ably consulted in such cases. The Committee 
observes that this state of affairs will not augur well for a safe environment as the 
interministerial non -cooperation is neither good for the country nor the institutions they 
represent. It also recommends that regulations should be immediat ely framed for DFCCIL 
or goods trains  and may be brought under the ambit of CRS . The Committee also 
expresses its dismay at the fact that only 8 -10% cases are enquired by CRS and feels that 
since CRS is the apex technical institution as regards passenger s afety, it should be 
involved in accident investigation in most of the cases. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that necessary amendments in existing laws may be made.  The Committee is 

13 
 
of the opinion that it should be made mandatory for the Railway Admi nistration not to 
reject or overrule any recommendations made by the Commissioners without a meeting 
between the Chairman, Railway Board and the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, 
where the matters can be discussed threadbare and agreements reached. While expressing 
their inability to accept the recommendations, the Railway Board should invariably give 
detailed reasons for not accepting the recommendations. 
 
Training of Officers of Commission 
33. The Committee  was informed by CRS that  technology available with Railways is 
upgrading very fast and high speed trains, Rapid transport system etc. are being introduced  and 
officials of the Commission inspect and sanction all such systems.  Hence, upgradation of 
technical knowledge of the Commis sion officials is very essential. In the past, Railways was 
requested to include officers from the Commission for training along with the Railway officers 
on regular basis so that both Railways and Commission are on the same platform. However, 
Railways are  not institutionalizing the inclusion of Commission officials in their periodic and 
specialised training programs. Even mandatory training is not imparted to officials of 
Commission, who are on deputation from MoR. 
 
34. Committee fails to understand the lo gic of MoR behind the non -inclusion of officers 
from the Commission for training along with the Railway officers on regular basis so that 
both Railways and Commission are on the same platform  as regards technological 
advancements. The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be taken to train the 
officials of Commission including the deputationists along with the officials of the MoR and 
the training imparted should be of a global level. The Committee feels that there is a 
genuine need of the officers of Commission of Railway Safety to get exposed to the latest 
technological advancements taking place in the railway sector in India and abroad , 
otherwise there is a real danger that the technical knowledge of the officers of the 
Commission will be obsolete and they may not be able to perform their assigned duties at 
the optimum level. The Committee recommends that the officers of the Commission should 
be exposed to latest global technologies and any new technology introduced by the 
Railways through training s in the country and abroad, so that they are in a position to 
perform their role effectively.  

14 
 
Upgradation of post of CCRS and requirement of separate Secretariat for Commission 
35. The Committee was apprised that recently post of CCRS has been upgraded to apex level 
i.e. Secretary Equivalent. As per Cabinet approval, CCRS is presently reporting to HMCA 
through Secretary (CA). This long pending upgradation was felt necessary to bring about better 
co-ordination between MoR and CRS in order to improve funct ioning of the Commission and 
overall safety of IR.  Further, the Committee was informed that in order to fully leverage the 
advantage of this upgradation, it is considered prudent to have separate secretariat for the 
Commission having provision of US/DS an d JS level officer reporting directly to CCRS. This 
will help to a great extent in expeditious clearance of issues related to Commission by avoiding 
duplicacy and issues related to other ministries like MoR, MoHUA, MoF etc. This will also, to 
some extent, reduce the burden of Secretary  (CA) who is otherwise occupied in Aviation related 
issues. 
 
36. The Committee appreciates the upgradation of the post of CCRS to Apex level of 
pay matrix of 7th CPC. The Commit tee is of the opinion that such  a step will enhan ce the 
status of the Commission, keeping in view its important responsibility to ensure overall 
safety of Indian Railways. It would result in attracting the best available technical talent in 
the country to the Commission.  The Committee also recommends that a separate 
Secretariat may be provided to the Commission to assist the CCRS in expeditious 
settlement of its work. 
 
37. The Committee notes that CCRS is working under the Administrative control of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The Committee recommends that the Commission of Railway 
Safety may be made an independent autonomous body just like many other regulatory 
institutions of the country to improve efficiency and freedom of action. 
 
Consequential Train Accidents 
38. The Railway Board informed the Committee about the ‘Consequential Train Accidents’, 
which refers to train accidents having serious repercussion in terms of loss of human life, human 
injury and loss to Railway property or interruption to Rail traffic. Such accident s happen due to 

15 
 
collisions, derailments, level crossing accident etc. The  Committee was informed that number of 
consequential train accidents has declined from 141 in 2010 -11 to 55 in the year 2019 -20 and 
further to 35 in the year 2021 -22.  In the current financial  year 2022-23 (up to 31.03.2022), 3 
consequential train accidents have taken place. The Committee was also informed that Research 
Design and Standards Organisation ( RDSO), Ministry of Railways  alongwith three Indian 
Original Equipment Manufacturers  (OEMs) have developed India’s own Automatic Train 
Protection ( ATP) System name KAVACH which is a Train Collision Avoidance System 
(TCAS). The system has been tested on 250 Route Km of Indian Railway.  
 
39. The Railway Board gave the following graphical details about declining trend of accident 
due to Pro-active contribution of Commissioners:-  
 
 
40. The Committee was also informed that t he following steps/measures have been taken to 
minimize accidents on Indian Railways:-  
 Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) h as been introduced in 2017 -18 for 
replacement/renewal/upgradation of critical safety assets. 
 Track Renewal, Maintenance & upgradation. 
 Repair/strengthening/rehabilitation/rebuilding of Railway bridges. 
 Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with LHB design coaches. 


16 
 
 Advanced Signaling System with Panel Interlocking/Route Relay Interlocking/Electronic 
Interlocking 
 Block Proving Axle Counter (BPAC) 
 Interlocking level crossings with Signals 
 Provision of fire detection and suppression system in newly man ufactured Power Cars 
and Pantry Cars and Fire and Smoke detection system in newly manufactured AC 
coaches. 
 All Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) route on Indian Railway 
have been eliminated. 
 Elimination of Manned Level Crossing gates by closure and providing Road Under 
Bridge (RUB) and Road Over Bridge (ROB) at location. 
 A GPS based Fog Pass device is being provided to loco pilots in fog affected areas which 
enables loco pilots to know the exact distance of the approaching landmarks like signals, 
level crossing gates etc. 
 
41. The Committee appreciates the Rai lway Board for  the reduction of consequential 
train accidents from 2010 -11 to 2022-23.  The Committee also congratulates the RDSO for 
the development of indigenous Train Collision Avoidance System ‘KAVACH’ , which will 
go a long way in reducing accidents through a cost -effective measure. The Committee 
recommends that KAVACH should be introduced phase -wise, through all the routes of 
India Railways. In first phase, all the routes where there are regular cases of accidents 
should be considered and KAVACH should be installed expeditiously.  
 
Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) 
42. The Committee was also informed of the following steps taken by CRS in reducing 
accidents at Railway level crossings: 
• Temporary manning of U nmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs)  has been suggested by 
CRS. 

17 
 
• All UMLCs eliminated with active support and hard work of CRS. More than 8000 
UMLCs were eliminated in 2017-19 vis-a-vis average 1135 UMLCs per year earlier.   
• Number of accidents at LCs reduced to 1 which were 50 prior to 2014 
• Now Commission is emphasising on prioritising construction of ROB/RUB/LHS at LC 
gates having high road traffic. This will benefit both Road users and Railways In 
following ways – 
 No detention to road users at LC gate 
 Release of manpower (a verage 4 per gate) which may be redeployed for safety 
category posts like Gangman etc. 
 Detention to trains will be avoided 
 Overall safety of train operation will improve by reductions of signals and possible 
obstruction on LC gate 
 
43. During the deliberation with Railway Board in the meeting, the Committee raised the 
issue of undue delay in construction of Railway over bridges (ROBs) and Railway Under bridges 
(RUBs), which has resulted in accidents and also the insufficient allotment of funds for ROBs & 
RUBs. The Committee also pointed out that every year due to accidents at unmanned level 
crossings, many precious lives are lost or many people are maimed for life. The Chairman &  
CEO, Railway Board has informed the Committee that many steps  have been taken to reduce 
accidents at level crossings. All Unmanned Level C rossings on broad gauge  of Indian Railway 
have been eliminated by 31.01.2019, which was a major cause of accidents. Elimination of 
manned level crossing gates by closure and providing Road Under Bridges (RUBs) and Road 
Over Bridge (ROBs) at locations were  also in progress and every year manned level crossings 
are being eliminated. 
 
44. The Committee notes the progress in elimination of such crossings by constructing 
RUBs and ROBs and hopes that the work would be expedited to eliminate all such 
crossings in near future.  The Committee also hopes that sufficient budgetary allocation 
may be made for the said purpose.  The Committee also recommends that a mechanism 

18 
 
should be de vised to complete the construction of ROBs and RUBs in a stipulated period 
and in case of a delay, the concerned agency should be penalized.  
 
Miscellaneous Safety Issues 
45. The Committee observes that during train accidents, the loss of life and property 
can be minimized if the Rail coaches are as per global safety standards. The Committee 
recommends that technology m atching global standards should be adopted so as to 
introduce global standards of safety for Indian Railway coaches. A railway station, a coach 
manufacturing factory/workshop and a stretch of railway track may be selected and bids 
may be invited from leading global agencies across the world for implementati on of the 
global best standards, which may then serve as a model for other railway stations/railway 
coach factories/railway tracks across the country.  
 
46. The Committee was also informed that the d ata regarding deaths on railway tracks and 
railway premises is maintained by respective State Government Railway Police (GRP). The State 
Police registers cases under Section 174 of Cr.PC in cases of unnatural deaths including 
unnatural deaths on railways, conducts investigation and takes further action as per law. The data 
of deaths registered over Indian Railways during the last 10 years as provided by concerned 
GRPs through Zonal Railways is as follows: 
Number of deaths reported over Indian Railways during the last 10 years 
Period Falling from Running Trains Fall in Platform Gap 
2012 3869 265 
2013 4765 352 
2014 4892 349 
2015 4979 281 
2016 5070 399 
2017 4804 282 
2018 4464 264 

19 
 
2019 3715 232 
2020 1076 55 
2021 1381 102 
 
47. Besides, the following corrective measures are being taken by the Railways to prevent 
human deaths in untoward incidents on Railway track: 
i. Railways have constituted interdepartmental ‘Joint Committee’ comprising officers of 
Safety, Security, Signal &  Engineering departments across all Zonal Railways to study 
the causes and suggest specific measures to minimise deaths due to untoward incidents 
including trespassing by humans.  Accordingly, preventive and corrective measures are 
taken to improve and create infrastructure to minimise casualties.  
ii. Regular announcements are made through Passenger Address System at Railway stations 
urging passengers to use foot over bridges (FOBs) and to avoid crossing of railway 
tracks.    
iii. Various awareness campaig ns are organized by Railways to sensitize passengers about 
the fatalities of crossing railway tracks, foot -board/roof-top travelling, boarding/de -
boarding running trains etc.  
iv. Regular drives are conducted against trespassing, travelling on foot -board, steps, roof top 
of trains, boarding/de -boarding running trains and the persons apprehended are 
prosecuted under the relevant provisions of the Railways Act, 1989. 
v. Railway Protection Force personnel are deployed on identified locations vulnerable for 
such deaths.  
vi. Erection of boundary wall/fencing at identified locations, vulnerable to trespass.  
vii. Warning sign boards are provided at conspicuous places for the awareness of passengers. 
viii. RPF takes continuous action against rooftop, foot step, fo ot board travellers as a 
preventive measure.  

20 
 
ix. RPF personnel have saved many lives of passengers who were at a risk of going under 
the wheels of running trains at various stations. 601 such lives were saved by RPF staff 
risking their own lives in 2021.    
 
48. While appreciating the efforts made by Railways and Railway Protection Force to 
save numerous lives , the Committee  recommends that u rgent steps need to be taken to 
minimize the unfortunate incidents of people, especially women and children, falling on 
tracks and getting seriously injured/ killed.  It should be ensured that Railway Police has 
safety training for undertaking on -the-spot rescue measures. The Committee emphasizes 
the need for delegation of powers to lower level officials also in o rder to enable swift action 
for addressing safety risks in Railways.  The Committee also recommends that a  Safety 
Task Force may be constituted in every State to respond to emergencies and that it should 
consist of young and robust personnel who have been g iven the necessary training and 
exposure to  international best practices. The Committee feels that a nother important 
requirement is the need to ensure that immediate and prompt help is rendered to accident 
victims. The Committee is underscoring this fact b ecause there have been instances 
wherein railway accident victims were stuck inside boggies for hours, without getting any 
help. Hence, detailed evacuation plan, in coordination with different agencies, should be 
put in place. A comprehensive safety Master  Plan for improvement of safety and security 
standards in railways may be worked out and implemented in a time -bound manner. It 
should be ensured that International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Safety Audits 
are conducted periodically for all the institutions under the Ministry.  
 
49. The Committee further noted the dilapidated condition of many railway quarters 
across the country which requires urgent attention, since it is a big safety risk to the 
residents. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all such railway quarters may be 
repaired at the earliest and sufficient funds may be provided for the purpose.  Besides 
many Railway stations and goods sheds are located in congested areas, sometimes leading 
to accidents during transportation of good s by lorries. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that steps may be taken to relocate the goods sheds to safer places in order to 
prevent accidents. 
*** 

21 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
Role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
The Committee notes that presently the powers of the CRS are derived from the Railways 
Act, 1989.  The Committee also notes that in exercise of the powers conferred under the 
Railways Act, 1989, the Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules, 1998 are 
framed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Railway (Notices of and Inquiries into 
Accidents) Rules, 1998 are framed by the Ministry of Railways. Further though the CRS 
functions under the administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation, the 
Commissioners of R ailway Safety are recruited from amongst officers of Indian Railways 
on absorption basis and the Deputy CRS work in the Commission on deputation basis. The 
Committee also notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation provides administrative, 
establishment and financial support to the CRS. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
involvement of two Ministries viz, Ministry of Railway and Civil Aviation, leads to 
avoidable confusion in the command structure of the CRS and there is an urgent need to 
free the CRS from the undue influences of both the Ministries. 
(Para 16) 
The Committee notes that the Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety come from 
Ministry of Railways on deputation basis and go back to the Ministry after completion of 
their deputation period. The Committee notes that the Deputy CRS is one of the senior 
most officers in the circle offices and comes second in hierarchy after the CRS. The 
Committee feels that such an important post should not be filled up on deputation basis, as 
the incumbent may not be inclined to give suggestions/ recommendations in his Reports 
against the Ministry of Railways, to which he originally belongs and would be sent back 
after his deputation period is over. The Committee recommends that the officers of the 
rank of Deputy CR S should be appointed in the Commission on absorption basis, just like 
the CRS and it should not be a deputation post. The Committee is of the firm view that 
appointing Deputy CRS on absorption basis will ensure grant of full autonomy which 
would make the Commission more independent and effective. 
(Para 17) 
 

22 
 
The Committee is of the opinion that to ensure the impartial working of the Commission of 
Railway Safety, it is essential that the Commission works outside the control of both the 
Ministries of Railways  and Civil Aviation. In order to make the functioning of the 
Commission more effective, it is strongly felt that the Commission should be provided 
greater powers and independence. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Commission of Railway Safety s hould be made an autonomous statutory body on the lines 
of many other independent regulatory bodies. CRS should have independent technical 
manpower and autonomy with respect to administrative, establishment and financial 
issues.  
 (Para 18) 
The Committee n otes that as per the existing scheme, the Ministry of Railways have full 
power and authority to amend the provisions of the Railways Act , 1989.  However, the 
Committee notes with serious concern that Ministry of Railways brings about unilateral 
change in such rules, codes and manuals, without consulting the CRS which has a bearing 
on jurisdiction of the Commissioners. The Committee also notes that the Railways Act, 
1989 also gives absolute power to Ministry of Railways in accepting/regulating/modifying 
any condition proposed by CRS.  The Committee notes that the CRS is the Principal 
Technical Advisor to the Ministry of Railways, in safety related matters and is of the firm 
opinion that the views of the CRS should mandatorily be taken into account in such cas es. 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Railways should avoid 
unilateral changes in Rules, Codes & Manuals which affects Railway Safety without 
consulting CRS. If any, changes are made it should be based on consensus between 
Ministry of  Railway; Ministry of Civil Aviation and the CRS.  The Committee also 
recommends that a complete review of the procedure adopted for amending  provisions in 
the Railways Act, 1989 may be done to include the suggestions of CRS. 
(Para 24) 
The Committee appre ciates that almost 90% of the recommendations of the CRS are 
accepted by the Ministry of Railways during the last five years.  However, the  Committee 
notes with concern that while a time frame has been defined for the Commission to submit 
accident reports to Ministry of Railway viz 30 days for preliminary and 180 days for final 
accident reports, but no time frame has been defined for the Ministry of Railway to submit 

23 
 
its Action Taken Reports and due to which generally the ATRs are received quite late. The 
Committee also expresses its concern that 15 ATRs are still pending in the Railway Board 
from Ministry of Railway with the oldest accident being of the year 2013 -14 which implies 
a delay of more than 8 years. The Committee is of the opinion that such an inordinate delay 
in submission of ATRs makes the whole effort of accident investigations fruitless. The 
Committee therefore feels that there is an urgent need to streamline the procedure of 
submitting ATRs to the Commission by Railway Board. The Committee re commends that 
there should be a fixed time frame for submission of ATRs by the Railway Board as well, in 
order to make the process of investigating the causes of the accident and taking effective 
measures to avoid the recurrence of such accidents and resul tant loss to property and 
human lives.  
(Para 28) 
The Committee expresses its serious concern at the disregard shown by the Railway Board 
towards the recommendations/suggestions of CRS, which has specifically been set up to 
provide technical guidance on ma tters relating to Railway safety.  The Committee 
specifically notes that no rules/regulations exist for DFCCIL or goods trains and no 
intimation was given to CRS regarding the accidents on DFCCIL routes. Further, though 
the CRS has taken up the issue with MoR, no action has been taken by them till date.  The 
Committee also notes that in 2018, MoR has amended Rules without considering the 
opinion of CRS. Besides, it also expresses its concern at the fact that only 8 -10% of 
accidents are enquired by CRS, whil e rest of the accidents are enquired by Railways itself 
and in such cases the reports are not even referred to CRS for comments. 
(Para 31) 
The Committee is of the firm view that the recommendations made by the Commission of 
Railway Safety should receive ut most importance from the Ministry of Railways. The 
Committee takes exception to the fact that, on certain occasions, the Ministry of Railways 
neither consults the Commission of Railway Safety before amending rules or rejecting a 
recommendation nor furnishe s reasons for not accepting the recommendations made by 
the Commission of Railway Safety. The Committee therefore recommends that CRS should 
be invariably consulted in such cases. The Committee observes that this state of affairs will 
not augur well for a safe environment as the interministerial non -cooperation is neither 

24 
 
good for the country nor the institutions they represent. It also recommends that 
regulations should be immediately framed for DFCCIL or goods trains and may be 
brought under the ambit of CRS. The Committee also expresses its dismay at the fact that 
only 8 -10% cases are enquired by CRS and feels that since CRS is the apex technical 
institution as regards passenger safety, it should be involved in accident investigation in 
most of the cases.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary amendments in 
existing laws may be made.  The Committee is of the opinion that it should be made 
mandatory for the Railway Administration not to reject or overrule any recommendations 
made by the Commissioners without a meeting between the Chairman, Railway Board and 
the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, where the matters can be discussed threadbare 
and agreements reached. While expressing their inability to accept the recommendations, 
the Railway Boa rd should invariably give detailed reasons for not accepting the 
recommendations. 
(Para 32) 
Training of Officers of Commission 
Committee fails to understand the logic of MoR behind the non -inclusion of officers from 
the Commission for training along with the Railway officers on regular basis so that both 
Railways and Commission are on the same platform as regards technological 
advancements. The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be taken to train the 
officials of Commission including the deputationists along with the officials of the MoR and 
the training imparted should be of a global level. The Committee feels that there is a 
genuine need of the officers of Commission of Railway Safety to get exposed to the latest 
technological advancements taking place in the railway sector in India and abroad, 
otherwise there is a real danger that the technical knowledge of the officers of the 
Commission will be obsolete and they may not be able to perform th eir assigned duties at 
the optimum level. The Committee recommends that the officers of the Commission should 
be exposed to latest global technologies and any new technology introduced by the 
Railways through trainings in the country and abroad, so that th ey are in a position to 
perform their role effectively.  
(Para 34) 
 

25 
 
Upgradation of post of CCRS and requirement of separate Secretariat for Commission 
The Committee appreciates the upgradation of the post of CCRS to Apex level of pay 
matrix of 7th CPC. The Committee is of the opinion that such a step will enhance the status 
of the Commission, keeping in view its important responsibility to ensure overall safety of 
Indian Railways. It would result in attracting the best available technical talent in the 
country to the Commission. The Committee also recommends that a separate Secretariat 
may be provided to the Commission to assist the CCRS in expeditious settlement of its 
work. 
(Para 36) 
The Committee notes that CCRS is working under the Administrative control  of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation.  The Committee recommends that the Commission of Railway Safety 
may be made an independent autonomous body just like many other regulatory institutions 
of the country to improve efficiency and freedom of action. 
(Para 37) 
Consequential Train Accidents 
The Committee appreciates the Railway Board for the reduction of consequential train 
accidents from 2010 -11 to 2022 -23.  The Committee also congratulates the RDSO for the 
development of indigenous Train Collision Avoidance Sys tem ‘KAVACH’, which will go a 
long way in reducing accidents through a cost -effective measure. The Committee 
recommends that KAVACH should be introduced phase -wise, through all the routes of 
India Railways. In first phase, all the routes where there are re gular cases of accidents 
should be considered and KAVACH should be installed expeditiously.  
(Para 41) 
Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) 
The Committee notes the progress in elimination of such crossings by constructing RUBs 
and ROBs and hopes that the work would be expedited to eliminate all such crossings in 
near future. The Committee also hopes that sufficient budgetary allocation may be made 
for the said purpose.  The Committee also recommends that a mechanism should be 
devised to complete the construction of ROBs and RUBs in a stipulated period and in case 
of a delay, the concerned agency should be penalized.  

26 
 
(Para 44) 
Miscellaneous Safety Issues 
The Committee observes that during train accidents, the loss of life and property can be 
minimized if the Rail coaches are as per global safety standards. The Committee 
recommends that technology matching global standards should be adopted so as  to 
introduce global standards of safety for Indian Railway coaches. A railway station, a coach 
manufacturing factory/workshop and a stretch of railway track may be selected and bids 
may be invited from leading global agencies across the world for implemen tation of the 
global best standards, which may then serve as a model for other railway stations/railway 
coach factories/railway tracks across the country.  
(Para 45) 
While appreciating the efforts made by Railways and Railway Protection Force to save 
numerous lives, the Committee  recommends that urgent steps need to be taken to 
minimize the unfortunate incidents of people, especially women and children, falling on 
tracks and getting seriously injured/ killed. It should be ensured that Railway Police has 
safety training for undertaking on -the-spot rescue measures. The Committee emphasizes 
the need for delegation of powers to lower level officials also in order to enable swift action 
for addressing safety risks in Railways. The Committee also recommends that a Safety 
Task Force may be constituted in every State to respond to emergencies and that it should 
consist of young and robust personnel who have been given the necessary training and 
exposure to international best practices. The Committee feels that anoth er important 
requirement is the need to ensure that immediate and prompt help is rendered to accident 
victims. The Committee is underscoring this fact because there have been instances 
wherein railway accident victims were stuck inside boggies for hours, w ithout getting any 
help. Hence, detailed evacuation plan, in coordination with different agencies, should be 
put in place. A comprehensive safety Master Plan for improvement of safety and security 
standards in railways may be worked out and implemented in a time -bound manner. It 
should be ensured that International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Safety Audits 
are conducted periodically for all the institutions under the Ministry.  
(Para 48) 
 

27 
 
The Committee further noted the dilapidated condition of m any railway quarters across 
the country which requires urgent attention, since it is a big safety risk to the residents. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that all such railway quarters may be repaired at the 
earliest and sufficient funds may be provide d for the purpose.  Besides many Railway 
stations and goods sheds are located in congested areas, sometimes leading to accidents 
during transportation of goods by lorries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
steps may be taken to relocate the goods sheds to safer places in order to prevent accidents. 
(Para 49) 
 
***** 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

28 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Monday, the 18 th May, 2022 in the Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           -               Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses: - 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
i. Shri Narender Singh, Deputy Secretary; 

29 
 
  
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
i. Shri Shri S. K. Pathak, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety; 
ii. Shri Ramesh Kumar Sharma, Commissioner of Railway Safety, Western Circle; 
iii. Shri Abhai Kumar Rai, Commissioner of Railway Safety, Southern Circle; 
iv. Shri Mohammad Latief Khan, Commissioner of Railway Safety, North Eastern Circle; 
v. Shri Anant Madhukar Chowdhary,  Commissioner of Railway Safety, South Eastern 
Circle; 
vi. Shri Janak Kumar Garg, Commissioner of Metro Rail Safety; 
vii. Shri Rajmal Khoiwal, Chief Signal and Telecom Engineer; 
viii. Shri Rajiv Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Railway Safety; 
ix. Shri Shalabh Tyagi, Officer on Special Duty; and 
x. Smt. Indu Rani Dubey, Officer on Special Duty. 
  
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
  *     *1     * 
  
Railway Board 
i. Shri V. K. Tripathi, Chairman & Chief Executive Officer; 
ii. Shri O. P. Singh, Member (Infrastructure); 
iii. Shri Arun Kumar Jain, General Manager, South Central Railway; 
iv. Shri Prakash Butani, General Manager, Western Railway; 
v. Shri Anil Kumar Lahoti, General Manager, Central Railway; 
vi. Shri S. K. Srivastav, General Manager, East Coast Railway; 
vii. Shri B. G. Mallaya, General Manager, Southern Railway; 
viii. Shri Rajesh Argal, Additional Member (Planning); 
ix. Shri Brijesh Kumar, Additional Member (Works); and 
x. Shri Devendra Kumar, Principal Executive Director (Safety). 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Chairman, Railway 
Board, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety (CCRS) senior officers of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, *  *  * to the meeting and informed them of the agenda for the 
meeting i.e. to deliberate on 'Railway Safety and *  *  *’. 
2.  Thereafter, the Chairman asked the CCRS to apprise the Committee of  the jurisdictional 
issues and jurisdictional autonomy issues faced by the Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
under the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways, responsibilities handled in its functioning, 
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 

30 
 
steps taken to investigate deficiencies, implementation of reforms for improving safety by the 
CRS, plans devised by the concerned Ministry/Board for effective functioning of CRS as an 
independent body and delays in executing connectivity projects across the country. He also 
queried about the safety standards followed in Indian Railways and the specific steps taken to 
address violation of safety rules to minimize serious accidents,  loss of life and property and 
whether current regulations are adequate for effective functioning of the CRS and the steps  taken 
to appoint/deploy efficient staff for railway safety. 
3.    The Commission of Railway Safety apprised the Committee of the impo rtant factors that 
should be considered for effective functioning of the Commission  viz. no unilateral changes 
should be made in the rules and regulations/codes and manuals by Ministry of Railways, no 
unreasonable imputation of delay on part of CRS in open ing new lines and according sanctions 
to minor works, proper reporting of all accidents to the Commission including those in  Para 114 
of the Railways Act, 1989, and proper guidelines/protocol formation for inspection of railways 
by the CRS. 
4.   *      *2     * 
5.  The representatives of the Railway Board apprised the Committee of the different 
infrastructural constraints faced by the Board in transporting coal, rake loading and unloading, 
less evacuation capacity, delay in projects due to problems in land acquisition, etc. Achievements 
such as loco inspectors to monitor performance of railway staff,  conducting safety seminars 
periodically to educate railway staff on the common problems faced on the line, provision of 
automatic signaling and provision of  Suraksha Kavach on two busy sectors of Southern Railway 
were also highlighted by the Board representatives. 
6.  *      *            *. Queries/issues 
were raised by the Members regarding need for constructing more rail –under bridges (RUBs), 
passenger safety, animal safety, etc. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by 
the Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed them to furnish written 
replies to queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
*      *     * 
  
 
                                                           
2 * Relates to other matters 

31 
 
 Witnesses:- 
 
*      *     * 
7.    *      *     *   
8.    *      *     *  
9.    *      *     * 
10.  *      *     * 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
11.  *      *3     * 
12.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.   The meeting adjourned at 3:59 P.M. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
                                                           
3 * Relates to other matters 

32 
 
XXII 
TWENTY SECOND MEETING 
  
          The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 31 st May, 2022 in Committee 
Room ‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           -    Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Tapir Gao 
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
9. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
11. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B, Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director  
             Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of t he 
Committee. He informed them that  agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  two 
draft reports on the subjects:- (i) *1    *    *; 
and (ii) Issues relating to Commission of Railway Safety.  
2.   The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes.   The Committee authorised the Chairman 
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 

33 
 
to make necessary corrections in the report and present the reports to the Hon' ble Chairman 
during the intersession period. 
3.     *      *     * 
 Witnesses: - 
*     *     * 
  
         *     *     * 
2.      *     *     * 
3.      *     *     * 
4.      *     *     * 
5.      *     *     * 
6.      *     *2     * 
7.      *     *     * 
8.      *     *     * 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9.    *     *     * 
10.  *     *     * 
11.         The meeting adjourned at 1.06 P.M. 
  
                                                                                                                       
   
 
                                                           
2 * Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE  

34 
 
ANNEXURE  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENTRELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
18th May, 2022 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
i. Shri Narender Singh, Deputy Secretary 
COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY (CRS) 
i. Shri Shri S. K. Pathak, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
ii. Shri Ramesh Kumar Sharma, Commissioner of Railway Safety, Western Circle 
iii. Shri Abhai Kumar Rai, Commissioner of Railway Safety, Southern Circle 
iv. Shri Mohammad Latief Khan, Commissioner of Railway Safety, North Eastern Circle 
v. Shri Anant Mad hukar Chowdhary,  Commissioner of Railw ay Safety, South Eastern 
Circle 
vi. Shri Janak Kumar Garg, Commissioner of Metro Rail Safety 
vii. Shri Rajmal Khoiwal, Chief Signal and Telecom Engineer 
viii. Shri Rajiv Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Railway Safety 
ix. Shri Shalabh Tyagi, Officer on Special Duty 
x. Smt. Indu Rani Dubey, Officer on Special Duty 
RAILWAY BOARD 
i. Shri V. K. Tripathi, Chairman & Chief Executive Officer 
ii. Shri O. P. Singh, Member (Infrastructure) 
iii. Shri Arun Kumar Jain, General Manager, South Central Railway 
iv. Shri Prakash Butani, General Manager, Western Railway 
v. Shri Anil Kumar Lahoti, General Manager, Central Railway 
vi. Shri S. K. Srivastav, General Manager, East Coast Railway 
vii. Shri B. G. Mallaya, General Manager, Southern Railway 
viii. Shri Rajesh Argal, Additional Member (Planning) 
ix. Shri Brijesh Kumar, Additional Member (Works) 
x. Shri Devendra Kumar, Principal Executive Director (Safety) 
 