  
 
  
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
281 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Seventy Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Seventy Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS (v)-(ix) 
4. REPORT 1-38 
CHAPTER-I-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
CHAPTER-II- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 39-42 
6. MINUTES        43-45 
7. ANNEXURES 46-48 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O‘Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
10. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
_________________________________________________________ 
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020 
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3 rd April, 2020 and re -nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 
2020 
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
(i) 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2020-21) 
(Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh     -   Chairman  
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri Derek O‘Brien 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
9. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
10. *Shri Raj Babbar 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat 
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 
 
 
 
          *Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020 
          **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
 
(ii)

  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              (iii) 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Transport, Tourism and  Culture,  having  been  authorized  by  the  Committee  to  present  
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and  Eighty  First  Report  on  Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Seventy Sixth Report on Dema nds for Grants (2020 -21) of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. 
 
2. The Two Hundred and Seventy Sixth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 12 th March, 
2020 to the Parliament. 
 
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Seventy Sixth Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
10th June, 2020. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted  the  Report  in  its  meeting  held  on  the  
11th September, 2020. 
 
 
 
(T.G. VENKATESH) 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
September 11, 2020  Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
20 Bhadra, 1942 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

  
Acronyms 
 
 
AAI - Airports Authority of India 
AAIB - Air Accident Investigation Board 
AAICLAS - Airports Authority of India Cargo Logistics and Allied Services 
AASL - Airline Allied Services Limited 
ACCS - Airport Air Cargo Community Systems 
ACI -  Aero Club of India 
AFS - Air Freight Station 
 
AIAHL - Air India Assets Holding Limited 
AIATSL - Air India Air Transport Services Limited 
AIESL - Air India Engineering Service Limited 
AIFs - Alternative Investment Funds 
AISAM - Air India Specific Alternative Mechanism 
AISATS - Air India SATS Airport Services Private Limited 
AIXL - Air India Express Limited 
ANS - Air Navigation Services 
 
APEDA - Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
ATB - Air Turn Back 
ATC - Air Traffic Controllers 
 
ATF - Aviation Turbine Fuel 
AVSEC - Aviation Security 
BBS - Biometric Boarding System 
BCAS -  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BIAL - Bangalore International Airports Limited 
BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
(v)

  
CAGR - Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAPEX - Capital Expenditure 
CAR - Civil Aviation Requirement 
 
CARs - Civil Aviation Rules 
 
CCEA - Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCRS - Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CGD - Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment 
cloA - conditional letter of Award 
CORSIA -  Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
COVID - Corona Virus Disease 
CPL - Commercial Pilot License 
CTSQ - Cargo Terminal Service Quality 
CUDCTs - Common User Domestic Cargo Terminals 
CUTs -  Common User Terminals 
DBOM - Design, Build, Operate and Maintain 
DDT - Dividend Distribution Tax 
DGCA -  Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DGFT -  Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DIAL - Delhi International Airport Limited 
DIGI YATRA - Digital Yatra 
DIPAM - Department of Investment and Public Asset Management 
EASA - European Aviation Safety Agency 
EDTO - Extended Diversion Time Operation 
F&B - Food and Beverage 
FAA - Federal Aviation Administration 
FTO - Flying Training Organizations 
(vi)

  
GoUP - Government of Uttar Pradesh 
GR - General Remittances 
GST - Goods and Services Tax 
 
HAL - Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
 
HEMS - Helicopter Emergency Medical Services 
HMOS - Hon'ble Minister of State 
HT Lines - High-tension Transmission Lines 
IAF - Indian Air Forces 
IATA - International Air Transport Association 
ICAO -  International Civil Aviation Organization 
IEC - Importer Exporter Code 
IFR - Instrument Flight Rules 
 
IFSC - International Financial Services Centre 
IFSD - Inflight Shut Down 
IGRUA - Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
IMG - Inter-Ministerial Group 
IR - Indian Railways 
 
IRDAI - Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
IT - Information Technology 
JV - Joint Venture 
 
LPT - Low Pressure Turbine 
 
MADC - Maharashtra Airport Development Company Ltd. 
MIAL - Mumbai International Airport Limited 
MIL - Mihan India Limited 
 
MMCC - Multi Member Consultative Committee  
MoCA - Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(vii)

  
MOU - Memorandum of Understanding 
MPEDA - Marine Products Export Development Authority 
MRO - Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
MSME - Micro Small & Medium Enterprises 
MT - Mega Tonne 
MTOW - Maximum Take Off Weight 
 
NACCS - National Air Cargo Community System 
NBFCs - Non Banking Financial Company 
NDRF - National Disaster Response Force 
NER - North East Region 
 
NIAL - Noida International Airport Limited 
OLS - Obstacle Limitation Surfaces 
PHL - Pawan Hans Ltd. 
 
PIM - Preliminary Information Memorandum 
PPP - Public Private Partnership 
R&D - Research and Development 
 
RBI - Reserve Bank of India 
 
RCS - Regional Connectivity Scheme 
 
RNA - Royal Nepal Airlines 
 
RPAS - Remotely Piloted Aircraft System 
SAOs - Selected Airline Operators 
SATS - Singapore Airport Terminal Services 
SESF - Special Extra Section Flight 
SEZs - Special Economic Zones 
SOP - Standard Operating Procedure 
 
SPV - Special Purpose Vehicle 
 
(viii)

 
 
 
TERI - Tata Energy Research Institute 
 
TIACA - The International Air Cargo Association 
ToR - Terms of Reference 
UAS - Unmanned Aircraft System 
UDAN - Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
UNFCCC - United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UTM - Unmanned Traffic Management 
VAT - Value Added Tax 
VFR - Visual Flight Rules 
 
VVIP - Very Very Important Person 
WG - Working Group 
YEIDA - Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix) 
 
 

1  
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 
observations/ recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy Sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of Ministry of Civil Aviation pres ented to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 12th March, 2020. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 10th June, 2020, in respect 
of all the observations/recommendations contained in the 276 th Report. The replies have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(ii) Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 16.5, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 19.1, 21.1, 23.2, 25.1, 27.1, 28.1, 30.1, 31.1, 
31.2, 32.1, 34.1, 35.1, 36.3, 37.1, 39.1, 41.1, 42.2, 43, 44.1, 45.1, 46.1, 48.1 
Total: 26 
 
(iii) Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Ministry‗s replies:- 
Paragraph Nos.: 18.4, 18.5, 23, 33.1, 37.2 
Total: 5 
 
(iii) Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13.3, 14.2, 15.1, 16.6, 17.1, 20.1, 22.0, 22.1, 23.1, 24.1, 26.1, 27.2, 
27.4, 27.5, 29.3, 38.1, 40.1, 47 
Total: 18 
 
(iv) Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited. 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
Total: Nil 

2  
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1. The Committee notes that RCS has given the Indian aviation industry a huge fillip. This 
Scheme has made air travel more affordable and also the connectivity to remote and hilly 
regions of the country has improved. The Comm ittee notes that availability of funds and high 
cost of operations are the major constraints under the Scheme. The Committee finds that out of 
688 valid routes awarded, only 256 routes have commenced operations, which constitute only 
37% of the awarded rou tes. Despite the fact that the Ministry frequently conducts bidding for 
RCS routes and awards routes, desired progress has not taken place. Given the tremendous 
enthusiastic response from the stakeholders including the passengers and significant change 
noticed in the economic activity of the connected routes with current level of 37% routes, there  
is a huge potential in terms of connectivity and the resultant economic prosperity under the 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore , desires that concerted efforts sho uld be made to 
operationalize all the awarded routes at the earliest. The Committee also desires that periodic 
evaluation of the Scheme be conducted to address the constraints of the issues in 
implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(Recommendation at Para 16.5 of 276th Report) 
1.1. Out of the 688 valid routes awarded, 268 RCS routes have been commenced so far. The 
Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) are obligated to commence RCS flight operations on a RCS - 
route, as part of individual route -proposal or a network proposal within a period of six months 
from the issuance of Letter of Award or within two months from the readiness of airport, 
whichever is later, unless any extension is granted by the Implementing Agency. 
1.2. There is also a mechanism to revi ew the performance of Selected A irline Operators 
(SAO) for RCS routes. RCS -UDAN is regularly monitored for successful implementation. In 
case of wilful default by a Selected Airline Operator (SAO), cancellatio n of routes are done by 
forfeiting the Performance Guarantee/Proposal Security and the routes are offered for rebidding 
in subsequent rounds of bidding. 
1.3. MoCA has therefore been making all possible efforts to operationalize awarded routes 
at the earliest. 
Development of Airport Infrastructure 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. The Committee exhorts the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and futuristic 
master plan for the airports in the country, in order to cater to the ever increasing demand for 
new and better airports. 
(Para 17.2)

3  
Reply of the Government 
 2.1. Noted please. 
2.2. The expansion and development of infrastructure facilities at the airports is a continuous 
process and is undertaken on the operational requirements fo r safety of aircraft operation and 
demand from airlines, depending upon availability of land and viability, as well as other facilities 
with reference to intended aircraft operations. 
2.3. AAI has embarked upon a CAPEX plan of Rs. 25000 Crore in next five years for 
development/ upgradation/modernization of various airports in the country to meet the 
requirement of Air Traffic / passengers growth which includes expansions / modification of 
existing terminal, new terminals, expansions / strengthening of exist ing runways, aprons, ANS 
works like control tower, technical block etc. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3. The Committee is of the view that sufficient parking spots and slots should be made 
available at the airports, in order to increase the efficiency of th e airlines. The Committee urges 
the Ministry to devise viable measures and a robust monitoring policy for attracting more and 
more investment for airport projects. 
(Para 17.3) 
Reply of the Government 
3.1. Development of Apron Parking Bays at Indian Airport s is  a continuous process  based  
on the requirement of the Airlines, slots and procurement of Aircraft. AAI is continuously 
developing Apron Bays considering 5 years horizon. At present there are approximately 705 
aircraft registered with Indian Schedule d carriers. As of now , there are approximately 1335 
aircraft parking bays at Indian Airports including AAI Airports,  JV  airports,  DIAL  and  
MIAL. 
3.2. Further, approximately 550 additionally aircraft Bays are being planned / under 
construction keeping in view the requirement of bays for the next 5 years. After  the  
construction of bays, Indian Airports will have approximately 1885 Aircraft parking bays. 
3.3. Slots at airports to various airlines are allocated  based  on  the  Airport  capacity.  
Airport capacity consists of Runway capacity, Terminal capacity & parking stand capacity. 
Airport capacity can be enhanced by adding new  /improving  existing  infrastructure  along  
with latest technological advancement associated with Runways, parking stands,  Taxiways, 
rapid exit taxiways terminal building etc.  Through  Airport  capacity  enhancement,  no.  of slots 
at airports can be increased, which will benefit both airlines and airports as well. Development of 
Apron Parking Bays at Indian Airports is a continuous process based on the requirement of the 
Airlines, slots and procurement of  Aircraft.  AAI  is  conti nuously developing Apron Bays 
considering 5 years horizon. At present there are approximately 705 aircraft registered with 
Indian Scheduled carriers. 
3.4. As far as attracting investment in the airport sector, Ministry of  Civil  Aviation  has  
been taking  various policy decisions in this direction.  The  Airports  Infrastructure  Policy,  
1997 and the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 encourage development of airports by the 

4  
State Governments or the private sector or in PPP mode. Recently, Govt. of India has  
undertaken PPP exercise of six airports of AAI namely, Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Mangaluru, 
Jaipur, Guwahati and Thiruvananthapuram. The bidding process  has  been  completed,  and 
three projects i.e., Ahmedabad, Lucknow and Mangaluru have been awarded to the successful 
bidder. Award of remaining three airports is in progress. 
3.5. Further, Greenfield Airports at Durgapur and Kannur have been operationalized with 
private partici pation. Further, Govt. of India  has  granted  'in  principle'  approval  for  
Greenfield Airports at Jewar, Navi Mumbai and Mopa which are being executed under PPP 
mode. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4. The Committee recommends that while granting approval for new airports, the Ministry 
should ensure that sufficient space is earmarked for commercial shops in the airport. Further, 5 
Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The Committee 
also desires that extra land, if a ny, should not be sold and should be kept for future 
developmental activities. 
(Para 17.4) 
Reply of the Government 
4.1. The Airports Infrastructure Policy, 1997 put major thrust towards increasing the share 
of commercial revenue emerging from non-aeronautical sources to help in optimal exploitation 
of the full commercial potential of airports and make the airports not only viable but capable of 
generating surpluses for further expansion and development. In the allocation of space 
commercial facilities, airports are required to prepare a Master Plan and follow a strict adherence 
to stipulated procedures, while maintaining sufficient flexibility in order to ensure quality 
products and services and attract the holders of reputed brand -names. Further, the National Civil 
Aviation Policy 2016 prescribes for ‗Hybrid Till‘  framework for economic regulation of airports 
under which 30% of non -aeronautical revenue will be used to cross -subsidise aeronautical 
charges. This framework encourages the airport op erators to maximize the land use potential of 
airport for commercial activities. 
4.2. Thus, the airport developers of new airports have not only freedom but also they get 
incentive for utilizing the airport land for commercial facilities and generate non -aeronautical 
revenue. 
4.3. Further, Airports Authority of India earns revenues from Aeronautical and Non - 
Aeronautical resources. Non -Aeronautical resources include earmarking 10 -15% area of a 
Terminal building for Offices, Retail and F&B. Also city side la nd is leased for non - 
Aeronautical activities as identified in the AAI Act which include hotels, restaurants, warehouses 
etc. 
Kushinagar  Airport 
Recommendation/ Observation 
5.        The Committee notes that though many of the works pertaining to operationalizing of the 
Kushinagar Airport have been completed, the ATC Tower and runway lighting are yet to be 
completed. The Committee observes that the claim of the Ministry about the completion of the 

5  
Airport without these two vital requirements gets negated. The Committee wishes to remind the 
Ministry that the work in respect thereto started several years ago and is still going on. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to complete these pending items without any further delay and 
also operationalize them soon. 
(Para 19.1) 
Reply of the Government 
5.1. The Projected Dates of Completion of the work of the ATC Tower and the lighting 
system at Kushinagar Airport are Dec, 2020 and Sept., 2020, respectively. 
5.2. Kushinagar Airport is situated approximately 50 km away from nearest Gorakhpur Civil 
Enclave. An MOU was signed between Govt. of Uttar Pradesh (GoUP) and Airports Authority  
of India (AAI) on 05.03.2019 for development and operationalization of existing airport at 
Kushinagar with existing infrastructure along with approximately 589 acres of land, free of cost 
and free from all encumbrances to AAI and further development of the airport will be done by 
AAI. 
5.3. The GoUP is to bear all the expenditure in respect of claims or liabilities  arising out of 
rehabilitation and re -settlement of affected people and claims or liabilities arising out of any 
litigation, present or future, in the matter of existing land acquisition. 
5.4. At present, Kushinagar Airport is non-operational and it is proposed to be developed for 
operation of ATR-72 type of Aircraft. A team comprising of officials from AAI, State Govt. and 
M/s RITES visited Kushinagar Airport on 23.08.2019 and 24.08.2019. GoUP has handed over 
the land and existing infrastructure to AAI. AA I Officials requested the State Govt. to get the 
following pending works completed such as completion of pending work of Boundary Wall, 
provision of adequate security personnel by State Govt., removal of all abandoned structures 
(like Schools, Buildings, temple, electrical polls and old ATC Tower) and trees which are falling 
in the runway strip and transitional surfaces, provision of adequate Fire service staff, 
construction of approach road from nearest National/ State highway to airport, diversion of road  
near Shahpur and Nanakni for completion of Airport boundary wall, resolution of pending legal 
cases on 1.8 acre of land to be handled and presented by state Govt. 
5.5. Under RCS UDAN -3, M/s Turbo Aviation Ltd. has been allotted route Lucknow — 
Kushinagar - Gaya - Kushinagar - Lucknow. 
Jewar Airport 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
6. The Committee hopes that the new Greenfield airport proposed at Jewar would 
materialize soon. 
(Para 21.1) 
Reply of the Government 
6.1. Gol granted 'in principle' approval to Government of Uttar Pradesh for setting up of a 
Noida International Greenfield Airport at Jewar vide certificate dated 08.05.2018. (Site clearance 
granted on 6th July, 2017). Noida International Airport Limited (NIAL)  has been authorized for 
development of Noida International Greenfield Airport, Jewar, Uttar Pradesh. GoUP appointed 
Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority (YEIDA) as the implementing agency 
for the project. The development of the project depends upon the respective airport developer. 

6  
GoUP has completed the bidding process for Jewar airport project. The financial bids for Noida 
International Greenfield Airport were opened on 29th November 2019 and Zurich Airport 
International AG emerged as the successful bidder. GoUP declared Zurich Airport International 
AG as the Selected Bidder and the 'conditional letter of Award'(cloA) dated 16th December  
2019 has been issued to them. A SPY named Yamuna International Airport Private Limited  has 
been incorporated by selected bidder on 22.01.2020 for project execution. 
6.2. Out of total project area of 1334 hectares, acquisition proceeding has already been 
completed and the possession of approximately 87% of land has already been tak en. Govt. of 
India has granted ‗Security Clearance‘ to the airport developer in May, 2020. 
Kolhapur Airport 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
7. The Committee notes that Kolhapur has tremendous tourism potential. In order to give 
a boost to tourism in and around Kolhapur, the Committee desires that the Ministry should 
consider upgrading the Kolhapur airport and ensure that facilities such as night landing are 
available at the airport. 
(Para 23.2) 
Reply of the Government 
7.1. Runway at the Kolhapur airport is being  extended from existing 1370m to 1930m 
within the existing land available and the State Government has been requested to provide 64 
acres of land to further extend the runway to 2300m for operation of the AB -320 type of aircraft 
and for the provision of CAT-1 Approach lighting system. 
7.2. Moreover, the work for the new Terminal Building with handling capacity of 0.5 
million passengers, Apron for 3 Nos. Code C aircraft, ATC Tower, Fire Station is also under 
progress. Presently simple approach lighting system will be provided for night landing. 
7.3. Further, AAI is taking up the matter for upgrading the airport from 3C VFR to 3C IFR   
with the DGCA. 
Installation of Solar Power Plants at the airports 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
8. The Committee recognizes the  fact that solar energy is a resource that can offer great 
benefits and that eco -friendly methods of energy production should be our aim in all sectors of 
development. The Committee is happy to note that steps have been taken by AAI to reduce 
carbon foot-print. The Committee desires that solar power plants should be installed in future at 
all the airports operated by it. 
(Para 25.1) 
Reply of the Government 
8.1. In addition to the already installed solar power plants at 53 airports/buildings having 
cumulative installed capacity of 41.285 MWp, the installation of solar power plant of 17.09 MWp 
capacity at 11 more locations /airports is in progress. 

7  
Institutes for Pilot Training 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
9. The Committee welcomes t he step taken by DGCA to simplify rules and regulations 
regarding setting up of Institutes for Pilot Training. Keeping in view the growth in the Indian 
aviation industry and shortage of pilots faced in India, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry shou ld give serious thought to setting up of new Institutes for Pilot Training and to 
revamp the existing ones and also augment the capacity intake of students in the existing 
Institutes. 
(Para 27.1) 
Reply of the Government 
9.1. Noted for compliance. 
9.2. A me eting with the heads of the FTOs in this regard has been held under the 
chairmanship of Secretary (CA). Various avenues for revamping the working of FTOs were 
discussed during the meeting. These steps are likely to increase the capacity of the existing 
FTOs. It may, however, be noted that except for IGRUA, all the FTOs are either under the State 
Governments or privately owned and managed. At present there is no proposal to open a 
Flying/Pilot Training Organisation under the Government of India. 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA)  
Recommendation/ Observation 
10. The Committee appreciates the roadmap formulated for IGRUA and hopes that the 
implementation of the roadmap will revive IGRUA which is beset with various problems. The 
Committee desires that periodic updates may be furnished to it on the steps taken for 
improvements in the domain of IGRUA. 
(Para 28.1) 
Reply of the Government 
10.1. Noted for compliance. 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) facilities in India 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
11. The Committee is aware of the huge potential that India has, in offering MRO facilities 
in its soil. It is a sad fact that India could not fully exploit the opportunities available in this 
sector. MRO, being a sunrise industry, and with our huge technical  and skill base, by creating a 
congenial environment, India can easily meet the requirements of the sector. By giving boost to 
this sector, new employment opportunities can be created for our fresh engineering students.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the Ministry should give adequate and immediate 
focus on the issues faced in the MRO sector and chalk out strategic measures to make positive 
interventions in order to ensure that India becomes a key player in offering MRO facilities. This 
will also help in achieving the Prime Minister’s vision of attaining 5 trillion dollar economy. 
(Para 30.1) 
Reply of the Government 

8  
11.1. The Government has taken up further improvements in policy, taxation and regulatory 
regime. The roadmap h as been developed in consultation with MRO industry for realizing self -
sufficiency in this vital and strategic aviation segment, which includes upgrading the 
demonstrated airframe capacity and setting up component and engine MROs in India. Reciprocal 
acceptance of air safety certificates between Indian and overseas regulators has also been taken 
up. Convergence between Defence sector and the civil MROs would be established to create 
economies of scale and maintenance costs for airlines would be brought down  including through 
rationalisation of royalty charged for MROs at airports. 
11.2. The implementation of the roadmap would act as a catalyst for future growth towards a 
well-developed Indian MRO ecosystem which will help in leveraging India‗s engineering 
advantage, a step towards achieving higher self -reliance in airline operations and Make-in- India. 
It will also help nurture R&D besides creating MRO training infrastructure, skills development, 
and churning out more jobs for the youth of India.  Commensurate with the airlines‘  fleet growth 
over time, the size of India aviation MRO is estimated by industry to grow annually from an 
estimated Rs. 13,500 crore in 2019 -20 to Rs. 21,600 crore in the  next five years, with domestic 
MRO contributing a higher proportion of about Rs. 5,000 crore. 
11.3. In pursuance of the roadmap, the tax regime for MROs has been substantially 
rationalized as below: 
(a) Import Duty has been exempted on Special Tools and Equipment for MRO. 
(b) Customs duty waived that applied to spares only for Airlines extended to MRO. 
(c) Aircraft brought into country for MRO allowed to stay from 1 month to 6 months 
without penalties. 
(d) Spares purchased for MRO can be consumed upto 36 months (up from 12 months) 
from time of landing in India. 
(e) GST on Domestic MRO reduced from 18% to 5% w.e.f. 1st April, 2020. 
(f) Sub-contracted transactions to domestic MRO by foreign MRO now treated  as 
exports with zero-rated GST w.e.f. 1st April, 2020. 
Air Cargo sector 
Recommendation/ Observation 
12. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry unveiled its National Air Cargo Policy 
in January, 2019 which includes some good initiatives like the first -in-world dedicated Air  
Flight corridors between India -Afghanistan which is proposed to be extended to all and land - 
locked countries in a phased manner. The Committee would like the Ministry to initiate concrete 
actions in that direction, for it will encourage code sharing/interline agreements between  
foreign and Indian carriers. 
(Para 31.1) 

9  
12.1. The Committee is of the view that India has  a huge untapped market potential in the 
sector and it is high time to bring about policy and structural changes aimed towards 
transparency and paperless trade environment in this sector. 
(Para 31.2) 
Reply of the Government 
12.2. (a) Growth of air cargo is  critical for industries such as e -commerce, pharmaceuticals, 
electronics, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, animal husbandry and marine exports, 
and high -value goods, including gems and jewellery and fashion garments, where 
shipments are highly time-sensitive. 
(b) High air cargo growth of 9.3% (CAGR) has been achieved during last five years 
compared to hardly any growth the preceding years. India‗s air cargo growth exceeded 
global growth during this period. During FY 2018-19, total air cargo handled reached to 
3.57 million MT comprising domestic air cargo of 1.36 million and international air 
cargo of 2.20 million MT. Domestic and international cargo grew annually by 12.1% 
and 2.6%, respectively. Indian air express and courier industry is one of the fast est 
growing markets globally. Growth is estimated at 17% CAGR during the last five years. 
Entry of e-commerce giants in air cargo business is expected to give further impetus to 
its growth. 
(c) Government has taken several initiatives to sustain the growth impetus in air cargo by 
way of cost reduction, efficiency improvement and better inter -ministerial coordination, 
and to bring the country‗s logistics on a par with global standards. These include, inter 
alia, the following: 
 
A. Infrastructure Creation/ Upgradation: 
(i) 23 Common User Domestic Cargo Terminals (CUDCTs) and 20 International Cargo 
Terminals (CUTs) made operational by Airport Authority of India (AAI) through its 
wholly-owned subsidiary, the AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Ltd. (AAICLAS). 
Both d omestic and international cargo terminals are also developed and operated at JV 
airports (Bengaluru, Cochin, Delhi, Hyderabad and Mumbai). 
(ii) AAICLAS has taken up a time -bound programme for developing air cargo facilities 
(including X -Ray machines) at unserve d airports and upgrading existing facilities at 
underserved airports as per commercial and other considerations. 
(iii) Cold Storage and perishable cargo handling facilities have been upgraded / developed at 
major airports. The segregated agro and other perishabl es facility, the 'Export Cold Zone', 
launched by MIAL (Mumbai International Airport Ltd.) on 20 February 2020 is world's 
largest airport-based temperature-controlled facility and a global first of its kind. 
(iv) Air Freight Station (off -airport common user faci lity) at Chennai is in operation. Delhi‗s 
first AFS is in readiness to be launched after obtaining security clearance. 
(v) For promoting multimodal synergies between air and road transportation in particular, 
multimodal logistics parks are being encouraged to help decongest airports and reduce 
logistics costs and air cargo processing time. 
B. Implementation of the provisions of the air cargo policy 
(i) Airport, including cargo terminals, and cold chain facilities and warehouses, have been 
included in Harmonised List of Infrastructure. 

10  
(ii) Free period for air cargo clearance has been reduced from 72 hours to within 48 hours 
across all major airports. 
(iii) Service Level Standards have been set for entire air cargo ecosystem. 
(iv) Progressively, air cargo dwell time on imports has been reduced from 72 hours to 52 hours 
by December 2017 and to 39 hours by December 2018 as per data maintained by IATA. 
Dwell time on export cargo was reduced at various major airports by 36 -72%, and  
averaged below 24 hours by December 201 8. A record was created when import 
consignment of an essential reagent/RNA extractor required for the COVID -19 test kits 
was cleared and handed over to the Indian importer within 7 minutes of aircraft touchdown 
at Bengaluru airport in pursuance of the tra de facilitation measures that have been put in 
place. 
(v) 4 Indian air cargo terminals were rated in top 6 in a global pilot project on Express/ Cargo 
Terminal Service Quality (CTSQ) conducted by The International Air Cargo Association 
(TIACA). 
(vi) Given the focus on automation and development of IT infrastructure at air cargo terminals 
connected to supply chains, transactions at the cargo terminals at major Indian airports are 
substantially paper -free. India also ranks among top -10 globally for e -Air Way Bill 
penetration. Single Window Customs clearances, 24x7 operations, are available at major 
airports. 
(vii) Airport Air Cargo Community Systems (ACCS) have been developed at major airports 
such as Delhi and Mumbai. As a mark of excellence of the Indian ACCS, the Indian 
aviation IT company has developed a similar system at Atlanta Airport (US) in 2019 -20 
and has now won the contract to develop it at Boston Airport (US) as well. Development of 
Digital Air Freight Corridors between Indian and European airports (MIAL and BIAL have 
been taken up their development with Schiphol and Atlanta airports). 
(viii) Pan-India market place development through globally -unique digital air cargo booking 
portals developed by aviation IT companies and launched in March 2018. These are also 
accessible through ACCS, and will facilitate connection of suppliers/consumers in Tier -II 
and III towns and MSME clusters to domestic and global supply chains. 
(ix) The pan -India National Air Cargo Community System (NACCS), which digitises and 
digitalises all aspects of the cargo transaction including regulatory clearances, financial and 
fiscal payments, has been fully conceptualised in consultation with stakeholders. It would 
cover both domestic and international transactions, and would be the global first of its  
kind. The Draft Cabinet Note is under preparation. 
(x) Unique Air Freight Corridors were launched in 2017 -18 between Afghanistan (Kabul) and 
India (Delhi, Mumbai, Amritsar). Similar corridors have been taken up with land -locked 
Central Asian countries. 
12.3.  Transshipment and transit infrastructure (Air -Air) developed at major airports such as 
Bengaluru, Delhi, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai. Unique Land -Air Cargo transshipment  
from Bangladesh via Petrapol and Kolkata airport using bonded trucking with GPS based 
tracking and Customs sealing has been successful operational since November 2018. 
 
Krishi UDAN 
Recommendation/ Observation 

11  
13. The Committee welcomes the launching of this new Scheme and hopes that its 
operationalisation will assist farmers to a large extent in timely transportation of agricultural 
products to the destined places of trade. This Scheme, if implemented in right earnest, will cut 
down the losses of farmers to a major extent and also in reducing waste. The Committee would 
like to be kept updated in the status of the Scheme and its implementation. 
(Para 32.1) 
Reply of the Government 
13.1. (a) The Committee on Krishi Udaan, at its first meeting held on 14 February 2020, 
constituted a Sub -Group each on Krishi Udaan and Krishi Rail to  draw up the contours of the 
Concept Note, and has reviewed the progress made thereafter. Two meeting s of the Sub-Group 
on Krishi Udaan have been held apart from multiple rounds of consultations with key 
stakeholders till date to draw up the production are as and the demand clusters for various agri -
products. The draft concept note has been drawn up. 
(b) Planning in advance of the harvesting of crops, daily coordination through video 
conferencing and facilitation measures were taken up with all links of the supply chains, 
namely, agri exporters, APEDA, MPEDA, horticulture board, brokers/agents, airports  and 
airlines. Impediments faced on shipments, including regulatory constraints faced by Indian 
airline carriers in new airports taken up by them for operatio ns, were removed. Resultantly, new 
products (Litchis from Bihar, mango es from UP, etc.) and new destination markets (in the East 
and Far East and also Central Asia and East Europe) for agri -produce of India have been 
successfully taken up for bringing bett er value  realization to Indian farmers. Since the 
announcement of Covid-19 Lockdown from 25 March 2020 to until 20 May 2020, over 10,000 
tonnes of agri -produce was exported to Europe, Middle East, South Asia, South East Asia, 
Hongkong, etc. Domestically, about 400 tonnes of agri -produce was shipped by air to the 
demand clusters. 
(c)    The first Land-Air multi-modal export of fresh vegetables from Varanasi to London via 
Delhi Airport was successfully implemented. 
13.2. The supply chains for agri -produce fr om the NER and tribal districts are being 
strengthened and export of organic produce has been under focus as well. 
High cost of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
14. The Committee welcomes the step taken by State Governments in reducing VAT on ATF 
for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The State Governments have shown reluctance to 
reduce VAT on ATF for other flights. The Committee feels that this issue needs urgent attention 
to bring much needed relief and help in flourishi ng the Aviation Sector. The Committee is of the 
view that the issue of inclusion of ATF under GST should be pursued vigorously with the State  
Governments. 
(Para 34.1) 
Reply of the Government 
14.1. (a) M/o Civil Aviation has requested M/o Finance to bring ATF under the ambit of GST 
with the applicable GST rate of 12% with full input tax credit. Simultaneously,  the Ministry has 
also requested various State Governments to provide full support for bringing ATF within the 
GST‗s ambit at the earliest during the deliberations on the matter in the GST Council. 
(b) Most State Governments have reduced VAT on ATF for aircraft operated in accordance 

12  
with the requirements of RCS -UDAN scheme. In some cases, VAT on scheduled and non - 
scheduled aircraft of M TOW of 40 tonnes and less or even of MTOW of more than 40 tonnes 
has also been reduced. 
14.2. In order to uphold affordability and sustainability of air passenger and air cargo 
transportation and to rationalise the billing mechanism of Fuel Throughput (Air port Operator) 
Charge levied by Airport Operators on ATF, it has been decided vide the Ministry ‘s Order dated 
8 January 2020 that levy of this charge in any manifestation shall be discontinued at all airports, 
airstrips and heliports across India with immediate effect. 
Digi Yatra 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
15. The Committee welcomes Digi Yatra initiative in the domain of security. Digi Yatra will 
not only facilitate paperless travel, but also ensure hassle free moment of passengers at multiple 
points at the airports. 
(Para 35.1) 
Reply of the Government 
15.1. DIGI YATRA, an initiative of Ministry of Civil Aviation, is a facial recognition 
enabled e -boarding system for passengers at Indian airports and provides a seamless travel 
experience and reduces queue  waiting time. The progress is being regularly monitored with the 
concerned authorities. 
Aircraft Leasing and Financing from India 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
16. The Committee is of the view that taking into account the thriving aviation industry in 
India, the regulatory framework relating to financing and leasing of aircrafts should be given a 
fresh look. This is vital to the sustainable and cost effective growth of the aviation industry in 
India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a detailed study may be conducted in this 
regard and a plan of action may be chalked out at the earliest. 
(Para 36.3) 
Reply of the Government 
16.1. (a) In a landmark initiative to create new business and top jobs for India's banking, non - 
banking, insurance, leasing and asset management, and also associated legal,  accountancy and 
consultancy sectors, Ministry of Civil Aviation had constituted an inter - Ministerial Working 
Group (WG) with industry participation in May 2018 to bring the new business of aircraft leasing 
and financing to India. 
(b) The WG held detailed consultations with Airlines, Banks, insurers, pension funds, 
NBFCs, AIFs, Foreign lessors/ Asset managers, Government Departments (Revenue, Economic 
Affairs, Financial Services, Corporate Affairs, Commerce), and Regulators (IRDAI, RBI, 
DGCA). It also carried out a detailed study and 360 -degree review of current regulatory 
framework affecting aircraft financing, identified challenges/barriers and recommended their 
potential solutions. It thus recommended a detailed roadmap along with an implementation action 
plan for developing aircraft financing and leasing as an asset class from institutional investors in 
India. The Report of the Working Group was released by the Ministry at the Global Aviation 
Summit-2019 held in Mumbai on 15 January 2019. 
(c) Ministry of Civil Aviation held further discussions with regard to the findings and  
recommendations of the Working  Group with banks, insurance and pension funds and major India -

13  
based airlines along with other key stakeho lders during the Aviation Conclave 2019 on 27 
February 2019 at New Delhi. An India Roundtable Conference on Project Rupee Raftaar was 
organised at Mumbai on 13 June 2019. A Workshop on Aviation Finance was also held in New 
Delhi organised by the Ministry i n association with foreign lessors/asset managers on 20 August 
2020. 
(d)  Through the Union Budget 2019 -20 announced on 5 July 2019, the Government has 
emphasized on the significant business of aircraft financing and leasing activities : “As the 
world’s thi rd largest domestic aviation market, the time is ripe for India to enter into aircraft 
financing and leasing activities from Indian shores. This is critical to the development of a self -
reliant aviation industry, creating aspirational jobs in aviation fina nce, besides leveraging the 
business opportunities available in India’s financial  Special Economic Zones (SEZs), namely, 
International Financial Services Centre (IFSC). Government will implement the essential 
elements of the regulatory roadmap for making India a hub for such activities”. 
(e)  Implementation of this mandate has been taken up through the Task Force on IFSC 
chaired by HMOS (Finance) and Group of Secretaries chaired jointly by DEA and MOCA. 
(f)  A detailed proposal for amending the Gujarat SEZ  Act to provide specific exemption 
from payment of Stamp Duty on instruments executed in connection with aircraft financing/ 
leasing transactions from India‘ s IFSC has also been taken up with the State Government. In 
principle decision already taken to exempt stamp duties by Government of Gujarat. 
(g) Some tax concessions have already been provided to create an enabling ecosystem for such 
financing and leasing activities an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC), notably, to 
bring the IFSC in India at par with similar IFSCs in other countries, which, inter alia, include the 
following: 
(i) Exemption from corporate tax for leasing units in IFSC announced. Hitherto, a unit in 
IFSC was allowed deduction of 100% of profits for first five consecutive years  an d 
50% for next five consecutive years from the year of commencement. Now, 100% 
deduction for 10 consecutive years has been provided and further the unit may claim  
the said deduction, at its option, for any 10 consecutive years out of 15 years from the 
year of commencement. 
(ii) Tax exemptions for interest received by a non -resident in respect of monies lent to a 
unit located in IFSC. 
(iii) Hitherto, only a non-resident was not required to pay capital gains tax on the transfer of 
specified securities made on a recognised stock exchange in the IFSC. This benefit 
stands extended to a Category -III Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) in IFSC of which 
all the unit holders are non-residents, subject to certain other conditions. 
(iv) Other securities have been notified which shall be eligible for capital gains exemptions 
if traded on a recognized stock exchange in IFSC by a specified person. 
(v) Hitherto, dividend distribution tax (DDT) was not leviable on the distribution of 
dividend by a company located in IFSC if the same was d istributed out of current 
income. This exemption benefit has been extended to distribution out of accumulated 
profit which has been accumulated by the unit after 1 st April, 2017 from operations in 
IFSC. 
(vi) In order to facilitate setting up of mutual funds in the IFSC, there would be no 
additional tax on distribution of any amount, on or after 1 September 2019, by  a 
specified Mutual Fund out of its income derived from transactions made on a recognised stock 
exchange located in any IFSC. 
(vii) Deduction under section 80LA has been allowed to a non -resident for the purpose of 

14  
computing tax liability in respect of income of the nature of interest, dividend etc. 
referred to in section 115A. 
(viii) Exemptions have been provided to an intermediary of financial services located in the 
IFSC to a customer located outside India. 
(h) Notable among the non -tax regulatory initiatives, IFSC Act was passed and the Unified 
Regulator for IFSC was announced making it an important move to ease operations of aircraft 
financing and leasing from the IFSC and to mark its presence in global financial markets. 
Insurance companies have been permitted to undertake aircraft insurance. DGFT/RBI waiver 
from Importer-Exporter Code (IEC) and from General Remittances (GR) have been announced. 
(i) Resultantly, global financial institutions and technology companies have started their 
operations at IFSC. 
(j)  Some Indian Business Schools have tied up with foreign aircraft asset management 
companies to take up training and research in the field of aircraft leasin g and financing activities. 
Private secto r companies have taken up skill  development programmes in various sub -
components of aircraft leasing, such as Maintenance Reserves, with the participation of Indian 
and foreign airline representatives. 
16.2. Rupee-denominated aircraft lease has taken off. Through open bidding, successful open 
bidding for indigenously manufactured and maintained civil aircraft (by HAL) for deployment 
on RCS-UDAN routes. Also, ATR aircraft successfully leased out by domestic leasing entity. 
Faulty Engines 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
17. The Committee is satisfied with the action taken by the Ministry. At the same time, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the airlines may purchase engines 
which have been in the  market for a stipulated, reasonable period of time with credentials of 
international safety standards. The Committee also desires that AAIB should assess the reasons 
for such engine failure and recommend suitable remedial measures. The Committee desires t he 
Ministry to frame safety standards/ protocols in aircraft operations. 
(Para 37.1) 
Reply of the Government 
17.1. Airbus A320 Neo aircraft fitted with two PW1100 series engines are operated by M/s 
Indigo Airlines and M/s Go Air. M/s Indigo Airlines induct ed their first A320 Neo aircraft in 
March 2016 and at present have a total of 106 aircraft in their fleet. M/s Go Air inducted their 
first A320Neo aircraft in May 2016 and presently have 43 aircraft in their fleet. More than 574 
such aircraft are operating globally. 
1. PW 1100 engines are manufactured by M/s Pratt and Whitney (P&W), USA. The engine 
has been type certified by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) of USA, the 
regulatory authority of the State of Design and subsequently by European Aviation Safety 
Agency (EASA). 

15  
2. Post induction of the aircraft into service, technical issues were experienced on these 
engines worldwide. Most of these issues have been suitably addressed by the 
manufacturer except high N2 Vibration and 3rd Stage Low Pressure Turbine (LPT) 
failures, which is being addressed by making suitable modifications during shop visits of 
the engines. 
3. As a final mitigation, modified engines with new 3rd stage LPT blades are being installed 
on the aircraft. 
4. DGCA has directed both the airlines to take following proactive measures in the interest 
of safety: 
(i) Record, monitor and inspect engines if Vibration is reported to be more th an 3CU (as 
against manufacturer‘s guideline of 5CU). 
(ii) Restricting operation of A320 Neo aircraft with P& W engines to Port Blair. 
(iii) Extended Diversion Time Operation (EDTO) for Airbus Neo aircraft has not 
been allowed by DGCA. 
(iv) All new inductions of A320/321 neo aircraft after August 2019 must be installed with 
engines having modified 3rd stage LPT. 
(v) No un-modified engine from MROs shall be accepted after September 2019. 
5. Subsequent to four Air Turn Back (ATB)/ Inflight Shut Down (IFSD) events witnessed in 
a week in October 2019, following additional measures have been taken: 
(i) DGCA reviewed the failure pattern which indicated that the failures were experienced on 
engines which had accumulated more than 2900 Flight hours. To enhance safety of 
operations, DGCA directed both the airlines to operate only those aircraft which had at 
least one modified engine, if the o ther engine had accumulated more than 2900 Flight 
Hours. The directive stands compiled by both the airlines. 
(ii) Further, in view of the fact that more number of events related to LPT failures were 
reported on engines of Indigo fleet (22 in case of Indigo & 4 in case of Go Air, as on 
date), DGCA directed M/s IndiGo for replacement of unmodified engines with modified 
engines on its entire fleet by 31st January 2020. In compliance, the operator and the 
manufacturer have taken steps to expedite replacement of unmodified engines. 
(iii) DGCA‗s stand has been acknowledged by Federal Aviation Administration of US and 
European Aviation Safety Agency, who have also committed to the replacement of 
unmodified engines. It involved procurement of about 200 engines. 
(iv) Considering the logistical challenges involved in replacing this unexpected demand of 
large number of engines and after ensuring that at least one modified engine has  been 
placed on all the aircraft, irrespective of the flight hours accumulated, DGCA has 
extended  the t imeline for complete removal of unmodified engine to 31 st May, 2020 
from earlier mandated 31st January, 2020. 
6. The schedule of replacement of engines has been adversely affected due to global 
lockdown. At present a total of 57 unmodified engines are install ed on aircraft of M/S 
Indigo fleet and 22 unmodified engines are installed on aircraft of M/s Go Air fleet. 

16  
7. M/s P & W is in the process of setting up an MRO in India in collaboration with M/S Air 
India for replacement of 3rd stage LPT at their Mumbai facility. This will significantly 
reduce the time taken for the upgrade. The facility was expected to be operational by the 
end of February 2020, however due to COVID 19 Pandemic, the process of restoration is 
likely to be completed upon normalcy post global lock down. 
8. DGCA is consistently monitoring the performance of these engines operated by Indian 
operators and taking mitigation actions to ensure safe operation of aircraft. Many of the 
issues have been addressed by taking suitable mitigatio n actions, by DGCA and the 
manufacturer. 
Air Connectivity/Helicopter Services 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
18. The Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt a futuristic approach in connecting 
important tourist destinations in the country. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure 
adequate infrastructure and facilities at such airports/heliports. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should bolster its efforts to enhance airport network by providing 
more Water-drones. 
(Para 39.1) 
Reply of the Government 
18.1. RCS is demand driven mechanism and the development of routes is left to market 
forces. Airlines undertake due assessment of demand of product and participate in RCS Bidding 
Process. 
18.2. In three rounds of bidding under RCS -UDAN, 46 To urism routes have been awarded, 
out of which 20 routes have commenced. Further, 10 water aerodromes have been awarded in 3 rd 
round of bidding of RCS-UDAN. 
Insufficiency  of  hangars 
Recommendation/ Observation 
19. The Committee is of the considered view that s ince the Ministry is taking commendable 
steps to ensure air connectivity to remote areas also, it is an essential corollary that well 
equipped hangars are also built in such places, in order to ensure proper and time efficient 
maintenance of aircrafts and helicopters. 
(Para 41.1) 
Reply of the Government 
19.1. Tenders for development of 13 hangers at 11 airports on Design, Build, Operate and 
Maintain (DBOM) basis (construction -cum-license to operate and maintain) have bee n awarded 
on 05.03.2019. Once  the agreement with these awardees/agencies finalizes, further action for 
allotment of hangars through call of tenders will be initiated for the airports, as per potential 
requirements / demands received from user agencies. 

17  
Air India Ltd. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
20. As the Government has already fast tracked the disinvestment of Air India, the  
Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a status note within one month from the date of 
submission of this Report to the Parliament. 
(Para 42.2) 
Reply of the Government 
20.1. Strategic Disinvestment of Air India 
1. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), in its meeting held on 28.06.2017, had 
given an 'in principle' approval for considering strategic disinvestment of Air India and its five 
subsidiaries. The Preliminary Information Memorandum (PIM) for inviting Expression of 
Interest (EOI) for the Strategic Disinvestment of Air India including its shareholding in Air India 
Express and AI SATS (Joint venture between Air India Limited and Singapore Airport Terminal 
Services (SATS Ltd)) was issued on 28th March, 2018. No EoI/bid was received till the last date 
of receipt of bids i.e. 31.05.2018. After no bid was received for strategic disinvestment of Air 
India by the last date i.e 31.05.201 8, the Air India Specific Alternative Mechanism (AISAM) in 
its meeting held on 18.06.2018, had, inter-alia, decided as follows: 
In  view  of  volatile  crude  prices  and  adverse  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates,  the  present 
environment is not conduci ve to stimulate interest amongst investors for strategic disinvestment 
of Air India in immediate near future. The issue would be revisited once global economic 
indicators including oil prices and forex conditions stabilize. 
2. The Air India Specific Alternati ve Mechanism (AISAM) in its meeting held on 27.11.2018 
decided that time is ripe for capturing intermediate steps towards the strategic disinvestment of 
Air India as crude oil prices have cooled down, forex regime has stabilised and there is 
improvement in  other indicators like liquidity. In this regard, AISAM further directed to 
separately decide the contours of the mode of disposal of the subsidiaries viz. Air India 
Engineering Services Limited (AIESL), Air India Air Transport Services Limited (AIATSL) an d 
Airline Allied Services Limited (AASL). 
3. After formation of new Government, AISAM has been reconstituted. The newly constituted 
AISAM has approved re -initiation of process of strategic disinvestment of Air India and its 
subsidiaries. Also , AISAM has approved the 100% sale of Government of India stake in Air  
India along with Air India Express Ltd and Government stake in Air India SATS for the re - 
initiated Strategic Disinvestment of Air India. The strategic disinvestment of Air India is to be 
driven by the Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) chaired by Secretary, Department of Investment  
and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) and co -chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. 
4. Meetings of Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) and Core Group of Secretar ies on Disinvestment 
(CGD) constituted by Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) were 
held on various issues related to issuance of Preliminary Information Memorandum for inviting 
Expression of Interest on strategic disinvestment of A ir India. The Preliminary Information 
Memorandum (PIM) for inviting Expression of Interest for sale of 100% equity share capital of 
Air India Limited (AIL) including AIL's 100% shareholding in the Air India Express Limited 

18  
(AIXL) and 50% shareholding in Air India Airport Services Private Limited (AISATS) has been 
issued on 27.01.2020. Subsequent to issuing of PIM, queries were received from the Interested 
Bidders. The clarification to the queries raised by the Interested Bidders have been issued. 
However, in view of prevailing situation arising out of COVID 19, last date for submission of 
EOIs has been extended from 30.04.2020 to 30.06.2020. Similarly, the date by which intimation 
to the Qualified Interested Bidders was to be given has been  extended from 14.05.2020 to 
14.07.2020. So far, 6 corrigendum have been issued in connection with the PIM issued on 
27.01.2020. 
A copy of PIM along with 6 corrigendum issued so far and clarification issued to the queries 
raised by the Interested Bidders a re available on the website of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(https://www.civilaviation.gov.in). Expression of interest in response to PIM by any group or 
entity will be submitted to the Transaction Adviser. 
5. The total debt of Air India Limited (AIL) as on 31 st March, 2019 is Rs. 58,282.92 crore. Debt 
amounting to Rs. 29,464 crore was decided to be transferred to Air India Assets Holding Limited 
(AIAHL), as decided in the meeting held on 07.09.2018 under the Chairpersonship of the then 
Finance Minister. Debt allocation between Air India and SPV to be revisited at a later date closer 
to disinvestment. 
6. The interest of the employees of Air India will be safeguarded in accordance with the 
guidelines of Department of Investment and Public Asset Management, Ministry o f Finance on 
strategic disinvestment of CPSEs and same will be reflected in the Share Purchase Agreement to 
be signed with new owner post disinvestment. 
7. The Government remains committed to the disinvestment of Air India 
Need for better co-ordination between Ministries 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
21. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road 
Transport & Highways, Culture, Tourism, Railways are not only inter -related and 
interconnected but also have a common objective to improve connectivity and better amenities 
for the benefit of tourists, travellers and faster movement of freight within the country. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly advocates a pressing need for having an effective co -ordination 
mechanism among these Ministries so that the policies and guidelines being formulated by them 
are executed seamlessly and can supplement each other in achieving these objectives. This will 
not only increase effectiveness and efficiency, but will also help in utilizat ion of funds and skilled 
manpower to the maximum possible extent. Therefore, the Committee recommends that an easy - 
to-use interface should be made available which allows hassle -free communication and 
coordination amongst them. A hotline number which is co mmon to all these Ministries, may be 
established so that whenever emergency arises, there can be effective and prompt coordination 
among these Ministries and issues in hand can be resolved at the earliest. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Government 
21.1. As per dir ection of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a Core Group having 
representations from all concerned M inistries have been formed under the Chairmanship of the 
Secretary, Civil Aviation. The first meeting of the Core Group was held on 23.01.2020. 

19  
Furthermore, as directed by the Committee, the proposal of Hot Line Commu nication amongst 
the concerned Ministries will be discussed in the next meeting being planned after Pandemic. 
Air ambulance 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
22. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should give urgent and 
adequate attention to growing need of Air Ambulance services in the country. The Committee 
desires that necessary policies and guidelines may be formulated in this regard. 
(Para 44.1) 
Reply of the Government 
22.1. DGCA has issued an Operations Circular OC No. 02 of 2016 dated 11.02.2016 on  
HEMS (Helicopter Emergency Medical Services). HEMS flight means a flight by a helicopter 
operating under a HEMS approval, the purpose of which is to faci litate emergency medical 
assistance, where immediate and rapid transportation is essential by carrying:- 
(a) Medical personnel or 
(b) Medical supplies (equipment, blood, organs, drugs) or 
(c) Any ill or injured persons and other persons directly involved. 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
Recommendation/ Observation 
23. The Committee observes that it would be in the fitness of jurisdiction and administrative 
convenience that the headquarters of the Commissioner of Railway Safety should be shifted from 
Lucknow to New Delh i for facilitating better logistics and coordination. The Commission may 
function as an independent entity and directly Report to the Minister of Civil Aviation through 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee desires that necessary manpower an d 
infrastructure may be provided at the earliest, for smooth functioning of the Commission. The 
Committee also desires that the status of Commissioner of Railway Safety may be upgraded, as 
recommended by the Committee in its 188th Report. 
(Para 45.1) 
Reply of the Government 
23.1. The Headquarter of the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety has been shifted from 
Lucknow to Delhi vide MOCA OM No. A.60015/101/2018 -CRS dt. 03.10.2018 and since then, 
CCRS is now functioning from CRS/Northern Circle office with sk eleton staff of RS wing of 
CCRS office. 
23.2. Action is being initiated to make functioning of the Commission as an independent 
entity and directly reporting to the Hon‗ble Minister of Civil Aviation through the Secretary. 
23.3. Proposal for upgradation of the Commission of Railway Safety is under consideration 
in the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA). Ministry of Railways vide OM no. 
2016/Safety(A&R)/1/6 dt. 18.09.2018 has also consented to this proposal and now draft Cabinet 
note is under consideration in the MOCA. 

20  
Multi Member Consultative Committee 
Recommendation/ Observation 
24. The Committee recommends that the MMCC should work out ways to empower CRS and 
to sort out issues presently existing in the effective functioning of CRS. 
(Para 46.1) 
Reply of the Government 
24.1. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has formed Multi Member Consultative Committee 
(MMCC) under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Civil Aviation to work out ways to empower 
CRS and to sort out issues presently existing in the effective functioning of the Commission. In 
order to achieve this objective, a well -defined Terms of Reference (ToR), (enclosed as 
Annexure-I), was given to MMCC. First meeting of the Committee has been held on 23 Jan, 
2020. The i ssues covered in ToR were discussed during the meeting and the matter is under 
deliberation. Suitable action shall be initiated as per the recommendations of the Committee. 
Miscellaneous 
Recommendation/ Observation 
25. The Committee notes that Patna needs a Gr eenfield project to cater to the growing  
traffic demand of the state, for domestic and international passengers and can emerge as the 
largest hub of Aviation in the Eastern Sector. It will also be beneficial to passenger traffic to the 
South-Eastern Corri dor, the Middle East and act as a diversion airport for Kathmandu. This 
proposed airport shall serve as a major hub for Buddhist and Sikh pilgrims on the Bihar 
religious tourism circuit. 
(Para 48.1) 
Reply of the Government 
25.1. As per the pre -feasibility study and the Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS) survey of 
the site identified by the District Administration, Saran, Bihar, the site has been found suitable 
for construction of a Greenfield Airport with orientation of Runway as 07/25, subject to detailed 
topographic survey, soil investigation and removal of all obstructions as per OLS Survey 
including relocation of HT Lines, etc. The report has been forwarded to the State Govt. of Bihar 
for their inputs/comments. 
25.2. As per the Greenfield Airports Policy , 2008, the State Government/AAI or any other 
Airport Company who wants to set  up an airport has to apply in the prescribed format for 'site 
clearance' followed by 'in principle' approval. Presently, Ministry has not received any proposal 
for development of Greenfield Airport at Patna as per the Greenfield Airport Policy. 
25.3. However, on the request of the State Government of Bihar, AAI carried out a pre - 
feasibility Study of the site in Saran District near Patna, identified by the District 
Administration, Saran for construction of a Greenfield  Airport, on 23 rd December, 2019. 
Subsequently, AAI has also prepared Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS) survey from 6th to 
14th January, 2020. Both the Pre -feasibility report and OLS Survey have been sent to the St ate 
Government of Bihar on 29.04.2020 for their consideration. State Government has not 
responded so far. 

21  
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
Greenfield  Airports 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1. The Committee is dismayed to note that operation of flights at Pakyong Airport were 
stopped due to poor visibility despite the fact that the airport opened with so much of fanfare and 
was showcased as a model for the development of North-East. The Committee fails to understand 
as to how, without having a proper instrument landing system and a longer runway, the airport 
was operationalized, being a Greenfield Airport. 
(Para 18.4) 
Reply of the Government 
1.1. Pakyong is  an operational airport and can handle ATR72 & Q400 type of aircraft 
operations under Visual Flight Rules (VFR) conditions. M/s Spice jet which was operating daily 
one scheduled flight on Kolkata - Pakyong - Kolkata sector had decided to temporarily suspen d 
its operations w.e.f. 01.06.2019 due to unpredictable weather which results in low visibility at 
Pakyong. Due to heavy rains in last monsoon, the debris/boulders slid from uphill area towards 
the basic strip, thus reducing the width of the basic strip to  30 meters, against the requirement of 
a minimum 40 meters for safe flight operations. There has been delay in removing the 
material/boulders to achieve the required safety width due to agitation by local people/villagers 
at the site. However, by the active co-ordination with the State Government and with the support 
of the State Govt. of Sikkim, the Runway Basic Strip has been cleared from loose soil for Code - 
B operations (Minimum 40m width from center line of Runway). 
1.2. Implementing Agency has awarded Kolkata-Pakyong-Guwahati-Pakyong-Kolkata route 
to M/s Spice Jet under RCS-UDAN. As per the scheme documents, interested airlines participate 
in bidding after doing due diligence of the route/network. As per the scheme documents, SAO 
commenced its RCS flig ht on readiness of the airport. However, Selected Airline Operator had  
to suspend its operations due to landslide/debris on basic strip. Debris has now been cleared. 
Network of the Selected Airline Operator has been requested to start the flight operations from 
Pakyong airport, after lifting of the present ban on all domestic flight operations during the 
lockdown period. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will address such sensitive issues and take 
corrective steps on priority basis to resolve them, in coordination with the State Government of 
Sikkim. 
(Para 18.5) 
Reply of the Government 
2.1. Pakyong is an operational airport and can handle ATR72 & Q400 type of aircraft 
operations under Visual Flight Rules (VFR) conditions. Due to heavy rains in last monsoon, the 

22  
debris/boulders slid from uphill area towards the basic strip, thus reducing the width of the basic 
strip to 30 meters, against the requirement of a minimum 40 meters for safe flight operations. 
There has been delay in removing the material/boulders to achieve the required safety width due 
to agitation by local people/villagers at the site. 
2.2. However, by the active co -ordination with the State Government and with the support 
of the State Govt. of Sikkim, the Runway Basic Strip has been cleared from loose soil for Code -
B operations (Minimum 40m width from centre line of Runway). 
Thanjavur Airport 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3. Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu, being a major Tourist destination, is connected only by the 
Road and Rail despite having an Indian Air Force Airport. One flight is operating from this 
Airport under the RCS Scheme. The Committee understands that the Airport has not been 
developed due to some land swapping issues between IA F and AAI, which is hampering 
operation of flights. Responding to this, the officials of the Ministry submitted that recently, a 
meeting took place between Secretary (Defence) and Secretary (Civil Aviation) to sort out this 
issue and assured the Committee that it will be done soon. The Committee hopes that a positive 
result will emerge soon. 
((Para 23) 
Reply of the Government 
3.1. Presently, Thanjavur airport is a non -operational airport owned by IAF. With a view to 
provide connectivity, AAI proposed to con struct civil terminal for which they requested IAF to 
provide 50 Acers of land. IAF is yet to transfer the land. Immediately on transfer of land by IAF, 
AAI will start the construction of Terminal building. 
Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) commonly known as 
drones Recommendation/ Observation 
4. The Committee takes note of the increasing number of drones in the country and calls 
upon the Ministry to establish an effective Drone Traffic Management System. The Committee 
would also like the regulatory mechanism to be strengthened for this purpose. 
(Para 33.1) 
Reply of the Government 
4.1. A C ommittee on Unmanned Traffic Management (UTM) has been constituted in 
Ministry of Civil Aviation with members from stakeholders, including representatives from the 
private sector, to recommend a suitable Unmanned Traffic Management (UTM) system and its 
deployment in the country. The Committee is likely to submit its report shortly. 
4.2. DGCA has issued CAR Section 3, Series X, Part I on Requirements for Operation of 
Civil Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS)‗ which is effective from 1st December 2018. 
4.3. Till date a total of 9 (nine) models of RPAS hav e been p rovisionally accepted by 
DGCA for operation in the country. 
4.4.  Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Rules, 2020 are under formulation  in  the Ministry  
which shall be subsequently released for public comments before finalisation. 

23  
Faulty Engines 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that aircrafts and 
helicopters which have at least 3 year flying exposure, should be considered for purchase, when 
it is used for commercial purposes. 
(Para 37.2) 
Reply of the Government 
5.1. An aircraft including aeroplanes and helicopters are manufactured only after its type 
design is approved by the country of design and a type certificate issued. Further, an aircraft for 
commercial/ air transport operations is designed and meets the laid down specific design criteria 
of the St ate of design given for such aircraft before the type certificate is issued. Aircraft 
designed and manufactured in the USA are type certified by Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) while those designed and manufactured in Europe are type certified by Eur opean Union 
Aviation Safety Agency. There is no laid down requirement for an aircraft to have a minimum 
flying hours for it to be considered for purchase. However, while issuing permission for import 
of an aircraft, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (D GCA) ensures that the aircraft proposed  
to be engaged in commercial operations is type certified for commercial operations and complies 
with the age and other relevant mandatory requirements as laid down in the applicable Civil 
Aviation Requirements (CARs ). Further, for the purpose of granting air operator certificate/ 
permit for commercial operations, the operator has to demonstrate airworthiness and operational 
requirements to DGCA. 

24  
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Projected demand vs. Allocation of Funds 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1. The Committee notes that compared to BE 2019 -20 of Rs. 4500 crores and Rs. 3700 
crores at RE 2019 -20, Rs. 3797.71 crore have been allocated to the Ministry of Civil Aviation  
for 2020 -21. Elaborating the reasons for the reduction of Rs. 800 crores at RE stage, the 
Secretary clarified that the delivery of two Special Extra Section Flight (SESF) VVIP aircrafts 
which were bought through Air India have been rescheduled from January, 2020 to June, 2020 
and hence this reduction. The Committee notes that the Capital side allocation had remained the 
same, whereas, on the revenue side, more than 50% of allocation is meant for s ervicing the debt 
of Air India and Purchase of 2 VVIP Planes and the remaining allocation is available for other 
activities of the Ministry. Keeping in view the security threat prevailing in the aviation sector all 
over the world, the Committee is of the c onsidered view that the inadequacy of budgetary 
allocation would hamper vital activities, such as installation of body scanners and provision of 
Capital for Rohini Heliport. The Committee feels that it is high time for installation of body 
scanners at all the airports in the country and therefore, fund allocation to the Ministry be 
substantially increased at the R.E. stage for the purpose. 
(Para 13.3) 
Reply of the Government 
1.1. As per BCAS‗s AVSEC Circular No. 05/2019 dated 08.04.2019, all Airport Operators 
have been directed to install Body Scanners at all airports at pre -embarkation security check 
points in a phased manner. In this connection, two trial runs of Body Scanners have been 
conducted at IGI airport, New Delhi from 05.12.2016 to 19.12.20 16 and from 04.10.2017 to 
09.10.2017. A trial run at domestic security hold area of T -3, IGI Airport, New Delhi has also 
started on 04.02.2020. 
1.2. The Tender for Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning of 198 Nos of Body 
Scanners at 63 AAI airpor t has been invited and scheduled to be opened on 26 th June 2020. The 
work is expected to be awarded by October 2020 and expected to be completed by December 
2021 at 63 AAI Airports 
1.3. Strategic disinvestment of PHL is underway and therefore process of demerger of 
Rohini Heliport has been initiated. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.4. The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why there was delay/rescheduling in 
the delivery of two special Extra Section Flight (SESF) VVIP aircrafts when sufficie nt 
allocations had been made in BE 2019 -20. This delay has resulted in the  downward 
revision of BE 2019 -20 allocation from Rs. 4500 crore to Rs. 3700 crore at the RE stage. 
The Committee would like to remind the Ministry that such shortfalls in utilization of 

25  
budgeted funds would derail the budgetary objectives of the Ministry and expects the 
Ministry to address this issue with due seriousness. 
1.5. The Committee also notes that the Ministry has not adduced any reasons for delay 
in rescheduling the delivery of VVIP aircrafts and would therefore like to apprised of the 
same as also the updated status in this regard. The Committee also desires to know 
whether any targeted action plan is in place for installation of body scanners at all the 
airports in the country. 
 
Savings 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. Considering the vital role played by the aviation sector in the growth and development of 
the nation and the growth registered by the aviation industry in the recent years, the Committee 
fails to understand why the Ministry requires more funds when even the allocated fund is not 
being spent fully both at the B.E. and R.E. stage of 2019 -20, and there is a saving of Rs. 76.80 
Crores in the Revenue Section. The Committee desires to know the reasons  for such a saving 
whereas crucial schemes like RCS are not being reimbursed fully to AAI. The Committee, 
therefore, opines that efforts should be made to fully utilize the funds allocated before seeking 
funds. 
(Para 14.2) 
Reply of the Government 
2.1. In 2 018-19 an amount of Rs.1014.09 crore (including Rs.124.00 crore of NER) was 
allocated to RCS but out of this only Rs.403.99 crore was incurred under this Scheme and 
balance amount of Rs.610.10 crore was re -appropriated/surrendered due to slow pace of 
expenditure. 
2.2. The broad reasons of less expenditure were : - Non-availability of land to be provided 
by State Governments, environmental issues, non-availability of working permission from MoD, 
Delay in shifting of State Highways, non -finalization of locatio n of heliports by State and 
consequent delay in execution at RCS airports by concerned State Governments etc. Hence the 
savings of Rs.76.86 crore could not be allocated in RCS during FY 2018-19. 
2.3. In 2019-20 against the BE of Rs.480 crore (including Rs. 70 crore NER), after cut on 
expenditure imposed by Ministry of Finance, Budget under this head was Rs. 451.51 crore. 
However, on request by MoCA the Ministry of Finance further allocated Rs.38.62 crore and 
increased the ceiling on expenditure on RCS to Rs.  490.13 crore. Final booking under RCS for 
2019-20 was Rs.488.81 crore. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.4. The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1014.09 crore was allocated to RCS 
for 2018-19 out of which only Rs. 403.99 crore was incurred and the balance amount was 
reappropriated/surrendered due to slow pace of expenditure. The Committee is 
constrained to note that a major chunk of the budgeted amount remained unutilized due to 
non-availability of land, environmental issues, delay in shifting of State Highways, non- 
finalization of location of heliports, etc. The Committee is of the view that such a huge 
underutilization of allocated funds is indicative of shortcomings in budgetary planning and 

26  
monitoring of utilization of the budgeted funds which clearly indicates fiscal indiscipline 
and laxity on the part of the Ministry. The Committee wo uld expect the Ministry to be 
more prudent in its budget formulation and make assessment after proper planning. 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3. The Committee notes that a serious challe nge is awaiting the nation, in the ever 
expanding aviation industry, after 2020 i.e., with regard to buying of carbon credits. As more 
and more areas are connected and expansion takes place, Ministry will have to buy a lot of 
carbon credit, which will invo lve huge financial implications. Under these circumstances, the 
Committee desires the Ministry to have a study of the financial implications involved for future 
expansion of our aviation sector which is presently at a nascent stage, but has a huge potentia l 
for further expansion. The Committee also calls upon the Ministry to take up, this issue 
diplomatically as well as politically, at the highest possible level, to sort it out as early as 
possible so as to secure the future of our civil aviation industry. 
(Para 15.1) 
Reply of the Government 
3.1.   1. It   is   true   that   a   scheme   called   ‗Carbon   Offsetting   and   Reduction   Scheme   
for International Aviation (CORSIA)‘  has been established by the International Civil Aviation 
Organisation (ICAO). The Scheme will commence operation from 2021 in a voluntary form 
which will last till 2026. From 2027 till 2035, it will run in mandatory form for all countries and 
collectively cover around 89% of total international aviation emissions. It will be further 
extended after a review. It provides for a global carbon offsetting mechanism under which the 
international  aeroplane  operators  will  be  required  to  purchase  and  cancel  ‗emissions  units‘ 
(carbon credits) to offset the increase in CO2 emissions covered by the scheme using the average 
annual emissions of 2019 and 2020 as reference. The Scheme lays down a formula for 
calculating the offsetting requirement of individual aeroplane operators. 
2. The Indian carriers will not be required to undertake any offsetting obligations until end of 
2026 since India has chosen not to join the Scheme in the voluntary phase (Pilot Phase 2021 - 
2023 and First Phase 2024 -2026). But from the b eginning of 2027, when the mandatory phase 
begins, India will have to join the Scheme as a member State of ICAO, and its carriers will be 
bound by the offsetting requirements and will have to buy carbon credits from approved sources 
to meet their obligations. 
3. A study has been commissioned by TERI (The Energy and Resources Institute) to assess the 
challenges posed by CORSIA for the air transport sector of India and the impact of CORSIA on 
the Indian airline industry. The first report is expected by the end of October, 2020. 
4. Even though India is committed to addressing the issues of climate change and environmental 
protection, India holds the view that CORSIA is unfair to developing countries like India and is 
also in some respects not in sync with the  UNFCCC. Accordingly, at the 40th ICAO Assembly 
session held in September/October 2019, India raised its concerns through a working paper but 
the updated Resolution on CORSIA was still adopted without any change since there was 

27  
inadequate support for India‗s stand. Still, India has filed its reservations to the Resolution in 
writing. 
5. ICAO has kept a provision for conducting review of the implementation of CORSIA every 3 
years, starting from 2022. In order to present the views of India s trongly and in a concerted 
manner to the ICAO Council during the proposed review in 2022, a Group of Secretaries 
consisting of Secretary, Civil Aviation as Convenor and Secretaries of M/o Environment, Forest 
& Climate Change, External Affairs and Petroleum  and Natural Gases as members, has been 
formed to develop a strategy to take forward the campaign for getting suitable changes in the 
design elements of CORSIA approved by ICAO. The Group has held one meeting in March, 
2020 at which the following points were deliberated: 
a) The proposal to shift the baseline year closer to 2027 needs to be firmly put forth for 
consideration under review of CORSIA scheme. To make the stand stronger, India is 
seeking the support of all states joining CORSIA scheme from 2027 on t he proposal of 
shifting the baseline year. In the recently held 11th BRICS Summit, the issue of CORSIA 
was discussed with the BRICS countries and consensus was built amongst them to work 
together on the review process of the CORSIA framework. 
b) The principle of attributing responsibility of emission reduction to Member  States instead 
of airline operators should be put forth as this will provide a more balanced and fair 
regime for States having large traffic volume of their own but relatively smaller airlines  
vis-à-vis States having low traffic volumes of their own but large airlines. Efforts should 
be made to  relate the emissions of a country to the total international flights from that 
country irrespective of the nationality of airlines operating such flights. 
c) Fast tracking the project for production of indigenous bio -fuels at commercially viable 
cost and to ensure that it meets the ICAO standards for sustainable alternative fuel so that 
the Indian airlines get the benefit of using such fuel under CORSIA scheme. 
d) Exploring diplomatic ways to elicit support of other countries for the above initiatives. 
6. However, due to the onset of the COVID -19 pandemic, the entire focus of the Government 
shifted to the contingency measures required to control the spread of epidemic in the country, and 
therefore, it has not been feasible to hold further meetings of the Group of Secretaries. But efforts 
will be made to organize the next meeting as early as possible. At this meeting, the  impact of 
COVID-19 on the CORSIA scheme  will also be discussed. As international air travel has been 
suspended or drastically reduced by most of the countries, there will be a massive reduction of 
carbon emissions for the year 2020. Hence, CO2 emissions from international civil aviation if 
calculated using the average annual emissions between 2019 and 2020, would result in an 
abnormally lower baseline and lead to higher offsetting requirements for aeroplane operators than 
previously anticipated. It is learnt that this development is being considered by ICAO presently. 
7. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is continuously monitoring the developments at ICAO 
through the Representative of India posted at ICAO in Montreal and efforts are being made to 
project our views at the Council meetings with the su pport of like -minded members of the 
Council. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 

28  
3.2. The Ministry, in its reply, has accepted that there will be deleterious effect on the 
financial health of the Indian carriers operating to foreign dest inations due to the present 
structure of CORSIA, wherein Indian carriers are hardly in any position to ramp up their 
credits due to long -haul international operations during the baseline determination period, 
i.e., 2019-21. The adverse effect will be notic ed after 2027 when the voluntary phase ends. 
The Ministry has indicated that TERI will be assessing the challenges posed by CORSIA 
and that a Group of Secretaries has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
of the Ministry to take forward the campaign for getting suitable changes introduced in the 
CORSIA structure. 
3.3. The Committee terms this as an interim response. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the outcome of TERI study and recommendations of the Group of Secretaries 
in the matt er. Furthermore, owing to the severe aviation lockdown due to the pandemic, 
there is a very strong case for reworking the baseline schedule. The Committee may be 
updated on the progress made in the matter. The Committee would like to   point out that  
if CORSIA structure is not amended, the airlines operating in this country would be at a 
massive competitive disadvantage against the airlines having the potential to generate huge 
credits due to their existing vast network. 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry for seamless integration of 
places of tourist and cultural importance at 46 Tourism routes out of which only 14 have 
actually operationali zed, which is only 30% of the i dentified routes. The Ministry needs to 
operationalize the remaining routes, as this will not only generate substantially financial/ huge 
resources, but also bear huge employment potential. The Committee desires that the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation should a ctively pursue the Ministry of Tourism, for early release of  100% VGF 
for the above-mentioned routes. 
(Para 16.6) 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.1. Noted please. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2. The Committee may be apprised as to whether there is an established mechanism 
for timely VGF release. 
Development of Airport Infrastructure 
Recommendation/ Observation 
5. The Committee finds a logical pattern of estimated cost under UDAN -I, II and III, but the 
trend of expenditure is quite disturbing. The Committe e presumes that correct estimations of 
projected cost have not been made by the Ministry in both the years 2018 -19 and 2019-20. The 
Committee points out that pace of expenditure has declined from 20% on UDAN-I, to 15% on 

29  
UDAN-II and nil on UDAN-III. The Committee, therefore, desires to know the precise reasons 
for the same. 
(Para 17.1) 
Reply of the Government 
5.1. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has approved the proposal for revival of 
existing unserved / underserved airports / airstrips of the State Governments, Airports Authority 
of India, Public Sector Undertakings and Civil Enclaves at an estimated cost of Rs. 4500 Crore. 
An airport which is included in the awarded routes of Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - 
UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) and requires upgradation/development for commencement of 
RCS operations, is developed under "Revival of unserved and underserved airports" scheme. 
5.2. The broad reasons of less expenditure which led to decline in the pace of expenditure 
are:- Non-availability of land to be provided by State Governments, environmental issues, non - 
availability of working permission from MoD, Delay in shifting of State Highways, non - 
finalization of location of heliports by State and consequent delay in execu tion at RCS airports 
by concerned State Governments etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.3. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take proactive steps to address the 
issues stated above within a time bound schedule, to ensure optimum utiliz ation of 
allocated funds under the scheme. 
Keshod Airport 
Recommendation/ Observation 
6. The Committee observes that 10 DGCA observations, though not shared with the 
Committee, are still pending with AAI. The Committee desires that these issues should be 
addressed urgently so that DGCA inspection can take place and licence be given for easy 
operation of the Airport. 
(Para 20.1) 
Reply of the Government 
6.1. Out of 10 Observations, work with respect to 6 Observations have already been 
completed. The timeline for other works has however shifted from 31.03.2020 to 31.08.2020 due 
to lock-down in the wake of outbreak of COVID-19. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the updated status of 
implementation of the remaining four observations of DGCA. 
Nagpur Airport 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
7. The Committee was given to understand that the Nagpur Airport was proposed to be 
operated under PPP model. All the formalities were completed; however, the operations were 
stopped due to General Elections and no further progress has been made till now. The saddest 
part of it is that even minimum maintenance that is required to run an Airport is not being done. 
(Para 22.0) 

30  
7.1. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should take serious note of the issues 
plaguing the Nagpur airport and take urgent necessary remedial action. 
(Para 22.1) 
Reply of the Government 
7.2. Nagpur Airport has been developed and is being operated by M/s MIHAN India Ltd. 
(MIL), a joint venture between Airports Authority of India (49% equity) and Maharashtra 
Airport Development Company Ltd. (MADC)(51 % equity). The operations and maintenance 
including future planning and designing of airport rests with MADC being the majority equity 
holder. However efforts are being made by MADC to improve the facility at Nagpur airport to 
match the international standard as being the case in all International airports. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.3. The emphasis made by the Committee in its recommendation was on taking 
necessary action so that the issues plaguing the Nagpur Airport could be sorted out. 
Instead of highlighting the specific measures taken or proposed for improving the facilities 
at Nagpur Airport to international standards, the  Ministry has chosen to absolve itself of 
any responsibility for improving the facilities by shifting the onus to MADC, though 
Airports Authority of India is an equity holder in joint venture of M/s MIHAN INDIA Ltd. 
(MIL). Obviously, there are serious shor tcomings in the role being played by the Ministry 
in acting as a facilitator in upgrading the facilities at the Nagpur Airport. The Committee, 
therefore, does not find the tenor of action taken note of the Ministry to be acceptable and 
recommends that the Ministry should play a proactive role in facilitating appropriate 
remedial measures for overcoming the shortcomings at the Nagpur Airport so that the 
facilities at the Airport are upgraded to international standards at the earliest. The 
Committee also desires that a detailed account of the measures taken in this regard may be 
furnished. 
Thanjavur  Airport 
Recommendation/ Observation 
8. The Committee opines that the capacity of the airports in India has not grown 
commensurate with the increase in the number of air travellers. This has resulted in traffic 
congestion at the existing airports. The Committee feels that setting up of Greenfield airports is 
the need of the hour to ease airport congestion. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
urgent strategic steps  with definite time lines be taken to ensure that Greenfield airports which 
have been granted 'In -principle' approval are set up and operationalized at the earliest. The 
Committee urges upon the Ministry to work on a mission mode to facilitate the smooth e xecution 
of processes in this regard. 
(Para 23.1) 
Reply of the Government 
8.1. Presently, Thanjavur airport is a non -operational airport owned by IAF. With a view to 
provide connectivity, AAI proposed to construct civil terminal for which they requested IA F to 
provide 50 Acers of land. IAF is yet to transfer the land. Immediately on transfer of land by IAF, 
AAI will start the construction of Terminal building. 

31  
8.2. Government of India has put in place a well -defined mechanism for developme nt of 
new Greenfield Airports in the country. A Greenfield Airports Policy was notified in 2008 to 
provide policy guidelines for setting up of greenfield airports across the country. As per the 
policy, a greenfield airport can be developed and operated eit her by AAI / State Government or 
by an Airport Company that has been given a license by DGCA as per its licensing conditions. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation grants 2-stages clearance to the airport projects. 
8.3. Once the approval is gr anted by Mo CA, project e xecution is the sole responsibility of 
the airport developer within a definite timeline and within the ambit of conditions prescribed by 
the Central Government. To facilitate the smo oth execution of the project, Mo CA serves as a 
single point contact for facilitating necessary approvals from other Government agencies, 
dispute resolution, co-ordination with various organizations or with State Government. Further, 
the project is monitored directly by the Steering Committee headed by Secretary (Civil 
Aviation) through one to one meeting with the developer and other stakeholders. The airport 
developers are required to submit periodic progress report of the project. With the above efforts, 
Greenfield Airports at Durgapur, Shirdi, Pakyong, Kannur and Kalaburagi h ave been 
operationalized. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.4. The Committee notes that the Ministry, in its Action Taken Note, has simply 
stated that AAI will start construction of Terminal building at Thanjavur Airport after 
transfer of 50 acres of land by IAF. Nothing has been mentioned about the follow -up 
action for expediting the matter. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
pursue the matter with IAF so that a final decision in the matter could be taken at the 
earliest. 
Safety and Security concerns at Airports 
Recommendation/ Observation 
9. The Committee observes that though the BCAS has taken a large number of steps for 
safety and security of passengers, the latest technology like facial recognition technology in this 
field is yet to be introduced. The Committee was informed that preliminary steps have been taken 
and it proposes to introduce it in a phased manner in the Airports. Considering the prevailing 
security scenario in the country, the Committee is of the view that it should no t be done in a 
piecemeal manner. The Committee desires that facial recognition technology be introduced at 
the sensitive and super sensitive airports by this year and airports catering larger traffic be 
taken up subsequently. The Committee urges upon the M inistry to provide adequate funds at the 
disposal of BCAS so that this project is not further delayed. 
(Para 24.1) 
Reply of the Government 
9.1. DIGI YATRA policy has been launched by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for providing 
seamless and hassle -free pas senger experience at Indian airports, without the need for 
verification of ticket and ID at multiple touch points. Passengers have to enroll themselves in  
this programme for a seamless travel experience. Identification & validation of his/her ticket is  
to be done by a biometric system. DIGI YATRA aims to simplify the passenger processes at 
various check points in the airport right from the terminal entry gate, check-in/bag drop, security 

32  
check up to boarding gates. DIGI YATRA initiative is at initial stage. Airports Authority of  
India (AAI) has awarded work for implementation for Biometric Boarding System (BBS) at 
airports viz., Kolkata, Pune, Vijayawada & Varanasi airports. Also, the scheme is at trial stage at 
Bengaluru and Hyderabad airports. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.2. The Committee had recommended the introduction of Facial Recognition of 
passengers at the sensitive and super -sensitive airports first. However, while the airports 
chosen for the first phase of introduction of DIGI -YATRA should have the facility 
introduced at the earliest, the Ministry has not given any assurance or timeline for  
covering the sensitive and super -sensitive airports. The Committee urges the Government 
to provide sufficient budget for this activity, which will lead to enhanced security at the 
airports on the one hand and lead to ease of travel for the passengers on the other hand. 
The Ministry should update the Committee with the plan to cover the sensitive and super - 
sensitive airports and other airports under the DIGI-YATRA plan. 
Shortage of pilots 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
10. The Committee notes that it is a matter of grave concern that the country needs about 
1000 pilots a year and that around 200 to 300 pilots only are trained, which leads to  shortage  
of type rated commanders in the count ry. The Committee strongly feels that with the huge 
manpower potential and skilled workforce available in the country, it is just a matter of time and 
effort that these resources are tapped into. 
(Para 26.1) 
Reply of the Government 
10.1. Noted for compliance. Necessary efforts are being made to enhance the capacity of 
Flying Training Organisations. However, this is a continual process. During the year 2019, the 
training capacity of Pilot/Flying Training Organizations (FTO) stood at 400. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.2. The Committee, while making its recommendation in Para 26.1 of its 276 th Report, 
had intended that the Ministry should chalk out a roadmap for overcoming pilot shortages 
so that availability of pilots and their induction coul d be enhanced. But, the Ministry has 
given a generic reply which is not acceptable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may spell out specific budgetary support to train pilots in India and 
enhancement of training facilities. 
Aero Club of India 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
11. Since the Aero Club of India is the nodal for FTOs across the country, it should be 
supported with budgetary grants to facilitate and enhance ab initio pilot training to match the 
requirement of induction of 700 -1000 pilots required annually with the anticipated addition of 
another 650 aircrafts in the next five years apart from meeting the requirement of the existing 
653 fixed wing aircrafts across the country. The Committee notes that the present capacity for 

33  
training of pilots in India is only 250 -300, out of which, nearly 50% is being supported through 
the Aero Club of India as the lead organization on behalf of the Ministry. 
(Para 27.2) 
Reply of the Government 
11.1. At present, there are 3 2 FTOs in India, out of which 28 are functional. There are 186 
aircrafts being used for flying training in these 32 FTOs. Out of these 186 aircrafts in use, around 
30 aircrafts have been given by Aero Club of India (ACI) to these FTOs. 
11.2. In 2019 more t han 400 Commercial Pilot License (CPL) have been issued from Indian 
FTOs. Further, to increase the training capacity in the country to 700 -1000 pilots, 200-300 more 
trainer aircrafts are required in the country. They may be in the existing FTOs or new FTOs. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.3. The Committee had made a specific recommendation regarding providing 
budgetary grants to the Aero Club of India. The Action Taken Note is silent in this regard. 
The Committee would like to be given a categorical response in this regard. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
12. The Committee observes that an organization i.e., ACI, that has been in existence for the 
last 93 years as a nodal for FTOs, working closely with the DGCA, fails to find a mention both 
in the Budget as well as the Annual Report of the Ministry. The Aero Club of India, in 
coordination with DGCA prepares Civil Aviation Rules (CARs) for aero sports like paragliding, 
paramotoring, skydiving, gliding etc. and no budgetary allocation has been made for promotio n 
of aero sports in the country, which go a long way in meeting the requirement of the Tourism 
sector as well. The Committee notes that despite the fact that grants were made to the Aero Club 
of India for purchase of sporting equipment to promote aero spor ts activities across the country, 
the budget document does not feature this as well. 
(Para 27.4) 
Reply of the Government 
12.1. ACI, in the past, was given grants by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for procurement of 
trainer aircraft and other equipment. Las t such grant of Rs. 10 lakh was provided in the year 
2014-15. Subsequent requests of ACI to approve further grants for the year 2015 -16 and 2016- 
17 were not agreed to by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
12.2. Further, a meeting was held  in MoCA on 01.01.2020 which was attended to by 
representatives of ACI and various Flying Training Organisations (FTOs). It was decided that as 
MoCA is working on a plan to improve the efficiency of FTOs, it would provide necessary 
regulatory support and o ther assistance along with State Governments for proper functioning of 
FTOs. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.3. The specific concern expressed by the Committee has been on the non -allocation of 
funds to ACI in the Budget for 2020 -21. The Action Take n Note is devoid of detailed 
reasons in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desires that a factual Note detailing the 
reasons behind not making any budgetary provisions for ACI by the Ministry of Finance, 
may be furnished. 

34  
Recommendation/ Observation 
13. The Committee also notes that the Aero Club of India, which is a body under the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation and had its functional administrative office for running the services entrusted  
to it on behalf of the Government at the premises of  Safdarjung, was evicted by AAI. It was also 
noted that the ACI building constructed at the Safdarjung Airport was done by the own  
resources of the Aero Club of India. The Committee observes that the legacy of ACI, which goes 
back to pre -independence times, even when it has been noted that the first commercial license 
issued in the country, prior to the formation of DGCA and the Ministry of Civil Aviation, both 
before independence and after independence has been completely eroded with its omission from 
the budget document and the Annual Report as well. It strongly suggests that all the 
aforementioned points be addressed by the Ministry. 
(Para 27.5) 
Reply of the Government 
13.1. Airport Authority of India has informed that land measuring 17400 sqft was allotted to 
Aero Club of India at Safdarjung Airport by DGCA for a period of 30 years at a nominal license 
fee which expired on 18.09.2013. All assets of DGCA concerning airport operations got vested 
in Airports Authority of India as per provisions under A irport Authority of India Act 1994. The 
issue regarding possession of the land has been settled through eviction and court proceedings. 
The settlement of outstanding dues of ACI towards AAI is under process for which AAI has 
appointed an advocate. The building is presently being extensively utilized by AAI for its offices 
and AAI informed that it is essentially required by them and not in a position to hand it over to 
ACI. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.2. The Ministry, in its reply, has given parti al response to the status of Aero Club of 
India (ACI), as a body under it. The Committee believes that it is an autonomous body 
under the Ministry, since its audited Report is submitted to the Parliament. More so, ever 
since the constitution of ACI took pl ace, it has figured in the Annual Report on Demand 
for Grants of the Ministry. However, this is missing now and no reasons have been given 
thereof. The Committee would like to know the reasons behind the exclusion of budgetary 
head of ACI from the Demand for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry. 
13.3. The Committee was given to understand that there was a proposal before the 
Ministry to extend the lease of Aero Club of India, which was later rescinded and 
thereafter, notice was served for eviction by Airports A uthority of India. The Committee 
would like to have a detailed factual note on this issue including the reasons for  
terminating the lease and evicting ACI. 
AirSewa initiative 
Recommendation/ Observation 
14. From the above table, the Committee finds that some grievances of passengers are 
pending from 2016 and that a large number of them i.e., 1065 grievances belong to 2019. The 
Committee feels that this is not a healthy sign. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to 
resolve all the pending grievances at the earliest and that a status note should be furnished to  
the Committee. The Committee, however, appreciates the fact that the Ministry is planning to 

35  
upgrade its Air Sewa Platform to meet passengers’ requirements. The Committee hopes that the 
upgraded platform will go a long way in resolving the grievances of passengers. 
(Para 29.3) 
Reply of the Government 
14.1. With a view to make the AirSewa portal more effective, all the organizations have been 
directed to nominate a nodal officer for attending to AirSewa grievances in a time bound manner. 
The organisations have also been requested to prepare an SOP relating to the mechanism and 
procedure for grievance redressal. The SOP shall clearly spell out the timelines for redressal of 
different categories of grievances. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.2. The reply of the Ministry is interim in nature since the SOP for grievance 
redressal is yet to be developed by the stakeholders. The Committee had recommended 
that all pending grievance s need to be addressed in a time -bound manner. The Ministry 
should update the Committee regarding the SOP and also expansion of the grievance 
redressal mechanism in the overall passenger interest. 
Emergency landing and cancellation of flights 
Recommendation/ Observation 
15. The Committee is anguished that the air travellers get a rough deal instead of care and 
attention, in cases of emergency landings and cancellation of flights by airlines. It is the 
obligation of the airlines to ensure the comfo rt and health of the passengers, especially women, 
children and patients. The Ministry should urgently frame the Guidelines to be scrupulously 
adhered to by the airlines with a clear provision for punitive action in case of violation of the 
guidelines. 
(Para 38.1) 
Reply of the Government 
15.1. In case of denied boarding, cancellation of flights and delays in flights, DGCA had 
issued Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR), Section-3, Series M, Part –IV on ―Facilities to be 
provided to passengers by airlines due t o denied boarding, cancellation o f flights and delays in 
flights‖ , wherein, airlines are required to provide meals and refreshments during substantial‗s 
delays and applicable compensation in case of flight cancellations. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.2. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The 
Committee had recommended that there should be guidelines/rules to address the 
sufferings of the most vulnerable passenger group like the patients, children and women. 
The reply of the Ministry is silent on introducing guidelines/rules to address the sufferings 
of the vulnerable group during emergency landing/cancellation etc. 
Cancellation charges 
Recommendation/ Observation 
16. The Committee notes that there is no uniformity in  the cancellation charges levied by the 
airlines. The Committee lends its support to the demand of rationalising the  cancellation 
charges and is of the view that the airlines may be persuaded to restrict not more than 50% of 

36  
the base far e as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected should be refunded 
to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be 
able to persuade the airlines for such rationalisation in the interest of the passengers. 
(Para 40.1) 
Reply of the Government 
16.1. As per the prevailing regulation, air fare including cancellation charge of pre -booked 
tickets are neither established nor regulated by the Government. However, as per the provision 
mentioned in para 3(i) of Civil Aviation Requirement (CAR) Section 3- Air Transport, Series M, 
Part II titled ―  Refund of Airline Tickets to Passengers of Public Transport Undertakings, ― Under 
no circumstances, the airline or its agent shall levy cancellation charge more than  the basic fare 
plus fuel surcharge‖. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.2. The Committee observes that absence of a regulatory regime should not allow 
airlines to exploit the hapless passengers by way of exorbitant cancellation charges. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should prevail upon airlines to restrict 
the cancellation charges to not more that 50% of the base fare. 
Core group on Safety and Security 
Recommendation/ Observation 
17. The Committee emphasizes the need for a combined  robust security framework to ensure 
safety and security in sectors of Civil Aviation, Road Transport & Highways, Shipping, Tourism 
and Railways. The Committee desires that in order to facilitate effective and periodic 
coordination among the concerned Mini stries and agencies, a core group comprising officers at 
the level of Joint Secretary of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Road Transport & Highways, 
Shipping, Tourism, Railways, Commissioner of Railway Safety and Petroleum may be set up to 
meet on monthly basis to chalk out ways and means for addressing safety and security concerns 
in these sectors and ensure that international best practices are followed. This core group  
should be headed by Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation. In order to upgrade to in ternational 
standards, the services of consultants (both domestic and international) who are experts in the 
respective fields and have domain knowledge, may be engaged for preparing Reports so that 
they can be implemented. This core group may serve as a th ink-tank and formulate guidelines 
and directions to improve safety and security standards in these sectors. The Committee would 
like the Ministry to furnish the monthly Reports and status of implementation of its decisions, to 
the Committee. 
(Para 47) 
Reply of the Government 
17.1. Recommendations of the C ommittee have been noted for examination in consultation 
with other Ministries/ Departments including attached offices of MoCA viz., DGCA, BCAS and 
AS Division. 
17.2. As per direction of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a Core Group having 
representations from all concerned ministries was formed under the Chairmanship of the 
Secretary, Civil Aviation to workout the modalities for supplementing each other during the 
various types of Ac cident investigation and suggesting preventive measures to improve safety 
and security standards in these sectors. The first meeting of the Core Group was held on  

37  
23.01.2020 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Civil Aviation and various common areas 
of interest with respect to accident investigation and other related activities have been identified 
and discussed, (enclosed as Annexure -II). An action plan based on these will be prepared for 
further coordination. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
17.3. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 

38  
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Nil. 
 
 
***** 

39  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Projected demand vs. Allocation of Funds 
 
The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why there was delay/rescheduling in 
the delivery of two special Extra Section Flight (SESF) VVIP aircrafts when sufficient 
allocations had been made in BE 2019-20. This delay has resulted in the downward revision 
of BE 2019 -20 allocation from Rs. 4500 c rore to Rs. 3700 crore at the RE stage. The 
Committee would like to remind the Ministry that such shortfalls in utilization of budgeted 
funds would derail the budgetary objectives of the Ministry and expects the Ministry to 
address this issue with due seriousness. 
(Para 1.4) 
The Committee also notes that the Ministry has not adduced any reasons for delay 
in rescheduling the delivery of VVIP aircrafts and would therefore like to apprised of the 
same as also the updated status in this regard. The Committee al so desires to know 
whether any targeted action plan is in place for installation of body scanners at all the 
airports in the country. 
(Para 1.5) 
Savings 
 
The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1014.09 crore was allocated to RCS for 
2018-19 out of which only Rs. 403.99 crore was incurred and the balance amount was 
reappropriated/surrendered due to slow pace of expenditure. The Committee is 
constrained to note that a major chunk of the budgeted amount remained unutilized due to 
non-availability of land, en vironmental issues, delay in shifting of State Highways, non - 
finalization of location of heliports, etc. The Committee is of the view that such a huge 
underutilization of allocated funds is indicative of shortcomings in budgetary planning and 
monitoring o f utilization of the budgeted funds which clearly indicates fiscal indiscipline 
and laxity on the part of the Ministry. The Committee would expect the Ministry to be 
more prudent in its budget formulation and make assessment after proper planning. 
(Para 2.4) 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
 
The Ministry, in its reply, has accepted that there will be deleterious effect on the 
financial health of the Indian carriers operating to foreign destinations due to the present 
structure of CORSIA, wherein Indian carriers are hardly in any position to ra mp up their 
credits due to long-haul international operations during the baseline determination period, 
i.e., 2019-21. The adverse effect will be noticed after 2027 when the voluntary phase ends. 
The Ministry has indicated that TERI will be assessing the c hallenges posed by CORSIA 
and that a Group of Secretaries has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary 

40  
of the Ministry to take forward the campaign for getting suitable changes introduced in the 
CORSIA structure. 
(Para 3.2) 
The Committee terms this as an interim response. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the outcome of TERI study and recommendations of the Group of Secretaries 
in the matter. Furthermore, owing to the severe aviation lockdown due to the pandemic, 
there is a very strong case for reworking the baseline schedule. The Committee may be 
updated on the progress made in the matter. The Committee would like to point out that 
if CORSIA structure is not amended, the airlines operating in this country would be at a 
massive competitive disadvantage against the airlines having the potential to generate huge 
credits due to their existing vast network. 
(Para 3.3) 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 
 
The Committee may be apprised as to whether there is an established mechanism 
for timely VGF release. 
(Para 4.2) 
Development of Airport Infrastructure 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should take proactive steps to address the 
issues stated above within a time bound schedule, to ensure optimum utilization of 
allocated funds under the scheme. 
(Para 5.3) 
Keshod Airport 
 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the updated status of implementation 
of the remaining four observations of DGCA. 
(Para 6.2) 
Nagpur Airport 
 
The emphasis made by the Committee in its recommendation was on taking 
necessary action so that the issues plaguing the Nagpur Airport could be sorted out. 
Instead of highlighting the specific measures taken or proposed for improving the facilities 
at Nagpur Airport to international standards, the  Ministry has chosen to absolve itself of 
any responsibility for improving the facilities by shifting the onus to MADC, though 
Airports Authority of India is an equity holder in joint venture of M/s MIHAN INDIA Ltd. 
(MIL). Obviously, there are serious shor tcomings in the role being played by the Ministry 
in acting as a facilitator in upgrading the facilities at the Nagpur Airport. The Committee, 
therefore, does not find the tenor of action taken note of the Ministry to be acceptable and 
recommends that the Ministry should play a proactive role in facilitating appropriate 
remedial measures for overcoming the shortcomings at the Nagpur Airport so that the 
facilities at the Airport are upgraded to international standards at the earliest. The 
Committee also desires that a detailed account of the measures taken in this regard may be 
furnished. 
(Para 7.3) 

41  
Thanjavur Airport 
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry, in its Action Taken Note, has simply stated 
that AAI will start construction of Terminal building at Thanjavur Airport after transfer 
of 50 acres of land by IAF. Nothing has been mentioned about the follow -up action for 
expediting the matter. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue the 
matter with IAF so that a final decision in the matter could be taken at the earliest. 
(Para 8.4) 
Safety and Security concerns at Airports 
The Committee had recommended the introduction of Facial Recognition of 
passengers at the sensitive and super -sensitive airports first. However, w hile the airports 
chosen for the first phase of introduction of DIGI -YATRA should have the facility 
introduced at the earliest, the Ministry has not given any assurance or timeline for  
covering the sensitive and super -sensitive airports. The Committee urg es the Government 
to provide sufficient budget for this activity, which will lead to enhanced security at the 
airports on the one hand and lead to ease of travel for the passengers on the other hand. 
The Ministry should update the Committee with the plan t o cover the sensitive and super - 
sensitive airports and other airports under the DIGI-YATRA plan. 
(Para 9.2) 
Shortage of pilots 
 
The Committee, while making its recommendation in Para 26.1 of its 276 th Report, 
had intended that the Ministry should chalk ou t a roadmap for overcoming pilot shortages 
so that availability of pilots and their induction could be enhanced. But, the Ministry has 
given a generic reply which is not acceptable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may spell out speci fic budgetary support to train pilots in India and 
enhancement of training facilities. 
(Para 10.2) 
Aero Club of India 
The Committee had made a specific recommendation regarding providing 
budgetary grants to the Aero Club of India. The Action Taken Note is silent in this regard. 
The Committee would like to be given a categorical response in this regard. 
(Para 11.3) 
The specific concern expressed by the Committee has been on the non -allocation of 
funds to ACI in the Budget for 2020 -21. The Action Taken Note is devoid of detailed 
reasons in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desires that a factual Note detailing the 
reasons behind not making any budgetary provisions for ACI by the Ministry of Finance, 
may be furnished. 
(Para 12.3) 
The Ministry, in its reply, has given partial response to the status of Aero Club of 
India (ACI), as a body under it. The Committee believes that it is an autonomous body 
under the Ministry, since its audited Report is submitted to the Parliament. More so, ever 
since the const itution of ACI took place, it has figured in the Annual Report on Demand  
for Grants of the Ministry. However, this is missing now and no reasons have been given 

42  
thereof. The Committee would like to know the reasons behind the exclusion of budgetary 
head of ACI from the Demand for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry. 
(Para 13.2)  
The Committee was given to understand that there was a proposal before  the 
Ministry to  extend the lease of Aero Club of India, which was later rescinded and  
thereafter, notice was served for eviction by Airports Authority of India. The Committee 
would like to have a detailed factual note on this issue including the reasons for terminating 
the lease and evicting ACI. 
 
(Para 13.3) 
Air Sewa initiative 
 
The reply of the Ministry is interim in nature since the SOP for grievance redressal 
is yet to be developed by the stakeholders. The Committee had recommended that all 
pending grievances need to be addressed in a time -bound manner. The Ministry should 
update the Committee regarding the SOP and also expansion of the grievance redressal 
mechanism in the overall passenger interest. 
(Para 14.2) 
Emergency landing and cancellation of flights 
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The 
Committee h ad recommended that there should be guidelines/rules to address the 
sufferings of the most vulnerable passenger group like the patients, children and women. 
The reply of the Ministry is silent on introducing guidelines/rules to address the sufferings 
of the vulnerable group during emergency landing/cancellation etc. 
(Para 15.2) 
Cancellation charges 
 
The Committee observes that absence of a regulatory regime should not allow 
airlines to exploit the hapless passengers by way of exorbitant cancellation charges . The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should prevail upon airlines to restrict 
the cancellation charges to not more that 50% of the base fare. 
 
Core group on Safety and Security 
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 16.2) 
 
 
(Para 17.3) 

43  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

44  
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 11 th September, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Ms. Goddeti Madhavi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
 
* * * 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  *  *  *. 
He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to adop t three draft Reports on Action 
taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in its Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, * * *. 
2.         * * *. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, conside red the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief discussion, 
adopted the same with minor changes. 

45  
4. * * *. 
5 * * *. 
6. * * *. 
7. * * *. 
8. * * *. 
9. * * *. 
10. * * *. 
11. * * *. 
12. * * *. 
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14. The meeting adjourned at 5:18 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
* relates to other matters. 
 

46  
XII  
TWELFTH  MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 28th January, 2021 in Committee Room 
No. 4, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary Shri P. 
Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director Ms. 
Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
 
*    *    * 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
 *  *  *. 
 
3.  *      *     *. 
 

47  
4.  *      *     *. 
 
5. *      *     *. 
 
6. *      *     *. 
  
7.  *      *     *. 
 
8.  *      *     *. 
 
9. *      *     *. 
 
10. The Committee then decided to present/lay  the following  Reports to both the  Houses of  
Parliament on 3rd February, 2021:- 
i. *     *     *; 
ii. 281st Report on  the Action Taken  by the Government  on the  Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its 276 th Report on Demands for  Grants 
(2020-21) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
iii. *     *     *; 
 
iv. *     *     *; 
 
v. *     *     *; 
 
vi. *     *     *;  and 
 
vii. *     *     *. 
11. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his absence, 
Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rahul  Kaswan, M.P. 
and in his  absence, Shri Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. was authorized to lay  the above mentioned 
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 11:58 A.M. 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
* relates to other matters. 
 
 

48  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 

49  
Annexure-I 
 
 
The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Committee are as under: 
1. Strengthening of the Commission of Railway Safety in order to make its functioning more 
effective and autonomous and with respect to various functions as laid down in Railway 
Act‗1989. 
2. To examine the feasibility of combining the investigating functions and to develop mechanism 
for sharing the best practices and knowledge pool pertaining to accidents concerning the Civil 
Aviation, Railways, Shipping and Oil Sector. 
3. To define a well laid down Inspection Protocol to be followed by IR in case of preventive 
inspections and Accident Investigation as these are well defined duties specified in the Railway 
Act. 
4. Skill upgradation and regular training for the officials involved in technical functions of the 
Commission. 
5. To examine the Recommendations and its implementation related to functioning of Commission 
of Railway Safety as proposed by various Committees and Commissions to examine safety on 
Indian Railways (IR) formed over the years by the Govt. of India. 
6. To suggest suitable Legislation to eliminate duality of Command as CRS is under administrative 
control of MoCA and doing the work of IR. 
7. To examine the stage of implementation of various recommendations given by the 
Commissioners in their Accident Inquiry Report with view to make it more transparent and 
visible so that the accepted recommendations are rolled out in a time bound manner. 
8. To suggest measures to minimize instances of unilateral changes in various Rules, Codes and 
Manuals etc by IR without any consultation with the Commission. 
 
 
-------- 

48  
Annexure-II 
 
 
Common areas of interest identified by the Core Group with respect to accident 
investigation and other related activities are: 
 
a. Various specialized agencies dealing with accident i nvestigation should identify area of 
common interest in order to develop a knowledge pool which can be shared amongst all. 
b. Database containing inventory of resources/facilities available with each specialized agency 
should be created. 
c. Identify the areas of  mutual help as each accident has 3 dimensions namely prevention 
measures, relief & rescue and post accident investigation. 
d. Lessons learnt during accident investigations should be shared amongst others. 
e. Case studies should be presented at least once in a y ear. NDRF may also be called during these 
meetings to share their experience of disaster management. 
f. The core group will also provide assistance to other stake holders as and when required during 
accident investigation. 
g. Training and skill upgradation procedures and periodicity in areas of accident investigation. 
h. Instrumentation and technologies adopted by other agencies in accident investigation. 
i. Alarm system for preventing probable accidents and exception reports generated by the 
monitoring mechanism. 
j. Methodology for preventive inspections/checks. 
 
 
 
 
 