 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT  
Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical 
Sites and Monuments 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3 rd February, 2022 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  February, 2022 ) 
REPORT 
NO. 
311  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT  
 
Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical 
Sites and Monuments 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3 rd February, 2022 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  February, 2022 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PA GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i  
2. INTRODUCTION ii 
3. ACRONYMS iii 
4. REPORT 1-39 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 40-47 
6. MINUTES                      48-62  
7. ANNEXURE           63  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted on 13 th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat 
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii   
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Eleventh Report o n ‘Creation of Regulatory Framework 
for protection of Historical Sites and Monuments’. 
 
2 . The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Min istry of Culture on the subject  
on 1 st November, 2021. The Committee heard the views of Ad ditional Secretary, Ministry of 
Culture; Dr. R. K. Sharma, Director General, Delhi Public Library; and Dr. R. K. Chadha, 
Former Additional Secretary, Parliament Library on the subject on 9 th December, 2021. The 
Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministr y of Culture on the subject on 6 th 
January, 2022. 
 
3 . The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the o fficers of Ministry of Culture and 
Domain Experts for placing before the Committee, th e material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4 . The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 31 st 
January, 2022. 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
January 31, 2022  Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
Rajya Sabha 

iii   
ACRONYMS  
 
 
 
AMASR  Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
AMASRA  Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 
ASI  Archaeological Survey of India 
CA  Competent Authority 
CPM  Centrally Protected Monument 
DFO  District Forest Officer 
DG  Director General 
FIR  First Information Report 
INTACH  Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
MTS  Multi Tasking Staff 
NMA  National Monuments Authority 
NOC  No Objection Certificate 
UNESCO  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

1  
REPORT 
 
 
Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical Sites and Monuments 
 
 
India has a rich and diverse historical cultural he ritage, and the same is beautifully 
reflected in the plethora of historical sites and m onuments which exist across the country. 
Besides their immense cultural and historical value , these sites and monuments are a major point 
of attraction for tourists, both domestic and inter national, which is showcased by the fact that 
these monuments are visited by millions of visitors  every year not only by Indians but also by 
foreigners. For these reasons, ensuring that the historical sites and monuments are well-preserved 
and protected for the generations to come, becomes utmost important and the same is reflected in 
the fact that Article 49 in Part IV of the Constitution of India states the following - 
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance. — 
It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or 
object of artistic or historic interest, 1[declared by or under law made by 
Parliament] to be of national importance, from spol iation, disfigurement, 
destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be. 
 
 
2 . Having a robust regulatory framework for the protec tion of historical sites and 
monuments is a necessary prerequisite to effectivel y ensure their preservation and protection in 
the best possible manner. The present state of the historical sites and monuments across the 
country leaves a lot to be desired and reflects the  need for the creation of a better regulatory 
 
 
1 Sub s. by the Constit ution (S eventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.  27, for /uni2015declared by parliament by law/uni01C1 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 

2  
framework for their protection. It is in this backd rop that the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e decided to take up the subject ‗Creation 
of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historica l Sites and Monuments‘ for detailed 
examination and Report thereon. 
 
 
3 . In this connection, the Committee heard the views o f the Secretary, Ministry of Culture 
on the subject in its meeting held on 1 st November, 2021 and 6 th January, 2022. The Committee 
also heard the views of domain experts, namely, Pro f. Alok Tripathi, Additional Director 
General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI); Shri , T.J. Alone, Joint Director General, ASI; 
Shri  Jayant  Tripathi,  President  Legal  Advisor  to  Archaeological  Survey  of  India;  and Shri 
A.D.N.  Rao,  Senior  Advocate  on  the  panel  of  Supreme  Court,  in  its  meeting  held  on  9 th  
 
December, 2021. 
 
 
4 . The Committee deliberated upon the following major points/issues pertaining to the 
subject, written views and opinions of various experts were also sought by the Committee: 
(i) The existing Regulatory Framework for the protectio n of Historical Sites and 
Monuments in the country; 
(ii) New Rules/ Regulations/ Policies/ Legislation/ Amen dments that can be 
introduced in order to ensure better protection of the Historical Sites and Monuments; 
(iii) Suggestions for creation of Regulatory Framework fo r protection of Historical 
Monuments presently not under the protection of both Central and State Governments; 
(iv) Efficacy of the existing Regulatory Framework to de al with the specific issue of 
encroachment of the Historical Sites and Monuments; 

3  
(v) Review of present provisions for grant of permissio n required for construction or 
repairs within the prohibited/ regulated areas of Centrally protected monuments; 
(vi) Evolving ways for institutionally integrating munic ipalities and  village 
panchayats in protection of regional Historical Sit es and Monuments and possible 
creation of a dedicated body to regulate the framework for the same; 
(vii) Creation of framework for preparation of dedicated conservation plan for all 
Centrally Protected Monuments across the country. 
(viii) Security policy for all Centrally Protected Monuments; and 
 
(ix) Improving the mechanism for coordination between AS I and State Government 
Departments concerned for better protection of Stat e-protected monuments through 
sharing of technical expertise and periodic exchang e of information about the 
developmental measures taken. 
 
 
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 
 
5 . In its background note on the subject, the Ministry  of Culture informed the Committee 
that The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites  and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 
provides legal provisions for declaring ancient mon uments and archaeological sites of National 
importance. The existing Act provides for the following: 
/uni25CF Most of the monuments declared protected before enactment of the AMASR Act, 
1958 are brought under the Act. 
/uni25CF There is provision to enter into agreement with the owner of the monument. Even 
agreement could be executed through collector. 

4  
/uni25CF The Central Government has the power of acquisition  of protected monuments 
and protected areas. 
/uni25CF There is a provision to protect the continuation of  practices at the time of 
protection. 
/uni25CF Owner of a protected area needs permission to under take any construction within 
the protected area. 
/uni25CF An area upto 100 meters from the protected limit ha s been declared as prohibited 
area and area further 200 meters from limit of proh ibited area has been declared 
as regulated area. 
/uni25CF The Act provides provision of prohibitions for cons truction related activities in 
prohibited areas. 
/uni25CF The Act provides provision of regulations for const ruction related activities in 
regulated areas. 
/uni25CF The Act provides provision of Heritage Bye-laws for each monument and site. 
 
/uni25CF The Act provides provision for notifying Competent Authority for grant of 
permission for construction related activities in prohibited/regulated areas. 
/uni25CF The Act provides for the formation of National Monu ments Authority to 
recommend NOC for grant of permissions by the Compe tent Authority for 
construction related activities in prohibited and regulated areas. 
/uni25CF The Act has provision for preparation of site plans. 
 
/uni25CF The Act has provision for controlling excavations i n protected areas and other 
areas. 
/uni25CF The Act regulates moving of notified antiquities. 

5  
/uni25CF The Act also provides provision of Penalties. 
 
6 . The National Monuments Authority (NMA) came into ex istence in 2011 as a statutory 
body constituted under the provisions of Ancient Mo numents and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (Amendment & Validation) Act, 2010. The bas ic objectives for setting up of NMA is 
implementation of the statutory provisions of prohi bited and regulated areas of Centrally 
Protected Monuments for the purpose of construction , repair/renovation of buildings and public 
projects. In addition, NMA has been mandated to fra me monuments specific heritage byelaws to 
regulate construction activities around the Central ly Protected Monuments. The NMA has also 
been given the responsibility of classification and  gradation of monuments in consultation with 
ASI. The Authority consists of a Chairperson, 05 Wh ole Time Members and 05 Part Time 
Members, and a Member Secretary. The Head office of  NMA is in New Delhi having 27 offices 
of Competent Authorities covering the entire country. 
7 . Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his written note furnished  to the Committee, stated that the law 
that currently protects monuments and archaeological sites and remains of national importance is 
the AMASR Act, 1958, and the Rules made thereunder.  Different States have legislations that  
are  broadly based  on the AMASR  Act,  to  provide protection to  monuments  that are not     of 
/uni2015national importance/uni01C1, but which require protection of la w in order to pre serve them. In addition 
to the AMASR Act, Rules have also been framed under  the Act, by which protection 
mechanisms have been created and strengthened. He s hared the following details regarding the 
evolution of the regulatory framework that exists t oday for the protection of Centrally protected 
historical monuments and sites, by dividing the sam e into three periods, i.e., (A) From 1959 to 
1992; (B) from 1992 to 2010, and (C) 2010 to present. 

6  
A. 1959 to 16.06.1992  
 
 
 
(i) The most significant provision that existed, and st ill exists, is that within the 
notified area of a monument, no construction can ta ke place 2. The only authority 
who can carry out any construction is an Archaeolog ical Officer. Most often, this 
is utilized in order to construct amenities for the  public, such as site museums, 
ticket stalls, toilets etc. 
(ii) Certain activities were also banned, and continue t o remain banned within 
monuments, such as holding meetings 3, selling goods 4, begging 5 etc. 
(iii) Contained within the 1959 Rules was a provision 6 which allowed the  Central 
 
Government to declare an area adjacent to or near t o a monument as a prohibited 
area or a regulated area, thereby controlling const ruction and mining activities in 
such areas. 
(iv) In other words, there was sufficient discretion ves ted with the Central 
Government to holistically examine a monument and d ecide whether or not to 
limit construction or mining activities near the monument. 
(v) Under this provision, notifications were issued fro m time to time to control 
construction activities around monuments such as th e Thousand Pillared Temple 
(Warangal), Golconda Fort, Elephanta caves, Fatehpur Sikri, Mahabalipuram etc. 
B. From 16.06.1992 to 29.03.2010  
 
 
2 Rule 33 of the 1959 Rules, and after 2010, also Section 20A(2) 
3 Rule 7 of the 1959 Rules 
4 Rule 8(d) of the 1959 Rules 
5 Rule 8(e) of the 1959 Rules 
6 Rule 31 of the 1959 Rules 

7 Heritage and Culture Forum vs. ASI (Writ Petition No. 2635 of 2002)  
7 
 
(i) However, the above position changed radically with the publication of the 
Notification dated 16.06.1992. 
(ii) By this Notification, an area of 100 metres from th e boundaries of ALL 
monuments was declared as prohibited for the purpos es of construction (and 
mining). 
(iii) Furthermore, an area of 200 metres beyond the prohi bited area (i.e., from 100 
to 300 metres) was declared as Regulated, where in order to construct, prior 
permission was required in terms of Rule 34. 
(iv) Thus, all of a sudden, an enormous swathe of land a round monuments across 
the nation was suddenly declared as a no-constructi on, or construction regulated 
zone. ASI officers and staff were now suddenly expe cted not only to look after  
the monuments, but also carry out inspections etc. in these Prohibited and 
Regulated areas. 
(v) However, owing to poor publicity, and poor enforcem ent, construction largely 
continued within these areas. It took time, even fo r the ASI field offices to come  
to grips with the situation. The explanation for th is was simple – there was not 
enough manpower created to enable the ASI to keep a  watch on construction, 
especially in congested urban areas, such as the wa lled city of Delhi, or the 
Jaisalmer Fort. 
(vi) In one case 7, the Delhi High Court observed that a uniform application of 100 
 
metres of prohibition did not make logical sense, a nd it would make sense if 
prohibition was made on a monument to monument basis, and directed the ASI to 

8 EMCA Construction Company vs ASI [LPA 417of 2009, decided on 30.10.2009]  
8 
 
review the Notification of 16.06.1992. This directi on was eventually challenged 
by the ASI in the Supreme Court, where it was set a side in 2012 (but by that time 
the amendment to the Act had already been made in 2 010 which had essentially 
rendered the Appeal before the Supreme Court infructuous). 
(vii) Eventually, as the 100 metre rule was causing hards hip to the general public, 
whose rights to construct to the extent permitted u nder building bye-laws were 
suddenly curtailed, ASI attempted to ease the situa tion by creating an Expert 
Advisory Committee comprising eminent historians an d archaeologists, which 
started giving permissions to construct within the prohibited area on a case to case 
basis. 
(viii) However, this action of the ASI did not find favour  with the Delhi High 
Court, which rightly held that prohibited meant pro hibited, and cancelled all 
permissions granted by the Committee and ordered th e demolition of all 
constructions that had taken place 8. 
(ix) This  became   a  serious  issue  as  several   infrastructure  projects   of    the 
 
Government, such as portions of the Delhi Metro, an d buildings for the 
Commonwealth Games were jeopardized. 
(x) The solution therefore was found by enacting the AM ASR (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, 2010, which came into force with effect from 29.03.2010. 
C. 29.03.2010 till present  
 
 
(i) The 2010 amendment drastically changed the Act in the following manner:- 
 
a. The 100 metre prohibited area (where construction was prohibited)  was 

9  
incorporated as a part of the Act, and thus the fle xibility that was 
contained by defining it through the Rules was lost . Now, in order to 
change the prohibited area, an amendment of the Act  would be required. 
Inclusion in the Act also ensures that prohibited a reas cannot be set on a 
monument to monument basis. 
b. Construction of even large scale public infrastruct ure projects now 
stands completely prohibited in the 100 metre area. 
c. The procedure to grant permissions for construction  in the Regulated 
Areas was set out in detail. The power of the ASI t o grant such  
permissions was taken away. 
(ii) A new body, the National Monument Authority, has be en created. The 
purpose of the NMA is set out in Section 20-I, and includes, grading and 
classification of monuments, overseeing the working  of the various competent 
authorities, to suggest measures for the implementa tion of the AMASR Act, and  
to make recommendations to the competent authority for grant of permission. 
(iii) However,  the  amendments  of  2010  impose  certain  restrictions 9,     which 
 
prohibit persons who have held any post with the AS I, or the Ministry of Culture, 
or a State Government from being employed by the NMA. This bar, especially the 
one relating to persons who have worked with the AS I, immediately deprives the 
NMA from a large pool of persons with specialized k nowledge in the very field 
that the NMA is supposed to be working in. 
(iv) Another   change   was   the   creation   of   /uni2015Competent   Authorit ies /uni01C1.   These  
 
 
 
9 Section 20F(3) of AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 

10   
competent authorities are supposed to perform the following functions:- 
 
a. Process the applications for construction in /uni2015Regulated Areas /uni01C1. 
 
b. In performing the above function, the competent aut hority is authorized 
to grant permissions in certain kinds of applicatio ns at its own level, 
whereas for others, it acts as a post office for the NMA. 10  
c. Preparation of Heritage Bye-laws for each protected monument. 
 
 
8 . Shri Jayant Tripathi submitted that the existing fr amework is both prohibitory and 
regulatory in nature. He stated that the prohibitio ns directly impact the property rights of citizens 
and are in danger of being challenged before the Co urts as being unreasonable and violative of 
Article 14. The regulatory aspects are overall well  enforced by the ASI within the notified areas 
of  monuments,  but  due  to  lack  of  manpowe r,  are  very  difficult  to  enforce  in  the  /uni2015Regulated 
Areas /uni01C1 outside the monuments. As an example of how the pr ohibitions adversely affect 
monuments, he highlighted the case of Begumpur Mosq ue in Delhi, which forms a part of 
Begumpur Village. Built like a mini-fortress, it is  said to have provided shelter to the villagers 
against marauders. Prior to 1992, the Mosque, altho ugh not in use as a mosque, was the social 
centre of the Village, where panchayat was held, and which was used by the villagers as a part of 
their daily life – such as tying of cattle, using the space to dry cow dung etc. There was an almost 
symbiotic relationship between the villagers and th e Mosque, with the villagers ensuring that the 
Mosque was kept in good order and not vandalized. However, after 1992, with the prohibition on 
construction within 100 metres coming into force, t he villagers now regard the Mosque as the 
source of their troubles, as they cannot expand the ir houses or create new living spaces. Such 
stories abound in almost all monuments, especially those which have habitation adjacent to them. 
10  Rule 6 of the AMASR (Framing of Heritage Bye-laws and Other Functions of the Competent Authority) Rules, 2011 

11   
9 . Shri Jayant Tripathi opined that the AMASR Act need s to be amended to bring back its 
focus on the protection of monument and sites, and not on the areas outside the monuments and 
sites. The current focus, after the 2010 amendments , has resulted in the bulk of the amendments 
being aimed at the areas outside the monuments, which are not within the jurisdiction of the ASI, 
and fall in the domain of municipal laws and buildi ng bye-laws. He was of the view that the 100 
metre prohibited area rule needs to be revisited, a s the same is not based on any logical criteria. 
There can be no basis for saying that a kos minar i n the middle of an agricultural field requires 
the same protection as the Qutab Minar or the Puri Temple. If at all the 100 metre prohibition has 
to remain, then there has to be synergy between the  AMASR Act and the municipal building bye 
laws to introduce the concept of Transferrable Deve lopment Rights, which would enable persons 
who  cannot construct within the 100 metre /uni2015Prohibited Area /uni01C1, still being able to monetize the ir 
properties. This would reduce the resentment that t he 100 metre rule has generated, and would 
immediately nullify all court cases that have been filed on this aspect. He further submitted that 
the 2010 amendment was brought about without any in puts from the ASI, and needs to be 
revisited. He stated that the committee that propos ed the amendments did not even have a 
representative from the ASI, and comprised three pe rsons, none of whom had any expertise in  
the field of archaeology or the preservation of mon uments. He observed that the scheme of the 
Act, as it currently exists, has three aspects – th e monument or site itself (where ASI has 
exclusive authority), the Prohibited Area (where AS I is supposed to enforce the prohibition) and 
the Regulated Area – where the ASI, the NMA and the Competent Authority play different roles. 
He submitted that this multiplicity of authorities leads to confusion, and needs to be streamlined. 
He further submitted that the AMASR Act requires an  overhaul, keeping in mind the current 
situation and the threats to monuments on account o f population pressures, pollution and other 

12   
factors. 
 
 
 
1 0 . Shri Vinay Ranjan, in his written submission, infor med the Committee that it still  
remains a matter of conjecture as to whether the ba sis of the 16 th June 1992 notification by the 
ASI, is indeed backed by views/opinions of experts on the subject or not. Hence, the prohibition 
contained in the said notification, now with the sa nction of legislative provisions, requires to be 
revisited for checking the basic premises to dispel any presumptions, adverse or otherwise,   with 
the aim of providing a reasonable and scientific ba sis for such prohibition. This is not to suggest 
that the prohibitions need to be diluted but only a re required to be proportionately calibrated  
upon categorization and classification of monuments , sites and remains to subserve sustainable 
development. 
 
 
1 1 . The Committee takes note of the existing regulatory  framework for the protection of 
Archaeological for protection of historical monumen ts and sites. The Committee notes the 
various provisions of the AMASR Act, 1958, which wa s amended through the AMASR 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 to, inter alia , incorporate the provisions for prohibited 
area and regulated area in the legislation and to form the National Monuments Authority. 
 
 
1 2 . The Committee takes into account the apprehensions raised by various legal experts well 
versed with the AMASR Act, regarding the blanket re strictions imposed by the Act on 
construction activities in prohibited and regulated  areas around the Centrally Protected 
Monuments (CPMs) across the country. The concept of  these restrictions in prohibited and 
regulated areas around the CPMs was first introduce d through the 16 th  June, 1992 notification 

13   
published by ASI. In this regard, the Committee tak es note of the following recommendation/ 
observation made by Select Committee on The Ancient  Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
and Remains (Amendment) Bill, 2018 in para 109 of its Report: 
 
 
/uni2015The  Committee  notes  that  the  Mini str y  of  Cult ure   has   found  no  specific  reasoning  or 
scientific basis behind the 100 metre and 200 metre  limit of the prohibited and regulated 
area of a monument, respectively, that was initiall y prescribed in the ASI notification 
dated 16th June, 1992 which was later validated and  given legal basis by the 2010 
Amendment of the principal Act. This is a serious c ause of concern. The Ministry of 
Culture should have looked into the scientific reas oning behind the area limits before 
passing the legislation. The Committee noted that i n some of the monuments, the 100 
metres prohibition may not be required and in some other case, even the 100 metres 
prohibition may not be sufficient to protect the mo nument. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that systematic study should be conducte d by a body of experts including 
archaeologists, historians, geologists and other ex perts in the subject to figure out a 
rational area limit that should be prescribed for p rohibition of construction for 
preservation and protection of a monument. There sh ould not be any blanket limit 
prescribed for construction; rather it should be decided on case-by-case basis.” 
 
 
1 3 . The Committee also takes note of the following obse rvation made by the Select 
Committee on AMASR (Amendment) Bill, 2018 in para 110 of its Report: 
 
 
/uni2015The Committee notes that most  countr ies  around the world do not impose  a blanket ban 

14   
on all construction activities in the vicinity of a  monument. A general trend that is 
observed in the comparable legislations of several countries is to decide the limit of area 
to be prohibited depending on the nature of monumen ts. This could be enabled in the 
context of our ancient monuments once NMA has devel oped the Heritage Bye-Laws for  
all the monuments. The Committee took serious note of the fact that NMA could not frame 
the Bye-laws even after passage of 8 years. /uni01C1 
 
 
1 4 . In light of the observations made by various expert s on the subject and the lack of 
any specific reasoning behind the limit of 100 metr es and 300 metres around the CPMs as 
prohibited and regulated areas, the Committee is of  the strong view that the Ministry must 
undertake a holistic, in-depth review of the restri ctions imposed by the AMASR Act on 
construction activities near the CPMs since it does not seem logical to have restrictions on a 
uniform amount of area across the highly diverse ty pes of monuments under the protection 
of the Central Government. The Committee takes seri ous notice of the observation made  
by one of the experts that the 2010 amendment was b rought about without any inputs from 
the ASI and recommends that the review of the exist ing legislation should be carried out in 
consultation with existing and former senior officials of ASI, and other subject experts. The 
Committee recommends that the area to be deemed as prohibited and regulated area  
should not be set in stone for all the monuments and should instead be decided on a case-to- 
case basis, with due consideration to the individua l requirements of the monument/site. 
There is no denying the fact that there needs to be  a mechanism for keeping a check on the 
construction activities in the vicinity of a histor ical monument but utmost care must be 
taken to ensure that doing so causes least possible  disruption in the lives of people who 

15   
have had been living in harmony with the monuments since decades, duly factoring in the 
specific requirements for such checks given the uni que nature of the individual historical 
monuments. The Committee recommends that the Minist ry should urgently work towards 
creating a regulatory framework that has provisions  for the least possible restrictions on 
construction activities in a manner suitable to the  specific requirements for individual 
monuments while ensuring that no structural or visu al damage is caused to the monument 
by any construction activities and does not unneces sarily impinge on the rights of people 
living nearby the monuments. 
 
 
1 5 . The Committee agrees with the concerns raised by on e of the experts regarding the 
prohibitions imposed by the AMASR (Amendment) Act, 2010 on appointment of any 
person who has held any post with the ASI or the Mi nistry of Culture, as the Chairman or 
member of the NMA. The Committee feels that having the services of personnel who have 
had actual field experience working for the preserv ation and protection of the historical 
monuments and sites, could help NMA fulfill its man date in a more effective manner but 
many people with such experience would be those who  have had worked with the ASI or 
Ministry of Culture and thus would be deemed inelig ible to be appointed as the Chairman 
or member of the NMA as per the existing provisions  of the AMASR Act. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may revisit the ration ale behind the restrictions imposed by 
Section 20F(3) of the AMASR (Amendment and Validati on) Act, 2010 and consider the 
pros and cons behind imposing such a restriction on  the appointment of Chairman and 
members of the NMA. Further, the Committee notes th at the NMA has also been given the 
responsibility of classification and gradation of m onuments in consultation with ASI. The 

16   
Committee recommends that NMA may complete the clas sification and gradation exercise 
at the earliest. The Committee feels that doing so,  alongwith preparation of heritage bye- 
laws for all CPMs, would permit the Ministry to com e up with provisions for restrictions 
best suited for each monument instead of blanket ba ns that fail to serve the intended 
purpose. 
 
 
1 6 . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may intr oduce the concept of 
Transferable Development Rights to enable people ha ving properties in the vicinity of the 
monuments to monetize their properties. The Committ ee feels that this would act as a 
deterrent to encroachment of monuments, especially in case the monument is located in a 
congested urban area. 
 
 
1 7 . Shri Vinay Ranjan further made the following sugges tions with regard to new Rules/ 
Regulations/ Policies/ Legislation/ Amendments that  can be introduced in order to ensure better 
protection of the Historical Sites and Monuments: 
/uni25CF To introduce the definitions of Public Works/ Devel opment Project, Public Utility 
Projects, Public Utility Service, National Importan ce, Archaeological Importance, 
Authenticity, Historical Importance, Demolition, En croachment, Integrity, Management 
(qua monuments on the basis of management plan) amo ngst others. To reconcile the 
various definitions and their reference in other pl aces in the Act for avoiding anomalous 
application or ambiguity. 

17   
/uni25CF A Preamble may be added and inserted in the Act to incorporate the reference to 
UNESCO and the commitments thereunder - to bring pa rity with UNESCO 
definitions/national register-UNESCO /National Heritage Site Law. 
/uni25CF Definition  of  /uni2015construction /uni01C1  may  include  /uni2015reconstructi on /uni01C1,  but  may  exclude  mi nor 
internal modifications/internal renovation. 
/uni25CF Definition of /uni2015reconstructi on /uni01C1 to include the limitati ons  of visual impact/visual integrity. 
 
/uni25CF To  include  metro  rail  in  the  definition  of  /uni2015development  project/uni01C1  or  /uni2015public  works /uni01C1- 
penalty clause be amended to exempt public works from prosecution. 
/uni25CF Definition  of  /uni2015protected  monument /uni01C1  may  include  some  objective  criteria  like  hundred 
yea rs  to make it objective rather than mere use of the expre ssi on /uni2015ancient /uni01C1. 
/uni25CF Enabling provision for the Central government to de legate the power of /uni2015demolit ion /uni01C1 for 
administrative ease. 
/uni25CF Permitted  construction  to  be  compliant  with  /uni2015visual  integrity/uni01C1  and  cult ural  impact 
assessment plus environmental impact assessment. 
/uni25CF To improve upon the existing provision relating to delegation of powers by the DG-  
ambit of delegation to be enlarged – again for administrative ease. 
/uni25CF It is better to have a comprehensive law on heritag e property and therefore a merger of 
overlapping laws relating to heritage sites etc. ma y be considered, if necessary by 
dedicating a separate chapter in the AMASR Act itself. 
/uni25CF To ensure that there is no overlapping in the role of ASI and NMA vis-à-vis Heritage 
Sites. 
/uni25CF ASI may set up an advisory body for unprotected monuments. 
 
/uni25CF Insertion of new provisions / sections after section 4A-relating to Heritage Sites. 

18   
/uni25CF Amendment to provisions of existing Section 9 – ord er by DG qua the failure or refusal  
to enter into an agreement – enforceability to be lent more teeth – may consider including 
a penalty for non-compliance. Cost of maintenance o f monument to be made recoverable 
as arrears of land revenue. 
/uni25CF May consider insertion of new sub-section (3) in se ction 16 – pertaining to restriction on 
revival of worship or religious practice in any Cen trally Protected Monument or Site, the 
criteria of discontinuation in existence for a cons ecutive period of 25 years- 25 years to  
be reckoned with reference to the date of notification of the monument. 
/uni25CF Section 19 may be amended for removal of ‗encroachment within protected area‘ and the 
word /uni01C1encroach/uni01C1 or  /uni2015encroachment /uni01C1 or other suitable  grammatical connotation may be 
included. 
/uni25CF As respects section 20A – amendment required for making way for construction of public 
works in the prohibited area solely on the criteria  of core public interest. Also sub- 
section (2) may be amended to cover within its ambi t any other activity such as mining, 
quarrying, blasting operation etc., or to prohibit any other unauthorized activity in 
prohibited area. 
/uni25CF Power to reduce or enlarge prohibited area as per c ategorization and classification of 
monuments. Mutatis mutandis for regulated area. Relaxation of prohibited area restriction 
only for providing public amenities within a CPM. 
/uni25CF Permission under section 20C to be based upon recom mendation of NMA. Deeming 
provision may be included in respect of regulated area - Permission deemed to be granted 
in respect of regulated area if no communication made within stipulated period. 

19   
/uni25CF With regard to provision in 20 C – use the expressi ons with consistency – development 
project / public works –- White-washing , internal renovation/modification etc and other 
permitted activity to be made subject to Guidelines/regulations. 
/uni25CF Amendment to section 20C empowering the DG, ASI, to  remove unauthorized 
construction on the lines of section 19(2) – if nec essary by requisitioning police help – 
presently no such express provision exists apart fr om placing weak reliance upon rule 
38(1) of the AMASR Rules, 1959. 
/uni25CF Construction/reconstruction Activity permitted to b e made – must be compliant with 
environmental impact assessment and cultural impact assessment. 
/uni25CF Section 20 E – may omit reference to I NTACH – instead may conside r including /uni2015such 
authority as may be notified /uni01C1. 
/uni25CF Section 20F – first proviso to subsection (3) of se ction 20 F- requires a re-look – removal 
of disability for appointment – may be made more eq uitable instead of a blanket  
embargo. 
/uni25CF Section 20-I – provision may be inserted regarding power of NMA to take remedial 
action in case of violations. May be considered whe ther NMA is to remain a 
recommending authority for all purposes or is it re quired to be given some power for 
remedial action? Also, in certain cases, NMA impose s fine, say, by virtue of a judicial 
order but there is no mechanism under the Act as to  how NMA is to treat the fine. 
Whether NMA to have some necessary executive powers or not – should be mulled upon. 
/uni25CF Section 20K – restrictions on future employment of chairperson /members of NMA – 
ineligibility to be reviewed and relaxed in the int erest of granting credence to past 
experience on a specialized subject. 

20   
/uni25CF To suitably incorporate the typologies of monuments 
 
/uni25CF Provision for a tiered appeal – with respect to ins ertion of new provision after section  
28A of the Act - relating to appeals providing for cases/ residuary class of appeals not 
otherwise provided elsewhere in the Act. 
/uni25CF With reference to provisions of section 28 of the A ct, relating to principles of 
compensation instead of reference to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, - reference to Right 
to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acqui sition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013, may be inserted. 
/uni25CF Sections 30, 30A, 30B – penalty clause- may have to  be amended in keeping with such 
foundational changes, particularly with reference t o construction/reconstruction and 
public works in prohibited area/regulated area. 
/uni25CF Moreover, it would appear from the extant practice in vogue that the Competent 
Authority has been issuing "No Objection Certificat e" in respect of repair and renovation 
to existing building or structure, instead of license or permission. Such practice of issuing 
NOC is unwarranted under the provisions of AMASR ac t or rules made thereunder.  
There is no provision in the Act or the Rules that permits issue of such NoC. It is not 
understandable as to under what provision of law NO C is being granted by the  
Competent Authority for repair and renovation to an  existing building within the 
regulated area. As such the action of the Competent Authority in granting NOC instead of 
permission or licence holds out and implies that th ere is no substantive provision under 
the law authorizing or empowering the Competent Aut hority to issue such NOC. In fact, 
the practice of granting NoC instead of a licence o r permission as warranted by the 

21   
provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder, often results in a leeway for 
opportunist litigant against the very objects of the Act. 
1 8 . The Committee takes note of the extensive list of s uggestions made by the expert 
regarding the new Rules/ Regulations/ Policies/ Leg islation/ Amendments that can be 
introduced in order to ensure better protection of the Historical Sites and Monuments. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Par a 14 of this Report and recommends 
that the Ministry may thoroughly examine the above- mentioned suggestions made by the 
expert while undertaking the review of the AMASR Act. The Ministry must ensure that the 
review of the existing legislation may factor in fe edback from experts in the field of 
conservation, preservation, archaeology, law as wel l as all the stakeholders who are 
impacted by the AMASR Act. 
 
 
 
Suggestions for creation of Regulatory Framework fo r protection of Historical Monuments 
presently not under the protection of both Central and State Governments 
1 9 . The Ministry informed the Committee that the State Governments and Union Territories 
have also declared the monuments/sites of State imp ortance under their respective Acts. The 
protection of monuments, sites and remains, which h ave not been declared by the Central 
Government as of national importance, fall under th e State List of the Constitution of India. As 
such, the protection of historical monuments and si tes is a responsibility being handled by 
Central Government as well as State Government for which legislative mechanism is available 
with Centre and State Governments. 

22   
2 0 . In this regard, Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his writte n note, has stated that Schedule VII to the 
Constitution contains appropriate entries in List I , List II and List III to provide protection to 
monuments and sites. These entries are extracted for ease of reference below:- 
List I (Union List) 
 
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, a nd archaeological sites and 
remains, declared by or under law made by Parliamen t to be of national 
importance. 
List II (State List) 
 
12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the 
State; ancient and historical monuments and records  other than those declared by 
or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance. 
List III (Concurrent List) 
 
40. Archaeological sites and remains other than tho se declared by or under law 
made by Parliament to be of national importance. 
2 1 . Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his written note, stated t hat monuments which do not fall within 
the above two categories are sometimes protected th rough local municipal laws by inserting 
provisions for the protection of heritage buildings . He further informed that there are two ways  
to achieve the objective of protection of Historical Monuments presently not under the protection 
of both Central and State Governments. The first wa y he suggested is the creation of an 
overarching non-binding Central policy regarding he ritage conservation, which States can adopt 
and legislate upon. He stated that the other way wo uld require a minor amendment in the 
Constitution, where the words  /uni2015hist orical buildings and sites/uni01C1 are added to Entry 40 of List III of 

23   
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, which wou ld pave the way to bring about a Central 
Legislation for the protection of Historical Buildi ngs and Sites as well as archaeological sites 
which are not declared to be of national importance . This could then be governed by a separate 
Heritage Commission with offices in every State, an d can protect monuments that are  
overlooked by the State Governments. 
2 2 . The Committee notes that as per the division of pow ers laid down under the Constitution 
of India, the Parliament can enact laws for only th ose historical monuments that have been 
declared  to  be  of  national  importance.  Besides  that,  Parliament  can  enact  laws  only      for 
/uni2015Archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament 
to be of national importance /uni01C1 but not for ancient and historical monuments. Alth ough the State 
Governments have been conferred the power to legislate for all ancient and historical monuments 
other than those declared to be of national importa nce, the Committee observes that there are 
many monuments across the country which do not make  it to the list of State-protected 
monuments either and are thus left totally neglecte d, falling victim to the vagaries of nature. The 
Committee feels that there is a pressing need to ta ke concrete action to ensure that such 
monuments are not damaged beyond repair and are kep t in a good state of conservation since 
they are a reflection of our rich and diverse histo rical heritage and going forward, could present 
opportunities for development of tourism in the local area as well. 
2 3 . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minis try may consider coming up 
with a legislation to amend the Constitution adding  /uni2015ancient and historical monuments 
other than those declared to be of national importa nce /uni01C1 to the Concurrent List, in order to 
permit the Central Government to enforce at least s ome set of provisions for the basic 
protection and conservation of archaeological monuments and sites which are presently not 

24   
under any sort of protection by Central and State G overnments. A separate Heritage 
Commission may thereafter be established to look af ter such monuments. Since a 
Constitutional amendment is a time-taking process, the Committee recommends that in the 
meanwhile, the Ministry may come up with policy gui delines which can be adopted by the 
State Governments across the country for looking af ter neglected archaeological sites and 
monuments. The Committee further recommends that th e Ministry may request for  
certain budgetary allocation to allow ASI to carry out urgent conservation measures at 
such miscellaneous monuments, possibly in coordination with concerned State Archaeology 
Departments. 
 
 
Efficacy of the existing Regulatory Framework to de al with the specific issue of 
encroachment of the Historical Sites and Monuments 
2 4 . On the issue of encroachment, the Ministry, in its written note, has informed that any 
construction, occupation of monument or part of mon ument by any means, installation of any 
kind, erection of any kind, temporary or permanent in nature, within the protected limit is 
considered as encroachment. The Section 19 of the AMASR Act even restricts the right of owner 
of the protected area to construct anything within the protected area and imposes condition to 
obtain permission from the Central Government. 
2 5 . In order to contain the encroachments, the Superint ending Archaeologist in charge of the 
Circles have been vested with the powers of an Esta te Officer to issue eviction notices/orders to 
the encroachers under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. They  
are also delegated with the powers to issue notices  under the provisions of Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules 1959 followed by an order to the 

25   
District Collector/Magistrate by Central Government  to remove such encroachment under  
section 19 (2) of the Act and Rules 38 (2) of the R ule. Assistance in containing and removing 
encroachments is also sought from the respective State Government/police force and where there 
are no fruitful results, actions are initiated agai nst the encroachers by filing cases in the court of  
law. 
2 6 . As and when construction activities are noticed/rep orted in the prohibited/regulated area 
the Superintending Archaeologist issues a notice to  the owner under rule 38 of the provisions of 
the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Rem ains Rules, 1959 for removal of 
unauthorized building. Simultaneously, help from th e local police is also sought by lodging a 
complaint and by registering a FIR. On receipt of a  report from the field office, the Director 
General, Archaeological Survey of India , issues a notice to the erring party in pursuance of sub 
section 19(ii) and sub-rule 38(i) of Ancient Monume nts, Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 
1958, and Rules, 1959 respectively for removal of s uch unauthorized construction within a 
specified period. A copy of the notice issued by th e Director General is also sent to the District 
Collector with the request to demolish the illegal construction. In this regard, the assistance in 
containing and removing encroachments is sought fro m the respective State Government and 
where there are no fruitful results, action is initiated by filing cases in the court of law. 
2 7 . Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his written note, opined t hat the main reasons why sites and 
monuments are encroached upon can be summarized as under:- 
(i) Inadequate numbers of personnel guarding monuments to prevent encroachment or 
report encroachment as soon as it takes place; 
(ii) The lack of ownership of monuments with the ASI; 
 
(iii) Inadequate penal provisions in the AMASR Act. 

26   
2 8 . Shri Jayant Tripathi further stated that under the AMASR Act, in order to protect a 
monument or a site, a notification is issued in the  Gazette. Sometimes it may just be the physical 
monument that is notified, and sometimes adjacent l and may also be included in the notification. 
The Act recognizes such adjacent land as an integra l part of the monument, and extends 
protection to such additional land also. However, a fter notification as a monument of National 
Monument, the ownership of the monument is not auto matically transferred to the Government 
or the ASI. Had that been the case, the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 could be utilized  to summarily throw out encroachers. In 
other cases, there are large areas surrounding monu ments which form a part of the monument, 
which are ripe for encroachment, one example being the Tughlaqabad Fort in Delhi. The lack of 
manpower to prevent the initial encroachment, and t he inadequacy in the law to adequately and 
swiftly punish such encroachment adds to the proble m. The only provision in the AMASR Act 
which provides punishment to persons who are encroa ching on monuments and sites is set out in 
Section 30. However, the wording of the same leaves  a lot to be desired, and there are loopholes 
which require rectification. Amendments are required in order to ensure that such encroachments 
are removed as fast as possible, in fast track cour ts, or by making the proceedings summary in 
nature. He submitted that the current regulatory fr amework, which was amended in 2010, does 
not provide adequate protection to sites and monuments. The amendments of 2010 actually focus 
more on the areas outside the monuments and sites, i.e., in the Prohibited and Regulated areas. 
Thus, the focus of the AMASR Act appears to have sh ifted from actually protecting monuments 
and sites to overseeing construction activities etc ., in the 300 metre area beyond the monuments. 
It is further submitted that this lack of focus nee ds to be remedied through legislative 
intervention,  in  order  to  ensure  that  monuments  and  sites  are  once  again  the  focus  of th e 

27   
AMASR Act, and the ASI can carry out work in its co re competency areas, rather than act as a 
chowkidar policing what is happening outside the monuments and sites. 
2 9 . Shri Vinay Ranjan, in his written note, stated that  provisions of the Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, are broug ht into motion only upon declaration of an 
ancient/historical monument/site/remains as of nati onal importance under the provisions of 
section 4 of the Act. Once the notification is duly  published in the Official Gazette under section 
4, all other provisions of the Act become applicabl e. However, in practice the notification is 
divided into two- preliminary and final. Alongwith the notification a revenue map/site map is 
also published for demarcation / delimitation of the boundaries of protection limits. In most cases 
the final notification is not done. Judicial ruling s have also held that in the absence of final 
notification, the preliminary notification may be d eemed as final and the same cannot be pressed 
into service as a disability. But the very purpose of the provision to verify the physical structure 
and to determine what portion, part or extent of the monument or the adjoining area is required to 
be within protected limits, is defeated by such lax ity to publish the final notification after due 
diligence. Again, in very many cases, the site map is missing as part of the preliminary 
notification. To moot the point, it is submitted th at if the final notification is published with due 
regard to delimitation /demarcation of the protecte d monument or the protected area, as the case 
may be, alongwith the site map, then the vexing que stion whether the limits of prohibited area or 
the regulated area is to be measured from the physi cal structure of the monument or its adjoining 
boundaries can be avoided from becoming the subject matter of vexatious litigation. On the other 
hand, it may be considered that publication of such  inchoate / inept notifications paves the way 
for subjective bureaucratic discretion which in tur n results in encroachments in and around the 
CPMs. Also, in focus would be the 16 th  June 1992 notification, which serves as    the cut-off date 

28   
for the ASI for the purpose of determining legality  or illegality of a construction. However, no 
modus or data is available pre and post the said cu t-off date to determine as which structures 
existed prior to such cut-off date and which constr uctions have come up thereafter. In the end, it 
often leads to default validation of the illegal co nstruction despite the legislative embargo for 
want of determinative and/or actionable data in this regard. Moreover, even when a  construction 
/ structure is identified as having been made in vi olation of the provisions of the AMASRA, 
1958, and the Rules made thereunder, the legislativ e gaps in the provisions of the Act and the 
Rules have resulted in beneficial litigation to off enders under the Act. For instance, the power to 
remove unauthorized construction in respect of a /uni2015protected area /uni01C1 and not ‗protected monument /uni01C1 
has been conferred upon the Central Government, by the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 
19 of the AMASRA, 1958. However, for the purpose of  removal of unauthorized construction 
with reference to /uni2015protected monument /uni01C1 or CPM,  the ASI has to fall upon the provisi ons  of Rule 
38 of the AMASR Rules, 1959. 
3 0 . Shri Vinay Ranjan informed that Rule 38 of the AMASR Rules 1959 states the following: 
 
" Removal of unauthorized buildings.— (1) The Central Government may, by order, 
direct the owner or occupier of an unauthorized bui lding in a prohibited area or in a 
regulated area or of a building or part thereof whi ch has been constructed in  
contravention of any of the conditions of a licence  granted under rule 35 to remove such 
building or part thereof within a period specified in that order. 
(2) If the owner or occupier refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub-rule 
(1), the Central Government may direct the District Magistrate to    cause the building 

29   
or part thereof to be removed, and the owner or occupier shall be liable to pay the cost 
of such removal." 
3 1 . Shri Vinay Ranjan stated that the provisions of rul e 38 (1) do not envisage the situation 
for issue of demolition order where neither an appl ication for licence has been made under rule 
34 nor any licence has been granted under rule 35. Consequently, in such cases, the question or 
occasion for contravention of any condition of lice nce does not and cannot arise and hence the 
applicability of action under Rule 38(1) also can b e contended to be as of no effect. Further, the 
entire scheme of the provisions as contained in rul e 38 hinges upon building or part thereof 
which has been "constructed" and the removal of suc h "construction". "Construction" has been 
defined under section 2 (dc) of the AMASR Act 1958 and is as follows:- 
/uni20152… 
 
(dc) 'Construction'  means  any  erection  of  a  s tructure  or  a  building  including  any 
addition or extension thereto either vertically or horizontally, but does not include any re-  
construction, repair and renovation of an existing structure or building , or, construction 
maintenance and cleansing of drains and drainage wo rks and of public latrines, urinals 
and similar conveniences, or, the construction and maintenance of works meant for 
providing supply of water for public, or, the const ruction or maintenance, extension, 
management for supply and distribution of electrici ty to the public or provision  for 
similar facilities for public." 
He submitted that it appears from the provisions of  the rule 39 of the AMASR Rules, 1959 that 
whoever unlawfully undertakes any construction in a  regulated area or fails or refuses to comply 
with an order made under sub-rule (1) of rule 38, shall be punishable with imprisonment,   which 

30   
may extend to three months or with fine which may e xtend to five thousand rupees or with both. 
He further submitted that where there has been no c onstruction (as distinguished from 
reconstruction) but only repair and renovation, the  penal provisions in the ultimate analysis fail  
to serve the purpose. Therefore, it is apparent tha t all the penal provisions or prohibitory 
provisions of the Act or the Rules that such provis ions are primarily concerned with 
"construction" activities and not re-construction o r repair or renovation, often allowing 
construction through the modicum of misplaced/misco nceived subjective bureaucratic discretion 
under the garb of re-construction or repair or reno vation. He opined that the above instances are 
merely enumerative of some of the glitches and gaps  that need to be addressed for a better and 
efficacious implementation of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. 
3 2 . During the meeting of the Committee held on 9 th December, 2021, Adv. A.D.N. Rao 
opined that the powers available with ASI to deal w ith encroachment are not sufficient as they 
are dependent on local police, which sometimes work s in connivance with the encroachers. He 
suggested that ASI officers should have powers like  those given to District Forest Officers 
(DFOs) under The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and that granting power to ASI to seal the site 
of illegal construction by the time the demolition can be done, would be effective in curbing the 
issue of encroachment of monuments. 
3 3 . The Committee notes the existing provisions in plac e in order to deal with the issue 
of encroachment of Centrally Protected Monuments an d the loopholes/ gaps/ glitches 
pointed out by various experts. The Committee agree s with the suggestion made by one of 
the experts that amendments are required in order t o ensure that encroachment of 
monuments are removed as quick as possible in fast track courts. The Committee feels that 
doing so can permit the encroachment to be removed before any permanent structure is 

31   
constructed in the vicinity of the monument, thus p reventing any sort of possible damages 
to the monument. 
3 4 . The Committee is concerned to note that the final n otification of declaration of an 
ancient/historical monument/site/remains as of nati onal importance, is not published by 
ASI in most cases. The Committee recommends that a time-bound limit may be prescribed 
for ASI to publish the final notification, alongwit h the site map, for monuments under its 
protection since the purpose of the same is to verify the physical structure and to determine 
the portion/part/extent of the monument that is required to be within the protected limits. 
3 5 . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may unde rtake a thorough review of 
the AMASR Act as well as the AMASR Rules in terms o f the powers available with ASI to 
tackle the issue of encroachment of monuments, keep ing in view the various loopholes and 
gaps pointed out by legal experts. The Committee fe els that the Ministry should  
incorporate provisions similar to those relating to  encroachment in the Indian Forest Act, 
1927, in the AMASR Act in order to empower ASI to e ffectively deal with the issue of 
encroachment of monuments. The Committee further re commends that the AMASR Act 
should grant power to ASI to seal the site of illeg al construction till the time the demolition 
can be done, so that any delay in the same does not  cause any further damage to the 
monument and there is no incentive for encroachers to undertake any illegal construction 
near the monument. The Ministry should request the Ministry of Finance to provide it with 
separate budget to carry out the demolition of unau thorized constructions that have taken 
place in the vicinity of Centrally Protected Monuments. 
35A. The Committee recommends that wherever possibl e, the Ministry/ASI  should  
develop the area in the vicinity of the ancient monuments as green space with amenities for 

32   
tourists since doing so will not only curb encroach ment of that area but also  bolster 
tourism in the region. 
 
 
Review of existing provisions for grant of permissi on required for construction or repairs 
within the prohibited/ regulated areas of Centrally protected monuments 
3 6 . The Ministry, in its background note, has stated th at as per the AMASR Act 1958 
construction related activities are permitted withi n the prohibited and regulated area on 
permission from Competent Authority as per recommen dation of National  Monuments 
Authority. Such constructional work taken up withou t the permission from competent authority 
within regulated area of protected monument/site ar e considered as unauthorized construction. 
The Ministry further informed the Committee that in  order to undertake repairs or new 
constructions within the regulated areas or repair and renovation within prohibited area of any 
protected monument, prior permission from Competent  Authority is essential. For this purpose, 
Director of Archaeology of State Governments or Com missioners of States have been notified as 
Competent Authority. 
3 7 . Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his written note, informed  the Committee that the repair works 
listed in Rule 8 of the AMASR (Framing of Heritage Bye Laws and Other Functions of 
Competent  Authority)  Rules,  2011  include  /uni2015repairs   to  water  tanks,...re-plastering  of  building, 
...filling up of cracks...., replacement of windows ..., relaying the flooring, ....providing coat of 
white wash or colour wash or painting of walls.... /uni01C1 etc. Citing an example of the implications of 
this, he stated that if his home in Basti district in Uttar Pradesh were to be within 300 metres of a 
monument of national importance and he needed to re pair a broken window of his home or get 
his  home  whitewashed,  he  would  first  need  to  seek  prior  permission  from  the  Competent 

33   
Authority (CA) whose office is in Lucknow and if th e CA happened to refuse permission for any 
reason, an appeal will need to be filed to the NMA in New Delhi. Getting the window repaired or 
the home whitewashed without prior permission would  be liable to penal consequences,  
including imprisonment. He submitted that the above  example highlights the issue  of 
government interference in the day to day life of t he citizens in the name of protecting heritage, 
which ultimately has the result of turning citizens  against heritage, or worse still, ignoring or 
flouting the law. 
3 8 . In this regard, Shri Jayant Tripathi suggested that  the entire issue of granting permissions 
for repairs needs to be streamlined, and made as ea sy as possible, especially for minor repairs, in 
the same manner as municipal building bye-laws. If a citizen does not need permission to carry 
out certain repairs under the building bye-laws, th en the AMASR Rules should be, as far as 
practicable, in line with those building bye-laws. He suggested that a review of the AMASR 
Rules in this regard needs to be done keeping in mi nd the building bye-laws around the country, 
and with the intent of making the life of citizens easier, and less bound by red tape. He further 
submitted that the purpose of the AMASR Act was not , and should not be, controlling repairs in 
houses which are outside the notified area of the m onument. He opined that the expertise of the 
ASI, which is a valuable resource, should not be wa sted on deciding whether a citizen can 
replace a window, or whitewash a house. 
 
 
3 9 . The Committee fails to see why a person living in t he Regulated Area of a CPM 
should be required to seek permission from the Comp etent Authority under the AMASR 
Rules for carrying out innocuous maintenance activi ties such as filling of cracks, 
whitewashing, replacement of windows etc. The Commi ttee feels that such uncalled-for 

34   
interference makes lives harder for people living n earby the monuments and could slowly 
cause feelings of anguish towards the monument itse lf. Given the large number of 
monuments across the country and the limited budget ary resources available with the 
Government, it is pertinent that people residing ne ar the monuments are encouraged to 
look after the monuments and protect them. Besides,  placing such unnecessary curbs and 
implementing them is a wastage of limited Government resources and turns the focus away 
from where it should be - actually protecting and p reserving the monument itself. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may undertake a thorough review of 
the AMASR Act and Rules and omit any provisions tha t provide for seeking permissions 
for minor works where the same is not actually need ed and streamline the process for 
applying for permission in case where the same is a ctually needed. Steps may urgently be 
taken to make it possible for the entire process fo r seeking permission for construction 
activities in prohibited and regulated areas, to be  completed online so as to not cause any 
hassle to bona fide residents living near the monuments. 
 
 
Evolving ways for participation of municipalities a nd village panchayats in the process of 
protection of regional Historical Sites and Monuments 
4 0 . Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his written note, stated t hat the examples from Delhi and Mumbai 
show that municipal laws and building bye-laws can be used as effective tools for ensuring 
protection of regional historical monuments and bui ldings. It has to be kept in mind that this 
aspect would fall within the legislative competence  enumerated in List II of the Seventh 
Schedule, and as such it may not be possible to cre ate a dedicated body which can regulate such  
a  framework  on  a  pan-India  basis.  He  suggested  that  if  there  is  a  minor      Constitution al 

35   
Amendment as proposed by him earlier (para 21 of th is Report), protection of regional 
monuments and sites would be possible through a Centrally enacted regulatory legislation. 
4 1 . Given the large number of historical monuments and sites located across the 
country, many of which are not under any sort of pr otection from the Central/State 
Governments, the Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 5.7.23 of its 294 th 
Report on the subject ‗Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeo logical 
sites - Challenges and Opportunities‘ and  recommends that the Ministry should find  ways 
to institutionally integrate municipalities and vil lage panchayats in the process of 
protection of historical monuments and sites across  the country and if needed, create a 
dedicated body to implement the regulatory framework for the same. 
 
 
Preparation of monument-specific conservation plan and bye-laws for all Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country 
4 2 . Appearing  before  the  Committee  in  the  capacity  of  a  domain  expert  on  the subject 
 
‗Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical Sites and Monuments‘ in its 
meeting held on 9 th December, 2021, Prof. Alok Tripathi, Additional Dir ector General, ASI 
opined that having monument-specific bye-laws, depe nding on their nature, date and kind of 
structure etc. will help ASI in protecting the monuments more effectively.. 
4 3 . The Committee opines that the Ministry/ASI/NMA shou ld carry out an exercise to 
prepare monument-specific conservation plans and he ritage bye-laws for all Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country, since there  cannot be a uniform plan for all the 
monuments and the unique conservation requirements of each monument can only be 
reflected through dedicated conservation plan for each monument. Such an exercise  would 

36   
undoubtedly require sufficient manpower and resourc es. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should ensure that swift action is tak en to ensure that ASI is adequately 
staffed at all times and staffing requirements shou ld be anticipated well in advance since 
recruitment of quality personnel is often a time-ta king exercise. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should formulate the b udgetary requirements for creation  
of dedicated conservation plans for all CPMs and re quest the Ministry of Finance to grant 
the same as a special one-time grant. 
 
 
 
Security policy for all Centrally Protected Monuments 
 
4 4 . Security of the monuments is being looked after by ASI by deploying round the clock 
watch and ward through MTS. Besides, additional sec urity is provided with the Central 
Industrial Security Force at Red Fort and Taj Mahal  and private security guards at selected 
monuments. 
4 5 . Additional Director General, ASI further informed t he Committee about the issue of lack 
of manpower faced by the ASI in the protection of h istorical monuments across the country. He 
was of the view that having regular staff at all Ce ntrally Protected Monuments can allow ASI to 
stop encroachments at the early stage before any illegal construction has taken place. 
4 6 . Shri Jayant Tripathi, in his written note, stated t hat it would require an in-depth study 
regarding the security requirements of each monumen t and a subsequent overarching policy. 
However, any policy would need to be sufficiently f lexible to take into account specific needs of 
monuments, as well as changes that may occur with t he passage of time. He opined that in the 

37   
event that the concept of Prohibited and Regulated Areas, outside monuments and sites is 
required to be enforced, it would be necessary to have a dedicated force to implement the same. 
4 7 . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may carr y out an exercise to figure 
out the requirements for security infrastructure as  well as for posting security personnel at 
each monument. The data thus obtained may be used t o frame a comprehensive security 
policy for all the Centrally Protected Monuments so  as to ensure a satisfactory level of 
protection of CPMs across the country. The Committe e acknowledges the budgetary 
constraints faced by the Ministry and recommends th at the Ministry may request the 
Ministry of Finance to provide sufficient budget to  allow it to post security personnel at all 
CPMs across the country. Outsourcing should be done  to appoint staff for security of the 
monuments and guides should be trained and they sho uld also be made responsible for 
taking care of the property. 
 
 
Improving the mechanism for coordination between AS I and State Government 
Departments 
4 8 . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may issu e guidelines to the State 
Government Departments concerned to approach the AS I in cases where the State- 
protected Monuments require the technical expertise  available with ASI for better 
protection and preservation of State-protected monu ments. The Committee further 
recommends that the regional offices of ASI should proactively review the status of 
protection and preservation of State-protected monu ments and in case gross neglect in the 
same is observed, the matter should be taken up wit h the State Government Department 
concerned. The Committee feels that a mechanism should be put in place to enable periodic 

38   
exchange of information about the developmental/ conservation/ protection measures taken 
by ASI and State Departments. 
 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
48A. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI , in coordination with the State 
Government Archaeology/Culture Department concerned , should take up the restoration  
of historical/ religious sites having heritage valu e and architectural and  cultural 
significance such as temples which are more than 10 0 years old and which have been 
converted into mixed-use buildings such as resident ial property or government building, to 
their original shape. A time-bound implementation p rogramme should be made for the 
same and accountability of officials working on the se projects should be fixed so that the 
restoration works are completed on time and in a sa tisfactory manner. The Ministry may 
approach the Ministry of Finance to allocate separa te budget for this purpose. The 
Committee further recommends that it should be mand ated that the management bodies 
for religious sites shall get periodically audited regarding the state of conservation, safety 
and security of the monuments and the amount of fun ds/donations received and spent, so 
as to ensure that such funds are not diverted for unrelated purposes. 
4 9 . During  the  meeting  of  the  Committee  held  on  1st   November,  2021,  the    Secretary, 
 
Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the Ministry hoped to present a strong proposal 
for amendments on encroachment, preservation, appoi ntment of guards etc. under the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 by the Winter Session, 2021 or the 
Budget Session, 2022. 

39   
5 0 . The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is  working on a much-needed 
amendment of the AMASR Act,1958. The Committee reco mmends that the Ministry may 
incorporate the recommendations made by the Committ ee in this Report and factors in 
feedback from experts and stakeholders in the amendment of the AMASR Act. 
5 1 . The Ministry, in its written note, informed the Com mittee that amenities such as drinking 
water, signage, toilet, Wi-Fi, ramps, interpretatio n centers, Light and Sound Show, child care 
rooms, etc. are provided at monuments. ASI is also working on Disaster Management Plan for 
monuments susceptible to natural calamities to hand le such situations and also to safeguard any 
unlikely loss of livestock. 
5 2 . The Committee recommends that ASI may frame Disaste r Management Plan for the 
monuments at the earliest since disasters can cause  irreversible damage to our invaluable 
historical monuments and sites and sincere efforts have to be made to have plans in place to 
minimize the damage caused due to such adversities. 
 
 
*** 

40   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
 
 
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 
In light of the observations made by various expert s on the subject and the lack of 
any specific reasoning behind the limit of 100 metr es and 300 metres around the CPMs as 
prohibited and regulated areas, the Committee is of  the strong view that the Ministry must 
undertake a holistic, in-depth review of the restri ctions imposed by the AMASR Act on 
construction activities near the CPMs since it does not seem logical to have restrictions on a 
uniform amount of area across the highly diverse ty pes of monuments under the protection 
of the Central Government. The Committee takes seri ous notice of the observation made  
by one of the experts that the 2010 amendment was b rought about without any inputs from 
the ASI and recommends that the review of the exist ing legislation should be carried out in 
consultation with existing and former senior officials of ASI, and other subject experts. The 
Committee recommends that the area to be deemed as prohibited and regulated area  
should not be set in stone for all the monuments and should instead be decided on a case-to- 
case basis, with due consideration to the individua l requirements of the monument/site. 
There is no denying the fact that there needs to be  a mechanism for keeping a check on the 
construction activities in the vicinity of a histor ical monument but utmost care must be 
taken to ensure that doing so causes least possible  disruption in the lives of people who  
have had been living in harmony with the monuments since decades, duly factoring in the 
specific requirements for such checks given the uni que nature of the individual historical 
monuments. The Committee recommends that the Minist ry should urgently work towards 
creating a regulatory framework that has provisions  for the least possible restrictions on 
construction activities in a manner suitable to the  specific requirements for individual 
monuments while ensuring that no structural or visu al damage is caused to the monument 
by any construction activities and does not unneces sarily impinge on the rights of people 
living nearby the monuments. 
(Para 14) 
 
 
The Committee agrees with the concerns raised by one of the experts regarding the 
prohibitions  imposed  by  the  AMASR  (Amendment)  Act,  2010  on  appointment  of any 

41   
person who has held any post with the ASI or the Mi nistry of Culture, as the Chairman or 
member of the NMA. The Committee feels that having the services of personnel who have 
had actual field experience working for the preserv ation and protection of the historical 
monuments and sites, could help NMA fulfill its man date in a more effective manner but 
many people with such experience would be those who  have had worked with the ASI or 
Ministry of Culture and thus would be deemed inelig ible to be appointed as the Chairman 
or member of the NMA as per the existing provisions  of the AMASR Act. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may revisit the ration ale behind the restrictions imposed by 
Section 20F(3) of the AMASR (Amendment and Validati on) Act, 2010 and consider the 
pros and cons behind imposing such a restriction on  the appointment of Chairman and 
members of the NMA. Further, the Committee notes th at the NMA has also been given the 
responsibility of classification and gradation of m onuments in consultation with ASI. The 
Committee recommends that NMA may complete the clas sification and gradation exercise 
at the earliest. The Committee feels that doing so,  alongwith preparation of heritage bye- 
laws for all CPMs, would permit the Ministry to com e up with provisions for restrictions 
best suited for each monument instead of blanket ba ns that fail to serve the intended 
purpose. 
 
(Para 15) 
 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may intr oduce the concept of 
Transferable Development Rights to enable people ha ving properties in the vicinity of the 
monuments to monetize their properties. The Committ ee feels that this would act as a 
deterrent to encroachment of monuments, especially in case the monument is located in a 
congested urban area. 
 
(Para 16) 
 
The Committee takes note of the extensive list of s uggestions made by the expert 
regarding the new Rules/ Regulations/ Policies/ Leg islation/ Amendments that can be 
introduced in order to ensure better protection of the Historical Sites and Monuments. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 14 of this Report and recommends 

42   
that the Ministry may thoroughly examine the above- mentioned suggestions made by the 
expert while undertaking the review of the AMASR Act. The Ministry must ensure that the 
review of the existing legislation may factor in fe edback from experts in the field of 
conservation, preservation, archaeology, law as wel l as all the stakeholders who are 
impacted by the AMASR Act. 
(Para 18) 
 
Suggestions for creation of Regulatory Framework fo r protection of Historical Monuments 
presently not under the protection of both Central and State Governments 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minis try may consider coming up 
with a legislation to amend the Constitution adding  /uni2015ancient and historical monuments 
other than those declared to be of national importa nce /uni01C1 to the Concurrent List, in order to 
permit the Central Government to enforce at least s ome set of provisions for the basic 
protection and conservation of archaeological monuments and sites which are presently not 
under any sort of protection by Central and State G overnments. A separate Heritage 
Commission may thereafter be established to look af ter such monuments. Since a 
Constitutional amendment is a time-taking process, the Committee recommends that in the 
meanwhile, the Ministry may come up with policy gui delines which can be adopted by the 
State Governments across the country for looking af ter neglected archaeological sites and 
monuments. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may request for certain 
budgetary allocation to allow ASI to carry out urge nt conservation measures at such 
miscellaneous monuments, possibly in coordination w ith concerned State Archaeology 
Departments. 
(Para 23) 
 
Efficacy of the existing Regulatory Framework to deal with the specific issue of 
encroachment of the Historical Sites and Monuments 
The Committee notes the existing provisions in plac e in order to deal with the issue 
of encroachment of Centrally Protected Monuments an d the loopholes/ gaps/ glitches 
pointed out by various experts. The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by one   of 

43   
the experts that amendments are required in order t o ensure that encroachment of 
monuments are removed as quick as possible in fast track courts. The Committee feels that 
doing so can permit the encroachment to be removed before any permanent structure is 
constructed in the vicinity of the monument, thus p reventing any sort of possible damages 
to the monument. 
(Para 33) 
 
The Committee is concerned to note that the final n otification of declaration of an 
ancient/historical monument/site/remains as of nati onal importance, is not published by 
ASI in most cases. The Committee recommends that a time-bound limit may be prescribed 
for ASI to publish the final notification, alongwit h the site map, for monuments under its 
protection since the purpose of the same is to verify the physical structure and to determine 
the portion/part/extent of the monument that is required to be within the protected limits. 
 
(Para 34) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may unde rtake a thorough review of 
the AMASR Act as well as the AMASR Rules in terms o f the powers available with ASI to 
tackle the issue of encroachment of monuments, keep ing in view the various loopholes and 
gaps pointed out by legal experts. The Committee fe els that the Ministry should  
incorporate provisions similar to those relating to  encroachment in the Indian Forest Act, 
1927, in the AMASR Act in order to empower ASI to e ffectively deal with the issue of 
encroachment of monuments. The Committee further re commends that the AMASR Act 
should grant power to ASI to seal the site of illeg al construction till the time the demolition 
can be done, so that any delay in the same does not  cause any further damage to the 
monument and there is no incentive for encroachers to undertake any illegal construction 
near the monument. The Ministry should request the Ministry of Finance to provide it with 
separate budget to carry out the demolition of unau thorized constructions that have taken 
place in the vicinity of Centrally Protected Monuments. 
 
(Para 35) 

44   
The Committee recommends that wherever possible, th e Ministry/ASI should 
develop the area in the vicinity of the ancient mon uments as green space with amenities for 
tourists since doing so will not only curb encroach ment of that area but  also  bolster 
tourism in the region. 
 
(Para 35A) 
 
Review of existing provisions for grant of permission required for construction or repairs 
within the prohibited/ regulated areas of Centrally protected monuments 
The Committee fails to see why a person living in t he Regulated Area of a CPM 
should be required to seek permission from the Comp etent Authority under the AMASR 
Rules for carrying out innocuous maintenance activi ties such as filling of cracks, 
whitewashing, replacement of windows etc. The Commi ttee feels that such uncalled-for 
interference makes lives harder for people living n earby the monuments and could slowly 
cause feelings of anguish towards the monument itse lf. Given the large number of 
monuments across the country and the limited budget ary resources available with the 
Government, it is pertinent that people residing ne ar the monuments are encouraged to 
look after the monuments and protect them. Besides,  placing such unnecessary curbs and 
implementing them is a wastage of limited Governmen t resources and turns the focus away 
from where it should be - actually protecting and p reserving the monument itself. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may undertake a thorough review of 
the AMASR Act and Rules and omit any provisions tha t provide for seeking permissions 
for minor works where the same is not actually need ed and streamline the process for 
applying for permission in case where the same is a ctually needed. Steps may urgently be 
taken to make it possible for the entire process fo r seeking permission for construction 
activities in prohibited and regulated areas, to be  completed online so as to not cause any 
hassle to bona fide residents living near the monuments. 
(Para 39) 

45   
Evolving ways for participation of municipalities a nd village panchayats in the process of 
protection of regional Historical Sites and Monuments 
Given the large number of historical monuments and sites located across the 
country, many of which are not under any sort of pr otection from the Central/State 
Governments, the Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 5.7.23 of its 294 th  
Report on the subject ‗Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeo logical 
sites - Challenges and Opportunities‘ and recommend s that the Ministry should find ways 
to institutionally integrate municipalities and vil lage panchayats in the process of 
protection of historical monuments and sites across  the country and if needed, create a 
dedicated body to implement the regulatory framework for the same. 
(Para 41) 
 
Preparation of monument-specific conservation plan and bye-laws for all Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country 
The Committee opines that the Ministry/ASI/NMA shou ld carry out an exercise to 
prepare monument-specific conservation plans and he ritage bye-laws for all Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country, since there  cannot be a uniform plan for all the 
monuments and the unique conservation requirements of each monument can only be 
reflected through dedicated conservation plan for e ach monument. Such an exercise would 
undoubtedly require sufficient manpower and resourc es. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should ensure that swift action is tak en to ensure that ASI is adequately 
staffed at all times and staffing requirements shou ld be anticipated well in advance since 
recruitment of quality personnel is often a time-ta king exercise. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should formulate the b udgetary requirements for creation  
of dedicated conservation plans for all CPMs and re quest the Ministry of Finance to grant 
the same as a special one-time grant. 
(Para 43) 

46   
Security policy for all Centrally Protected Monuments 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may carr y out an exercise to figure 
out the requirements for security infrastructure as  well as for posting security personnel at 
each monument. The data thus obtained may be used t o frame a comprehensive security 
policy for all the Centrally Protected Monuments so  as to ensure a satisfactory level of 
protection of CPMs across the country. The Committe e acknowledges the budgetary 
constraints faced by the Ministry and recommends th at the Ministry may request the 
Ministry of Finance to provide sufficient budget to  allow it to post security personnel at all 
CPMs across the country. Outsourcing should be done  to appoint staff for security of the 
monuments and guides should be trained and they sho uld also be made responsible for 
taking care of the property. 
(Para 47) 
 
Improving the mechanism for coordination between ASI and State Government 
Departments 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may issu e guidelines to the State 
Government Departments concerned to approach the AS I in cases where the State- 
protected Monuments require the technical expertise  available with ASI for better 
protection and preservation of State-protected monu ments. The Committee further 
recommends that the regional offices of ASI should proactively review the status of 
protection and preservation of State-protected monu ments and in case gross neglect in the 
same is observed, the matter should be taken up wit h the State Government Department 
concerned. The Committee feels that a mechanism should be put in place to enable periodic 
exchange of information about the developmental/ conservation/ protection measures taken 
by ASI and State Departments. 
(Para 48) 
 
Miscellaneous 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI, in coordination with the State 
Government Archaeology/Culture Department concerned , should take up the restoration  
of   historical/   religious   sites   having   heritage   value   and   architectural   and  cultural  

47   
significance such as temples which are more than 10 0 years old and which have been 
converted into mixed-use buildings such as resident ial property or government building, to 
their original shape. A time-bound implementation p rogramme should be made for the 
same and accountability of officials working on the se projects should be fixed so that the 
restoration works are completed on time and in a sa tisfactory manner. The Ministry may 
approach the Ministry of Finance to allocate separa te budget for this purpose. The 
Committee further recommends that it should be mand ated that the management bodies 
for religious sites shall get periodically audited regarding the state of conservation, safety 
and security of the monuments and the amount of fun ds/donations received and spent, so 
as to ensure that such funds are not diverted for unrelated purposes. 
(Para 48A) 
 
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is  working on a much-needed 
amendment of the AMASR Act,1958. The Committee reco mmends that the Ministry may 
incorporate the recommendations made by the Committ ee in this Report and factors in 
feedback from experts and stakeholders in the amendment of the AMASR Act. 
 
(Para 50) 
 
The Committee recommends that ASI may frame Disaste r Management Plan for 
the monuments at the earliest since disasters can c ause irreversible damage to our 
invaluable historical monuments and sites and since re efforts have to be made to have  
plans in place to minimize the damage caused due to such adversities. 
 
(Para 52) 
 
***** 
  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
     
 
  

48  
II  
SECOND MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 11:00 AM on Monday, the 1 st  November, 2021 in the Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
Members present: 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman  
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque  
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar  
LOK SABHA  
6. Shri Anto Antony  
7. Shri Margani Bharat  
8. Shri Tapir Gao  
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe  
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan  
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu  
14. Shri Prince Raj  
15. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat  
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
17. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas  
18. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
19. Shri. Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
 Witnesses: - 
            * * * 
 
 *Relates to other matters.  
 

49  
Ministry of Culture  
i. Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary, Ministry of Culture.  
ii. Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma, Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Culture.  
iii. Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). 
iv. Shri Alok Tripathi, Addl. Director, ASI 
v. Shri Ajay Yadav, Director, ASI  
vi. Shri T.J. Alone, Jt. Director General, ASI. 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee to the first meeting 
of the reconstituted Committee and apprised them of  the agenda of the meeting, i;.e. * * * (ii) oral 
evidence of Secretary M/o Culture on the subjects -  * * * and "Creation of Regulatory Framework 
for protection of Historical Sites and Monuments". 
 
2.         *        *       *
 
3.         *  *  * 
4.        *  *  * 
5 *  *  * 
6.         *  *  *
 
  
                
 
*Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 

50  
 
 
(ii) Oral Evidence of Secretary, M/o Culture 
 
7.         The meeting resumed at 02:30 P.M. to hea r the views of Secretary, Ministry of Culture on 
the * * * and ‘Creation of Regulatory Framework for  protection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments.’ At the outset, the Chairman welcomed th e Members and informed that a background 
note on * * *  and ‘Creation of Regulatory Framewor k for protection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments’ has been circulated . Thereafter, the Ch airman welcomed the Secretary and the senior 
officials of the Ministry of Culture, * * *  
8.         The Chairman also briefly touched upon t he second subject, i.e.,  ‘Creation of Regulatory 
Framework for protection of Historical Sites and Mo numents’ and averred that the Ministry of 
Culture and Archaeological Survey of India ought to  work towards preservation of historical sites 
and monuments. He desired that the Committee may be  informed of budgetary shortfalls/ 
constraints faced by the Ministry in the existing f ramework for protection of these sites/ 
monuments and the data collected to ensure their pr eservation for future generations. He queried 
whether existing provisions/ mechanisms/ frameworks  for removal of encroachment from these 
sites were sufficient or any amendment to the Act w as required for their effective preservation.. 
Thereafter, he emphasized that the funds raised by selling tickets at the centrally protected 
monuments should be utilized for maintenance/ upkee p of the heritage sites. Similarly, up-
gradation of libraries should also be done out of money collected by the State Governments in  
_____________________________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters. 

51  
 
the name of libraries.  Thereafter, he invited the Secretary, Ministry of Culture to make a 
presentation on the subject - "Creation of Regulato ry Framework for Protection of Historical sites 
and Monuments". 
9.         *   *   * 
10.       * * * He, however, assured that Ministry will positively look into the matters of creation o f 
regulatory framework for historical sites and monuments, their inclusion in Concurrent List by ASI 
etc. and hoped to present a strong proposal for ame ndments on encroachment, preservation, 
appointment of guards etc. under the Ancient Monume nts and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
Act, 1958 by the Winter Session, 2021 or the Budget  Session, 2022. The Committee was apprised 
of the guidelines for restoration and conservation of licensed excavation in unprotected 
archaeological sites. 
11.       Members raised various queries on * * *  creation of regulatory framework for historical 
sites/ monuments and intangible heritage, * * *  ex pansion of research in detection of historical 
sites/ monuments around Indian borders and forest a reas of north eastern India, protection of 
unprotected sites/ monuments, identification and pr eservation of privately owned heritage sites & 
villages * * * need for innovative infrastructure across the heritage sites/ monuments. 
 
 
 
 
 
*
 Relates to other matters  
  

52  
 
12.       The Secretary of Ministry of Culture repl ied to some of the queries raised by the Chairman 
and Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed  him to furnish written replies to the 
remaining queries/points/issues raised by the Membe rs which remained unanswered, within a 
week's time. 
(The witnesses then concluded their remarks withdrew) 
13.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
14.       The meeting adjourned at 3:20 P.M.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53  
VIII  
EIGHTH MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th  December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA  
4. Shri Anto Antony 
5. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
6. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
7. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
8. Shri Dushyant Singh 
9. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
10. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
11. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT  
      
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54  
Witnesses: -         
 
 
 *   *   * 
 
1. *   *   * 
2.         *   *   * 
3.         *   *   * 
4.         *   *   * 
 
 Witnesses: - 
   * * *  
 
5.         *   *   * 
6 *   *   * 
7 *   *
1   * 
8.         *   *   * 
  
Witnesses: - 
Archaeological Survey of India, Ministry of Culture 
1. Prof. Alok Tripathi 
(in the capacity of domain expert ) 
Additional Director General 
2. Shri T.J. Alone 
(in the capacity of domain expert ) 
Joint Director General 
  
Domain Experts 
 
1. Adv. A.D.N. Rao Senior Advocate on panel of Supr eme Court 
2. Adv. Jayant Tripathi President Legal Advisor to ASI 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
1 *Relates to other matters. 
 

55  
 
9.         The meeting resumed at 4:00 P.M. to hear  the views of Prof. Alok Tripathi, Additional 
Director General, ASI; Shri T.J. Alone, Joint Direc tor General, ASI; Adv. A.D.N. Rao, Senior 
Advocate on panel of Supreme Court of India; and Ad v. Jayant Tripathi, President Legal Advisor 
to ASI, on the subject ‘Creation of Regulatory Fram ework for protection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments’. 
10.       Adv. A.D.N. Rao briefed the Committee abo ut the difficulties faced by the people living 
around the protected monuments leading to issues of  encroachment. He stressed upon the need for 
public participation for protection of historical m onuments and sites and educating the people 
living nearby protected monuments regarding the imp ortance of the monuments. He felt that the 
powers available with ASI to deal with encroachment  are not sufficient as they are dependent on 
local police, which sometimes works in connivance w ith the encroachers. He suggested that ASI 
officers should have powers like those given to Dis trict Forest Officers (DFOs) under The Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972 and that granting power to A SI to seal the site of illegal construction by the 
time the demolition can be done, would be effective  in curbing the issue of encroachment of 
monuments. He was of the view that local industries  should be approached for safeguarding of 
local monuments through CSR funds. 
11.       The Chairman recommended that the Forest Act should be studied and important points 
should be taken and implemented in the legislation for protection of historical monuments and 
sites. He suggested that local Panchayats and Munic ipalities should be roped in to ensure the 
security of historical monuments. He was of the vie w that outsourcing should be done to appoint 
staff for security of the monuments and that guides  should be trained and they should also be made 
responsible for taking care of the property. 
12.       With regard to outsourcing, Adv. A.D.N. R ao highlighted the issue of contract workers 
asking for regularization after completion of their  contract. He raised the issue of infrastructure 

56  
projects facing problems in implementation because of protected monuments in the vicinity and 
suggested that the authorities should hold consultations with the ASI at the planning stage. 
13.       Adv. Jayant Tripathi informed the Committ ee that the role of ASI in respect of monuments 
need to be ascertained and that after 1992, ASI is supposed to look at 300 meters beyond the 
monument and see if any construction, repair or ren ovation is going on in the area. He opined that 
ASI does not have the expertise and the manpower fo r this purpose, and that the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 should be revisited in this regard. On 
the issue of monuments which are not under any sort  of protection, be it Central Government or 
State Government, he opined that protection of such  non-protected monuments can be enabled by 
incorporation of heritage-specific bye-laws in the municipal building bye-laws of the concerned 
municipal corporation. The other alternative that h e suggested for the protection of non-protected 
monuments was to set up a Heritage Commission to lo ok after them but that would require a minor 
Constitutional amendment wherein the words ‘histori cal buildings and sites’ would need to be 
added to Entry 40 of List III of the Seventh Schedu le of the Constitution. Briefing the Committee 
about the rule regarding restrictions on constructi on in prohibited and regulated area of a 
monument, he informed the Committee that the said r ule is turning the citizens against our heritage 
by restricting their rights to construct on their o wn land. He suggested that the lengths of regulated  
and prohibited areas of each monument should be dec ided on a case-to-case basis, which would 
require a new survey of all the monuments by ASI. 
14.       Additional Director General, ASI informed  the Committee about the issue of lack of 
manpower faced by the ASI in the protection of hist orical monuments across the country. He was 
of the view that having regular staff at all Centra lly Protected Monuments can allow ASI to stop 
encroachments at the early stage before any illegal  construction has taken place. He further opined 
that having monument-specific bye-laws, depending o n their nature, date and kind of structure etc. 
will help ASI in protecting the monuments more effectively. 

57  
15.       Members of the Committee raised various q ueries, some of which were replied to by the 
witnesses. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
16.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
17.         The meeting adjourned at 5:05 PM. 
  
  

58  
 
 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Monday, the 6 
th January, 2022 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           -               Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA  
4. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
5. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
6. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 SECRETARIAT  
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses: -  
  
 
 *  *   * 
 
  
1. *  *   * 
2. *  *   * 
___________________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters. 
 

59  
 
 
3. *  *   * 
4. *  *   * 
5. *  *   * 
6. *  *   * 
7. *  *   * 
8. *  *   * 
9. *  *   * 
10. *  *   * 
11. *  *   * 
12. *  *   * 
 Witnesses: - 
Ministry of Culture  
1. Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
 
Archaeological Survey of India  
2. Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General 
3. Shri Alok Tripathi Additional Director General 
4. Shri Janhwij Sharma Additional Director General 
5. Shri T.J. Alone Joint Director General 
6. Dr. M. Nambirajan Joint Director General 
13.         The Chairman welcomed Shri Govind Mohan , Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Ms. 
Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey  of India (ASI) and other senior officers from 
the Ministry and ASI to the meeting of the Committe e. * * *. He further enquired from the 
Ministry whether experts and stakeholders have been  consulted during the course of drafting of the 
upcoming amendment to the existing legislation for protection and preservation of ancient sites and 
monuments. He suggested that powers to take action against concerned officers who do not take 
action on ASI’s demolition orders, may be included in the upcoming amendment of the existing 
legislation. He further suggested that wherever ancient monuments more than hundred  
*Relates to other matters. 

60  
years old, have been converted and utilized for dif ferent purposes, the same should be vacated and 
brought back to their original shape. He desired th at the Ministry may incorporate the 
recommendations that will be made by the Committee in its upcoming Report on the subject 
‘Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of  Historical Sites and Monuments’, in its 
upcoming amendment Bill of the Ancient Monuments an d Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(AMASR) Act, 1958. 
14 * * * He assured the Committee that the Ministry  is on course to introduce a Bill to amend 
the AMASR Act, 1958 in the upcoming Budget Session.  He stated that the Ministry has held two 
stakeholder meetings and that art conservationists,  heritage experts, former ASI experts and all 
infrastructure Ministries have been consulted by th e Ministry. He stated that the Ministry is 
balancing the conflicting demands of the infrastruc ture Ministries and conservationists in the draft 
AMASR Amendment Bill. He further informed the Commi ttee that the Ministry will amend the 
Act to provide ASI with punitive penal powers to tackle the issue of encroachment of monuments. 
15.       Director General, ASI informed the Commit tee the issue of ASI officers not being 
permitted to be a part of National Monuments Author ity (NMA) as its Chairman or Member, is 
being looked into. She stated that as per the preli minary security assessment of the monuments, 
around 10,000 support security staff is presently r equired and that the assessment is being done 
again as ASI receives support from local Governments and local panchayats as well. 
16.         Secretary, Ministry of Culture and DG, ASI responded to the queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman  then directed the Secretary to furnish 
written replies to other queries/points/issues rais ed by him and the Members of the Committee, 
which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.   
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
17.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18.       The meeting adjourned at 2:43 PM. 
 
___________________________________________________ ____________ 
*Relates to other matters. 

61  
 
  
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st  January, 2022 in Committee Room - 
'4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA  
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm w elcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the  meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 

62  
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
(i) *  *  *  * 
(ii) *  *  *  *  
(iii) *  *  *  *  
(iv) *  *  *  *  
(v) *  *  *  *  
(vi) *  *  *  * 
B.        Draft subject Report on - 
 (i)   *  *  *  *  
(ii)     Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical Sites and  
                     Monuments; 
(iii) *  *  *  *  
(iv)       *  *  *  * 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered th e aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 

63  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMEN T-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
01 st  November, 2021  
Ministry of Culture  
i. Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary, Ministry of Culture.  
ii. Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma, Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Culture.  
iii. Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). 
iv. Shri Alok Tripathi, Addl. Director, ASI 
v. Shri Ajay Yadav, Director, ASI  
vi. Shri T.J. Alone, Jt. Director General, ASI. 
09 th  December, 2021  
Archaeological Survey of India, Ministry of Culture 
1. Prof. Alok Tripathi 
(in the capacity of domain expert ) 
Additional Director General 
2. Shri T.J. Alone 
(in the capacity of domain expert ) 
Joint Director General 
Domain Experts 
 
1. Adv. A.D.N. Rao Senior Advocate on panel of Supr eme Court 
2. Adv. Jayant Tripathi President Legal Advisor to ASI 
 
 
 
 
  
06th January, 2022 
 
Ministry of Culture  
1. Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
 
Archaeological Survey of India  
2. Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General 
3. Shri Alok Tripathi Additional Director General 
4. Shri Janhwij Sharma Additional Director General 
5. Shri T.J. Alone Joint Director General 
6. Dr. M. Nambirajan Joint Director General 
 
 
 