Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Phalguna , 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETIETH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling 
and Sikkim
 
REPORT NO. 
190
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

49
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETIETH REPORT
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling
and Sikkim
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—32
Chapter-I Introduction .................................................................................................. 1—3
Chapter-II Development of Tourism related Infrastructure in Darjeeling ............ 4—9
Chapter-III Development of Tourism related Infrastructure in Sikkim ................. 10—16
Chapter-IV Development of Transport Connectivity ......... ........................................ 17—27
Chapter-V Centrally Protected Monuments in Darjeeling and Sikkim .................. 28—30
Chapter-VI General Observations and Recommendations ......................................... 31—32
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................ 33—43
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 4 5—48

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
17. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
@18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Prabodh Panda
20. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
21. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
22. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@23. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sudhakaran
29. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
*30. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
#31. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
(i)
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.
* Nominated on 14 th December, 2012 vice  Shri Khagen Das.
# Nominated on 9 th January, 2013 vice Dr. Kruparani Killi, who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon
her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon,  Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf this
One Hundred Ninetieth Report on ‘Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim’.
2. The Committee, in continuation of its special focus on promotion of Tourism in India, took
up the North-Eastern Region for studying various issues related to promotion of tourism sector in
that region. The Committee undertook a study visit to Guwahati, Aizawl, Shillong and Agartala from
9
th to 15 th February, 2011 and presented its 172 nd Report to the Parliament.
3. The Committee further visited Darjeeling and Gangtok from 26 th February to 2 nd March,
2012 to study the difficulties that came in the way of promotion of tourism in the Region such
as restriction on entry of tourists, poor infrastructure, lack of transport facility, poor security and
insufficient road-rail-air network etc.
4. The Committee expresses its gratitude to the officers of the Ministry of Tourism, Ministry
of Culture, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of
Shipping, Ministry of DONER, Airports Authority of India, Air India, National Highways Authority
of India, Archaeological Survey of India, Inland Waterway Authority of India, North Eastern
Council and Officers of State Governments of Sikkim and West Bengal, Tour-Travel and Hotelier
Associations of these States and others for their cooperation in furnishing the required feedback
and information in connection with the examination of the subject and also for making valuable
suggestions for improving the tourism scenario in these States.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 3
rd January, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI Chairman,
January 3 , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
13 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAI – Airports Authority of India
IAF – Indian Air Force
ASI – Archaeological Survey of India
BRO – Border Roads Organisation
CA T – Critical Area Test
CFA – Central Financial Assistance
CoS – Committee of Secretaries
DGHC – Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
DoNER – Department of North-Eastern Region
EOI – Expression of Interest
FCI – Food Craft Institute
IHM – Institute of Hotel Management
ILS – Instrument Landing System
JWG – Joint Working Group
LPG – Liquified Petroleum Gas
LTC – Leave Travel Concession
MAFI – Modernisation of Air Force Infrastructure
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MICE – Meetings Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions
MoD – Ministry of Defence
NGO – Non-Governmental Organisation
NH – National Highways
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India
NJP – New Jalpaiguri
NLC – National Level Consultant
PHHL – Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited
PWD – Public Works Department
RTH – Road Transport and Highways
RTO – Regional Transport Office
SARDP – Sepecial Accelerated Road Development Programme
SNT – Sikkim Nationalised Transport
TCS – Tata Consultancy Services
(iv)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
The eight States of the North-Eastern Region form part of the East Himalayan region, which
includes Sikkim that embraces the Darjeeling Hills of West Bengal. The rich natural beauty, serenity
and exotic flora and fauna of the area are invaluable resources for the development of eco-tourism.
The Region is endowed with several tourist attractions, each State having its own distinct features.
Such attractions are scattered all over the region largely located in remote areas within highly
fragile environments.
2. Despite abundance of natural beauty, snow peaked mountains and white water rivers,
forests and wild life, the flow of incoming tourists has been marginal mainly due to lack of
infrastructure in this region. All our efforts for the development and promotion of North East
Region, that includes allocation of 10% of the Plan fund all the Ministries has had no desired
impact. An amount of Rs.110.00 crore has been earmarked in B.E. 2011-12 for the region. The
financial assistance being given to North East States includes assistance for development of tourist
infrastructure, promotion of fairs/festivals and tourism related events in the region, Information
Technology related projects, publicity campaigns, market development assistance, human resource
development, promotion and marketing etc.
3. Realizing that certain aspects/areas of the region did not get required emphasis in its earlier
report, the Committee decided to look into those aspects relating to North-Eastern Region, the
Committee decided to take up the issues relating to development of tourism for detailed
consideration and make a report to Parliament. The Committee undertook an on-the-spot study of
the region and visited Guwahati (Assam), Aizawl (Mizoram), Shillong (Meghalaya) and Agartala
(Tripura) where it interacted all the stakeholders including State Governments and local people. The
Committee has been quite concerned about the lack of infrastructure and other facilities for a long
time reflected in its observations/recommendations in its various Reports from time to time. So
much so, it had earlier made a study of the region and presented its 172
nd Report on the
Development of Tourism in North Eastern Region on 17 th August, 2011.
4. The Committee visited Darjeeling and Sikkim with the view to see, discuss and find
solutions to the problems and bottlenecks confronting the promotion of Tourism in the region.
It comprehensively studied the two major aspects of the Infrastructure Development in the two
areas, commutation; viz. development of roads, roadways, railways, airways, ropeways,
helicopter services, bridges; and (ii) Hospitality; viz ., development of hotels, homestays,
development of areas of tourist interest and to provide facilities like telescopic Himalayan
mountain views, trekking and adventure tourism, parks, monuments, etc. With these aspects in
mind, the Committee held interaction with the transport operators, hoteliers and other
stakeholders in the private sector as well as with the Ministries of Tourism, Civil Aviation, RTH,
Culture, and organizations like ASI, BRO, Airports Authority of India, Air India, and the State
Governments of West Bengal and Sikkim.
5. Darjeeling  in West Bengal is one of the most magnificent hill resorts in the world. It
conjures visions of snow peaks, serenity of vibrant green hills steeped in splendor, a land of

2
breathtaking beauty crowned by the majestic Himalayas and attracts young, adventurous and
enthusiasts across the age groups. The tourist spots and attractions in the region are serene,
pristine and hub of adventure, leisure and special interest tourism. The tourism products of
Darjeeling and adjoining areas are Tea Tourism, Toy Train—a World Heritage product, Trekking,
Water Rafting, Bird Watching Tour, Butterflies Tours, Forest Safaris and Wellness Tourism.
6. Sikkim  is a small State in the North-Eastern Himalayas, surrounded by vast stretches of
Tibetan plateau in the North, the Chumbi valley of Tibet and the kingdom of Bhutan in the East,
Darjeeling district of West Bengal in the South and the kingdom of Nepal in the West. The State
being a part of the inner ranges of mountains of Himalayas has no open valleys, and no plains but
varied elevation ranging from 300 to 8583 mtrs. consisting of lower hills, middle and higher hills,
alpine zones and snow bound land. The highest elevation of 8583 mtrs. is at the top of the
Mt. Kanchenjunga. This Hill State is a bio-diversity hotspot endowed with unblemished natural
beauty with lush green forest and abundant flora and fauna.
7. Sikkim also famous for its unique culture, ethnic heritage, pilgrimage tours, sites of
archeological interest and more so, a perfect option for adventure lovers. This hill-station, popular
as ‘Nature’s own Garden’, is one of the most sought after hill destinations. As a showcase of
nature-tourism, the hills of Sikkim offer multiple options for those in search of authentic natural
splendor away from hustle of city atmosphere.
8. These factors are supporting these hill stations to have a regular upward growth in the case
of tourist arrivals over the years.
The details of tourist arrivals in West Bengal and Sikkim  are as follows:
Domestic and foreign Tourists visited during 2006-10 (in lakhs)
Year Tourist Visits Sikkim W est Bengal All India
2006 Domestic 4.22 158.08 4623.21
Foreign 0.18 9.98 1 17.39
2007 Domestic 4.65 185.81 5265.64
Foreign 0.18 1 1.55 132.57
2008 Domestic 5.12 193.14 5630.34
Foreign 0.21 1 1.34 143.81
2009 Domestic 6.16 205.29 6688.00
Foreign 0.18 1 1.80 143.72
2010 Domestic 7.00 210.72 7402.14
Foreign 0.21 1 1.92 178.53
2011 Domestic N.A. 222.57 8508.56
Foreign N.A. 12.13 194.94
9. The above Table illustrates that the Tourist arrivals in Sikkim, both domestic and foreign,
had witnessed substantial increase in the recent years. The domestic tourists stand at 4.22 lakhs

3
in 2006 and 7.00 lakhs in 2010 whereas the foreign tourist arrivals in 2006 was 0.18 lakh and in
2010 it was 0.21 lakhs. As per a study conducted by the Ministry of Tourism for the State of
Sikkim, April, May, June and October appears to be the peak season for tourists with reasonably
satisfactory inflows during the months of March, August, July to December as well. Thus, January
and February are the leanest months for the Tourism Industry to bear. The Major source markets
for domestic tourists were West Bengal, Maharashtra, Delhi and Gujarat. The share of other States
appears to be only marginal. Sikkim also attracted tourists from Western Europe, U.S.A, UK, Japan,
etc. though very nominal.

4
CHAPTER-II
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE IN DARJEELING
10. Infrastructure development holds the key to India’s sustained growth in the tourism sector.
Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and
Circuits, the Ministry of Tourism extends Central Financial Assistance to the State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects identified in consultation with them for the
improvement of existing tourism products and also for developing new ones. 100% Central
assistance is given under the scheme for development of destinations/circuits including mega
projects to world standard and also for rural tourism infrastructure development. The Ministry of
Tourism provides financial assistance up to Rs.5.00 crores for the development of Destinations and
Rs.8.00 crores for the development of Circuits. The upper limits of financial assistance for
development of identified mega destinations and circuits are Rs.25 crore and Rs.50 crore
respectively. For Rural Tourism Infrastructure Development, the thrust is on development of
tourism infrastructure at the identified rural tourism sites so that socio-economic benefits of
tourism reach to the rural community. A maximum of Rs.50.00 lakh is sanctioned for each project
under this scheme for the development of tourism related infrastructure.
11. The Ministry of Tourism, during the course of its submissions, has informed the Committee
that the following initiatives have been taken by the Government for Darjeeling:
(1) Heritage Railway Stations like Darjeeling, Kurseong, Sonada and Ghoom shall be
refurbished and components of the Darjeeling Himalayan Railways shall be restored.
(2) Master Plan is being prepared for Tourism Development in Darjeeling.
(3) Under the Project ‘Destination Darjeeling’, parking Space, Street Lighting, main
thoroughfares, Public Conveniences, Signages, View Points, parapet with railing and
garbage disposal vats will be set up in the town of Darjeeling.
(4) Himalayan Mountaineering Institute shall be revived.
(5) Mirik;
(i) Setting up of Aquarium on Mirik Lake;
(ii) Providing Water Sports facilities on Mirik Lake;
(6) Management of tourism facilities- Swiss cottages in Mirik, Teesta, Tribeni, Jorpokhari
Wayside facilities;
(7) Setting up of Public Convenience at State Highway 12, Mongpoo Road, Kalimpong
Road and Lava-Gorubathan Road.
(8) Improving the trekking route from Manebhanjan via Sandakphu to Phalut with more
wayside amenities, as also accommodation.
(9) Kalimpong;
(i) Setting up of Horticulture Park;
(ii) Setting up of Orchid Garden.
4

5
(10) T agore Trail– This circuit would cover Mongpu, (Museum and Sureli Bunglow),
Gouripur House and Chitrabhanu in Kalimpong.
(11) Tourist Information Centre near Coronation Bridge with kiosks/Souvenir Shops/tea-
shops.
(12) Home stay facilities in the district.
(13) Complete Restoration of Sureli Bungalow, the abode of Rabindranath Tagore in
Mongpu, Darjeeling.
(14) Creation of tourism infrastructure at Sandakphu and Phalut, Development of trekking
route from Manebhanjan to Sandakphu/Phalut.
(15) Refurbishment of Tiger Hill observation centre.
(16) Landscaping at Tiger Hill and creation of Tourism Interpretation Centre.
(17) Two Rural Tourism Projects at Darjeeling.
(18) Creation of cafeterias at the railway stations of Darjeeling, Kurseong and Ghoom.
(19) Develop the Trekking infrastructure on Lava-Lolegaon route.
(20) Creation of infrastructure to facilitate Rafting at Teesta, Gliding in Kalimpong, Angling,
Mountain Biking etc.
(21) Motor Vehicle Training for 200 youth by augmenting the facilities at the Tibetan.
12. The Committee notes that various tourism development schemes have been proposed
for the development of Darjeeling and adjoining areas. The Committee was informed that
approximately 4000 people visit Tiger Hill every morning to watch the sunrise. The
Committee is of the view that augmentation of facilities at the observation with latest
telescopes and such aids will attract more tourists to this place. To cater to the requirement
of influx in tourists, the Committee recommends that projects initiated for the promotion
of tourism in Darjeeling and the adjoining areas may be completed within the proposed
time-frame.
13. The Committee held interaction with various Governmental and non-Governmental agencies.
The following points emerged during the discussions:
Darjeeling Ropeway
14. The long pride of Darjeeling has been the ‘Singla Ropeway’, which once connected the
Darjeeling town to the other side of Sikkim, making transportation much easier has been recently
opened but with only one station. The Committee during its field visits has seen the most scenic
ropeway that has the backdrop of the snow-capped mountains, tea gardens and the Rangeet River.
The Committee hopes that this may be connected to Singla as served earlier and later it
can be extended to the other side of the river to Jorethang in Sikkim and taking it to
Namchi, making this a Darjeeling-Sikkim Ropeway, which would be a major tourist
attraction in both the places.
Darjeeling Himalayan Railway
15. The Committee found the neglect in Darjeeling Hill Railway was evident from the ill-
equipped railway stations with very old and shabby looking buildings which were once the pride
of Darjeeling. The train service requires a major overhaul. The Committee, therefore,

6
recommends that renovation/restoration of all stations from Siliguri station to Darjeeling
station should be taken up. Not only the Railway Stations, but the adjoining areas with tea
estates, old buildings, etc. should be brought under ‘Tourism and Heritage Park’. Siliguri
Town, Sukna, Tindharia, Kurseong, Sonada, Ghoom and Darjeeling station need to be
provided with tourist information and felicitation centre and other amenities.
Neighbouring Country Borders
16. The Committee was informed that there are 3 major border points which are used by
tourists, viz., Kakkarvitta-Panitanki border with Nepal, Chengrabandha-Burimari border with
Bangladesh and Phuentsholing-Jaigaon border with Bhutan. These points need to be immediately
upgraded to facilitate tourists, which are completely unorganized at the present State. The
Committee, therefore, takes the view that all-weather single window facility like customs
and immigration clearances, foreign exchange and other information should be available to
the tourists at these spots. Inter-country reciprocal arrangement with Nepal and Bhutan
with regard to taxis, permits, foreign exchange, etc. for tourists between India-Bhutan and
India-Nepal were demanded by the tour operators. The Committee recommends that the
matter may be taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs.
Celebration of Tourism Day
17. The Committee was also informed that in order to create awareness about Ministry of
Tourism, Darjeeling tourism celebrates World Tourism Day on the Mall. However, last year (2010-11)
they did not get funds and the event was not organized. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that ‘Tourism day’ should be celebrated with festivity to encourage tourism sector on
regular basis and adequate allocation of funds should be provided by the Government.
Streetlights and Footpaths
18. The Committee was informed by the stakeholders that they are not allowed to put
streetlights and build footpaths. The Committee, during the visit witnessed itself darkness
on the streets and lack of proper walking space in the roads. The Committee notes that
such measure would only enhance the market capacity of the place and recommends that
efforts should be made to put proper streetlights and build footpaths.
Development of Parks
19. The Committee received a memorandum demanding to develop and maintain Bankim
Chandra Park situated near Kalimpong which has huge tourism potential. This park is now in
a dilapidated State over-run by weeds and the glass house there has been dismantled by the
authorities. It was also submitted to the Committee that Kalimpong was a neglected area as the
roads, electricity and water problems are rampant there.
20. The suggestions given to the Committee are summed up as under:
(i) an immediate survey of the park be made by a Team of Experts comprising of
distinguished architects, landscape experts and planners of Kalimpong;
(ii) upgradation work be immediately taken up by construction of a glass house, repairs
of pathways and gazebos and suitable planting of decorative plants and shrubs;
(iii) Pay-toilets be constructed for the use of tourist and visitors; and

7
(iv) Abundant Cafeterias with parking lots be constructed where clean drinking water, tea
and coffee and light snacks are served by suitably liveried attendants to tourists and
local visitors, etc.
21. The Committee notes that Bankim Chandra Park is an important component of
tourism in Kalimpong. For development of tourism in Darjeeling and adjoining region, the
development of Kalimpong is crucial. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate steps for the development of Kalimpong and also Bankim Chandra Park should
be taken. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has proposed setting up of
horticultural park, orchard garden and creation of infrastructure facilities for gliding in
Kalimpong. The Committee also recommends that the State Government may be consulted
and sensitized to submit new proposals in this regard.
22. The Committee was also informed that the Janmukti Park situated in  the heart of
Kalimpong town is built on land where the Kalimpong Arts and Crafts once functioned. It is a
small Open Air Park with flowerbeds, pathways, benches, small lawns with a panoramic view of
the Himalayas. The Committee was, however, surprised to find that its view is obstructed and
obscured by concrete structure and the entrance to the park is through a historic section of
Kalimpong town where the original pagoda style enclosure that once housed the bust of Queen
Victoria still stands besides the original structure of Coronation dispensary. The Committee
recommends for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the park by the concerned agencies.
Maintenance of Lakes
23. Mirik is a tourist place. It was submitted to the Committee that Mirik lake is nowadays
facing acute neglect and there was no system to keep the lake clean. The local sewage and mud
all are deposited into the lake. The Mirik lake is also source of potable water for Darjeeling and
the adjoining areas. The Committee takes a serious view of the utter neglect of Mirik lake.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a proper sewage disposal
mechanism for the area so that the process of polluting the Mirik lake could be checked.
The Committee also recommends that de-silting should be done in Mirik Lake and,
thereafter, proper maintenance work should be carried out at regular intervals.
Observatories
24. Observing Kanchenjunga is a very pleasant experience from the Tiger Hills. However, all the
tourists will not get the opportunity as it depends on the weather conditions. The Committee
recommends that telescopes and such facilities enabling the tourists to get clear view of the
mountain may be arranged at the Tiger Hills.
Adventure tourism and trekking
25. The Committee also came to know that adventure tourism and trekking can be good options
to woo tourists. To add to the offers Biking trail can be made around Darjeeling to attract more
adventure tourists. However, the Committee was informed that no project was received for
adventure tourism.
Tea Tourism
26. Darjeeling is famous for its beautiful Tea Gardens spread far and wide having
immense potential for tourism. The concept of ‘Tea Tourism’ should be explored for tourism
purposes. The Committee was informed during the discussions with the stakeholders that
for this purpose Lease agreement is to be reviewed to include tourism in it. The Committee

8
recommends that the State Government may be consulted for taking necessary steps in this
regard.
MICE tourism
27. Conventions and conferences are, today, acknowledged as a significant segment of the
tourism industry. A large number of conferences are held around the world every year. Meetings,
Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE) are important segments of the tourism industry.
In a rapidly globalizing high growth Indian economy, MICE tourism is set to grow and the country
is in need of more Convention and Exhibition Centres to meet this requirement. To encourage
investment and standardize facilities in these areas, the Ministry of Tourism grants approval to
Convention Centres.
28. The Committee notes that these two places have immense potential for this purpose.
There are no facility for holding conference in Darjeeling, as such, the corporate sector is
not interested in visiting the place. In Sikkim also the situation is more or less the same.
The Committee therefore recommends that the State Governments of West Bengal and
Sikkim should take benefit from the above mentioned scheme as so far they have not sent
any proposal for setting up convention centres in these places.
Hotel Accommodation and Amenities
29. Darjeeling is the most sought after tourist destination but there is dearth of good hotels.
There are no five star hotels. The Convention centre facilities are also not good. The Government
gives subsidy for construction of hotels above two stars as such bigger hotels are getting
subsidies. However, the Committee is of the view that there is need for giving incentive for building
two star hotels as most sought after hotels are in this category. Also there is demand for tax
holiday for 5 years in the region. The Stakeholders in Darjeeling also informed that they have to
face stiff competition from Sikkim as they get the exemption in taxes by the State Government.
The Committee was also informed that in 1991 Darjeeling Industrial Centre promised subsidy for
small hotels but the proposal did not materialize. The Committee recommends that subsidy
should be provided to smaller and Budget hotels on priority basis. The Committee is of the
strong view that there is need to give special status to Darjeeling and keep it at par with
NE States so that it can also get exemption in taxes, etc. If timely action is not taken the
tourist flow will gradually decrease and this will affect the economy of the region as the
major source of employment is tourism related services.
30. The Committee also visited the West Bengal Tourism hotel at Mirik. The place is
situated atop a hill with scenic beauty and the rooms are very spacious. However the facility
was not opened for visitors. The Committee noted that the place away from the crowd can
be a good staying option if properly maintained. The Committee recommends that the
possibility of opening the hotel for the public may be explored.
Rural Tourism
31. As the whole of North Bengal and Sikkim are dominated by villages, the Committee finds
the hope for pro-poor tourism development as per the Central Government’s new tourism initiative.
The Committee was also informed that the tourist spots near Darjeeling is 85% villages and the
village tourism by way of Home stays can be a good option for the visitors. However, the Home
stays do not get subsidies. The Committee recommends that scheme for subsidy to Home
Stays should be included in the subsidy scheme for building tourist accommodation in
villages. The Committee recommends that there is an immediate need to formulate a rural

9
tourism policy and support for development of some model tourism villages in the
Darjeeling and Sikkim region.
Removal of Eyesores
32. The Committee was also informed of the towers which have been installed on the
rooftops and the hills which is an eyesore on the beauty of Darjeeling. There is urgent need
for relocating them. Further, there are BSNL cables lying all over the city in a haphazard
manner. These cables are potential danger and also destroy the beauty of the place. The
Committee recommends that local authorities should take corrective measures to solve the
problem.
Drinking Water Supply
33. The Committee during the deliberations with the hoteliers had found that their major
complaint was about the shortage of drinking water. Since water supply is available once in a week
that too for one hour, the hoteliers have to depend on private water suppliers for meeting their
requirements. During the deliberation the Committee was informed by the officials of Darjeeling
Gorkha Hill Council (DGHC) that major water project of Rs. 159 crore is underway for lifting the
water and to distribute it and is likely to complete in one and a half year.
34. The Committee recommends that drinking water should be arranged on priority basis
and special schemes for the purpose should be formulated. The Committee hopes that the
project will be completed within a period of 1½ year as informed to the Committee.
Sanitation and cleanliness
35. The Committee also noted that sanitation and cleanliness is lacking in Darjeeling which has to
be taken up as utmost important. Since Ministry of Tourism is already holding the “clean
India” campaign, the Committee recommends that Darjeeling should be included in the
campaign. The Committee also recommends that local bodies and NGOs may be involved the
‘Clean India’ campaign at the field levels.
Erratic supply of LPG
36. The Committee also got complaints of erratic supply of LPG cylinders to hotels which had
led to price hike and black marketing. The Committee recommends that the matter may be
taken up with concerned Ministries/agencies to ensure that hospitality sector does not face
the shortage of LPG cylinders.

10
10
CHAPTER-III
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE IN SIKKIM
37. Problems/challenges in Tourism Development  in Sikkim as submitted by the Ministry of
Tourism to the Committee are:–
• Sikkim is a mountainous area, the damage to Arterial road and inter-district
connectivity due to landslides is a recurring phenomenon causing the problems in
project implementation.
• Sikkim is a rain-fed region with extreme monsoon, the working season is limited to
about 8 months at the lower climatic zones, which is further reduced in the higher
altitude regions.
• The State is landlocked with international border along three sides and one side open
to the country through West Bengal. Political stability depends on the implementation
of the project and the inflow of the tourist.
• Project cost is comparatively higher as Mountainous and High Altitude area rather than
plain land.
• Administrative clearance and Forest clearance (in case of project site falling under
forest land)
38. On this basis of study conducted for Sikkim, the key Strengths and Weakness  have been
identified as follows:
• Strengths
■ Historical importance of Sikkim
■ Value for money accommodation infrastructure.
■ Buddhist Culture/ambience as a tourist attraction.
■ Eco/Adventure Tourism.
• Weaknesses
■ Connectivity/poor basic infrastructure like roads, expensive travel costs due
to absence of public/private transport system.
39. Key tourism products and packages could be Adventure activities, trekking, yak rides,
angling; Village tourism/home stays; Fairs and festivals; Pilgrimage; Handloom and handicrafts;
Local cuisine; Floriculture; Wellness.
40. The Committee notes that at present, Sikkim primarily is seen as a standalone
destination. However, it can be a unique combination of various products of tourist
interest. These include culture, nature and adventure tourism products. The ultimate
aim is to develop Sikkim as a part of Buddhist Circuit and an eco-tourism destination
in the country. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to integrate all
the tourism products. The Committee hopes that these adversities like poor

11
connectivity, under developed roads, expensive travel costs, etc. should be met with
proper study on the actual problems and implementing modern technologies for the
construction works, etc.
41. The Ministry of Tourism has informed that the following tourism projects were completed
in Sikkim:–
Sl. Project Name Amount (CFA)
No. (in lakh)
2008-09
West Sikkim
1. Tourist Infrastrcture at Rameydham Rabdha and war site at 500.00
Thapgay Dara, Sribadam
2. Development of Barshay rhododendron T ourist Centre in Soreng, 500.00
West Sikkim
East Sikkim
1. Construction of Heritage Centre at Marchak and Beyong in East 300.13
Sikkim
2. Construction of Tourist Infrastrcture at Old Rumtek and Rey in 416.36
North Sikkim
1. Dev of high altitude trekking route from Taschu to Sebang and 92.72
foot trail from Kedyong Pilgrimage Monastery in North Sikkim
2. Development of trekking route to Green Lake and Nimtey in 299.35
North Sikkim under the Destination Development Scheme
South Sikkim
1. Development of Tourist infrastructure at Jorethang in South Sikkim 385.85
2009-10
East Sikkim
1. Tourist Circuit Development En-Route Rumtek in East Sikkim 418.41
North Sikkim
1. Development and promotion of Eco-Tourism Destination in Lachung, 397.41
Yumthang in North Sikkim
2. Destination Development of Mangan Tourist Axis i/c Heliport in North 329.11
Sikkim
The Ministry of Tourism has further informed that the following projects are under progress in
Sikkim:–

12
Sl. Project Name Amount (CFA) Status
No. (in lakh)
12 3 4
2008-09
East Sikkim
1. Development of Gangtok as Major Tourist Destination 2390.70 In progress
South Sikkim
1. Construction of Tourist infrastructures at Temi-Tarku 380.52 In progress
in South Sikkim.
2. Construction of Yatri-Niwas at Assangthang in South 500.00 In progress
Sikkim
3. Development of Tourist Infrastructure at Damthang in 471.09 In progress
South Sikkim
4. Development of Tourist infrastructure at Tif findara 379.73 In progress
and Children Park at Namchi in South Sikkim
5. Tourist infrastructure at T endong and Jorpokhari in 253.78 In progress
South Sikkim
6. Rural Tourism at Village Jaubari in South Sikkim 62.91 In progress
(CBSP&H/W)
7. Rural Tourism Project at village Maniram Bhanjyang 58.24 In progress
in South Sikkim (CBSP&H/W)
8. Rural Tourism Project at village Rong in South Sikkim 58.24 In progress
2009-10
West Sikkim
1. Development of camping sites and trekking routes 490.54 In progress
along Singharila trekking trail in West Sikkim
2. Destination Development of Geetang Khola waterfall 325.18 In progress
i/c heliport in West Sikkim
3. Rural Tourism Project at Village, Darap, West Sikkim 17.00 In progress
(CBSP)
4. Rural Tourism at Village Srijunga Martam, West Sikkim 49.59 In progress
(H/W)
East Sikkim
1. Tourist Spot Development at Kumrek including trek 381.85 In progress
route development from Gadi to Jhandidara via Dikling
in East Sikkim
2. Rural Tourism at Village Pandam Gadi Budang, East 17.00 In progress
Sikkim (CBSP)

13
12 3 4
3. Rural Tourism at Village Lower Tumin Distt., East 63.17 In progress
Sikkim (CBSP & H/W)
4. Rural Tourism at Pastanga Gaucharan Distt. East 17.00 In progress
Sikkim (CBSP)
South Sikkim
1. Development of Tourist Infrastructure at Yangyang in 403.77 In progress
South Sikkim
2. Development of Tourist Infrastructure at Melli in 379.61 In progress
South Sikkim
3. Destination development of tourist infrastructure under 421.57 In progress
berfung Ralong constituency and Heliport at Chemchey
in South Sikkim
2010-11
West Sikkim
1. Const. of Modern Wayside Amenity at Rimbi Water 440.91 10%
Garden along Pelling- Rimbi-Yuksom Road, West Sikkim
2. Construction of Modern Wayside Amenity at Daramdin 438.44 15%
along Nayabazar-Daramdin-Sombaria-Hilley Road in West
Sikkim
3. Rural Tourism at Village Srijunga Martam, West Sikkim 20.00 In progress
(CBSP)
4. Rural Tourism Project at Village, Darap, West Sikkim 50.00 In progress
(H/W)
East Sikkim
1. Tourist Sport Development at Namil River from (Opp. 444.08 20%
Science Centre) at Marchak in East Sikkim
2. Development of Pilgrimage Circuit at Rorathang, Reshi 405.41 20%
and Rhenok in East Sikkim
3. Development of Integrated Adventure tourism 398.01 20%
Infrastructure in and around Thami Dara in East Sikkim
4. Rural Tourism at Pastanga Gaucharan distt. East 47.15 In progress
Sikkim (H/W)
5. Rural Tourism at Village Pandam Gadi Budang, East 47.12 In progress
Sikkim (H/W)
2011-12
West Sikkim
1. Construction of model wayside Armenity at Sribadam 433.83 In tender
along Kaluk-Sribadam-Soreng road in West Sikkim process

14
12 3 4
2. Construction of model Wayside Amenity at Chakung 465.81 In tender
along NayaBazar-Chakung-Soreng road in West Sikkim process
East Sikkim
1. Development of Tourism Infrastrcture at Naitam, 736.55 In tender
Lower Syari and WSA at Bhusuk in East Sikkim process
South Sikkim
1. Construction of Wayside Amenity at Phongla Junction 410.69 In progress
along Namchi-Mamring road in South Sikkim
42. The Committee has observed that many projects sanctioned during 2008-09 and
2009-10 are still to be completed. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made
to complete these projects at the earliest.
43. The Committee also recommends that ropeway between Namchi to Samdruptse may
be considered to take tourists from Namchi which will not only save time but will also to
have a panoramic view of the place. The Committee during its field visits to the Char-Dham
temple complex has seen the well organized facilities for the pilgrim tourists there. The
Committee is also impressed with the simulator aided film show which is a major tourist
attraction there. The Committee recommends that such initiatives need to be developed at
other tourist locations in Sikkim as these places will be on must visit places by a tourist
once landed there.
44. The Committee also received suggestion for developing Relli village which at a distance
of 12 km. from Kalimpong town and is a small hamlet and Relli River meanders through its
course providing scenic picnic spots and camping sites. A local club constructs a temporary
dam across the river in winter to create a shallow swimming pool for tourists. A lot of visitors
drive to this scenic valley during the winters for outings and picnics. The Committee
recommends for constructing of steps for approaching the river and the pathways. The
sandy beach area below the bridge could be cleaned up and permanent picnic spots could
be set up. The drive down to Relli village is through picturesque villages. Suitable
viewing points should be constructed with facilities for drinking water, toilets and
refreshments kiosks.
45. Across the Relli bridge, a small hamlet is situated the Gorkha Village complex with
cottage and a restaurant maintained by DGHC Tourism. These facilities should be opened
round the year for the sake of the tourists.
46. The swimming pool complex being constructed on the banks of the Relli River is clearly
visible from the lawns of Gorkha Village and presents a wonderful sight. The large flat area at the
back of the Swimming Pool complex should be put to use of construction of a water theme park
with water slides, water falls and other water based recreational facilities with suitable cafeteria and
catering facilities and a landscaped rock garden for tropical plants.
47. The Committee recommends that development of Relli Village as a potential tourist
spot should be initiated by the Ministry of Tourism and the wayside inn, situated in an
excellent location on a small hillock just beyond the bridge needs to be spruced up and
remain open on all occasions for the service of tourists and guests.

15
Human Resource Development
48. For upgrading the skills and capacity building of service providers of the industry, the
Ministry offers a Scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers, under which trainings are
undertaken to cover a wide range of services like health and personal hygiene, cleanliness, basic
service techniques, cooking techniques, garbage disposal, etiquette and basic manners, basic
nutrition values, energy saving techniques, guides training, etc. It, inter-alia , covers service
providers such as porters/servers/waiters /helpers/front office staff/reception and counter staff/food
kiosk and dhaba staff/personnel engaged in handling tourists, Airport Security Staff, Immigration
Officials and Customs Officers.
49. As per a study, majority of hotels are owned by the private sector. The hotel owners are
not exposed to hotel business; and trained managers and trained staff are not easily available locally.
It has, therefore, been increasingly realized that training facilities for development of manpower,
especially for development of managerial skills, needs to be given top priority in the tourism
development programme. Upgradation of the present Food Craft Institute to the national level of
Institute of Hotel Management for giving a three-year diploma course in hotel management will go
a long way to add quality education in hospitality industry. The Committee also recommends
that Institute of Travel and Tourism Management in Sikkim on the lines of the Tourism
Management Institute at Gwalior for serving the interest of tourism industry of North East
may be established.
50. The Committee was informed that under the scheme of Capacity Building for Service
providers and Hunar se Rozgar program no proposal has been received in respect of Darjeeling
district and from Sikkim. For assistance to IHM/FCI Sikkim has sought the grant of Rs. 474.22
lakh out of which Rs.200 lakh has been released for construction of IFC at Namchi. For broad
basing of Hospitality Education, no proposal has been received.
51. The Committee notes that Darjeeling district and Sikkim, both have the potential for
capacity building. They have huge manpower resources which should be tapped for the
tourism industry in the States and also for seeking placement outside the States. Trained
manpower presents positive image in the tourists mind and helps for flourishing the tourism
industry. The Committee recommends that the States should seek the benefit from the
scheme of capacity building to exploit human resources.
52. In the case of hospitality education, which is equally important for the tourism
development of Sikkim, the Committee has come to know that there is no proposal from
the State Government. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism may consult
the State Government for a suitable location for establishment of an Institute of Tourism
Studies and the project may be taken up.
53. The Committee during deliberations noted that Mirik can be a potential tourist
destination. They should be made aware of the tourism potential in the area so that they
could make a better earning from it in the days ahead. There is also potential for Home
stays in Mirik town which can be explored. For exploiting the resources the local people
should be trained under some schemes.
STUDIES AND SURVEYS
54. The Committee was informed of the recent study of Survey carried out on promotion of
tourism and development of tourism infrastructure in Darjeeling and Sikkim:
• For identification/development of Tourism circuits in the North-East region a study has
been done by TCS for the North Eastern council, Ministry of DoNER. For the rest

16
of the States/UTs, including West Bengal, a study has been assigned, by the Ministry
of Tourism, to National Level Consultant (NLC), IL and FS. The Tourism Circuits, in
the States/UTs (excluding North-East) to be developed during Twelfth Plan, have been
tentatively identified by the NLC.
• Ministry of Tourism has commissioned a State Tourism Survey for the State of Sikkim
for Collection of data on Domestic Tourism. The one year long survey started in June,
2011. The purpose of this survey is to improve the quality of domestic tourist’s data.
55. The Committee recommends that the studies/surveys should be completed in time
and action should be taken on the study to improve various aspects of tourism. The
Committee also recommends identifying the source markets and carrying out intensive
market research through qualified consultants. The Committee also recommends that
collection of tourism data should also be made for Darjeeling.

17
17
CHAPTER-IV
DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSPORT CONNECTIVITY
RAILWAYS
56. The preferable mode of travel by Indian tourists is still by Rail. The major railhead is at
New Jalpaiguri (NJP) on Delhi-Guwahati line, which is about 95 km. from Darjeeling. All trains
going towards Guwahati pass through New Jalpaiguri. For Sikkim, Kalimpong and Darjeeling the
nearest railhead is also NJP.
57. The Committee got complaints regarding poor transport connectivity to Gangtok from the
Central and Western India which is due to the operation of only one train ‘Kurla-Guwahati’ which
runs thrice a week from Mumbai to New Jalpaiguri Station, the main railway junction for North
Bengal and Sikkim. The tourists from the western part of India and especially Maharastra are
hesitant to visit this area as they cannot cope up with the current train schedule. Requests in this
regard was received by the Committee to look into the matter and increase the frequency of
express trains in Mumbai/Guwahati sector to all seven days a week which will fulfil the
requirement of tourists as well as general public.
58. In addition to that there was demand for introducing one Shatabdi train connecting Kolkata
to New Jalpaiguri which may be a boosting factor for attracting more travellers in the region. A
number of trains including Rajdhani halt at New Jalpaiguri Station at present for onward journey
to Gangtok and other parts of Sikkim. The nearest Railway station is Patna, on the Buddhist route.
It is therefore suggested that this route should be extended to Sikkim because of its Buddhist
connections and a number of well-known unique monasteries. The train from Bodhgaya should be
extended to New Jalpaiguri to give a meaning to the Buddhist route. All the benefit available to the
Buddhist circuit should be extended to Sikkim as well.
59. The Committee is of the view that the increased transport connectivity to the Sikkim
would be a major boost for attracting travelers to the region. The Committee recommends
that Ministry of Tourism may take up the issues with the Railway Board for introducing more
trains, increasing frequency of existing trains and introduction of new trains to this sector.
AIR CONNECTIVITY AND AIRPORTS
60. The nearest airport to both Darjeeling and Gangtok is Bagdogra, Darjeeling is 90 kms. and
Gangtok is 125 kms. from the Bagdogra airport. Air India currently operates seven flights in the
Delhi–Bagdogra sector and 4 flights in the Kolkata–Bagdogra Sector. In addition to this private
airlines has the following flights:–
Delhi-Guwahati-Bagdogra-Delhi
Kingfisher Airlines Delhi–Bagdogra–Guwahati–Delhi A-320 4 flights
Delhi–Guwahati–Bagdogra–Delhi A-320 3 flights
Spicejet Delhi–Guwahati–Bagdogra–Delhi B-737 7 flights
Delhi–Bagdogra–Guwahati–Delhi B-737 7 flights
Go Air Delhi–Guwahati–Bagdogra–Delhi A-320 4 flights
Delhi–Bagdogra–Guwahati–Delhi A-320 3 flights
Jet Airways also has daily flights in the Delhi–Kolkata–Bagdogra sector.

18
61. There are 12 operational airports served by scheduled airlines viz. Dibrugarh, Guwahati,
Lilabari, Imphal, Dimapur, Agartala, Shillong, Jorhat, Silchar, Tezpur, Bagdogra and Aizawl in North
East region. As per winter schedule 2011, filled by Scheduled airlines to DGCA, a total number of
406 flights are being operated by scheduled airlines viz. Air India, Alliance Air, Jet Airways, Jet Lite,
Kingfisher Airlines, SpiceJet, IndiGo and Go Air. Druk Air (Bhutan) is operating two flights per
week on Paro-Bagdogra-Bangkok and VV route.
62. The Committee was informed that Bagdogra airport in West Bengal belongs to Indian Air
Force (IAF), Ministry of Defence (MoD). It is the nearest airport serving the tourism needs of
Darjeeling and adjoining areas. Airports Authority of India only maintains a Civil Enclave at this
airport for handling civil operations. Presently, 68 flights including four international flights per
week are operated from this airport. The airport is not capable of handling night operations.
63. The Airports Authority of India informed the Committee about the plans to develop
Bagdogra airport:
(a) Airports Authority of India has planned to install CAT-I Instrument Landing System and
CAT-I Approach Lights in Coordination with IAF and subject to land being made
available by the State Government.
(b) In the long term, Airports Authority of India has plans to further expand the
infrastructure by constructing a new Terminal Building and Apron, subject to additional
land measuring 118 (79 acres required for phase-I development) being made available
by the State Government.
64. Bagdogra Airport is the only airport which supports a large area, including the States
of West Bengal, Sikkim, Bihar and Assam. It also caters to countries like Bhutan, Nepal and
Bangladesh. This is the only profitable terminal for Northeast India. Bagdogra needs to be
better connected to the rest of the country with flights for Mumbai, Bangalore, Dibrugarh,
Gaya etc. Also, a facility to connect most of the South and Southeast Asian capitals.
65. The Committee, keeping in view the limitations for operating civil flights at a
Defence airport, has suggested that Air India flights need to be increased for linking
Bagdogra with major cities of the country. Since the LTC package is open to the North East
Region, the passenger rush is peak during the summer holidays and so the Air India should
make arrangements for getting more passengers accommodated by ensuring extra flight/
seat availability in the sector.
66. The Committee while interacting with stakeholders was informed that there is need of air
connectivity from Kathmandu to Bagdogra which can be profitable route as most of the foreign
tourists wish to extend their tour to North Bengal/India from Nepal but due to the present poor
connectivity by air we get very negligible foreign tourists from Nepal.
67. This matter has been communicated to the Ministry of Civil Aviation and their written reply
States that Indian carriers are operating to neighbouring countries like Indian carriers are operating
to neighbouring countries like Afghanistan, Maldives, Nepal, Sri Lanka and China. However, they
are not operating on India-Bhutan and India-Pakistan sector. Foreign carriers are operating on these
sectors. The Ministry further informed that:–
68. Indian carriers are free to mount services from any point in India to foreign destinations
as per the respective bilateral air services arrangements. However, actual operations are always
guided by its commercial judgment.
69. The Committee is also of the view that this sector has good tourist potential due to
Buddhist connection and that needs to be explored in a big way. The Travel Agents

19
Association also suggested for operating international flights from Bagdogra to Paro
(Bhutan) and Bangkok (Thailand). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
commercial viability may be assessed in these sectors.
70. The Committee hopes that the efforts in enhancement of the tourist’s visits to these
areas, the commercial viability will be improved and profitable flights could be operated in
future.
71. During deliberation with the tour and travel agents association, the Committee came to
know that there was a long standing demand for ‘ILS’ facility and Night Landing facility, which
the Committee feels needs to be looked seriously.
72. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in this regard submitted their reply which States that the IAF
in their latest communication have mentioned that they intend to provide ILS for the most usable
runway at Bagdogra through their MAFI programme (Modernization of Air Force Infrastructure) in
March, 2014 time period and also mentioned that if required, AAI could consider provision of ILS
for reciprocal runway approach. As per ATM Directorate the other runway approaches are having
limitations due to terrain and hills and hence approach on reciprocal runway is not feasible. Hence,
ILS for the reciprocal runway approach will not serve the required purpose. For the main runway,
as said above, IAF intends to provide the ILS in their MAFI programme.
73. As regards provision of approach lights, AAI has requested IAF for permission to carry out
survey for identification of obstacles; matter is being pursued with IAF. Acquisition of 23 acres
additional land for upgrading the facilities at Bagdogra Airport is not yet over due to hindrances
such as village road, 11 KV electrical transmission lines and some private houses still exist. The
matter has already been taken up with State Government authorities in this regard.
74. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of
India may take up with the Ministry of Defence and Indian Air Force in getting the airport
facilities upgraded as per the above proposal. The matter may also be taken up with
Government of West Bengal for making available additional land for expansion of the
Bagdorga Airport.
75. Keeping in view the culture of the area a suggestion has been made to rename Bagdogra
Airport as ‘Kabiguru Rabindranath Tagore International Airport’. The Committee desires that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation may look into the possibility of renaming the airport.
76. Airports Authority of India has also briefed the Committee about constructing a new
Greenfield Airport at Pakyong in Sikkim for operation of ATR72 type of aircraft. The Project is
funded by the Central Government and is being taken up in phases. The total cost of the project
is Rs.309.46 crores and will be completed in 2013. The tourist inflow will be boosted up in Sikkim
after the new airport is made operational. The Committee was also informed that the runway is
6000 feets and further expansion is not possible due to steep hills. The Committee was also
informed that the Airport is suitable for smaller aircrafts. As such the Committee desires
that the frequency of the aircrafts is to be increased to be able to lift more tourists.
Keeping in view the density of international tourists, the airport should be made to
international standards with all the facilities. The Committee also came to know that two
lane road is to be constructed by State Government to connect Pakyong airport to Ranipool
to Gangtok city to facilitate smooth movement of traffic. The Committee recommends that
the work on the road should be completed before the airport becomes functional so that the
passengers do not face problem of congestion on the road.
77. Taxi operators have submitted many complaints as regards the tax structures, plying of
unauthorized vehicles, unjustifiable parking fee etc. at Bagdogra airport . The Committee desires

20
that the Government of West Bengal and Airports Authority of India should look into the
grievances and take remedial measures.
CONNECTIVITY BY HELICOPTER
78. The State Government has been operating regular passenger/tourist flights on Gangtok-
Bagdogra-Gangtok sector and other flights for carrying tourists. Pawan Hans has provided a
5-seater bell helicopter on wet lease to the Government of Sikkim since 31
st October, 1998. The
services are being run by the State Government on subsidized basis with 75% subsidy from MHA
and balance 25% is being recovered from the passengers by the State Government and extra costs,
if any, met from State Government fund.
79. As per the details provided by Pawan Hans for providing connectivity in NER, total No. of
Helicopter to be required in Sikkim will be:
80. Existing service-1 Helicopter
(a) Helicopters required as per Twelfth Five Year Plan
(i) New Sectors in Sikkim– 1 Helicopter
(ii) Inter-State Connectivity– 1 Helicopter
81. The tourist places in Sikkim can be connected by helicopters. The Committee was also
informed that Helicopter services are being upgraded with the construction of network of Helipads,
Mountain flights, joy rides and heli services will soon start in all the districts. Heli tourism is being
aggressively promoted by creating more heliports at places of tourist interest with the assistance
provided by Ministry of Tourism. So far one proposal was received by the Ministry from Sikkim
for the scheme of building heliport. The helicopter connectivity will encourage more tourists to visit
Sikkim.
82. In case, the Government of West Bengal desires, PHHL informed that they may provide Air-
connectivity to the Darjeeling area by Helicopters on wet lease basis or mutually agreed terms and
conditions. The proposed sectors/route for Airconnectivity by Helicopter for Darjeeling could be:
Bagdogra–Darjeeling–Bagdogra
Darjeeling–Bagdogra–Darjeeling
Darjeeling–Kalimpong–Darjeeling
Darjeeling–Mirik–Darjeeling
Any other sector could also be connected as per requirement.
The Ministry of Civil Aviation has further clarified that:–
(i) A Pawan Hans helicopter has been operating on the sector Gangtok-Bagdogra on wet
lease basis. PHHL in its preliminary feasibility study done at the request of
Government of West Bengal has brought out the fact that there is potential of
providing connectivity from Bagdogra–Darjeeling and other neighboring places like
Mirik, Kalingpong etc.
(ii) PHHL is keen to start the helicopter operation in association with Government of West
Bengal. Further PHHL has also highlighted the infrastructure facilities to be developed
in these areas such as helipad, passenger lounge, frisking facilities, etc., however
further response of Government of West Bengal in this regard is still awaited.
(iii) In December, 2011 an Expression of Interest (EoI) for Starting of Helicopter Services
was floated by Transport Department, Government of West Bengal. Accordingly,

21
Pawan Hans has responded to the same and requested Government of West Bengal to
form a Joint Working Group (JWG) to explore and discuss the modalities. However,
State Government’s response is still awaited.
(iv) PHHL would be keen to operate helicopter service in association with Government of
West Bengal at mutually agreed terms and conditions.
83. The Committee, during its interaction, was also informed by that the area is under the
surveillance of Army. As such, clearances for them are required for helicopter operations which
makes the helicopter services dependent on the clearance of the Army. This makes the venture
unfriendly.
84. The Committee notes the various initiatives proposed by Ministry of Tourism and the
proposal of Government of Sikkim Government which is trying to promote heli-tourism in
the State. However, the connectivity in Darjeeling is yet to be explored. As such the
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should make plan with the West
Bengal Government to cover the Darjeeling area also by heli services and provide financial
assistance for the same. The Committee recommends that adequate numbers of helicopters
as per the requirement may be procured or leased from Pawan Hans Ltd. for the purpose.
Besides this the Army may also be taken into confidence for the smooth functioning of
helicopter operations in the region.
85. Taking into consideration the extent of subsidy in Helicopter journeys being enjoyed
by the tourists, the Committee is of the opinion that tourism activities should be aimed at
bringing revenue to the exchequer and not be made a burden on the tax payers. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Pawan Hans Ltd. should make a detailed study on
how the heli tourism can be made a profitable business without seeking any-subsidies, on
the lines of the heli-taxi services started by a private operator at nominal rates in Kerala
recently.
ROAD CONNECTIVITY AND CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS
86. Both Darjeeling and Sikkim depend entirely upon the road transportation system for the
movement of goods and people from one place to another within or outside the State. There is
no other means of transport like railways, waterways, etc. except helicopter service, which also
depends on weather conditions. The road network is the sole medium of transportation for the
State and its importance in the tourism sector is important.
87. The arterial road from Siliguri to Gangtok is NH 31A and is the only means of connectivity
of the region to remaining part of the country through West Bengal as the State shares three sides’
international borders with Indian territory. NH 31A, the life line of Sikkim was reported to have
been hit by 13 major and 12 minor slides. Bridges on NH 31A were generally safe. Longitudinal
cracks were reported on the pavement at many places, forming breach at 27.80 km. huge size
boulders at 5 locations.
88. With the advent of developmental works and with the increase in population the need for
wider roads with smooth curves was necessary so that heavy vehicles can also ply on it for
transportation of essential commodities and people could also travel from one place to another
through transport vehicles at reasonable rates. The achievement of this objective involved widening
of narrow roads, smoothening the steep gradient and improving the acute angles and blind curves.
89. The State PWD and Border Roads Organisation (BRO) looks after all major roads in North
and East Districts. Even seemingly inaccessible places have been covered by roads – which are
sheer engineering feats has been achieved by BRO. Its funding was reduced drastically in the late

22
1990s resulting in reduction of its units and subsequently in the year 2004 the Project HQ was
shifted to Afghanistan. On the demand of Government of Sikkim and Army it was raised again in
the year 2008. Since then it has started planning and execution of works and the budget is
increasing every year.
90. BRO informed that presently, the Sevoke–Gangtok Road (NH-31A) is the only Highway to
connect Gangtok, the capital of Sikkim with Siliguri/North Bengal. The road NH-31A is passing
through unstable soil of strata and the road is frequently blocked during monsoon due to landslides.
It is therefore felt necessary to provide an alternative route to Gangtok connecting it with Siliguri/
North Bengal which will become a force multiplier during emergency. Further, the possibility of
building another alternate highway between Sevoke and Ranipur which has been estimated at only
a slightly higher cost than improving the existing highway, too, is being explored. The process of
improving the existing highway will involve stoppages which may not be desirable from the point
of view of the State, but with the Gangtok by pass and 22 km. long Gangtok–Nathu La road, it
will be able to form a continuous new highway from Sevoke (West Bengal) to Nathu La via
Gangtok. Thereafter, both roads can be kept operational so that the State is not held hostage to
any natural calamity on any one of these critical link roads.
91. BRO informed that the proposed double lane alternative highway to Gangtok originally is via
Chalsa–Khuniamore–Jaldhaka–Thode–Rachela–Aritar–Rangpo–Gangtok. The alignment was approved
in principle in November, 2008. Accordingly, the action for preparation of DPR for construction/
improvement of road Chalsa–Khuniamore–Jaldhaka–Thode–Rachela–Aritar–Rangpo–Gangtok was
initiated. Sikkim is now connected with the rest of the country with NH 31A between Sevoke and
Gangtok. Due to the uncertain topographical nature of that road, land slides and other blockages
frequently hamper the supply of essential goods and travel between Sikkim and the rest of India.
It is, therefore, important for Sikkim to have an alternate highway between Sevoke and Ranipur
which has been estimated at only a slightly higher cost than improving the existing highway. The
process of improving the existing highway will involve stoppages which may not be desirable from
the view point of the State. With the Gangtok by pass and 22 km. long Gangtok–Nathu La road,
it will be able to form a continuous new highway from Sevoke (West Bengal) to Nathu La via
Gangtok. Thereafter, both roads can be kept operational so that the State is not held hostage to
any natural calamity on any one of these critical link roads.
92. While taking up the case for forest clearance with the Department of Forest, Government
of West Bengal for Alternate Highway Chalsa–Khuniamore–Jaldhaka–Thode–Rachela–Aritar, they
have expressed reservation for approving the alignment in a meeting held on 30 October, 2010 as
15 km. (approx.) length of the road between Thode and Rachela is passing through Neora valley
National Park. They have suggested two other alternate alignments in place of the approved
alignment Chalsa–Khuniamore–Jaldhaka–Thode–Rachela–Aritar:–
(a) Alignment No. 1 – Damdim–Gorbathan–Phaparkheti–Labha–Aritar
(b) Alignment No.2 – Bagrakot–Chukhim–Nimbong–Kafer–Kolbung–Aritar
93. The Committee was further informed that during the meeting of the Committee of
Secretaries (CoS) on Review of NH-31A and the alternate route to Sikkim held on 25 February,
2011 at Cabinet Secretariat, a direction was given to DG Forests and the officials of MOD/BRO
and Forests Department of West Bengal to visit the site and to finalise a feasible alternate alignment.
The DG Forests along with various officials visited the site between 19 to 21 April, 2011 and a
report of the joint inspection was submitted. It has been recommended by DG Forests to follow
the alignment Bagrakot–Chuikhim–Nimbong–Kafer–Bakhim–Algarh–Rhenok route to be taken up as
an Alternate Highway to Sikkim. They have also recommended that since this is passing through
forest land the road may be used by the Army alone so that ecological pressure is not increased
and also the security needs are safeguarded.

23
94. The Army HQ is of the view that the road Khuniamore–Thode–Tangta–Rachela-Aritar is of
operational significance and continues to be priority. However, due to the concerns of the Forests
Deptt. there is no objection by the Army to develop the alignment No. 2 i.e., Bagrakot–Chuikhim
–Nimbong–Kafer–Bakhim–Algarh–Rhenok through SARDP NE Phase-A. As the alignment Bagrakot–
Chuikhim–Nimbong–Kafer–Bakhim–Algarh–Rhenok has been recommended by DG Forests to be
used only by Army, the MoRT&H has expressed reservation to accept it as the Alternate Highway
to Sikkim, as an alternative to NH-31A which provides connectivity to Sikkim with the rest of the
country.
95. The BRO informed the Committee that HQ CE (P) Swastik has taken up the case with the
Dte. GBR and duly recommended that the proposed Alternate Highway shall be used by the Army
as well as the Civilians. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has sought the confirmation
from the Defence Secretary whether the proposed route will be available for use to both civilians
and Army. The reply of the same is awaited.
96. The Committee notes various steps taken to provide an alternative highway for
Gangtok which is very essential so that it is well connected with the country. Since it is
surrounded by international borders, the need is more also from the strategic point of view.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that keeping in view its strategic location the
alternate highway should be given top priority. The Committee hopes that the proposed
highway will be completed as per schedule overcoming all the shortcomings.
97. The Committee was also informed that presently, the BRO is maintaining 62 roads in Sikkim
and the present status of important works being executed by BRO has been given in the succeeding
paragraphs:–
NH-31A (Sevoke-Rangpo-Ranipur-Gangtok)
98. The length of this National Highway is 92.60 km. and it is of Intermediate Width
Specifications (5.5 m carriageway). The road is 51.70 km. in West Bengal and 40.90 km. in
Sikkim. Border Roads Organisation (BRO) has been entrusted with maintenance and improvement
of 81 km. length of the highway. NH-31 A is being upgraded to double lane specification under
SARDP: Phase-A. Out of 80 km. road stretch with total cost of Rs.463.33 crores, works on 52.65
km. has been sanctioned and work is in progress. The probable date of completion is 2014. Double
laning works on 6 km. has been completed so far. With the increase in international projects, the
bridges that carry the vehicles are not able to sustain. Recently, a bridge collapsed as the truck
was carrying more load than authorized.
Gangtok-Sherathag road (length 66.41 km.)
99. Two laning work has been approved with the approximate cost Rs.478.71 crore and work
is in progress with PDC by 2013. Work on 30 km. has been completed.
Strategic roads
100. Out of 3 strategic roads, work on one road katto-Bump-IV has been completed. Work is
in progress on road Northern Alignment (Bheem Base Dokala) of length 13.48 km. with probable
date of completion by 2013. Formation work of 9 km. has been completed. Work on the
Southern Alignment road (Flag-Hill-Dokala) has not yet started due to Wildlife clearance. Bio-
diversity impact report has been carried out by Rain Forest Research Institute and comment on
the report has been sent on 18 th November, 2011. The proposal is under examination at National
Board for Wildlife.

24
Long Term Perspective Plan I
101. BRO has been entrusted with development of 23 General Staff roads in Sikkim with length
of 794.55 km. at an approximate cost of Rs.1219 crore. The probable date of completion is 2012.
Out of 23 roads, works are in progress on 9 roads, 2 roads are affected due to forest clearance,
and works on remaining roads will be planned in a phased manner.
102. The Nathula Pass  is located in East District of Sikkim and is the only trading port in the
NE region, in between India and China. In the year 2006, the pass opened for trans border trade
which is increasing every year. In the effort to improve the customs and trade, large numbers of
infrastructure development projects are taking place on Road Gangtok to Nathula. The Project
Swastik (BRO) has been entrusted to upgrade this road to National Highway Double Lane
specification under special programme (SARDP-NE) of Ministry of Road transport and Highways
with formation width 12 m and carriageway 7 m in a phased manner. Its Total Length is 16.50
km. and the estimated cost is Rs.478.71 crores.
103. The Committee during the deliberations was also informed that in Sikkim, BRO has to take
the clearances from the concerned agencies for the construction of Roads. There is also shortage
of machinery and they also require modern machinery for carrying out the work.
104. The Committee was informed of the status of forest clearances in road projects. Out of
total 72 forest/wild life clearance cases final approval has been accorded in 4 cases, approval in
principle has been accorded in 19 cases. 40 cases are pending with the Forests Department and
9 are pending with the Revenue Department. The present status of these cases is as tabulated
below:
Sl. No. State Final Case pending with
Approval in With With Total
principle Forest Revenue
accorded Department Department
1. Sikkim 1 15 23 6 45
2. West Bengal 3 4 17 3 27
T
OTAL 41 9 4 0 9 7 2
105. To expedite forest clearance regular review meetings are being held at Ministry of Defence,
last meeting was held on 23 rd December, 2011 and S tate official were advised to expedite the
pending cases. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to get required
clearances. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that out of the 72 projects only
19 have got the clearances and 49 projects are found to be under process at various stages.
Maintenance and development of NH is crucial not only for the economic development of
Sikkim and Darjeeling and surrounding region, but also for the security of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Forests Departments of West Bengal and
Sikkim may be impressed upon to take strategic and economic interest of the region while
considering the proposals received for clearances. The Committee hopes that the projects
will be cleared and started soon.
106. The Committee is aware of the constraints in proper maintenance of the road
conditions in the Darjeeling and Sikkim region. The Committee also recommends that the
BRO should be given modern equipment and adequate funds for the roads maintained by
them. The Committee is surprised to observe that BRO, in addition to its main work of

25
construction and maintenance of NH has to engage itself in the task of seeking clearances
from the State Governments. The Committee recommends that BRO should concentrate its
efforts in the construction of roads and the rest of the formalities should be completed by
the Ministry in consultation with the concerned State Governments.
107. The Committee has noted that the road connecting Bagdogra Airport to Darjeeling is
in a dilapidated State, which is a major bottleneck for the growth of tourism in Darjeeling
and Sikkim. The Committee, therefore, recommends that since different authorities are
involved in the maintenance work at various stretches, a coordinated action is required to
maintain the highway from Bagdogra to Darjeeling.
108. The Committee had witnessed the road damages at various places as a result of the
recent earth quake. The Committee finds that at many places, lack of water drains are
causing over flow of water on the roads and sliding of the sides. It, therefore, recommends
that BRO/NHAI need to take up the matter at the time of road design itself. The
Committee has the opinion that all the roads in the Sikkim and in the North East should
be provided with proper culverts so that the rain water and mud should not come to the
roads as a result of rain or for other reasons.
109. The Committee also examined the bridges – small and big – along the road network in
Darjeeling and Sikkim. It noticed that with the power projects coming up in Sikkim, lot of
transportation takes place and sometimes the trucks in order to avoid long routes, take the
bridge(s), whose capacity is not adequate to bear the weight of loaded trucks. Recently a bridge
near Gangtok, thus, collapsed as the truck was carrying load more than the carrying capacity of
the bridge. The Committee recommends that at the entry point of Sikkim i.e. Rengpo check
post, the concerned authorities and the transport officials should monitor the movement of
trucks to ensure that they do not carry extra load. Otherwise, they should be directed to
move through roads which can sustain extra load.
110. The Committee notes that the maintenance of roads is an expensive task in the hilly
terrain because of high rainfall and topographical conditions. It, therefore, recommends that
some long-term financial solutions be evolved to create a fund dedicated to the maintenance
of roads for Darjeeling and the North-East including Sikkim so that modern technology may
be better utilized for improving the pace and quality of work.
111. The Committee also recommends for strengthening of the existing bridges so that
the carrying capacity may be increased for higher loads. With these objectives in view,
special emphasis may be given to the improvement of low cost roads and bridges and
construction of new roads in new areas.
112. Having regard to the importance of roads network in the overall economic
development of the State in general and the need for connectivity for the growth of tourism
in particular, the Committee recommends for granting adequate funds and timely release
of the same, which will go a long way in improving the construction/replacement/repair of
roads at various stages/locations.
113. The Committee got complaints that NH-55 is closed for traffic since last 20 months and
NHAI is neither taking any steps nor the State PWD who is entrusted with its maintenance is
utilizing the services of NHAI. The Committee recommends that proper coordination with the
two agencies may be ensured so that the road maintenance and construction works should
not be trapped in red tapes.
114. The Committee also noticed the insufficient and deficient road signage which is a major
cause of accidents. The Committee recommends that proper signage and road markings
should be provided at important points.

26
ROAD PERMIT
115. The Committee was informed that in Darjeeling, New Jalpaiguri and Cooch Behar, the
permits issued for taxis are valid within the concerned limit of those districts only. Inter-country
vehicles from Bhutan and tourist vehicles from Sikkim can come to those districts. This increases
the cost of the package tours in Darjeeling, Cooch Behar and New Jalpaiguri as sometimes it is
as high as 65%.
116. To overcome the bottlenecks of multiple inter–State road transport barriers, the Ministry of
Tourism informed the Committee that they have been advocating implementation of seamless travel
for commercial tourist vehicles. It was felt that that there is a need for a system which would
ensure single window payment of taxes for seamless travel, through which tax can be collected
centrally and apportioned to States. This would facilitate smooth movement of vehicular traffic and
avoid delays and inconvenience to tourists. The system was implemented for Delhi–Jaipur–Agra
Sector. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to adopt the same approach for
seamless travel in Darjeeling and Sikkim in consultation with the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways. The Committee recommends that the taxi fare and road taxes
should be rationalized in consultation with the stake holders concerned by the State
Governments.
117. The Committee recommends that the problem of road permit in Darjeeling should be
considered by the Ministry of Tourism on priority in consultation with the concerned
Departments to give them a level playing field. The State Government should also take the
benefit from the scheme for construction of modern, state-of-the-art, dedicated parking lots
for which financial assistance is provided by the Ministry of Tourism.
118. The State Transport Department of Sikkim informed the Committee that Sikkim Nationalised
Transport (SNT) caters to the transportation needs of all Government departments, PSUs and
Central Agencies such as NHPC, Border Roads Organisation (BRO), Army, etc . All the routes inside
Sikkim and to and from Siliguri are nationalized. During the Twelfth Five Year Plan it is envisaged
to improve and modernize the workshop and operation infrastructure thereby improving the
efficiency and other key indicators. The State Transport Department of Sikkim has submitted some
suggestions for improving the passenger facilities, which are as given below:
(i) A modern bus terminus having modern passenger amenities was constructed and
completed during 1996. Proposal for future needs such as additional departure bays
along with a depot working having garage sheds, washing platforms, security room
fuel room and depot store is to be undertaken under Phase-II.
(ii) Modern Bus Terminus-cum-Minor Workshop at Namchi:
Namchi is a growing tourist centre with new tourist attraction being added to the
itinerary of tourists. The increased tourism activity also increases the Transportation
needs of local population. In order to cater to the growing demand for transportation
needs of passengers in the south district a proper Bus Terminus at Namchi with
proper passenger amenities and a Sub-Deport Workshop has been planned,
(iii) Modern Inter State Bus Terminus at Rangpo:
The tourist footfall to Sikkim is growing at a high rate. With this the transportation
needs of Inter State travel has grown tremendously. It is envisaged to develop an
Inter–State Bus Terminus at Rangpo to cater to the transportation needs of the Inter–
State commuters. This ISBT will operate buses to neighbouring State capitals; Kolkata,
Guwahati, and Patna and other high passenger flow corridors like Kakaribhitta,
Bodhgaya, Phunssholing etc.

27
(iv) Way Side Amenities along National Highways and District Roads inside Sikkim:
119. With the increase in frequency of City Runners and increased demand in Intra-State as well
as Inter State routes it has become necessary to provide way side passenger amenities. The rainy
season is typically long so the passengers are mostly inconvenienced as there are no way-side
waiting sheds.
120. The Committee agrees with the State Government’s view on the importance of
strengthening the public transport facilities. The Committee is of the view that with new
initiatives for enhancing the tourist inflow to the State, immediate attention is required for
proper road connectivity and vehicles. Since the public transport is able to minimize the
road congestions, strengthening of the State transport facilities and passenger amenities
should be taken up on priority basis.

28
28
CHAPTER-V
CENTRALLY PROTECTED MONUMENTS IN DARJEELING AND SIKKIM
121. The Committee was informed that under the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) there are
two Centrally Protected Monuments in Darjeeling:
1. Tomb of Alexander Csoma de Koros (A great Hungarian Scholar).
Located within the Christian cemetery at Darjeeling, the small hexagonal memorial tomb
on a low platform is built over the grave of noted Hungarian Philologist Alexander
Csoma de Koros who died at Darjeeling in 1842 AD. This spot is an important tourist
attraction especially for the foreign tourists.
2. Tomb of General Lloyd (Discoverer and founder of Darjeeling).
This tomb is also in Darjeeling Cemetery.
122. There are three monuments in Sikkim (i) Rabdentse, the site of the ancient capital of
Sikkim, West Sikkim, (ii) Dubdi Monastery, Yuksam, West Sikkim and (iii) Coronation Throne of
Norbugang near Yuksam, West Sikkim.
123. The Committee was apprised that Conservation and maintenance of the centrally protected
monuments in Sikkim effectively started from the year 2000. Apart from general maintenance of
the monuments and sites, necessary conservation works have been done to the monuments for
preserving them with their original building fabric as much as possible.
124. Dubdi Monastery, in Y uksam was worst affected by earthquake in September, 2011.
Masonry walls developed long and wide cracks and a portion of wall collapsed. Internal wall plaster
containing decorative mural paintings severely damaged. Wooden frame structure of the roof has
titled and wooden fixtures fitted to rear wall containing religious books etc detached, twisted and
partially fallen to floor. ‘Stone masonry chorten’ in front of the monastery collapsed to ruin. Water
reservoir for supply of water at site collapsed. The Committee was also informed that ASI had
taken steps for restoration of monuments after the earthquake. For the purpose detailed inspection
reports have been made. Expert opinion has been obtained for earthquake resistant retrofitting of
the monastery.
125. The Committee was informed that at the Rabdentse Site, the whole area was covered with
very thick vegetation, accumulated periodical debris and the roots of the big trees were
penetrated in the core of the structure weakening its stability and existence. It noted with
satisfaction that thorough cleaning and removal of vegetation from the entire area have been done
by ASI. Fallen and missing portions of the walls have been reconstructed. Boundary terraced
walls have been strengthened. Illumination of the area has been arranged at night. Toilet block
has been constructed.
126. The Committee was informed that in the Dubdi Monastery, damaged wooden portions of
the roof and floor have been repaired with necessary replacement. Stone pathway has been laid

29
from Yuksam village up to the monastery. In addition to the above, some more works have been
undertaken in successive years by structural maintenance to the monastery and Kali temple
behind the monastery namely– (i) repairing to the damaged floor of the monastery and Kali
temple; (ii) resetting to the approach pathway and retaining wall and (iii); construction of new
boundary wall in place of old barbed wire fencing with random rubble masonry with MS grill
on top of it.
127. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the ASI in restoring the monuments
Dubdi Monastery which was damaged by the earthquake in September, 2011 has been
repaired. Since these monuments major tourist attractions, it is equally important that
tourist amenities are also made available in these sites. The Committee recommends that
adequate funds and manpower should be provided to these monuments as most of them do
not have proper maintenance staff. The Committee also recommends that illumination of
monuments should also be considered by ASI on priority in these places.
128. The Horticulture branch of the Archaeological Survey of India is a specialized branch
responsible for developing, landscaping and maintaining the environment in and around the centrally
protected monuments having the following aims:–
1. Conserving by creating microclimatic conditions in protected limits;
2. Enhancing and improving the aesthetic outlook;
3. Checking the preying eyes of the encroachers;
4. Maximizing the tourist flow towards the ancient sites; and
5. Introduction of periodic flora matching the monuments.
129. As per the data provided by ASI, the Committee is constrained to note that the
Horticulture Department is almost absent in Sikkim and out of the 14 sanctioned posts at
various levels including Garden Attendant and Chowkidar, the man in position is NIL. At
present the works are being supervised by Horticulture Assistant Grade I, Cooch Behar. The
Committee would like to know the reasons accounting for utter neglect of the region and
non-filling up of posts. The Committee recommends that immediate steps be taken to fill
up the vacant posts of the Horticulture Branch cater to the need of Sikkim.
Visa-on-Arrival
130. Ministry of Tourism has informed that the Scheme of ‘Visa-on-Arrival” (V oA) had been
introduced by it for 5 countries w.e.f. January, 2010 as a facilitative measure to attract more
foreign tourists to India. It was extended for another 6 countries in January, 2011. The outcome
of this scheme has been encouraging with 12,761 persons having availed of V oA facility in 2011.
The Government is making efforts to extend the facility of V oA to the nationals of more countries.
The Committee was informed that no provision for visa on arrival has been made in the borders
near Darjeeling and Sikkim although three neighbouring countries– Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh-
border can be explored.
131. Further, for foreigners, two months cooling period is required due to visa restriction. But
the topography of both Sikkim and Darjeeling is such that there is requirement of multiple entries
through this corridor for other parts of country. In order to attract more tourists, there is a need

30
to simplify and relax the Restricted Area Permit (RAP) regime for some special areas. Provisions
should be made to issue inner line permits at all major tourist offices, railheads, airports and State
entry gates along with national highways. Low budget tours should be promoted for trekkers,
campers and young people.
132. The Committee recommends that the Visa on Arrival facility should be provided at
Bagdogra airport to facilitate international tourists. Extension of the ‘Visa on Arrival’
facility at the border adjoining Darjeeling and Sikkim may also be considered.

31
31
CHAPTER-VI
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Inclusion of the Darjeeling Hills in ambit of DoNEAR for allocations of 10% of the Union
Budget
133. The Committee while going through different areas in and around Darjeeling and
Sikkim, could notice a strong sense of deprivation and discrimination amongst the people
in Darjeeling. The argument being that both the areas are adjacent and have same
topography, etc. The Darjeeling area is also affected by the same problems and has all the
considerations based on which other adjoining areas are getting special help, but same
treatment is not being given to them. There are no special projects either by the Union or
the State Government to boost the economy of areas. Darjeeling has had enjoyed traditional
glory and has lot of memories of the past. There is a threat of loosing the heritage status
of the Darjeeling Himalayan railways. Besides this, the permit system for taxi operators in
Darjeeling is different from the rest of the State and the Operators have to make
unnecessary rounds of RTO office to get the permit. In fact the tourists in the earlier days
only talked about Darjeeling and were fascinated by the place. But with no developmental
work taking place in the region, the Darjeeling area has lagged behind other States and has
been left to remain only in our memories.
134. The said resentment in the areas was also about the exclusion of the Districts of
Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri and Coochbehar from the Northeast Tourism Development schemes.
It was said to be mainly due to regional discrimination meted out to them. The Committee
also feels that the people of Darjeeling are also facing the same vagaries of nature and
difficulties of life as that of the North-Eastern States. The Committee also feels that these
arguments have merit that deserve to be considered seriously as earlier as possible. Why
not include Darjeeling Hills also in the category of NE region so that it gets the benefit of
10% of the funds through the Ministry of DoNEAR. The Committee recommends that for
the integrated development of the NE region, benefits of the 10% tourism budget for the
NE Region should be extended to the three north eastern districts of the West Bengal.
These areas should be considered along with Sikkim for the purpose of development of
tourism facilities, subsidies, reorganization, tax benefits etc of Ministry of DoNER. The
Committee also recommends that Darjeeling should be included in the “Incredible India”
campaign. The Ministry of Tourism should take the desired steps and lay special emphasis
on the publicity campaign by including Darjeeling in all the campaigns.
LTC facility in lieu  of Hometown granted to Central Government Employees
135. The Committee also notes that Darjeeling is excluded from the LTC facility in lieu  of
Hometown granted to Central Government Employees. The Committee recommends that the matter
should be taken up with the DoPT to grant the same status to Darjeeling.
Need to create balance with the ongoing tourism activities and the forest laws
136. The Forest Laws in the State of Sikkim prohibit the diversion of forest-land for non-
productive sector under the Forest Conservation Act. The Committee came to know that the laws

32
are very stringent and the Tourism Department has to go through a very long process to get the
forest land for the purpose. Even for the utilisation of the private holding the local landowners are
very rigid and the acquisition procedure is very cumbersome for issuing notifications and ultimate
acquisition. The Urban towns are congested and no adequate spaces are available for creation of
amenities like Tourist toilets. To get a suitable land at different towns to meet the requirement of
the tourists, the concerned department has to undertake exhaustive survey to identify the land.
Apart from this, even in case of ongoing projects the Forest Department Officials posted in the
districts interfere with the work in progress obstructing the agencies to stop the work as long as
they do not receive specific instructions from their superiors. The Committee recommends that
there is need to create balance with the ongoing tourism activities and the forest laws. The
Ministry should take up the clearance of the projects on priority basis.
Strict norms for construction and abiding the building rules in the Region
137. The Committee notes that Sikkim and Darjeeling lies in the seismic zone and are
prone to earthquakes. During the deliberations in Darjeeling the Committee was informed
that there is no framework/guidelines for construction in the area. The Committee
recommends that strict norms for construction and abiding the building rules in the Region
should be followed in all the projects involving concrete structures. The Committee is also
of the view that keeping in view the hill areas, there is need for a Technical Institute who
can frame guidelines and help the hill people in constructing in the area keeping in view
the ecological balance.
Connectivity by telecommunications and internet
138. To facilitate tourists to remain connected with their people, connectivity by
telecommunications and internet is very important. The internet service and mobile signals
are very weak in most of the places in Darjeeling and Sikkim. This may be causing
difficulty in proper communication especially at times where immediate assistance is
required. The Committee recommends that this matter may be taken on a priority basis
with the concerned agencies i.e. Ministry of Communication and IT.
Special holiday railway concession during festival seasons
139. The Committee also recommends for special holiday railway concession during
festival seasons. Permission should be given to use chartered flights for NE package tours.
Special steps should be taken to attract tourists through advertisements by tourist offices,
travel agencies and airlines.
Special Incentives for film industry
140. To promote tourism in the region, the Cine producers may be invited and facility
provided for shooting in Darjeeling and Sikkim. The movies which are shot in these areas
should be screened in festivals also, to create awareness about the rich beauty of the place.

33
33
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Development of Tourism related Infrastructure in Darjeeling
The Committee notes that various tourism development schemes have been proposed
for the development of Darjeeling and adjoining areas. The Committee was informed that
approximately 4000 people visit Tiger Hill every morning to watch the sunrise. The
Committee is of the view that augmentation of facilities at the observation with latest
telescopes and such aids will attract more tourists to this place. To cater to the requirement
of influx in tourists, the Committee recommends that projects initiated for the promotion
of tourism in Darjeeling and the adjoining areas may be completed within the proposed
time-frame. (Para 12)
Darjeeling Ropeway
The long pride of Darjeeling has been the ‘Singla Ropeway’, which once connected the
Darjeeling town to the other side of Sikkim, making transportation much easier has been recently
opened but with only one station. The Committee during its field visits has seen the most scenic
ropeway that has the backdrop of the snow-capped mountains, tea gardens and the Rangeet River.
The Committee hopes that this may be connected to Singla as served earlier and later it
can be extended to the other side of the river to Jorethang in Sikkim and taking it to
Namchi, making this a Darjeeling-Sikkim Ropeway, which would be a major tourist
attraction in both the places. (Para 14)
Darjeeling Himalayan Railway
The Committee, therefore, recommends that renovation/restoration of all stations
from Siliguri station to Darjeeling station should be taken up. Not only the Railway
Stations, but the adjoining areas with tea estates, old buildings, etc. should be brought
under ‘Tourism and Heritage Park’. Siliguri Town, Sukna, Tindharia, Kurseong, Sonada,
Ghoom and Darjeeling station need to be provided with tourist information and felicitation
centre and other amenities. (Para 15)
Neighbouring Country Borders
The Committee was informed that there are 3 major border points which are used by
tourists; viz., Kakkarvitta-Panitanki border with Nepal, Chengrabandha-Burimari border with
Bangladesh and Phuentsholing-Jaigaon border with Bhutan. These points need to be immediately
upgraded to facilitate tourists, which are completely unorganized at the present State. The
Committee, therefore, takes the view that all-weather single window facility like customs
and immigration clearances, foreign exchange and other information should be available to
the tourists at these spots. Inter-country reciprocal arrangement with Nepal and Bhutan
with regard to taxis, permits, foreign exchange, etc. for tourists between India-Bhutan and
India-Nepal were demanded by the tour operators. The Committee recommends that the
matter may be taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs. (Para 16)

34
Celebration of Tourism Day
The Committee was also informed that in order to create awareness about Ministry of
Tourism, Darjeeling tourism celebrates World Tourism Day on the Mall. However, last year (2010-11)
they did not get funds and the event was not organized. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that ‘Tourism day’ should be celebrated with festivity to encourage tourism sector on
regular basis and adequate allocation of funds should be provided by the Government.
(Para 17)
Streetlights and Footpaths
The Committee was informed by the stakeholders that they are not allowed to put
streetlights and build footpaths. The Committee, during the visit witnessed itself
darkness on the streets and lack of proper walking space in the roads. The Committee
notes that such measure would only enhance the market capacity of the place and
recommends that efforts should be made to put proper streetlights and build footpaths.
(Para 18)
Development of Parks
The Committee notes that Bankim Chandra Park is an important component of
tourism in Kalimpong. For development of tourism in Darjeeling and adjoining region, the
development of Kalimpong is crucial. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate steps for the development of Kalimpong and also Bankim Chandra Park should
be taken. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has proposed setting up of
horticultural park, orchard garden and creation of infrastructure facilities for gliding in
Kalimpong. The Committee also recommends that the State Government may be consulted
and sensitized to submit new proposals in this regard. (Para 21)
The Committee was also informed that the Janmukti Park situated in the heart of
Kalimpong town is built on land where the Kalimpong Arts and Crafts once functioned. It is a
small Open Air Park with flowerbeds, pathways, benches, small lawns with a panoramic view of
the Himalayas. The Committee was, however, surprised to find that its view is obstructed and
obscured by concrete structure and the entrance to the park is through a historic section of
Kalimpong town where the original pagoda style enclosure that once housed the bust of Queen
Victoria still stands besides the original structure of Coronation dispensary. The Committee
recommends for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the park by the concerned agencies.
(Para 22)
Maintenance of Lakes
The Committee takes a serious view of the utter neglect of Mirik lake. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a proper sewage disposal mechanism
for the area so that the process of polluting the Mirik lake could be checked. The Committee
also recommends that de-silting should be done in Mirik Lake and, thereafter, proper
maintenance work should be carried out at regular intervals. (Para 23)
Observatories
The Committee recommends that telescopes and such facilities enabling the tourists
to get clear view of the mountain may be arranged at the Tiger Hills. (Para 24)

35
Tea Tourism
Darjeeling is famous for its beautiful Tea Gardens spread far and wide having
immense potential for tourism. The concept of ‘Tea Tourism’ should be explored for tourism
purposes. The Committee was informed during the discussions with the stakeholders that
for this purpose Lease agreement is to be reviewed to include tourism in it. The Committee
recommends that the State Government may be consulted for taking necessary steps in this
regard. (Para 26)
MICE tourism
The Committee notes that these two places have immense potential for this purpose.
There are no facility for holding conference in Darjeeling, as such, the corporate sector is
not interested in visiting the place. In Sikkim also the situation is more or less the same.
The Committee therefore recommends that the State Governments of West Bengal and
Sikkim should take benefit from the above mentioned scheme as so far they have not sent
any proposal for setting up convention centres in these places. (Para 28)
Hotel Accommodation and Amenities
The Committee recommends that subsidy should be provided to smaller and Budget
hotels on priority basis. The Committee is of the strong view that there is need to give
special status to Darjeeling and keep it at par with NE States so that it can also get
exemption in taxes, etc. If timely action is not taken the tourist flow will gradually decrease
and this will affect the economy of the region as the major source of employment is tourism
related services. (Para 29)
The Committee also visited the West Bengal Tourism hotel at Mirik. The place is
situated atop a hill with scenic beauty and the rooms are very spacious. However the facility
was not opened for visitors. The Committee noted that the place away from the crowd can
be a good staying option if properly maintained. The Committee recommends that the
possibility of opening the hotel for the public may be explored. (Para 30)
Rural Tourism
The Committee recommends that scheme for subsidy to Home Stays should be
included in the subsidy scheme for building tourist accommodation in villages. The
Committee recommends that there is an immediate need to formulate a rural tourism
policy and support for development of some model tourism villages in the Darjeeling and
Sikkim region. (Para 31)
Removal of Eyesores
The Committee was also informed of the towers which have been installed on the
rooftops and the hills which is an eyesore on the beauty of Darjeeling. There is urgent need
for relocating them. Further, there are BSNL cables lying all over the city in a haphazard
manner. These cables are potential danger and also destroy the beauty of the place. The
Committee recommends that local authorities should take corrective measures to solve the
problem. (Para 32)

36
Drinking Water Supply
The Committee recommends that drinking water should be arranged on priority basis
and special schemes for the purpose should be formulated. The Committee hopes that the
project will be completed within a period of 1½ year as informed to the Committee.
(Para 34)
Sanitation and cleanliness
The Committee also noted that sanitation and cleanliness is lacking in Darjeeling which has
to be taken up as utmost important.  Since Ministry of Tourism is already holding the “clean
India” campaign, the Committee recommends that Darjeeling should be included in the
campaign. The Committee also recommends that local bodies and NGOs may be involved the
‘Clean India’ campaign at the field levels. (Para 35)
Erratic supply of LPG
The Committee also got complaints of erratic supply of LPG cylinders to hotels which had
led to price hike and black marketing. The Committee recommends that the matter may be
taken up with concerned Ministries/agencies to ensure that hospitality sector does not face
the shortage of LPG cylinders. (Para 36)
The Committee notes that at present, Sikkim primarily is seen as a standalone
destination. However, it can be a unique combination of various products of tourist interest.
These include culture, nature and adventure tourism products. The ultimate aim is to develop
Sikkim as a part of Buddhist Circuit and an eco-tourism destination in the country. The
Committee recommends that efforts should be made to integrate all the tourism products.
The Committee hopes that these adversities like poor connectivity, under developed roads,
expensive travel costs, etc. should be met with proper study on the actual problems and
implementing modern technologies for the construction works, etc. (Para 40)
The Committee has observed that many projects sanctioned during 2008-09 and 2009-10
are still to be completed. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to
complete these projects at the earliest. (Para 42)
The Committee also recommends that ropeway between Namchi to Samdruptse may
be considered to take tourists from Namchi which will not only save time but will also to
have a panoramic view of the place. The Committee during its field visits to the Char-Dham
temple complex has seen the well organized facilities for the pilgrim tourists there. The
Committee is also impressed with the simulator aided film show which is a major tourist
attraction there. The Committee recommends that such initiatives need to be developed at
other tourist locations in Sikkim as these places will be on must visit places by a tourist
once landed there. (Para 43)
The Committee recommends for constructing of steps for approaching the Relli river
and the pathways. The sandy beach area below the bridge could be cleaned up and
permanent picnic spots could be set up. The drive down to Relli village is through
picturesque villages. Suitable viewing points should be constructed with facilities for
drinking water, toilets and refreshments kiosks. (Para 44)
Across the Relli bridge, a small hamlet is situated the Gorkha Village complex with
cottage and a restaurant maintained by DGHC Tourism. These facilities should be opened
round the year for the sake of the tourists. (Para 46)

37
The Committee recommends that development of Relli Village as a potential tourist
spot should be initiated by the Ministry of Tourism and the wayside inn, situated in an
excellent location on a small hillock just beyond the bridge needs to be spruced up and
remain open on all occasions for the service of tourists and guests. (Para 47)
Human Resource Development
The Committee also recommends that Institute of Travel and Tourism Management
in Sikkim on the lines of the Tourism Management Institute at Gwalior for serving the
interest of tourism industry of North East may be established. (Para 49)
The Committee notes that Darjeeling district and Sikkim, both have the potential for
capacity building. They have huge manpower resources which should be tapped for the
tourism industry in the States and also for seeking placement outside the States. Trained
manpower presents positive image in the tourists mind and helps for flourishing the tourism
industry. The Committee recommends that the States should seek the benefit from the
scheme of capacity building to exploit human resources. (Para 51)
In the case of hospitality education, which is equally important for the tourism
development of Sikkim, the Committee has come to know that there is no proposal from
the State Government. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism may consult
the State Government for a suitable location for establishment of an Institute of Tourism
Studies and the project may be taken up. (Para 52)
The Committee during deliberations noted that Mirik can be a potential tourist
destination. They should be made aware of the tourism potential in the area so that they
could make a better earning from it in the days ahead. There is also potential for Home
stays in Mirik town which can be explored. For exploiting the resources the local people
should be trained under some schemes. (Para 53)
STUDIES AND SURVEYS
The Committee recommends that the studies/surveys should be completed in time
and action should be taken on the study to improve various aspects of tourism. The
Committee also recommends identifying the source markets and carrying out intensive
market research through qualified consultants. The Committee also recommends that
collection of tourism data should also be made for Darjeeling. (Para 55)
RAILWAYS
The Committee is of the view that the increased transport connectivity to the Sikkim
would be a major boost for attracting travelers to the region. The Committee recommends
that Ministry of Tourism may take up the issues with the Railway Board for introducing
more trains, increasing frequency of existing trains and introduction of new trains to this
sector. (Para 59)
AIR CONNECTIVITY AND AIRPORTS
Bagdogra Airport is the only airport which supports a large area, including the States
of West Bengal, Sikkim, Bihar and Assam. It also caters to countries like Bhutan, Nepal
and Bangladesh. This is the only profitable terminal for Northeast India. Bagdogra needs to

38
be better connected to the rest of the country with flights for Mumbai, Bangalore,
Dibrugarh, Gaya etc. Also, a facility to connect most of the South and Southeast Asian
capitals. (Para 64)
The Committee, keeping in view the limitations for operating civil flights at a
Defence airport, has suggested that Air India flights need to be increased for linking
Bagdogra with major cities of the country. Since the LTC package is open to the North East
Region, the passenger rush is peak during the summer holidays and so the Air India should
make arrangements for getting more passengers accommodated by ensuring extra flight/
seat availability in the sector. (Para 65)
The Committee is also of the view that this sector has good tourist potential due to
Buddhist connection and that needs to be explored in a big way. The Travel Agents
Association also suggested for operating international flights from Bagdogra to Paro
(Bhutan) and Bangkok (Thailand). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
commercial viability may be assessed in these sectors. (Para 69)
The Committee hopes that the efforts in enhancement of the tourist’s visits to these
areas, the commercial viability will be improved and profitable flights could be operated in
future. (Para 70)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of
India may take up with the Ministry of Defence and Indian Air Force in getting the airport
facilities upgraded as per the above proposal. The matter may also be taken up with
Government of West Bengal for making available additional land for expansion of the
Bagdogra Airport. (Para 74)
Keeping in view the culture of the area a suggestion has been made to rename Bagdogra
Airport as ‘Kabiguru Rabindranath Tagore International Airport’. The Committee desires that
the Ministry of Civil Aviation may look into the possibility of renaming the airport.
(Para 75)
Airports Authority of India has also briefed the Committee about constructing a new
Greenfield Airport at Pakyong in Sikkim for operation of ATR72 type of aircraft. The Project is
funded by the Central Government and is being taken up in phases. The total cost of the project
is Rs.309.46 crores and will be completed in 2013. The tourist inflow will be boosted up in Sikkim
after the new airport is made operational. The Committee was also informed that the runway is
6000 feets and further expansion is not possible due to steep hills. The Committee was also
informed that the Airport is suitable for smaller aircrafts. As such the Committee desires
that the frequency of the aircrafts is to be increased to be able to lift more tourists.
Keeping in view the density of international tourists, the airport should be made to
international standards with all the facilities. The Committee also came to know that two
lane road is to be constructed by State Government to connect Pakyong airport to Ranipool
to Gangtok city to facilitate smooth movement of traffic. The Committee recommends that
the work on the road should be completed before the airport becomes functional so that the
passengers do not face problem of congestion on the road. (Para 76)
Taxi operators have submitted many complaints as regards the tax structures, plying of
unauthorized vehicles, unjustifiable parking fee etc. at Bagdogra airport . The Committee desires
that the Government of West Bengal and Airports Authority of India should look into the
grievances and take remedial measures. (Para 77)

39
CONNECTIVITY BY HELICOPTER
The Committee notes the various initiatives proposed by Ministry of Tourism and the
proposal of Government of Sikkim Government which is trying to promote heli-tourism in
the State. However, the connectivity in Darjeeling is yet to be explored. As such the
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should make plan with the West
Bengal Government to cover the Darjeeling area also by heli services and provide financial
assistance for the same. The Committee recommends that adequate numbers of helicopters
as per the requirement may be procured or leased from Pawan Hans Ltd. for the purpose.
Besides this the Army may also be taken into confidence for the smooth functioning of
helicopter operations in the region. (Para 84)
Taking into consideration the extent of subsidy in Helicopter journeys being enjoyed
by the tourists, the Committee is of the opinion that tourism activities should be aimed at
bringing revenue to the exchequer and not be made a burden on the tax payers. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Pawan Hans Ltd. should make a detailed study on
how the heli tourism can be made a profitable business without seeking any-subsidies, on
the lines of the heli-taxi services started by a private operator at nominal rates in Kerala
recently. (Para 85)
ROAD CONNECTIVITY AND CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS
The Committee notes various steps taken to provide an alternative highway for
Gangtok which is very essential so that it is well connected with the country. Since it is
surrounded by international borders, the need is more also from the strategic point of view.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that keeping in view its strategic location the
alternate highway should be given top priority. The Committee hopes that the proposed
highway will be completed as per schedule overcoming all the shortcomings. (Para 96)
To expedite forest clearance regular review meetings are being held at Ministry of Defence,
last meeting was held on 23 rd December, 2011 and State official were advised to expedite the
pending cases. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to get required
clearances. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that out of the 72 projects only
19 have got the clearances and 49 projects are found to be under process at various stages.
Maintenance and development of NH is crucial not only for the economic development of
Sikkim and Darjeeling and surrounding region, but also for the security of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Forests Departments of West Bengal and
Sikkim may be impressed upon to take strategic and economic interest of the region while
considering the proposals received for clearances. The Committee hopes that the projects
will be cleared and started soon. (Para 105)
The Committee is aware of the constraints in proper maintenance of the road
conditions in the Darjeeling and Sikkim region. The Committee also recommends that the
BRO should be given modern equipment and adequate funds for the roads maintained by
them. The Committee is surprised to observe that BRO, in addition to its main work of
construction and maintenance of NH has to engage itself in the task of seeking clearances
from the State Governments. The Committee recommends that BRO should concentrate its
efforts in the construction of roads and the rest of the formalities should be completed by
the Ministry in consultation with the concerned State Governments. (Para 106)
The Committee has noted that the road connecting Bagdogra Airport to Darjeeling is
in a dilapidated State, which is a major bottleneck for the growth of tourism in Darjeeling

40
and Sikkim. The Committee, therefore, recommends that since different authorities are
involved in the maintenance work at various stretches, a coordinated action is required to
maintain the highway from Bagdogra to Darjeeling. (Para 107)
The Committee had witnessed the road damages at various places as a result of the
recent earth quake. The Committee finds that at many places, lack of water drains are
causing over flow of water on the roads and sliding of the sides. It, therefore, recommends
that BRO/NHAI need to take up the matter at the time of road design itself. The
Committee has the opinion that all the roads in the Sikkim and in the North East should
be provided with proper culverts so that the rain water and mud should not come to the
roads as a result of rain or for other reasons. (Para 108)
The Committee recommends that at the entry point of Sikkim i.e Rengpo check post,
the concerned authorities and the transport officials should monitor the movement of
trucks to ensure that they do not carry extra load. Otherwise, they should be directed to
move through roads which can sustain extra load. (Para 109)
The Committee notes that the maintenance of roads is an expensive task in the hilly
terrain because of high rainfall and topographical conditions. It, therefore, recommends that
some long-term financial solutions be evolved to create a fund dedicated to the maintenance
of roads for Darjeeling and the North East including Sikkim so that modern technology may
be better utilized for improving the pace and quality of work. (Para 110)
The Committee also recommends for strengthening of the existing bridges so that
the carrying capacity may be increased for higher loads. With these objectives in view,
special emphasis may be given to the improvement of low cost roads and bridges and
construction of new roads in new areas. (Para 111)
Having regard to the importance of roads network in the overall economic
development of the State in general and the need for connectivity for the growth of tourism
in particular, the Committee recommends for granting adequate funds and timely release
of the same, which will go a long way in improving the construction/replacement/repair of
roads at various stages/locations. (Para 112)
The Committee got complaints that NH-55 is closed for traffic since last 20 months and
NHAI is neither taking any steps nor the State PWD who is entrusted with its maintenance is
utilizing the services of NHAI. The Committee recommends that proper coordination with the
two agencies may be ensured so that the road maintenance and construction works should
not be trapped in red tapes. (Para 113)
The Committee also noticed the insufficient and deficient road signage which is a major
cause of accidents. The Committee recommends that proper signage and road markings
should be provided at important points. (Para 114)
ROAD PERMIT
To overcome the bottlenecks of multiple inter–State road transport barriers, the Ministry of
Tourism informed the Committee that they have been advocating implementation of seamless travel
for commercial tourist vehicles. It was felt that that there is a need for a system which would
ensure single window payment of taxes for seamless travel, through which tax can be collected
centrally and apportioned to States. This would facilitate smooth movement of vehicular traffic and

41
avoid delays and inconvenience to tourists. The system was implemented for Delhi–Jaipur–Agra
Sector. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to adopt the same approach for
seamless travel in Darjeeling and Sikkim in consultation with the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways. The Committee recommends that the taxi fare and road taxes
should be rationalized in consultation with the stake holders concerned by the State
Governments. (Para 116)
The Committee recommends that the problem of road permit in Darjeeling should be
considered by the Ministry of Tourism on priority in consultation with the concerned
Departments to give them a level playing field. The State Government should also take the
benefit from the scheme for construction of modern, state-of-the-art, dedicated parking lots
for which financial assistance is provided by the Ministry of Tourism. (Para 117)
The Committee agrees with the State Government’s view on the importance of
strengthening the public transport facilities. The Committee is of the view that with new
initiatives for enhancing the tourist inflow to the State, immediate attention is required for
proper road connectivity and vehicles. Since the public transport is able to minimize the
road congestions, strengthening of the State transport facilities and passenger amenities
should be taken up on priority basis. (Para 120)
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the ASI in restoring the monuments
Dubdi Monastery which was damaged by the earthquake in September, 2011 has been
repaired. Since these monuments major tourist attractions, it is equally important that
tourist amenities are also made available in these sites. The Committee recommends that
adequate funds and manpower should be provided to these monuments as most of them do
not have proper maintenance staff. The Committee also recommends that illumination of
monuments should also be considered by ASI on priority in these places. (Para 127)
As per the data provided by ASI, the Committee is constrained to note that the
Horticulture Department is almost absent in Sikkim and out of the 14 sanctioned posts at
various levels including Garden Attendant and Chowkidar, the man in position is NiL. At
present the works are being supervised by Horticulture Assistant Grade I, Cooch Behar. The
Committee would like to know the reasons accounting for utter neglect of the region and
non-filling up of posts. The Committee recommends that immediate steps be taken to fill
up the vacant posts of the Horticulture Branch cater to the need of Sikkim. (Para 129)
VISA-ON-ARRIV AL
The Committee recommends that the Visa on Arrival facility should be provided at
Bagdogra airport to facilitate international tourists. Extension of the ‘Visa on Arrival’
facility at the border adjoining Darjeeling and Sikkim may also be considered. (Para 132)
Inclusion of the Darjeeling Hills in ambit of DoNEAR for allocations of 10% of the Union
Budget
The Committee while going through different areas in and around Darjeeling and
Sikkim, could notice a strong sense of deprivation and discrimination amongst the people
in Darjeeling. The argument being that both the areas are adjacent and have same
topography, etc. The Darjeeling area is also affected by the same problems and has all the
considerations based on which other adjoining areas are getting special help, but same
treatment is not being given to them. There are no special projects either by the Union or
the State Government to boost the economy of areas. Darjeeling has had enjoyed traditional

42
glory and has lot of memories of the past. There is a threat of loosing the heritage status
of the Darjeeling Himalayan railways. Besides this, the permit system for taxi operators in
Darjeeling is different from the rest of the State and the Operators have to make
unnecessary rounds of RTO office to get the permit. In fact the tourists in the earlier days
only talked about Darjeeling and were fascinated by the place. But with no developmental
work taking place in the region, the Darjeeling area has lagged behind other States and has
been left to remain only in our memories. (Para 133)
The said resentment in the areas was also about the exclusion of the Districts of
Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri and Coochbehar from the Northeast Tourism Development schemes.
It was said to be mainly due to regional discrimination meted out to them. The Committee
also feels that the people of Darjeeling are also facing the same vagaries of nature and
difficulties of life as that of the North-Eastern States. The Committee also feels that these
arguments have merit that deserve to be considered seriously as earlier as possible. Why
not include Darjeeling Hills also in the category of NE region so that it gets the benefit of
10% of the funds through the Ministry of DoNEAR. The Committee recommends that for
the integrated development of the NE region, benefits of the 10% tourism budget for the
NE Region should be extended to the three north eastern districts of the West Bengal.
These areas should be considered along with Sikkim for the purpose of development of
tourism facilities, subsidies, reorganization, tax benefits etc. of Ministry of DoNER. The
Committee also recommends that Darjeeling should be included in the “Incredible India”
campaign. The Ministry of Tourism should take the desired steps and lay special emphasis
on the publicity campaign by including Darjeeling in all the campaigns. (Para 134)
LTC facility in lieu  of Hometown granted to Central Government Employees
The Committee also notes that Darjeeling is excluded from the LTC facility in lieu
of Hometown granted to Central Government Employees. The Committee recommends that
the matter should be taken up with the DoPT to grant the same status to Darjeeling.
(Para 135)
Strict norms for construction and abiding the building rules in the Region
The Committee notes that Sikkim and Darjeeling lies in the seismic zone and are
prone to earthquakes. During the deliberations in Darjeeling the Committee was informed
that there is no framework/guidelines for construction in the area. The Committee
recommends that strict norms for construction and abiding the building rules in the Region
should be followed in all the projects involving concrete structures. The Committee is also
of the view that keeping in view the hill areas, there is need for a Technical Institute who
can frame guidelines and help the hill people in constructing in the area keeping in view
the ecological balance. (Para 137)
Connectivity by telecommunications and internet
To facilitate tourists to remain connected with their people, connectivity by
telecommunications and internet is very important. The internet service and mobile signals
are very weak in most of the places in Darjeeling and Sikkim. This may be causing
difficulty in proper communication especially at times where immediate assistance is
required. The Committee recommends that this matter may be taken on a priority basis
with the concerned agencies i.e. Ministry of Communications and IT. (Para 138)

43
Special holiday railway concession during festival seasons
The Committee also recommends for special holiday railway concession during
festival seasons. Permission should be given to use chartered flights for NE package tours.
Special steps should be taken to attract tourists through advertisements by tourist offices,
travel agencies and airlines. (Para 139)
Special Incentives for film industry
To promote tourism in the region, the Cine producers may be invited and facility
provided for shooting in Darjeeling and Sikkim. The movies which are shot in these areas
should be screened in festivals also, to create awareness about the rich beauty of the place.
(Para 140)

MINUTES

46

47
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd January, 2013 in Committee Room
‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Shri A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
***
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and extended them good wishes
for the new year 2013. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft reports on the
(i) Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety; (ii) Development of National Waterways –
Potential and Challenges; and (iii) Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim. After some
discussion the Committee adopted these reports without any modification.
47
*** Relate to other matters.

48
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again on 16 th January, 2013.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.