122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY- SECOND REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KAKINADA-PONDICHERRY
STRETCH OF CANALS AND THE KALUVELLY TANK,
BHADRACHALAM-RAJAHMUNDRY   STRETCH   OF
RIVER GODAVARI AND WAZIRABAD-VIJAYAWADA
STRETCH OF RIVER KRISHNA) BILL, 2006
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16TH  AUGUST, 2007)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  16TH  AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1929(SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
2.         INTRODUCTION                 
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
5.         ANNEXURE                                                                                                  
6.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                        
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2006-2007)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.   Shri S.S. Chandran
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.   Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.   Shri Janardhana Poojary
7. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
LOK SABHA
 
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.  Dr. P.P. Koya
23.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Suraj Singh
31. *Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Director         
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director
* Nominated on 20.3.2007 in the vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Manbendra Shah. 
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and
 Twenty-second Report of the Committee on the National Waterway (Kakinada-Pondicherry Stretch of canals and the
 Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of River
 Krishna) Bill, 2006*.
2.         In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble
 Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 8
th December, 2006 and pending
 therein, to the Committee on 13 th December, 2006 for examination and report within three months.  On the request
 being made by the Chairman of the Committee, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension of time upto
 the first week of Monsoon session of Parliament for the presentation of the Report of the Committee on the aforesaid
 Bill.
3.          In the course of examination of the Bill, the Committee visited Vishakhapatnam and Chennai and took oral
 evidences of the Chief Secretaries of Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu at Vishakhapatnam and Chennai
 on the 5th and 7th February, 2007, respectively on the various provisions of the Bill.
4.         In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee invited the views of individuals, organisations and
 institutions on the subject through advertisement in all major national dallies and vernacular newspapers all over the
 country. Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalized the Report.
5.        The Committee  considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same on the 18
th July, 2007.

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
6.          The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping
 and Chief Secretaries of Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu for the assistance and inputs provided during
 deliberations on the provisions of the Bill for finalizing the Committee Report.
                                                                                                                                  
NEW DELHI ;
July 18, 2007  
Asadha 27, 1929 (Saka)                                              
SITARAM YECHURY
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
 
*   Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 8.12.2006.
**   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 43706,  dated 13.12..2006.
REPORT
            The National Waterway (Kakinada-Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of River Krishna) Bill, 2006 was
 introduced in the Lok Sabha on 8
th December, 2006. On 13 th December, 2006 Hon'ble Chairman Rajya Sabha, in
 consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the Bill to this Committee for examination and Report. 
 Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalised the Report. The Bill seeks to provide for the
 declaration of the Kakinada-Pondicherry stretch of canals comprising of Kakinada  canal, Eluru canal, Commamur 
 canal, Buckingham canal and the Kaluvelly tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and
 Wazirabad-Vijayawada stretch of river Krishna in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and the Union
 Territory of Puducherry to be a national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and development of the said
 stretch of the rivers and the canals for purpose of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for matters
 connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2.       In the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the Government have enumerated the objects to be achieved
 by this legislation. 
 
2.1       In the absence of suitable organisation and paucity of resources with the State Governments, the development of
 Inland Water Transport (IWT) has not made much headway in those parts of the country where it has vast potentials. 
 There are certain advantages in this mode of transport, such as low cost transport, energy efficiency, generation of
 employment among weaker sections of the society and its eco-friendly nature.  Various committees set up by the
 Government for the purpose of looking into this matter had in the past recommended that the Central Government
 should declare certain waterways as national waterways and assume responsibility for their overall development. The
 Central Government has accordingly constituted the Inland Waterways Authority of India under the Inland Waterways
 Authority of India Act, 1985, for the regulation and development of inland waterways for purposes of shipping and
 navigation.  Allahabad-Haldia stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River, Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of the
 Brahmaputra river and Kollam-Kottappuram stretch of West Coast Canal along with Champakkara and Udyogamandal
 Canals have already been declared as national waterways. Consequently, Inland Waterways Authority of India has
 taken up the development, maintenance and management of these waterways.
 
2.2       The Department of Shipping proposes to declare Kakinda-Puducherry stretch of canals comprising of Kakinada
 Canal, Eluru Canal, Commamur Canal, Buckingham Canal and Kaluvelly Tank along with Bhadrachalam-
Rajahmundry stretch of Godavari river and Wazirabad-Vijayawada stretch of the Krishna river as a National Waterway,
 Infrastructure facilities currently available on this waterway are not adequate for safe, convenient and sustained
 shipping and navigation by large mechanized crafts.  Therefore, the waterway is required to be suitably developed by
 providing adequate infrastructure for safe, convenient and sustained shipping operations.  The regulation and
 development of the proposed national waterway under the control of the Union for the purposes of shipping and
 navigation is in the public interest and declaration to that effect has also been made in this Bill.
3.         The Department of Shipping in their background note furnished to the Committee informed that Inland Water
 Transport is an economic, fuel efficient, environment friendly and employment oriented mode of transport. The role of
 the Union Government is to regulate shipping and navigation on Inland Waterways declared by Parliament by Law to
 be national waterways. The responsibility and executive authority for development and maintenance of all waterways
 other than those declared as National Waterways rest with the State Governments. The following inland waterways

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 have so far been declared as National Waterways through Acts of Parliament:
 
(i)                  Allahabad-Haldia stretch (1620 kms.) of the Ganga-Bhagirathi Hooghly river system by the National
 Waterways (Allahabad-Haldia stretch of Ganga-Hooghly river) Act, 1982
(ii)                Sadiya-Dhubri stretch (891 kms.) of Brahmputra river by the National Waterway (Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of
 the Brahmputra river) Act, 1988 ; and
(iii)               Kottapuram-Kollam stretch of the West Coast canal alongwith Champkara canal and Udyogmandal canal
 (205 kms.) by the National Waterway (Kollam-Kottapuram stretch of West Cost Canal and Champakara and
 Udyogmandal canal) Act, 1992.
3.1       The Central Government has constituted Inland Waterways Authority of India for development, maintenance
 and regulation of National Waterways for shipping and navigation. The infrastructure facilities on the existing three
 National Waterways are being created by it. It is aimed to made these three National Waterways fully functional by
 2007-08.
3.2       It is now proposed to declare Kakinada-Puducherry stretch of canals consisting of the Kakinada Canal, the Eluru
 Canal, the Commamur Canal, the Buckingham Canal and the Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of
 the Godavari river and Wazirabad-Vijayawada stretch of the Krishna river as National Waterway. (Annexure-I) The
 Waterway under consideration comprises river and canal sections having a total length of 1095 km falling in the States
 of Andhra Pradesh (907 km), Tamil Nadu (186 km) and Puducherry (2 km) with following break-up:-
Name of River/Canal Length (in Km.)
River Godavari (Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry) 171
 
River Krishna (Wazribad-Vijayawada) 157
 
Kakinada Canal (Kakinada-Rajahmundry)       50
Eluru canal (Rajahmundry-Vijayawada) 139
 
Commamur canal (Vijayawada-Pedaganjam lock) 113
 
Buckingham canal (Pedaganjam lock-Mercaunam) 443
Kaluvelly tank (Mercaunam-Puducherry 22
Total 1095
 
3.3       The Department of Shipping informed that infrastructure currently available on this waterway is not adequate for
 safe, convenient and sustained shipping and navigation by large mechanized crafts. Therefore, the waterway is required
 to be developed by providing adequate infrastructure for safe, convenient and sustained shipping operations. It has been
 visualized that substantial quantum of inland water transport traffic to the tune of 6.42 million tones is likely to be
 carried on the proposed national waterway after its full development in a span of 5 years. This traffic is expected to be
 handled at 14 terminals namely Bhadrachalam, Pochavaram, Rajahmundry, Wazirabad, Muktiyala, Vijayawada, Eluru,
 Tadepalligudem, Kakinada, Kottapatnam, Maipadu, Durgajaupatnam, Chennai and Puducherry. The major identified
 cargo are paddy, tobacco, chilies, oil seeds, pulses and cotton; timber, bamboo, firewood, tendu (beedi) leaves, coal,
 limestone, iron and steel, building materials, cement, general merchandise, fertilizers and civil supplies. The proposed
 dimension of the waterway is:-
For Kakinada, Eluru and Commamur canals
                        Bed width                     -                       14 m
                        Depth                           -                       1.6 m
                        Side slope                    -                       1:3
For River Godavari and Krishna, Buckingham canal and Kaluvelly tank
                        Bed width                     -                       32m
                        Depth                           -                       1.8 m

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
                        Side slope                    -                       1:5
3.4       The Department of Shipping informed that the development of the rivers and canals along with provision of
 infrastructure facilities for purposes of shipping and navigation and to handle the traffic requires development of the
 waterway for navigation, channel marking, construction of terminals transit sheds, installation of handling equipment,
 etc. Further, it was estimated by the Consultant M/s RITES in the year 2002 that the expenditure with respect to the
 said development will be of the order of Rs.542 crore (Rs.395 crore for fairway development + Rs.143 crore for
 terminals + Rs.4 crore for setting up of office). The expected period of implementation of the project is 5 years.
 Besides, the Consultant for operation of the waterway and terminals also estimated annual maintenance cost of Rs.11
 crore. The waterway will facilitate movement of 100 tonnes vessels (32 m X 5 m X 1 m) in the irrigation canal portion
 and 350 tonnes vessel (45 m X 9 m X 1.2 m)in the rivers and Buckingham canal portion. It will provide an alternative
 mode of transportation for movement of commodities between ports of Chennai, Ennore and Kakinada and various
 hinterland cities namely Wazirabad, Vijayawada, Rajahmundry, Polavaram, Eluru, Nellore, Ongole and Puducherry. It
 will also facilitate decongestion of roads, fuel savings, provide better environment corridor, ensure better port-
hinterland connectivity, generate employment among weaker sections of the society and increase tourism activities in
 the region. The Consultant M/s RITES who prepared the techno-economic feasibility study had reported that sufficient
 Government land is availble for widening of narrow canals except for Eluru canal (76 hectares), South Buchkingham
 canal (393 hectares) and for the artificial canal link connecting Kaluvelly tank and Puducherry (14 hectares). The State
 Government of Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh have been requested to carry out delineation survey to assess the
 extent of land to be acquired.
4.         In order to have wider consultations, the views of individuals, organizations and institutions on the subject
 matter of the Bill were invited through advertisements in all major dailies and vernacular newspapers in the country.
 The Committee during its visit to Vishakhapatnam, Chennai, Andaman and Nicobar islands and Kolkata from 4
th to
 12th February, 2007 heard the views of the Chief Secretaries, Government of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu on the
 provisions of the Bill on 5 th and 7th February, 2007 at Vishakhapatnam and Chennai respectively. The Government of
 Tamil Nadu, Public Works Department vide their letter dated 28.06.07 informed the Committee that Government of
 Tamil Nadu has no specific comments on the provision of the Bill and the Bill is acceptable to that Government.
4.1       Similarly, the Government of Puducherry, Local Administration and Public Works Department vide their letter
 dated 6th March, 2007 have furnished their comments on the Bill which are reproduced below :-
(i)      The UT of Puducherry supports the move, since the formation of the proposed inland waterway will be
 beneficial of UT of Puducherry.  As such there is no reservation on the issue.
(ii)     The consent of the UT Administration was given after inspection of the site by the officials concerned.
(iii)    The Bill can be cleared in its present form.  The regulation and development of the proposed national waterway
 will be carried out by the inland Waterways of India in the limits shown under the Schedule (Section –2) and as
 per the Financial Memorandum of the Bill enclosed with the reference letter.
 
5.         The Committee pointed out that the existing National Waterways in the country are under utilized and desired to
 know the reasons for declaration of the new waterways and the strategy conceived to popularize the IWT mode in the
 country, the Department of Shipping in their reply informed the Committee that like any other transport sector, inland
 waterways also require basic infrastructure facilities namely assured navigation channel with adequate depth and width,
 terminals for berthing of vessels and loading and unloading of cargo and navigational aids for round the clock operation
 of inland vessels. Though some infrastructure has been provided on the three National Waterways, it has not reached a
 threshold level to become commercially viable. Hence, the waterways are not being utilized to their potential. However,
 cargo is being transported on the three national waterways and an increasing trend is also visible as given below:
             
                                                              (in billion tonne km)
Cargo Transportation 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
NW-1 0.160 0.312 0.411
NW-2 0.029 0.025 0.032
NW-3 0.022 0.015 0.017
Total 0.211 0.352 0.460
 

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
6.         IWAI has now made an Action Plan to make these National Waterways fully functional subject to availability of
 funds. Utilization of the National Waterways thereafter is expected to increase substantially, as also operations on these
 waterways will become commercially viable. For demonstrating the functionality of the three NWs and increasing the
 confidence level of IWT operators, IWAI has also planned Fixed Schedule Service (FSS) for demonstrative purpose on
 the three NWs, which will be operated by cargo vessels acquired by IWAI. This level of development of the existing
 National Waterways will be the ‘Stage-1’ of the development where basic infrastructure will be put in place through
 pubic investment, and private investment will be mainly for operation of IWT vessels. Thereafter, further upgradation
 of infrastructure e.g. developing higher LAD, specialized terminals could take place through private investment. This
 upgradation can be termed as ‘Stage-2’ development. The ‘Stage-1’ development will require 2 to 3 years for putting
 up infrastructure and further 3-4 years for demonstration of functionality after which the ‘Stage-2’ development will be
 mainly through private investment and role of IWAI/Government will be that of facilitator and regulator only.
 
7.         IWT is a fuel efficient, cost effective and environment friendly mode of transport. With adequate investment and
 focus it can be developed into a viable and visible mode complementary to the rail and road modes. Due attention has
 not been paid in the past to the IWT mode, but now the Union Government intends to develop it fast and as a part of
 this effort two new waterways have been identified for declaration as new National Waterways. It is planned that while
 existing National Waterways are being made fully functional under Stage-1 development, the procedural formalities
 would be gone through and Parliamentary approval would be obtained for declaration of new National Waterways, so
 that projects on these are approved and they become ready for Stage-1 development, thereby maintaining a continuity
 in IWT development in the country. In other words, when the existing three National Waterways would be in Stage-2
 development mode, the proposed new National Waterways will be developed under Stage-1 and after their Stage-1
 development, they also will be ready for Stage-2 development.
 
8.         The waterways other than National Waterways will also be developed through the respective State Governments
 for which liberal funding is available under Centrally Sponsored Scheme as of now. This approach will lead to overall
 development of IWT sector in the country. As far as enhancing utilization of existing and proposed National
 Waterways is concerned, apart from demonstrative cargo operation for ascertaining functional characteristics of the
 waterways and increasing the level of confidence of users, other promotional measures such as inland vessel building
 subsidy, viability gap funding for profitable operators, setting-up of vessel leasing company and other incentives for
 increased use of the waterways would be provided in a phased manner depending upon the requirement from time to
 time.
 
9.         The Committee wanted to know whether the proposed National Waterways will have any impact on irrigation
 interest of the region, the Department of Shipping in their reply informed that the irrigation canals in the State of
 Andhra Pradesh viz Kakinada canal, Eluru canal and Commamur canal form part of the proposed National Waterway-
4. It was initially proposed to develop these waterways for a bed width of 32 m and depth of 2 m. But based on the
 request of the State Government, it has been decided to develop this portion of the waterway for a bed width of only 14
 m and depth of 1.6 m in order to safeguard the requirements of irrigation. Hence the proposed declaration of the
 National Waterway will not jeopardize the irrigation interest of the State Government. The East Cost Canal (which is a
 part of proposed National Waterway-5) was already designed as irrigation cum navigation canal and under the existing
 proposal also, no development is proposed which will adversely affect irrigation interests of the region. Further, IWAI
 had been in continuous touch with all the concerned State Governments of the proposed National Waterways at various
 stages and their views have been considered while planning development works. Therefore, it is confirmed that
 irrigation interests of the concerned States will not be compromised due to development of proposed National
 Waterways.
 
10.       The Committee wanted to know as to how the IWT vessels would be serviced and repaired when large number
 of vessels start plying on existing three National Waterways and proposed two National Waterways. The Department of
 Shipping submitted that the coastal areas of the existing and proposed National Waterways namely Kolkata in case of
 NW-1, Kochi in case of NW-3 and Kakinada, Chennai, Visakhapatnam and Paradip etc. in case of NW-4 and 5 already
 have repair facilities which can cater to the repair needs of inland vessels. On National Waterway No. 1 and 2 however,
 adequate repair facilities do not exist on inland stations like Patna, Varanasi, Allahabad (NW-1) and Guwahati (NW-2).
 Therefore, under the Action Plan of IWAI for making three National Waterways fully functional, projects for
 construction of repair facilities at Patna and Guwahati are also being prepared.  When the IWT vessels start plying in

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 large numbers on these waterways, it is expected that facilities will also grow based on the demand, propelled by
 market forces.
 
11.       The Committee wanted to know as to how this particular waterway will benefit the people of Andhra Pradesh,
 Tamilnadu and Puducherry. The Department of Shipping informed that potential of inland water transport (IWT)
 corridors if developed with required IWT infrastructure namely fairway, navigational aids and terminals, can offer
 alternative/supplementary mode of transport vis-à-vis rail and road modes. Since waterways generally do not provide
 door-to-door service independently, it is necessary that these are connected with rail and/or road mode for total
 transport linkages to the user.
 
12.       The Committee was further informed that each IWT corridor (waterways) has specific characteristics and
 developmental needs, to become viable mode of transport. Several Committees (viz. Gokhale Committee, Bhagavati
 Committee and National Transport Policy Committee) have studied IWT system of the country since independence
 from time to time and have advocated systematic development of the IWT mode. National Transport Policy Committee
 in its report (1980) accordingly recommended for setting up of an authority for development and regulation of inland
 waterways. Accordingly, Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) was constituted in October, 1986. Techno-
economic feasibility studies have been made for different waterways from time to time which establish viability of this
 mode by developing a particular waterway with above stated IWT infrastructure to act as supplementary/alternative
 mode.  Further, the proposed National Waterway will provide an alternative mode of transportation for movement of
 commodities between ports of Chennai, Ennore and Kakinada and various hinterland cities namely Wazirabad,
 Vijayawada, Rajahmundry, Polavaram, Eluru, Nellore, Ongole and Puducherry. It will also facilitate decongestion of
 roads, fuel savings, provide better environment corridor, ensure better port-hinterland connectivity, generate
 employment among weaker sections of the society and increase tourism activities in the region.
 
13.       The Department of Shipping further submitted that the fundamental requirement for growth of IWT sector is
 development of waterways with basic IWT infrastructure namely fairway with adequate depth, navigational aids for
 day and night navigation and terminals with mechanical handling facilities and connectivity with rail and road to enable
 the waterways to provide a cost effective mode of transport. However, ownership and operation of cargo and passenger
 vessels should be in private hands. Therefore, in addition to putting up infrastructure, it is also required to provide
 necessary conditions conducive to private sector participation in IWT operations. IWAI is concentrating on providing
 full infrastructure in the existing National Waterways in order to make them fully functional. The following
 steps/measures are also being taken up for giving boost to Inland Water Transport Sector:
 
·
        Encouraging private sector in development, operation and management of IWT infrastructures.
 
·        Providing facilitative framework for increasing IWT fleet under private ownership by way of providing
 Inland Vessel Building Subsidy and forming Inland Vessel Leasing Company with the support of financial
 institutions and private sector.
 
·        Attracting/promoting cargo transportation by IWT mode by way of demonstrative voyages/fixed schedule
 sailings by IWAI, attracting multi-modal operators to IWT and providing funding for operating IWT
 vessels.
 
·
        Encouraging States to develop their potential waterways through liberal assistance under Centrally
 Sponsored Scheme.
 
 
14.       The Committee wanted to know the overall, region - wise plan for development for proposed waterway
 including augmentation of infrastructure, the Department Shipping informed that out of the total length of 1095 km of
 the proposed waterway, 907 km falls in Andhra Pradesh, 186 km in Tamil Nadu and 2 km in Puducherry. The Godavari
 river, the Krishna river, the Buckingham canal and the Kaluvelly Tank stretches of the waterway are proposed to be
 developed for a fairway of 32 m bottom width and  1.8 m depth whereas the irrigation canals namely Kakinada canal,
 Eluru canal and Commamur canal for a bed width of 14 m. and depth of 1.6 m. Terminals are proposed to the set up at

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 Rajahmundry, Pochavaram, Bhadrachalam in river Godavari, Wazirabad, Muktiyala and Vijayawada in river Krishna
 and at Kakinada, Eluru, Tadepalligudem, Kottapatnam, Maipadu, Durgarajupatnam, Chennai and Puducherry in the
 canal portion. Once fully developed the waterway would be operational for 24 hrs navigaion. The techno-economic
 feasibility (TEF) study for the project has been carried out through the Consultant M/s RITES, New Delhi during 1998.
 The TEF study gives a projected cargo of 3.04 million tons, 4.95 million tons and 6.42 million tons for the 1 st year, 5th
 year and 10 th year after fully developing the waterway. In order to get the present status a study for preparation of
 detailed project report (DPR) is underway through the Consultant M/s WAPCOS. The planning and implementation of
 the project would be made based on the project components identified as per the DPR study. The requisite monitoring
 system will be worked out after declaration of the waterway as a National Waterway.
 
15.       On a query regarding the estimated cost for development of the waterway and likely generation of the revenue
 after its full development, the Department of Shipping informed that the project cost is estimated at Rs.542 crore (2002
 rate). Besides recurring cost to the tune of Rs.11 crore approximately is also estimated to be carried out for annual
 maintenance of fairway and terminals. The Consultant has estimated that Rs.56 crore annual earnings will be generated
 in the initial years after full development of the waterway with necessary infrastructure facilities by way of revenue
 collected in the form of cargo handling charges, berthing charges, mooring charges, storage/warehousing charges etc.
 
16.       The Committee wanted to know whether the Department of Shipping has consulted the Government of Andhra
 Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Puducherry before the introduction of the Bill, in their reply, the Department of Shipping
 informed that the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have been consulted. The then Secretary,
 Ministry of Shipping vide D.O. letter dt. 11.7.2002 addressed to the Chief Secretaries of both the States informed about
 the intention to declare the waterway as National Waterway and seeking their participation in the project by way of
 transfer of lands, etc. The State Government of Tamil Nadu vide letter dt. 13.8.2002 informed that the State
 Government is interested in taking up the project in general. The State Government of Andhra Pradesh vide letter dt.
 04.03.2003 conveyed their acceptance to the participation in the project.  The proposal was discussed with the officials
 of the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in a meeting held on 09.07.2003 and further a meeting
 was held with the Chief Secretary of Tamil Nadu on 30.06.2006 on various issues pertaining to the declaration
 proposal. Various issues related to the development of proposed National Waterway such as delineation survey for
 assessing the quantum of land acquisition for widening of canal, right of way (ROW) already available, setting up of
 special revenue unit, providing navigational structure at Polavaran and Pulichintala Dams under construction,
 assistance for Detailed Project Report and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Liaison office at Vijayawada etc.
 were discussed by the Inland Waterways Authority of India with the State Government of Andhra Pradesh on
 23.09.2006 at Hyderabad. Before, introducing the Bill in the Parliament, a letter dated 25.8.2006 was also written by
 the Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways to the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and
 Puducherry about the intention of the Government to introduce the Bill in the Parliament to declare the proposed
 Waterway as a National Waterway.
 
17.       As regards, the stake of the State Governments on the proposed National Waterway and the details of the
 pending riparian disputes amongst these States, the Department of Shipping submitted that the existing usage of water
 in the canal and rivers, in particular the irrigation interest, will continue to be facilitated by the concerned State
 Governments. The Department is not aware of any riparian dispute between the State Governments in the region. The
 fairway development (for navigation) will be done without hampering the existing water usages including irrigation
 interests of  the concerned States.
 
18.       On a specific query as to why State Governments are not taking interest in the development and maintenance of
 IWT sector, the Department of Shipping intimated that IWT sector remain neglected in the entire country for a very
 long time due to which Central Government as well as State Governments did not give priority for its development.
 After formation of IWAI in October, 1986, the Central Government/ State Governments started giving attention for
 development of National Waterways. However, due to fund constraints due attention was not paid for development of
 waterways other than National Waterways. After revision of assistance pattern under Central Sponsored Scheme for
 IWT development in October, 2002 where 100% grant to NE States and 90% grant to other States was made applicable,
 many States have already shown great interest in development of IWT mode. From 2003-04 the Central Government
 has sanctioned onwards 33 projects of 14 States and Rs.48 crore have also been released to these States for progress of

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 sanctioned projects.
 
19.       As regards, the steps taken to motivate the State Government for development and maintenance of IWT sector in
 the country, the Department of Shipping in their written replies, submitted that considering the interests shown by the
 States in developing IWT sector through revised Central Sponsored Scheme, it is necessary that this scheme is
 continued on a long term basis to generate further confidence among the States. It is also necessary that IWT
 organization in all the Riverine and Coastal States are strengthened in a time bound manner. These aspects have already
 been impressed upon the States through forums such as Maritime States Development Council (MSDC), IWT
 Development Council and interaction done by IWAI with these States. In addition concerned States are continuously
 consulted/involved in development of existing National Waterways as well as in the preparation of development plans
 for other waterways.
 
20.       The Committee has been informed that considering the interests shown by the States in developing IWT sector
 through revised Central Sponsored Scheme, it is necessary that this scheme is continued on a long term basis to
 generate further confidence among the States. All Riverine and Coastal States are consulted through fora such as
 Maritime States Development Council (MSDC), IWT Development Council and interaction done by IWAI etc. In
 addition, concerned States are continuously consulted/ involved in development of existing National Waterways as well
 as in the preparation of development plans for other waterways.
 
21.       The Committee notes that the Inland Water Transport (IWT) is one of the oldest, fuel efficient, cost-effective
 and environment friendly mode of transport. Unfortunately, the potential of IWT remains largely unexplored due to the
 indifferent attitude of the Central and State Governments. Although, the Department of Shipping is committed to
 increase the share of IWT in the country’s total EXIM trade, still the waterways are not being utilized and remain
 largely neglected and underdeveloped for want of required infrastructure namely fairways, terminals and navigable
 aids, as a result, it has not reached at a threshold level to become commercially viable. The Committee is of the view
 that with adequate investments, policy framework and focused approach, the IWT in the country, can be developed into
 a viable mode complementary to the rail and road modes. The Committee is also of the opinion that if the Government
 is serious enough to develop the IWT sector then it must sincerely put efforts to implement the policy framework and
 minimize the procedural bottlenecks. Besides, provision of adequate investments both from the public and private
 partnership should be generated to develop it to a level where private sector feels confident enough to invest in this
 sector particularly, in ownership and operation of cargo and passenger vessels. The Committee, therefore, recommends
 the Government to provide institutional framework for development of IWT sector in the country so as to increase the
 capacity of IWT agencies, commercialization of IWT industries, increased cost recovery through user charges and
 creation of a vibrant IWT sector in the country.
 
22.       The Committee notes with concern that Research and Development Studies facilities especially in design of
 vessels and night navigation facilities and identification of economically viable routes for development of Inland Water
 Transport sector has not been given due consideration.  The Committee is of the view that Research and Development
 activities is the backbone for success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research &
 Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water Transport Sector in the country. The Committee
 also urges that Research and Development studies should be conducted for making assessment of the impact of the
 increased inland water transport activities on the aqua-marine life since livelihood of many people depends on it.
23.       The Committee notes that the proposed National Waterway would also provide better environment corridor, port
 hinterland connectivity, generate employment and increase tourism activities in the region.  The Committee observes
 that since waterways do not provide door-to-door service independently, it is expedient that these are connected with
 rail or road modes for total transport linkages to the user.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to
 improve the total modal mix of transport in the country and prepare the road map for integrated transport policy to
 include IWT, Costal Shipping, Road Transport and Highways and Railways.
 
24.       The Committee notes that a consultant has been appointed for preparation of techno-feasibility study and
 detailed project report (DPR) for the Waterway.  The Committee also notes that the further details are being collected in
 consultation with the State Governments.  The Committee finds that the developmental plans of these waterways are
 being worked out on the basis of the DPR.  The Committee, however, notes that no land acquisition is involved for the
 proposed waterways.  The Committee hopes that as stated by the Government, the interest of the concerned States

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 would not be compromised due to development of proposed national waterway.
 
25.       The Committee notes that IWT vessels once start plying in large number would require repair facilities on this
 waterway on the demand propelled by the market forces.  The Committee recommends the Department to prepare an
 action plan for meeting the growing demands of repair and service facilities of IWT vessels on all the national
 waterways.
 
26.       Finally, the Committee notes that there were some reservations on the part of the State Governments of Andhra
 Pradesh and Tamil Nadu concerning the interests of the respective States about which IWAI informed the Committee
 that the issues have been discussed with these States and differences have been resolved. However, the Committee
 recommends that before sending the notice for consideration and passing of the Bill in its present form to Lok Sabha
 the concurrence of the concerned States and Union Territory be obtained after resolving their reservations, if any, and
 then only the Bill be proceeded further for being passed by both the Houses of Parliament.
27.       Subject to the recommendations in the foregoing paras the Committee adopted clauses 2,3 and the schedule
 without suggesting any amendments therein.
28.       In clause 1(1) for “Pondicherry” the word “Puducherry” and for the figure “2006” the figure “2007” be
 substituted which will automatically substitute the word “Pondicherry” and the figure in the short title of the Bill from
 “Pondicherry” to “Puducherry” and “2006” to “2007”.
29.       In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty Seventh’ be substituted by ‘Fifty Eighth’.
30.       The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in its present form with formal amendments, subject to what
 is stated in para 26. However, the Committee hopes that while implementing the provisions of the Bill, the
 recommendations made by the Committee in the foregoing paragraphs will be given due consideration so that the
 purpose of declaration of the proposed National Waterway should not be defeated. The Committee also recommends
 that due consultations and concurrence of the State Governments be also taken in preparing developmental plans and on
 other related issues for the proposed National Waterway.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
            The Committee notes that the Inland Water Transport (IWT) is one of the oldest, fuel efficient, cost-effective
 and environment friendly mode of transport. Unfortunately, the potential of IWT remains largely unexplored due to the
 indifferent attitude of the Central and State Governments. Although, the Department of Shipping is committed to
 increase the share of IWT in the country’s total EXIM trade, still the waterways are not being utilized and remain
 largely neglected and underdeveloped for want of required infrastructure namely fairways, terminals and navigable
 aids, as a result, it has not reached at a threshold level to become commercially viable. The Committee is of the view
 that with adequate investments, policy framework and focused approach, the IWT in the country, can be developed into
 a viable mode complementary to the rail and road modes. The Committee is also of the opinion that if the Government
 is serious enough to develop the IWT sector then it must sincerely put efforts to implement the policy framework and
 minimize the procedural bottlenecks. Besides, provision of adequate investments both from the public and private
 partnership should be generated to develop it to a level where private sector feels confident enough to invest in this
 sector particularly, in ownership and operation of cargo and passenger vessels. The Committee, therefore, recommends
 the Government to provide institutional framework for development of IWT sector in the country so as to increase the
 capacity of IWT agencies, commercialization of IWT industries, increased cost recovery through user charges and
 creation of a vibrant IWT sector in the country.  (Para 21)
 
            The Committee notes with concern that Research and Development Studies facilities especially in design of
 vessels and night navigation facilities and identification of economically viable routes for development of Inland Water
 Transport sector has not been given due consideration.  The Committee is of the view that Research and Development
 activities is the backbone for success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research &
 Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water Transport Sector in the country. The Committee
 also urges that Research and Development studies should be conducted for making assessment of the impact of the
 increased inland water transport activities on the aqua-marine life since livelihood of many people depends on it.(Para

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 22)
 
            The Committee notes that the proposed National Waterway would also provide better environment corridor, port
 hinterland connectivity, generate employment and increase tourism activities in the region.  The Committee observes
 that since waterways do not provide door-to-door service independently, it is expedient that these are connected with
 rail or road modes for total transport linkages to the user.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to
 improve the total modal mix of transport in the country and prepare the road map for integrated transport policy to
 include IWT, Costal Shipping, Road Transport and Highways and Railways.(Para 23)
 
            The Committee notes that a consultant has been appointed for preparation of techno-feasibility study and
 detailed project report (DPR) for the Waterway.  The Committee also notes that the further details are being collected in
 consultation with the State Governments.  The Committee finds that the developmental plans of these waterways are
 being worked out on the basis of the DPR.  The Committee, however, notes that no land acquisition is involved for the
 proposed waterways.  The Committee hopes that as stated by the Government, the interest of the concerned States
 would not be compromised due to development of proposed national waterway.(Para 24)
 
            The Committee notes that IWT vessels once start plying in large number would require repair facilities on this
 waterway on the demand propelled by the market forces.  The Committee recommends the Department to prepare an
 action plan for meeting the growing demands of repair and service facilities of IWT vessels on all the national
 waterways.(Para 25)
 
 
            Finally, the Committee notes that there were some reservations on the part of the State Governments of Andhra
 Pradesh and Tamil Nadu concerning the interests of the respective States about which IWAI informed the Committee
 that the issues have been discussed with these States and differences have been resolved. However, the Committee
 recommends that before sending the notice for consideration and passing of the Bill in its present form to Lok Sabha
 the concurrence of the concerned States and Union Territory be obtained after resolving their reservations, if any, and
 then only the Bill be proceeded further for being passed by both the Houses of Parliament.(Para 26)
            Subject to the recommendations in the foregoing paras the Committee adopted clauses 2,3 and the schedule
 without suggesting any amendments therein. (Para 27)
            In clause 1(1) for “Pondicherry” the word “Puducherry” and for the figure “2006” the figure “2007” be
 substituted which will automatically substitute the word “Pondicherry” and the figure in the short title of the Bill from
 “Pondicherry” to “Puducherry” and “2006” to “2007”.(Para 28)
            In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty Seventh’ be substituted by ‘Fifty Eighth’. (Para 29)
 
            The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in its present form with formal amendments, subject to what
 is stated in para 26. However, the Committee hopes that while implementing the provisions of the Bill, the
 recommendations made by the Committee in the foregoing paragraphs will be given due consideration so that the
 purpose of declaration of the proposed National Waterway should not be defeated. The Committee also recommends
 that due consultations and concurrence of the State Governments be also taken in preparing developmental plans and on
 other related issues for the proposed National Waterway.  (Para 30)
ANNEXURE
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
on 8th DECEMBER, 2006
 
 
Bill No. 93 of 2006
 

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KAKINADA-PONDICHERRY STRETCH
OF CANALS AND THE KALUVELLY TANK, BHADRACHALAM-RAJAHMUNDRY STRETCH OF RIVER
 GODAVARI AND
WAZIRABAD-VIJAYAWADA STRETCH OF
RIVER KRISHNA) BILL, 2006
 
A
 
BILL
 
to provide  for  the declaration of the Kakinada-Pondicherry  stretch  of  canals  comprising
of Kakinada  canal, Eluru canal, Commamur  canal, Buckingham canal and the Kaluvelly
 tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada
 stretch of river Krishna in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and the Union Territory of Pondicherry to be a
 national waterway and also to provide for the
 regulation and development of the said stretch of the rivers and the canals
 for purpose of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for
 matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
           
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
 
 1.      (1) This Act may be called the National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wizirabad-Vijayawada
 Stretch of River Krishna) Act, 2006.
 
 
 
Short title and
 commencement.
             (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 
 
Declaration of
 certain
 stretches of
 rivers and
 canals as
 National
 Waterway.
          2. The Kalkinada-Pondicherry stretch of canals comprising of
 Kalinada canal, Eluru canal, Commamur canal, Buckingham canal and the
 Kaluvelly tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and
 Wizirabad-Vijayawada stretch of river Krishna, the limits of which are
 specified in the Schedule, is hereby declared to be a National Waterway.
 
 
 
 
Declaration as
 to expediency
 of control by
 the Union of
 certain
 stretches of
 rivers and
 canals as
 National
 Waterway.
          3. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the
 Union should take under its control the regulation and development of
 Kakinada-Pondicherry stretch of canal comprising of kakinada canal, Eluru
 canal, Commamur canal, Buckingham canal and Kaluvelly tank,
 Bhadrachalam- Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and Wazirabad-
Vijayawada stretch of river Krishna for purposes of shipping and navigation
 on the national waterway to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways
 Authority of India Act, 1985. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 of 1985.
 
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
 
LIMITS OF THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KAKINADA-PONDICHERRY STRETCH OF CANALS AND

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 KALUVELLY TANK, BHADRACHALAM-RAJAHMUNDRY STRETCH OF RIVER GODAVARI AND
 WAZIRABAD-VIJAYAWADA STRETCH OF RIVER KRISHNA)
 
            Kakinada-Pondicherry canal
           
(Canal system consisting of Kakinada canal, Eluru canal, Commamur canal and North Buckingham canal,
 portion of the Coovum river linking North and South Buckingham canals, South Buckingham canal and Kaluvelly
 tank)
 
Northern limit A line drawn across the Kakinada canal parallel to the Jagannadhapuram road bridge, kakinada
 at a distance of 500 metres down stream at Lat 16
o  56'24"N, Lon 82o 14'20"E.
Southern limit Junction of East Coast Highway and Chinnakalawari-Kanakachettikulam road and
 Kanakachettikulam which is the end point of the artificial canal link to kaluvelly tank at Lat
 12
o  02'36"N, Lon 79o 52'12"E.
River Godavari  
Western limit Road bridge at Bhadrachalam across river Godavari at Lat 17o  40'39"N, Lon 80o 52'52"E.
Eastern limit Sir Arthur Cotton barrage across river Godavari at Dowlaiswaram, Rajahmundry at Lat 16o
  56'05"N, Lon 81o 45'32"E.
River Krishna  
Western limit Road bridge at Wazirabad across river Krishna at Lat 16o  40'50"N, Lon 79o 39'29"E.
Eastern limit Prakasam barrage across river Krishna at Vijayawada at 16o  30'18"N, Lon 80o 36'23"E.
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
            In the absence of suitable organisation and paucity of resources with the State Governments, the development of
 Inland Water Transport has not made much headway.  There are certain advantages in this mode of transport, such as,
 low cost transport, energy efficiency, generation of employment among weaker sections of the community and its eco-
friendly nature.  Various committees set up by the Government for the purpose of looking into this matter recommended
 that the Central Government should declare certain waterways as national waterway stand assume responsible for their
 development.
 
            2.  The Central Government have accordingly constituted the Inland Waterways Authority of India under the
 Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985), for the regulation and development of inland waterways
 for purposes of shipping and navigation.  Allahabad-Haldia stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River, Sadiya-
Dhubri stretch of the Brahmaputra river and Kollam-Kottappuram stretch of West Coast Canal along with Champakkara
 and Udyogamandal Canals have already been declared as national waterways by the National Waterway (Allahabad-
Haldia Stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 1982, (49 of 1982), the National Waterway (Sadiya-Dhubri
 Stretch of the Brahmaputra River) Act, 1988 (40 of 1988) and the National Waterway (Kollam-Kottappuram Stretch of
 West Coast Canal and Champakkara and Udyogamandal Canals) Act, 1992 (25 of 1992), respectively.  Consequently,
 Inland Waterways Authority of India has taken up the development, maintenance and management of these waterways.
 
            3.  It is now proposed to declare Kakinda-Pondicherry stretch of canals comprising of Kakinada Canal, Eluru
 Canal, Commamur Canal, Buckingham Canal and Kaluvelly Tank along with Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of
 Godavari river and Wazirabad-Vijayawada stretch of the Krishna river as a National Waterway, Infrastructural facilities
 currently available on this waterway are not adequate for safe, convenient and sustained shipping and navigation by

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 large mechanised crafts.  Therefore, the waterway is required to be developed by providing adequate infrastructure for
 safe, convenient and sustained shipping operations.  The regulation and development of the proposed national
 waterway under the control of the Union for the purposes of shipping and navigation is in the public interest and
 declaration to that effect has also been made in this Bill.
 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 
NEW DELHI;    
The 24
th November, 2006
                                                  
          T. R. BAALU.
 
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
 
            [Copy of letter No. NW-12013/1/2004-IWT (Vol.II), dated the 24 th  November, 2006 from Shri T.R. Baalu,
 Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
           
            The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed National Waterway (Kakinada
 Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and
 Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of River Krishna) Bill, 2006 recommends under article 117(3) of the Constitution of
 India, the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 
            The regulation and development of the proposed national waterway will be carried out by the Inland Waterways
 Authority of India constituted under the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985).  Consequently,
 three distinct functions namely, development, maintenance and management of the proposed waterway will devolve on
 the Inland Waterways Authority of India.  It has been visualized that inland water transport traffic to the tune of 6.42
 million tones is likely to be carried on the proposed national waterway after its full development by the year 2011-12. 
 This traffic is expected to be handled at 14 terminals, namely Bhadrachalam, Pochavaram, Rajahmundry, Wazirabad,
 Muktiyala, Vijayawada, Eluru, Tadepalligudem, Kakinada, Kottapatnam, Maipadu, Durgarajupatnam, Chennai and
 Pondicherry.  The  development of the rivers and canals along with provision of infrastructural facilities for purposes of
 shipping and navigation to handle the above mentioned traffic includes development of the waterway of navigation,
 channel marking, construction of terminals, transit sheds, installation of handling equipment, etc.  It is estimated that
 the expenditure with respect to the said development will be of the order of Rs.542.00 crores which will be of a non-
recurring nature.
 
            2.  In addition, it is estimated that an expenditure of recurring of the order of Rs.11.10 crores annually will be
 incurred for operating the waterway and terminals.
 
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
 
to  provide  for the  declaration of  the Kakinada-Pondicherry stretch of canals comprising of
Kakinada canal, Eluru canal, Commamur canal, Buckingham canal and the Kaluvelly tank,
Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada
stretch of river Krishna in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and the
Union Territory of Pondicherry to be a national waterway and also
to provide for the regulation and developmentof the said stretch
of the rivers  and the canals for purpose of shipping and
navigation on the said waterway and for matters
connected therewith on incidental thereto.

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 
(Shri T. R. Baalu, Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways)
 
MINUTES
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 18 th July 2007 in Committee Room A, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri S.S. Chandran
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
8. Shri Joachim Baxla
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Shri N.S.V.Chitthan
11. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
12. Dr. K.Dhanaraju
13. Shri P. Karunakaran
14. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
15. Dr. P.P.Koya
16. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
17. Shri Samik Lahiri
18. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
19. Shri Hemlal Murmu
20. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
21. Shri Dushyant Singh
22. Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary    
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Director
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director         
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRASNPORT AND HIGHWAYS:
 
Shri Vijay Singh, Secretary
Shri S.K. Dash, Joint Secretary
Shri S.B. Basu, Chief Engineer
Shri Arvind Kumar, Adviser (TR)
Shri Anand Prakash, Director
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE

122nd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/122ndreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:27:13]
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Shrimati Sharda Jain, Additional Legislative Counsel
 
2.         At the outset, the Committee decided to take up for consideration and adoption of the two draft Reports on the (i)
 National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006; and (ii) National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and
 Wazirabad-Vijayavada Stretch of River Krishna) Bill, 2006.  After consideration and some discussion the Committee
 adopted both the Reports without any change.    The Committee also authorized its Chairman to fix the date and
 nominate the names of Members of the Committee for presentation of these two Reports to the Parliament during the
 ensuing Monsoon session.
3.         *                      *                      *.
4.         *                      *                      *.
 
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.
 
 * Relates to other matters.
 
 