I 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE INLAND WATERWAYS 
(PRESENTED ON THE 25-8-95) 
RAJYA SABRA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 1995/Sravana , 1917 (Saka ) 

CONT E NTS 
PAOES 
I . COMPOsmoN OF THE COMMtTTEE .• .. •••••. . .• ••. ..... . ...... .. . .... . ..... ... ........ ...... ..... ... .. ...... (i)·(ii) 
2. INTROOt:CilON "". "." ... ' " " .. ...... .. .. " . ". " ... . " " " . """. " " . ..... ". " . .... .... " " .. " .. .... ". " (iii) 
3. REPORT Ot' TH'£ COMMl1TEE .. .. .. . .. . " .. .. . . .. .. . ......... .. ...... .. ..... .. .. . .. "" .. . " ... .... . .. . .. .. . ... I- ll 
4 . A PPENDICES 
(1) STUDY REPORT OF THE SUB· CoMMn'TEE· I ............. .... ..... ........... .......... . .. ........ .... 15-24 
(u) STUDY REPORT OF THE Svs·CoM Mtnu-11 ........ ........ . .... .... ............... .. ...... .. ....... 25-37 
(m) LIST OP WITNESSES APPEARED BEFORE 11-IE CoMMITTEE............. ............ ... .... ......... 38 
(sv) GANCA· B HAOIRA11 U·HoocHLY R rv ER SYSTeM 
(NAnor<AL WATER WA Y No.!)...... ......... ..... ........ .... ... .... ...... ........ ..... .. .. .... .... .. 39 
(v) B :<AHMAPVTRA RsvER (NAnor<AL WATERWAY No. II) ..... .... ......... .. ... .. .... ...... ..... 40 
(vt) WesT CoAST CAr<AL (NAnosAL W ATERWA v No. JU) ...................... .... .. .. .... .... .... 41 
5. MINUTES ................. " . ... " .. .. .. " ....... " . " . .. ... """ "" . ... "" ..... " .. .. " ... ... "." .. ... ... ". " . 43--53 
' 

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT & TOURISM 
( 1995-96) 
l. Shri Pramod Muhajun-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. Austin 
3. Shri Ghufran Azam 
4. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
5. Shri John F. Fernandes 
6. Shri Bhadreswar Buragohain 
7. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
9. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
10. Shri Raghavji 
11. Shri Ratna Bahadur Rai 
12. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
13. Shri Iqbal Singh 
14. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
15. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Vilusrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
17. Shri K. Muruleedharan 
18. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
19. Shri A. Charles 
20. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
21. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
22. Shri K.M. Mathew 
23. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
24. Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
25. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
26. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
27. Shri Imchalemba 
28. Shri Manphool Singh 
29. Shri K.D . Sultanpuri 
30. Shri Jangbir Singh 
31. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
32. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
33. Shri Chattrupal Singh 
34. Shri Kalka Das 
35. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
36. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
37. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
38. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
39. Shri Lokanath Oloudhury 
40. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
41. Sbri Ram Sunder Das 
'42. Vacant 
• Vi« Shri Anodl Cboran o., reoianed w.d. 1.6.9S. 
(i) 

(ii) 
43. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
44. Shri Krishna Marandi 
45. Shri Uday Pratap ·Singh 
'SECRETARIAT 
l. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
3. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain, Under Secretary 
5. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
• 

1 
INTRODUCriON 
I, the Chairman, Standing Commit!ee on Transport and Tourism having b::c:n 
authorised by the Committee 10 present on their beha lf this 18th Repo; t on the 
lnland Waterways. 
2. The Commiuee held four r.1eetings to consider the; subject. Ir heard the 
Secretary, Mintstry of Surf;Jce Transpc;n and the Chairm:;n, JWAI on the mauer a< 
its meeting held on 5th July, 1995. ll also heard the representatives of State Govts . 
of U.P. Andhra Prades h, Vlest Benga l and Kerala at its meeti ng held 011 20th 
July. 191)5. 
3. In the meeting held on 5.7.9) the Commillee decided to constitute its two 
Sub-Committees to study the inland waterways of the country . It was also decided 
that Sub-Committees namely, the Sub-Comminec·l would visll Kerala and Goa and 
the Sub-Committcc-II would visit Assam, West Bengal and Bihar to make an on the 
spot study of Inland Waterways in these States . Both tbc Sub-Committees visited 
Trivandrum and Panaji, Guwallati , Calcutta and Patna. from 24th to 28th July, l995 
and held discussions with the representative of the State Govts. The Study Report of 
the Sub-Committee-[ was considered and adopted on 9.8.95 and the Study Report of 
Sub-Committee-11 was considered and adopted on 19.8.95. Study Reports of the 
Sub-Commi ttees arc placed at Append ix- ! and U. The observations/recommcnda· 
tions of the Sub-Committees have suitably been incorporated in the Report. 
4. The Committee plac.es on record its appreciation for the work done by both 
the Sub-Committees . It also expresses its gratitude to the members of the Sub­
Committees for their valuable contribution in the study reports. 
5. The Committee also expr~sses thanks IO •. the Secretary, Ministry of Surface 
Transport and the Chairman, Inland Waterway Authority of lndia.The Committee is 
also thankful to the Dept!. of Touri:;m, Govt. of India and the representatives of 
Transport Deptt. and Touri~m Department of concerned State Governments for 
their evidence before the Commtttee . 
6. The Comm itt.cc in its meeting held on the 22nd August, 1995 considered and 
adopted !.he report. 
NEW DEi..HJ; 
August 22, 1995 
Sravana 3l, 1917 (Saka) 
(ili) 
PRAMOD MAHAJAN 
Chairman, 
Commit1ee on Transport and Tourism . 

I ~ 
REPORT 
Inland Waterways has b<:cn the oldest mode of transport . lis role .!Jowever. bas 
remained limited till recentlv when the need for an c~o-friendly and pollution-free 
mode of transport was sorely felt. Whereas there are obvious advantage 's that inland 
water transport enjoys over rail road and air transport, it luis its limitations which 
have prevented it from emerging as an alternative to the latter. Inland Waterways 
can certainly supplement . and ease the tremendous pressure on· other modes of 
modern tnffic, if the constraints faced by Inland Water Transport are removed. 
There are immense possibilities of developing Inland Water Transport in the 
country . These have not been fully exploited. 
2. The probl ems of IWT sector were studied in past by several Committees of 
technical experts/groups viz., Gokhale Committee on lnl and Water. Transport 
(1959), the Committee on Transport Policy and Coordination (1966), the Bhagwati 
Committee on Inland Water Transport (1970) and Committee on National Water· 
ways (1974). These Committees considered the difficulties and problems of riv.er 
transport in the country and were of the opinion that IWT should [orrn part of 
National Transport, and recommended various technical, organizational and financial 
measures to develop it. Thereafter, the National Transport Policy Committee 
(NTPC) was set up in 1978 by the Government to study various modes of transport 
and suggest policies for their development. This Committee also analysed the Inland 
Water Tra nspo rt and submitted its report in 1980. 
3. The Committee (NTPC) had examined the navigable waterways by 
mechanised vessels in many States . It was of the opinion that declaration of certain 
important rivers as national waterways would help in their unified development for 
navigational purposes. The N.T .P.C. laid down the following principles for 
declaration of a panicular waterway is a national waterway: 
(a) It should possess capability of 'navigation by mechanically propelled vessels 
of a reasonable size. · 
(b) It should have about 45 metre wide channer and minimum 15 metre depth. 
(c) It should be a continuous stretch of 50 kms. The only exception to be made 
to waterway length is for urban cong lomerat ions and intra-port traffic. 
(d) (i) it should pass through ami serve the interest of more than one State, or 
(ii) it should connect a vast and pro sperous hinterland and . major ports. or 
(iii) it should pass through a strategic region where development of 
navigation is considered necessary to provide logistic support for 
national sec urity, or 
(iv) it shou ld connect places not served by any other mode of transport. 
4. On · the basis of aforesaid criteria , NTPC recommended the' following 
waterways to be' declared as national waterwa ys: 
(i) ll1e Gangu·f3h~ghir,!!\Jli·J looghly. 
(ii) The Brahmputra 
(iii) The Sunderbaos 

(iv) The Narmada 
(v) The Mahauarit 
(vi) The Taptt 
(vii) The Godavari 
(viii) 'tbc Krishna 
2 
(ix) ·rn~ Mandovi 1\nd Zuvari nvers and tht Cumburjua canal in Go11 
(x) The We.~t Coast Canal System ir. l<:erala 
5. The Committee {NTPC) lnnher recommended <hat !~lure t.ra[[i:: pc:enti~l fOg 
waterways must be assessed . The amount of trafftc presently carried need not be given 
undue weighwge at that stage. The NTl'C was of the \'iew liJat the growth of t:affr:c would 
<'.epend un the development o! infr~structure and indiJstrial locati on ~) policir.s pllll'ucd by the 
State and Central Govts . 
6. In acconhmcc w1th the recommendations of NTPC, Govt. o! India set up Inland 
Waterways Autbcrity of India in 1986 by and Act of Parliament with 1he Primary objective 
of regulatio;: and dcvelop<nent of Inland Waterways for th. iollowing purposes: 
(i) Declar.uion of certain major inland waterways as National Waterways (i.e. cury out 
surveys and investigations for the development, maintenance and better utilisation 
of National Waterways); 
(ii) Development of tho~c waterways which are declared as Nalionaf Waterways (this 
includes setting up of infrastructural facilities. execulion of conservancy measure• 
and training works, control of othe r aclivities in the waterways, remove or alter any 
obstruction or structure on across or under the Natoonaf Waterways); 
(iii) Other connec ted I subsidiary functions like providing for the regulation of 
navig3tion and traffic, maintenance of pilotage, co-ordination of Inland Wa1cr 
Transport on National Waterways wiih other modes of lran sport etc.; 
(iv) Conduct research in maners relaLing to IWT (R&D) works related to cra ft design, 
mechani•ation of country craft. technique of towage, infra,tructural facilities etc.); 
(v) Lay dcwn standards for classification of Inland Waterways; 
(vi) Arrange programme for technical training of lWT personnel within and ou1side the 
country; 
(vii) As,~i st the State Governments in formula tion and implementation of schemes for 
lWI' development; and 
(viii) Advise Central Government on matters relating to IWf. 
7. In oursuance of the recommendations of NTPC. tne Govt. of lndta have declared the 
foUowing waterways as national waterways: • 
(i) The Ga nga-Bhagiralhi·l looghly rivers system (1620 Kms.) from I:Ialdia to 
Allah.,bad in 1986; 
(ii) The Brahmaputra from Banglades h Border to Sadiya (891 Kms.) in 1988; ~nd 
(iii) The West Coast Canai-Koflam to Kot~~puram (lflS Kms.) and Champal:ara CJilaJ 
(14 Kms.) and Udyogmandal Can~! (23 Kms.) declarerf in 1993. 
8. As reg<trcis the other ~>~<llerwa>; viz .. the Sunderb6ns, Godavari, Krishna, tvlahanarlt 
and Narmada, the Coma~itttc has been informed by lhc Ministry of Surface Transport that 

I 
3 
initially the policy of the; Govern ment of lnd.ia wus to declare only the West Coast Canal as 
National Waterways during the 8th Five Year Plan. This target has since been achieved. The 
Commiuee has been further informed that action has also been initiated for declaration of 
Godavari. Sunderbans and Goa Waterways as National Waterways during the 8th Five Year 
Plan period. 
9. The Committee takes note of the slow pace of development of lnland Water 
Transport sector despite expectation generated by the establishment of IW AI. During his 
deposition berore the Committee, Secretary, Surface TrHnsport has explained that during the 
initial years from 1986 to 1989 IWAI lacked leadership, as its Chairma n remained in office 
for short period. Secondly, IW AI c{)ntinued to suffer from the inadequacy of officers and 
staff at project offices in various national waterways projects. Govt. are now making internal 
arragements and adjustments such as drawing officers from the old I1Jiand Water Transport 
Directorate which dealt mainly with ferry services. Fresh Recruitment to the IW AI requires 
new sanctions from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee bas been informed that the 
Staff ·lnspection Unit (SIU) of the Ministry of Finance, which assesses the justification for 
recruitment of staff completed its study for the IW Al headquarters office in 1993 but has not 
yet" submitted its report to the Government. Similarly, the S1U report for National 
Waterway· I bas also not been submitted. A.s regards "National Waterway H and ill , the S1Us 
are yet to muke the study. 
10. The Committee deplores these inordinate delay being taused in creation of necessary 
positio1~s in IWAl and impfesses upon the Ministry of Finance to direct tl1e SIUs to expedite 
their reports with regard to National Waterways No. I, U and Ill within a period of three 
months. At tbe same time the CommiUee also directs the 1\'linistry or Surface Transport to 
provide inputs, where needed by the SIUs. 
11. The Committee further directs the Ministry of Surface Transport to consider ways 
and means to appoint the officers and staff for tWA! within a time frame of six months, as 
per rul~ & regulations already framed. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministries of 
Fimince, 
1 
and Surface Transport would expedite actions at their en<IS to see that the IW AI is 
adequately stalled by June, 1996. • 
12. In its lOth Report presented to P~irliamcnt on April , 1994 the Committee observed 
that there bad been a wide gap between the allocation of funds for IWT Sector made in the 
8th Five Year Plan period, and expenditure incurred thereon. The 8th Five Year Plan outlay 
for IWT sector provided for R~. 240 crores. Out of ihis, only Rs. 132.20 crorcs were 
released to JWA!. ln his evidence before tbe Committee, Secretary, Surface Transport 
informed the Committee that during the first three yean;, the funds released to the IW AI 
were of the order of Rs.l4.30 crores with expenditure incurred of around Rs. 12.98 crores. 
This itself is indicativ~ or the low priority ac:corded to IW AI. 
Status of National Waterways 
National Waterway-/ 
13. The Comminee has been informed by the Ministry of "Surface Transport that the 
National Waterway No.1 (Appendix-IV) can be divided into three metches for development 
and operational convenience. The stretch from Haldia to Farakka (560 kms.) i.e. down 
stream pan of the declared waterway b being bette r uulised by IWT operators. In this sector 
LAD (least available depth) of 2.0 M is being maintain ed through ~nservancy measures like 
dredging and bandalling, and the entire navigable stretch is marked for navigation by 
daylight navigation marks. There are adequate terminal facilities available in this sector , one 
at Haldia, and two at Calcutta (TT Shed and Jugarnath Ghat) maintained by lW.AJ. with 

4 
berthing facilities with Farakka Barrage project at Pakur and Farakka respectiv ely . It is also 
planned to have ·a floating Pontoon Term inal at G.R . Jetty area . 
14. The Committee heard the representatives of Govt. of West Bengal . The Commiuee 
has been informed by the representatives that there is considerable potential for cargo 
movement in the Haldia -farakka sector . Apart from petroleum product s which are being 
carried on this Sector, there is considerable scope for movement of steel, coal, ston e chips 
etc. As regards the constraints , the Committee has been further told that there is no night 
navigation facility available on this sector. There is also a lack of adequate terminal facilities 
and the re is no regularity of traffic which is absolutely essential to develop the waterways. 
The Comm itt ee has further been informed that programmes I projects which IW AI was 
supposed to have undert aken between 1994 and 1997 are still going on. These programmes 
include improvement of the existing facilities, including night navigation, and construction o( 
terminals at Calcutta. 
15. The stretch Faraklca to Patna (460 Kms.) is also proposed to be maintained for 2.00 
m depth with necessary infrastructural facilities . In this stretch , floating terminals are 
available at 3 pla«S, viz., Bhagalpur, Monghyr and Patna. A scheme for construction of the 
RCC permanent term inal to handle heavy cargo at Patna is under active consideration of the 
Ministry. This stretsb has day light navigation facilities with necessary pilotage facility. It is 
planned to maintain a 2.0 m navi$able depth in the stretch by means of dredging and 
bandalling even though during the lean season · several shoals occur at different places. 
thereby reducing navigable depth. 
15.1 In its study report Sub-Committee-Il of this Committee has observed that no 
ierminal has been provided on the North banlc of NW-1. Terminals on North bank are 
essenti(ll keeping in v)ew the needs of the people and cargo potential of the region. The 
Committee impresses upon the IW AI to, at least , provide one noating terminal on the North 
bank or the river. 
16. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry of Surface Transport that the 
IW AI has been entrusted with all conservancy work including bandalling. dredging and 
channel marking. Presently the work is going on in the Farakka-Patna stretch. The note 
furnished by IWAI indicates that bandalling is execu ted on oontract basis wherea~ dredging 
is being dene by rw AI itself. This sector also suffers from heavy bank erosion which has 
been going on for years without protective measurd being undertaken by the State Govts. It 
is the duty of State lrrigation Department to t~ke adequate mc~sures to prote ct the river. 
17. The stretch from Patna to Ballia is proposed to be maintained for 2.0 m LAD 
during 1995-96, sif\CC adequate cargo is likely to move as promised by the M/s Malvika 
Steel Company Ltd. As informed by the Ministry of Surface Transport the stretch beyond 
Ballia would also be monitored for its behaviour during the 8th Five Year Plan. 
Development activities would be taken up depending upon lhe traffic need either in 8th or 
9th Plan period. 
18. The Committee has been told by the representatives of the Govt . of Uttar Pradesh 
that ever since its declaration as the national waterway No.I the stretch from Allahabad to 
Ballia has not been used as a means or transport. The river suffered from a great shortage of 
water, depth wise during the lean season . There is a need to· implement the river 
conservancy plans which have been prepared and approved by Govt. of Jndia. Secondly the 
movement of vessels would also be hampered by road/rail bridges which therefore require 
some alterations. 
19. The Committee has been further informed that the Govt. of Uttar Pradesh had 
submitt ed a proposal for the Ghagra river to be declared as a nat ional waterway as major 
industries were coming up at Jagdishpur and that technical studies covering activities such as 

5 
river conservancy, cargo identific<~tion, navigability etc. are likely to be completed very 
shortly: Government of India have however approved the Ghagra proposal not as a part of·, 
national waterway but only as a feeder. 
20. The Committee is constrained to note thai the conservancy work taken up by 
l.W.A.I at National Waterway No. 1 is far from salisfa<:tory. There is lack·of round the clock 
navigational facilities, which the committee feels is the duty of I.W.A.l. to provide. The 
information placed before . the Committee does not indicate the likely time by when this is 
proposed to be done. 
21. The Committee feels that the setting up of termin als at the waterway, would take a 
long time. The Committee furth er feels that services In the. National Waterway-1 are not 
reguJar and this has an adverse impact on cargo movement. :rhe Committee would like to 
impress upon the Ministry of Surface Transport and I.W .A.l. to frame ·a time bound result 
oriented programme to nchieve desired results. 
22. The Committee also iJnpresses upon the Governments of West Bengal, Bihar and 
Uttar Pradesh to provide necessary assistance in development or waterways and to create 
awareness for utilisation of water transport. 
National Waterway-ll 
23. The river Br~bJTiaputra from Dhubri to Saclia, a distance of 891 ~rns. (Appendix- V) 
was declared as National Waterway during Sept . 1988. The Committee has been in£om1ed by 
the Ministry of Surface Transport that on Lhis National Waterway,'essential activities like 
issue of river notices by undertaking hydrographic survey, marking of channel during lean 
season and improv~ng the depth up to 2.00 m by bandalling were started in the year 1989-90. 
These activities are at present carried out in Dhubri-Dibrugarh (168 kms.) stretch on year­
to-year basis at a cost. of about Rs. 1.25 to 1.50 crores per annum and would be extended 
further upstream uplll Sadia in phases. With a view to reduce lhe ·transit time, LW.A.L 
sanctioned a scheme for providing day navigational facilities (with a provision to upgrad.e the 
same to night navigation at a later stage) in Dhubri-Guwabati stretch (260 kms) at cost of 
Rs. 1.95 crores in March 1993. Tenders are under finalisation for executing this scheme, and 
it is scheduled to be implemented during a period of 3 years from the date of award of 
work. Apart from the existing berth i•\!l facility at Pandu, another terminal a! Tezpur is 
proposed to be provided, for which terminal design is in progress. CIWTC Ltd. are 
operating river services on the river Brahmaputra in the stretch from Calcutta to Pandu 
through Bangl~desh under 'lndo -13angladesh protocol on Transit and Trade '. Apart from 
CIWfC Ltd. the IWT, Directorate of Govt. of Assam are also operating river: service~. 
24_ On enquiring about t11e conservancy measures undertaken by rWAI between Dhubri 
to Guwahati, the Committee was informed that the LWAl has been maintaining 2 m LAD 
(Least Available Depth) in the stretch Dhubri to Guwahati round - the year, including 
through bandalling. During the lean season, CIWTC who are the main o~rators in the NW· 
ll regularly operate their vessels with 1.8 m draft in 1 he stretch . Therefore, the conservancy 
measures undertaken by IWAI between Ohubri to Ouwa haLi are sufficient to operate vessels 
of 1.8 m draft at any time. 
25. As regards the stretch between Guw<~hati·Dibrugarh, the Committee has been 
informed that it is being m;linlained witl1 1.5 depth throug .hout the year. It would be 
improved to 2.00 metres dcp1h depe nd ing~ upon the demand during 8th plan . Aoatings 
terminal a re proposed at Tezpur and Dibrugarh. 
26. The Committee notes that Brahmaputra lacks proper navigational facilities. The 
major constraints in tl1e development or National Waterway-ll ar~; the turJ,>ulent nature of 

6 
the river particularly in monsoon season and high quantum of sill in the navigable channel 
during the winter seasons. Most purls of the river banks are affected by erosion, thereby 
making it extremely difficult for selling up terminals. Consequently , termina .l points have to 
be shifted in accordance with the fluctuat ing level of water in Brahmaputra . This calls for 
unwarranted expenditure. The committee feels tha t permanent terminal stations can be 
constructed in banks affected by erosion, such as like Guwahati, Dhubrl, Pancharatna etc. 
tJational Warerwtly-lll 
27. This waterway includes the West Coast Canal (Kouapuram to Kallam (168 km .) 
Champakara Canal (14 km .) and Udyog mandalan Cana l (23 km .) (Appendix-VI). Nati onal 
Waterway 111 is very active in IWT where the m ove ment of cargo is of the order of 5 lakh 
tonnes per annum. The I.W.A.l. has chalke d out the following.policy for the development 
of this waterway· .. 
(i) To develop and to maintai n Udyog mandal Cana l (23 kms. ) to have a navigat ional 
canal or 32 m. width ~nd 2 m. depth with 24 hrs. navigational facilities and bank 
protection wherever required and terin inals at selec ted location s depending upon the 
traffic . 
(ii) Champakara Canal: to provtde a channel or 32 m. width and 2 m. depth 
immediate ly and to prov1de 24 hrs. navigational facilities and terminals at selected 
locations . 
(iii) Kochi -Kollam stretch: to develo p a waterway or 32 m. width .and 2 m. depth for 
the movement of general cargos and POL products. It is also proposed to provide 
terminal facilitieli on sciCClcd locations for handling cargos like POL products 
general cargo etc. and to provide 24 hour s navigational facilities in phases in 8th 
plan period. 
(iv) Kochi·KO tta puram Stretch is proposed to be developed only after development of 
Ko~hi-Ko ll am Stretch that too depending upon the availability o f cargo. 
28. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that as per the estimates prepared by 
I W .A. I, full development of Nau(lnnl Waterway - Ill involves dredging of 38 Jakh cubic m. 
During the last 211
1 years only 2 lakh cubic m. dredging has been done. Of this, 1.4 lakh 
cubic m. dredging was carried out by the Irriga tion Department of Government of Kerala 
with in a period of six months. 
29. The commi llee was also informed by the representatives of Governme nt of Kcraht 
that prior to declarat iM of National Waterway, the irrigat ion Departmen t of Governm ent 
of Kerala had the sole respon sibility or dredging the watccways. Thereafter, development 
and mainten ance being the respon,ihiluy of I. W A 1 the role of Irrigation Department came 
to an end . llte hitter however. undertook the job on a contract basis. On being asked as to 
why I. W.A .l. did not 111kc up the job, the com mittce was informed that various National 
W~terways projects could not be executed due to inadL't:juacy of staff including officers in the 
project offic,es ,of I. W.A .l. The Irrigation Dcpnrhncnt or Ker.;Ja Gover nmen t was, however 
e<•ger to take up the development of wate rways and gave an assurdnce ubout executing the 
work quickly . lltc representatives o( the Stale Government were of the view that it would 
be beuer. if 1he development of Nntional Waterways was done on the hnes or National 
Highways, where the State Government undertakes and executes all the works. 
30. The comminee has noted that the stretch from Kovalam to Kollum has not been 
included in the National Waterway Ill. The connniltee f~els that I his port ion of Wat~n• U)' 
would r·emain neglected if not included in N. W. ·lll. The commitlee would like to impress 

r-
7 
upon the I. W.A.I. tbat it explore possibilities for the development or tbls stretch and ior 
which a project report has already been submit1ed by Government to Kerala or I. W .A.I. The 
committee reels that NW-m should be developed within a time frame and 1. W .A.J. -should 
also consider the relaxation in the National Wat erways standards keeping in view U1e peculiar 
nature of Kerala Waterways and quantum or cargo handled by them. 
31. In addition to the Waterway s dcc13red as Na tional Waterway s the following three 
waterways are under act ive consideration for declar3tion as National Waterways during the 
8th plan period-
1. The Sunderbans (191 kms .) the international steamer route between Sagar and 
Raimangal at Bangladesh Border. 
2. The river Godavari (rom Cherla to Rajamundry (208 kms.) alongwith delta canals. 
3. Goa waterways viz, river Mandavi (41 kms.) and river Zuari (64 kms.) and 
Cumberjua canal system (17 kms.) 
32. As regards the Sunderbans , the comminec has been informed that this Waterway 
was extensively . used by cargo vessels plying between Calcutta & Assam/Bangladesh. A 
Techno-economic feasibility study was conduct ed in 1988 and as per the traffic projections, 
37.48 lakhs tonnes of cargo is to be moved through this route by the year 2000. Tite cargo 
basically comprises Coal , POL, Timber, Foodgrain s. Tea , e tc. However, most of the traffic 
originates/cu lminates at Calcutta , Pandu and Karimganj and hence, this route serves as a 
trans it route. An environmental study on the waterway which is a pre-requisite before 
declara tion is under progress. 
33. The Committee has been informed by the representatives or the Government of 
West Bengal that this waterway could be profitably used for transport of cargo from other 
partS to the North-Eastern States and carry jute , fertilizer and other miscellaneous products. 
Sundcrbans being a criss-cross channel, it need~ night navigation fatilities, piloting facility 
and con;truction of jetties . 
34. Since Sunderbans has not been a national waterway the expenditure for its 
development is met by the State Government and construct ion or jetties is to be undertaken 
under centrally sponsored schemes. The committee has been told that proposal for assistance 
from Governmen t of India has been submi tted. It is hoped that the scheme when it 
becomes opera tional would promote passenger traffic. 
35. The committee feels that U1e real dcvclnpm ent work would start only nrter declaration 
of Sunderba ns as Nationa l Waterway. It theref ore Impresses upon Ute Government of India 
to expedite the declarati oo of Sund erbans as National Waterway. 
36. The committee has been infnrmtd by the Ministry of Surface Trunsport that · 
Godavari river is expected to carry abou t one million tonnes of traffic-consisting mainly of 
coal in bulk and general cargo by tbe year 2005 A.D. A cabinet note in regard to the 
declaration of this Waterway as Notional Waterwa) has been circulated to concerned like 
Ministries such as Finance, Environment and Forests, Planning Commission etc., and their 
observations are being clarified by the Ministry of Surface Transport. 
37. The Comnuttee heard tlte representative or Government of Andhra 'J>raa~sh who 
informed the Committee that RITES had made a study on the Godatari· river -system. 
l.W.A.I. has also conducted two ~tud ies i.e. on hyd rographic, and anoth!:r techno-eco Qomic 
feasibility study, which found tbat the stretch from Cherla to Rajamundry was . quite 
navigable and rate of return was optimistic. The Singren i Collieries have vast amou nts o f 
coal reserves which could be transported rrom Cherla to Rajamundry th roug\i this river 

-
8 
system. Hence Ibis stretch is quite profitable. So far as the development of the Godavan 
river system (200 lcms.) is concerned , the total projected cost comes to Rs. 250 crore~. and 
the estimated volume of tTa(fic on this sector. as per the survey conducted in 1987 is around 
3 lalch mt. by 2000 A.D. i.e. 3 times the cargo at the base year. 
38. The Commillee impresse s upon the l.W.A.I. und Ministry or Surface Transport to 
declare Godava ri river system as Nalional Waterway, 
39. The Committee has al~n noted that the Gov.ernment of Andhra Prade;h had 
submiued a proposal to the Minbtry of Surf,,ce Tram. port lir-. in 1987, and updated and 
lCVised the same in 1987 10 develop the rivers between Kakinada and Madras port 
compr~sing 4 canals which have been propo:.ed for improvemem under Integrated C~1tal 
System. This proposal with a total project cost of R~. 404 crore is presently with the Mmbtry 
of Su1 face Transport. 
40. The Commillee impresses upon tht ~linb.try or Surface Tr3nsport to positively 
consider the proposal of the State Go,·ernment and sanction schemes under the Int egrated 
Canol System. AI the same lime tht Committee desires that both the I.W.A.l. und 
Government of Andhra Pradesh consider privntisation or the waterways keeping in view the 
fact that these are quite profitable. 
41. The Committee was inform ed tlwt Gou waterways including M<utdovi and Zuari 
rivers and Cumberjua Olnal lutd been developed for ore carxying barges and other vessels 
and were under operation at all tidol stretche~ excep1 for a ponion of the Zuuri river which 
was to be commenced very shortly. Presently 15 mtllion tonne~ of ore is moved every year in 
addition to !he other cargo. Declaration of th•• w;~tcrway as National Waterway h~s been 
under consideration of the Government. As per the constitutional position in respect of 
Waterways, concurrence of the Stdtc Government b needed for declaring thc~c a\ National 
Waterways. The representatives of the Ministry <>f Surface Transport while dcpo)rng before 
the Committee stated that, in princ1plc GovernnH:nt of Goa has agreed to the declaration of 
their waterways as National Waterways, ulthough formal approval was yet to be received. 
42. On being asked about the reason~ for illOI'dinate delay in accepting the propo;al of 
Governm~nt of lndia , the represcntmive of Government of Goa who appeared before the 
Sub-Committee of this Committee at Goa expl~ined that in the event of decl~ration as 
National Waterways , Government of Go;~ lllight lo~e the revenue p(cscntly being collected 
by it from on the vessels presently opcr~ting i 11 Goa wate rways. Goa State Government 
collects about Rs. 75 lakhs annually from vessel~ as barge tax , port dues, goods tax and 
other fees under the provisions of variO\t• Ach. Secondly, the State Government w~nteu to 
rcluin the present position of Captain of Por1s, who would become an agt>nl of I W A I. if 
Goa Waterways were declared as Nat1onal Waterways. The Committee was informed tllilt 
Olptain of Ports is !he reg~lating authority in tht.: State and is responsible for tonservancy of 
waterways .and for implementation of various provi , ions of Indian vessels Act, 1917 and 
lndi~ .Por{s' Act, l908 and rules fram ed thereunder. He is also the exeoUiing authority with 
regard to. co)lection of port dues, barge tax, goods tax and other taxes or dues. . ' 
4~ .''rhe.'Secre1ary, SFT and other representative o[ the Ministry of Surfac·e Tran;port who 
appeared before the Committee on 5th July, 1995 stated that this matter had been discussed 
with the Secretary, Transport, Government of Goa, and he had been assured that whatever 
revenues were being collected by the Captain of the Ports in Goa , would continue to be 
collectetl by the Slate Government and. the C1rpwin of the Ports of Goa would be un agent 
of the IWAl for all activities presently undertaken by him. 

9 
" ' 
44. During delibe;ations the Committee. had noted th~t Government of Goa had not 
carried out any study/survey to assess the likely losses of revenue to the state in the event of 
dr.ctilriNg Goa Wate tway as Nat ional Watcrw~y. In ,the ;J.bsence of such these studi.cs it is 
very' difficult for the Comrnitcec to give any opinion ei tllerway. The Committee bOwe.ve~, 
would like to impress upon the Ministry of Surface Transport. I .W.A. I. & Government: or 
Goa to facilitau aod upedi te declaration of Goa Waterways as National Watet~ays. 
' 45. The remaming four waterways viz the Krishna, the Mahanadi!Brahamani rlver 's>'Stem, 
the Narmada and the Tapti, _ which had been identified for declaration as National 
Waterways by the NTPC either, have inadequate water for safe navigation or inadequate 
cargo. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Surface Transpon that none of these 
waterways was under considera tion for the declaration as National Waterways eithe r in 8th 
Plan or 9th Plan period. ', 
' 46. The Committee h'a• noted that the St.ate Govts. are not aware of the programmes/ 
projects of I. W.A. I and progres s thereof. This fact came to the notice of the Committee 
when Secretary , Deptt. of Transport, Govt. of West Bengal subnuttcd that there was no co­
ordination be~ween the State Govt . and the I W.A.I. In Sept. 1993 Secretaries of all the 
State Govts. lrnd a meeting with l.W.A.I. wherein u was suggested that State Oovts. had to 
' i. I '· 
be involved in the development of IWT sector. 11 was also suggested that, li,ke National 
I lighways, there. ~hould be a constant interacti on between State Govts. and I.W.A.}. in 
!respect 't>f National Waterways projec t which would be executed 111 consulta tion with the 
State Govts. Desp ite all this there had not been an)' formal · intemction between officers 
concerned. Thi s ha~ resulted in the lack of co-or dination bctwt:en the I. W.A.I. & State 
Govts. witll regard to the development of National Waterway s. 
47. The Committee was, further informed b) the Secretary, Tran~pon Deptt,f . qovt. of 
Wc~t Bengal that if State Govts. executed the projects on agency basis as they were doing in 
respect of National liighways the entire scheme would be implemented in cl()';e cooperation 
between the State Govt~. ;md the Central Govt. In that case State Gov t. would be sending 
proposals to Govt. of India and Swte Govt. would implement it. 
48. T11e same jssue ltl~o c~me up be[ore the Sub-Ccimil1ittec of the C<inirnittee wh'ich 
visited Kera la and Goa and met the reprcscntu tiv~~ of the Stat<;; Govb. of Kcrala and Goa. 
' It was stated th<tt the Stute Govt>. had the i nfr a~tr u ct ure and capacity to execute the projects 
of 1.\V.A.I. in r~pect of NW-Jll . It wa,, therefore, suggested that State Govts. should be 
entrusted with the job along the line~ of National Highway~ wh~;;re State Govts. execute nil 
tho! p roject~. Repre~cntatives or Go' t. of Goa also tnsistcd that Captain of Ports. as an 
officer of the State Govt . should act as an agent of I.W.A.I. 
,. 
49, ThP Comrnillte i~ cons t.-ained lo 11,ote t he lnck of co·ordinotioil IJc.twccn the State Covts. 
and I. W.A.L with regard to ~xec u tio n uf !. W . A.~. projec ts. The Committee do~s not 
appreci ate the attitude or Ministry or SUI·fuce TrHnSJlOt't & !. W .A-1. for no! laki ng a ny follow 
up ;\clion afler the meet ing r1f Secretaries held in Sepl. 1993 wherein il was decided to form a 
Comrl1illee to work out the moda lities of invot••mcnt of Sta te Covts. The Committee b 
· critical or the apathetic attitude or the \1ini~tr) in the matter. It feels that this has certainly 
~ontrihuted to d e la> ~ in the execution of prujtcts. 
511. Tlte Committ~e al'o takes note of the '"J:Ilestion of the Stntt Covts. that execution of 
1'\alivnal Wal.r\\a) S pl'tljecls shou ld he tal,cu up :tlong the lines or National Highways. The 
Cummittce <fl·,irc' th:ll th i< mallcr he nut nim·d hy the ;\linistry . T hc-Commillee suggests tlwl 
"'il;ltt· (;u , h . ' lwu h.l ht inH.>hed :,O O!'! to t·n.,.urc cfft•(.:tht mul rohcshc w o r kin~ bt:twccn lhc 

I I· 
I 
t 
10 
State Govts. and the I.W.A.L The Committee desires that a suitabl!! mechanism be devised 
even If It requires amending rules and regulations . 
51. The Development of Inland Waterways is being carried out by the respective State 
Govts. either through their own resources or through Centrally Sponsored Schemes (C.S.S.). 
Under th"' C.S.S. SO% of the project co~t is met by the Centre on soft loan basis. These 
schemes are monitored by the Central Govt. through I.W.A.I. Periodic prop-ess reports are 
obtained from the respective State Govt. with a view to monitoring progress of each project. 
l.W.A.I. recommends the release of fund depending upon the. progress achieved on each 
project. According to information supplied by the Ministry of Surface Transpon, the Central 
Govt. have so far sanctioned Rs. 18.63 crores on various peojects under this Scheme. 
52. One Sub-Committee of this Comminee during its visit to Kerala and Goa sought the 
reaction of the Stale Govts. on the Centrally Sponsored Schemes. It was brought to the notice 
of the Sub-Committee that under these schemes the Govt. of Kerala had spent Rs. 595.70 
lakhs till 1994-95. However, the Central share for those works had not been received by them. 
The Sub-Committee observed that the release of funds had been inordinate:y delayed. 
53. The Committee is of the opinion that the Central assistance to the tone of SO% of the 
project cost being provided to the State Govts. is no assistance as this assistance has to be 
returned alongwith Interest. The Committee feels that the pattern of providing assl$tance needs 
to be'reviel"ed. Tbe Commiltee, however, desires that in case Central assistance is not feasible 
in the form of grant/aid, then the share or Central Govt. sbould be enhanced from SO"'o to 
75%. 
54. The Committee has noted the resource constraints in the development of IWT. Both 
the Centra l and the State Govts. are hard pressed on that account. Conseqvent upon the 
liberalisation policy of the Govemmem, Private Sector participation can be expected in 1\Vf 
by way of investment in infrastructural facilities. The provisions of 1. W.A.l. Act, 1985 clearly 
stipulate that tbe Authority can provide or permit setting up of infrasturctrual facilities in 
National Waterways. Hence there is legally no restriction on the private sector to invest in 
national Waterways . The Govt. therefore, needs to sell the idea to users. The Commiltee 
therefore, feels that there is a need for creating awareness ~pecially in the C<lrgo and passanger 
traffic areas. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry of Surface Transport & 
I.W.A.I. to launch awareness campaij!,iiS in this direction. 
'15. '1he C.Jmmiuee is also aware of the fact that water tr3nsport wo•1ld not be popular 
unless there is traWc potential. The State Gov ts. have a crucial role to play in this regard. 
They should encourage set•;og up of industrial units in the identified area~ by granting 
subsidies or incentives for those areas. The Committee has also become aware .Jf the fact that 
various terminals, and ietties are not connected with the approach roads, and that there are 
problems like land acquisition for setti ng up of terminals and creating approach reads which 
normally takes lot of time. The Committee therefore, appeals to the State Govts. to create an 
atmosphere where private: sector is induced to invest. 
56. In the course of examination of IWT, the Commiltee fell it necessary to examine the 
potential offered by the Waterways towards the promotion of tourism. The Committee has 
found that these waterways, particularly the backwaters of Kerala and Goa have immense 
tourism potential. Although in Kerala, Water tourism has begun, but its potential is yet to be 
fully realised. There is a lack of waterside amenities along the waterways. Tlte Committee 
desires that both the DepU. or tourism, Govt. of India !Uld State Tourism Department should 
make concuted efforts in · that directiotl. 

11 
57. The Committee suggests that Government of India should launch an aggressive 
publlclty campaign in the international market pcoje~ting countr)•'s waterways as outstanding 
products more suitable for foreign investment. 
58. The Committee desires that Ministry of Surface Transport, Inland Waterways 
Authority of India, Department of Tourism sltould take necessary action on the observations/ 
suggestions or the Sub-Committees' reports at Appendix I & fl. 
' 

APPENDICES 

APPENDJX -1 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction ;md para 58 of the Report) 
SUB-COMMITTEE-I 
STUDY REPORT 
ON 
INLAND WATERWAYS IN KERALA AND GOA 

COMPOSlTION OF SUB-COMMITIEE-1 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan~hairman 
2. Shri J agir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
4. Sh ri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
6. Shri Raghavji 
7. Shri Iqbal Singh 
8. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
9. Shri K. Muraleedbaran 
10. Shri A. Charles 
II. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
12. Shri lmchalemba 
13. Shri Jangbir Singh 
14. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
15. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
16. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
17. Shri Arvind Trived i 
18. Shri S.M . Lal Jan Basha 
SECRE TARIAT 
I. Shr i Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
3. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sayed Ausaf Husain, Under Secretary 
5. Shri K.P. Singh, Commince Officer 
u •. 

STUDY REPORT 
1, the Chairman, of the Sub-Committet>-1 of the Committee on Transport and Tourism 
present this Study Report of the Sub-Committee in connection with its visits to Kcrala and 
Goa from 24th to 28th July, 1995 on the development of lnlnnd Waterways in the States of 
Kerala and Goa. 
2. 'The Sub-Committee-!' was constituted by the Committee, at its meeting held on the 
5th July, 1995 to study the In land Waterways particularly in Kerala and Goa. lt was also 
decided that the Sub-Commiuee should visit the concerned States for an on-the -spot study of 
the waterways in the respective States and hold discussions with the representatives of the 
concerned State Government s. It was furtller decided that the Sub-Commiuee might study 
the possibilities to harness tbe Inland Wa tcrways for promotion of Tourism in the area~. 
3. The Sub-Committee visited Trivandrum from 24th to 26th July, 1995 and Goa on 
27th & 28th July, 1995 and. held discussions with representatives of the State Govts. 
4. 'I11c Sub-Committee considered and udopted its Study Report at its meeting held on 
the -9th August, 1995. 
I. Kerala 
5. The Sub-Committee met the representatives of the Transport Department and 
Tourism Depnnment, Government of Kerala , Kerala Tourism Development Corporation, 
Ministry of Surface Transport and Department of Tourism. Government of India. Inland 
Waterways Authority of India and India Tourism Development Corporation at Trivandrum 
at 10.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 25th July, 1995. 
6. While giving a brief account of lnlaod Water Tran~pon System in Kerala, the State 
Transport Secretary informed the Committee that of the total Inland Waterways Transport 
System of 1895 km., the West Coast Canal starting from Hosdurg in North and Poovur in 
South ~tretches to a length of 560 kms. The portion from Kollam tO Kottapuram is the most 
developed and busiest ~ctor of We~t Coast Canal. The stretch from Kollam to Kottapuram 
(168 kms.) alongwith Champakara Canal (14 kms.) and Udyogamandal Canal (23 kms.) has 
beeo declared National Waterway No. 3 w.e.f., 1st February, 1993. With the declaration of 
its National Waterways the development works, on this sector are now entrusted to the 
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IW AI). 
6.1 The Sub-Committee has noted that stretch from Kovalam to Koll:tm (75 kms.) bus 
not been included in the National Waterways as the two tunnels near Verkala have a width 
of about 5 meters which could not be widened due to laterite cliff aod arduous nature of 
works invqlved. For the development of !he reach between Kovalam and Nadayara (55 
kms.), ·a project: report has b<len prepared. The estimated cost vC this work, am<lllntmg to 
Rs. 687.20 fakhs was placed before the I.W.A.l. for central Assistance in Feb.1995. The 
reply from l.W.A.I. is awaited;- The Sub-Committee observes that as 'the reach between 
Kovalam to NadayaJ"a has not been included in the National Waterway lll, the National 
Waterway standard cannot be maintained. lt has further obseiVed that the reach cannot be 
neglected as it is a vital link connecting southern part o( the State. The Sub-Committee feels 
that I. W.A.L should explore the possibilities to provide nesessary financial assistance to the 
State Government without further loss of time as the latter could not take up the job fllT 
want of funds. 
-ntc Committee also con.ttltuted anCHhe:r Sub-Co.nmiate i.e. Sub-Comminc:c U to $1udy the Inland Wttcrways in the States a{ 
Assam, We$t Bcn&al and Bihar and hold discuss-lOll$ witl '.he r~preuncativa of the conctrned State Govu. 
17 

18 
7. The Committee has noted that after the declaration of West Coast Canal as National 
Waterway Ill, there has been a very little work done for the development of Waterways. As 
per the estimate prepared by the I. W.A.I, full develomem of Nattonal Waterway Ill 
involves dredging of 38 lakh cubic m . In the last 2 years and 6 mpnth~ only 2 lakh cubic m. 
dredging has been done. Of this, 1.4 lakh cubic m. dredging was carried out by the 
Irrigat ion Departmen t of Government o[ Kerala within a period of six months. 
8. The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note the tardy Progress made so far in the 
development of National Waterway W. The Sub-Committee was infom1ed that prior to 
declaration of National Waterways , the lrrigation Department had the sole responsibility of 
dredging the waterwa)''S. Thereafter, development and maintenance being the responsibility 
of I. W .A. L, the role of Irrigation Department came to an end. l11e latter however, 
undertook the job on a contract basis. On being asked as to why I. W.A.l. did not take up 
the job, the Sub-Commi ttee w~1s informed by the represe ntative of I. W.A. l . that various 
Nat ional Waterways projects could not be executed due to inadequacy of sta ff including 
officers m the project offices. The Irrigation Department of Kerala Govt. was, however, 
eager to take up the development of waterways and gave an assurance about executing the 
work quickly. The representatives of the State Govt opin~d that it would be bener , if the 
development of National Waterwuy~ was taken on the lines of Nationa l Highways, where the 
State Oovt. undertakes and executes all the work. 
9. The Committee was told thuL the Na tiona I Waterway No. 3 hand led 0.5 million 
tonnes cargo in the year. 1994-95. On the basis of a survey conducted in 1982 it was 
estimated that annual volume of cargo might rise to 3 million tonncs. 'In addition to the 
conventional cargo such as bulk quantities of cash crops of high ranges and export cargo 
(mainly ca~hewnut~ and sea-foods) [rom Kallam to Cochin port, the transport of petroleum 
products (rom Ernakulam to Koll:om had already hcen ~tarted by the l lindustan Petroleum 
COrporation Ltd. (HPSL) 
10. l11c Comm ittee was informed by the represen tatives of the Sta te Government that 
the project report on the programme of modernisation of jcuies in Keral~ for the years 1990-
91 to 1994-95 had been forwarded to Government of lndia . A scheme for construction of 55 
jetties in Kerala was sanctioned by Govt. of India on 6.1.93. The Government of Kerala had 
started the work in anticipation of <tpproval with a view to avoid lapse of funds provided in 
its budget. The State Government ~~nt Rs. 595.70 lak h ~ till 1994-95. Th~.: Central share for 
these works was yet to be o·eccivcd. The Su b-Comrnittee was tOld tha t under a Ce ntral 
sponso red scheme the St;ote Government received 50% of tbe cost of project on loa n basis. 
As is evident from the instant ca~c the release of amount is also delayed at the instance of 
the Govt. of Lndta. The Sub-Committee opines-that in fact there 1S hardly any assistance in 
this sector from the Central Government since the assistance on loan basis ba~ to be 
returned. l11c Sub-Committee, therefore, calls for a review of the scheme of providmg 
assistance on loan basis. lt desire.' that in c<~sc Centra l assistanc~.: i~ not feasible in the form 
of gran ts or aid. the Cen tr~l Government's sh are sho uld be increased 'from 50% to 75%. 
11. The Sub-Committee ha~ noted that there 1S a lack of project management appro3ch 
in l. W.A.l. towards the development and maintenance of National Waterwa~~- as it could 
not spell out uny time bound programme for the development of Nattonal Watcrwtl) ' Ill. 
The Sub-Committee has desired th;ot the CommtllCc on Transport and Tourism >hould thrcct 
the Mini$try of Surface Transport and LW.A.I. to frumc a tim<.: bound project for the 
development of Na tional Watcrwtt)'s with ~ d cqu;He l'und, , 

19 
12. The Sub-Commi ttee took up this opportunity to stud y whether \he 
waterways of Kerala had the potential for the promotion of tou rism. During 
li'!liberations, it was noted that Government of Kerala had already announced a 
number of schemes to project backwaters as an outstanding tourism product. These 
included setting up of house boats, floating cottages and special boat races. It was 
fur•hcr told that the Government of Kcrala had proposed to declare the 
Quil lon-Alleppey Waterway s as a special tourism segment. In the year 1994 around 
40% of the foreign tourists who visited Kerala had undertaken backwater cruises.As 
regards the role of private entrepreneurs the Sub-Committee . was lold that most of 
the backwater cruises and house boats were run by private sector. The State 
Government had received Central assistance for the construction of waterside 
amenities at Yaikam which had been completed while those at Changanacherry and 
Aranmula are at different Stages of progress. In the curren t year .waterside amenities 
at Kollam and Kumanakom have been prit:rilised. The Central Govemm ent has also 
provided assistance for purchase of boats including 4 luxury cruises, floating 
restauran• at Yeli and boat train at Kumarakom. The _Sub-Committee felt happy tu 
note that State Govt. had its tourism policy and efforts were made to implement the 
same. 
13 Kewla is a land of waters. Its water resources need to be exploited at a 
much faster pace. LW .A.I. could not so far do well becau se of certain constra ints 
which ne('d to he looked into for immed iatc remedial act ion. The Sub-Committee 
opines that proper exploitation of water resources will encourage tourism activities to 
flourish . T!;e Sub·Cc:>'llmittee urges upon all concerned to pay immediate attention to 
:he pn .,pcr deve lopment of National Waterways. 
ll Go2 
14. The Sub:Committec l'1Ct the repn;:,cnwtives of the Transport and I. W.T. 
DepartmP.nt and Tourism Dcpanment, Government of Go:t, Goa State Touri~m 
Development Corporation., Mini~try of Surface Transport and Department of Tourism, 
Government of lndi~ and Inland Waterways Authoroty of India at Panaji at 10.30 a.m. on 
Thursday the, 27th July, 1995. 
15. The representatives of the Govt. of Goa informed the Committee that Mandovi and 
Zuari rivers and Cumburjua canal arc the principal waterways in Ooa. The State Govt. 
exercises overall control on the usage of watcrw;tys in the State. Goan waterways have 
alrndy been developed for o. e carrying barges and other vessels and are now operating ;H 
all tu.!al ~tage~. cxcepi for 11 portton of the Luari river. whioh is likely to commence very 
~ il u rtly. The Sub-Commiucc hi1s also been appnscd that IS million tonnes of ore arc 
p1esently being moved every yeur, 111 addit1011 to other cargo. The State Govt. collects about 
Rs.75 lakhs .on vessels annually by way of ba1·gc tax, port dues. goods tax and other fees 
under the provisions of various Act. · 
16. As the regulating authority for operation or water transport. the Captain of l'orb is 
responsible for conservancy of waterways and for tmplementation of various provision~ ~uc h 
<IS those contained in Lndian Vessels Act, 1917, lnd1an Ports Act 1908 etc. and rule.~ framed 
thereunder . He b, also the taxation authority with regi!rd to collection of Port due{. barge 
tax, goods tax and other taxe~ or dues. 

20 
17. The State's waterways have so far not been declared "National Waterways" despite 
recommendations to this effect by the National Transport Policy Commiuee (NTPC) in 1980. 
The Inland Waterways Authority of India (1. W.A.l.) is, however, associated with the State 
Govt. as consultant, for dredging work. The Ministry of Surface Transport provides financial 
assistance to the extent of 50% under Centrally sponsored Schemes. 
18. As regards . the reasons for not declaring Goa Waterways as National Waterways, the 
Sub-Commiuee has been informed by the State Govt. that modalities are being worked out, 
:and a study to that effect is to be undertaken by the l.W.A.I. It has also been pointed out to 
the Sub-Committee that Govt . of India . had already P.roposed to me Govt. of Goa that 
Mandovi and Zuari rivers and Cumburjua canals be declared National Waterways . The Govt. 
of Goa has, however, not concurred with the proposal. The representatives of Ministry of 
Surface Transport while deposing before the Committee at Delhi on the 5th July, 1995 
submitted that in principle tbeGovt. of Gt>a had agreed to the' declaration of their waterways as 
the National Waterways. The formal approval was yet to be received from Gov t. of Goa. 
18.1 The representatives of the Govt. of Goa explained that they bad the following 
reservations on the proposal to declare Goan waterways as r.ational waterways: 
1. Govt. of Goa might lose the revenue whtch it collects on vessels operating in their 
waterways: 
2. The position of Captain of Ports should be retained a:: such unci he should become 
an agent of the I.W.A.J. to undertake all the activities which are presently baing 
attended to by him. 
18.2 The Sub-Committee noted the reasons put forth by the representatives of Govt. of 
Goa. After examining the views expressed by the representatives o( Ministry of Surface 
Transport , the Sub-Committee has felt that the above mentioned apprehensions of Govt. of 
Goa needed to b~ removed, since the Govt. of India in any c~1sc considering that revenu e 
being collected by the Capta in of Ports in Goa should continue to be collected by the State 
Govt. and that Captain of the Ports of Goa be nn agent of LW.A .l. to undertake the 
activities. Thc- Su~-Commit:~e is hopeful that 2tter these clarifications the Gcwl. of Goa would 
agree to the proposal of Oovt. of India tc declare Goa waterv.ays as National Waterways . 
19. The Sub-Commit.ee enqutrcd about the likely losses o i revenue to the State Govt. 
and also the expenditure likely to be saved once the Goan waters are declared National 
Waterways. The representatives of the Govt. of Goa informed the Sub-Committee that no 
such studies hud been carr ied out . It is the view of the Sub-Committee that in the absence of 
these studies, it is very difficult to give the opinion either way. 111e Sub-Committee desired 
that the Committee may direct the Ministry of Surface Transport and I. W .A.I. and State 
Govt. to expedit.- the derlar,.inn of Goa waterways as ~alional Waterways. 
20. The attention of Sub-Committee was drawn to the limitations in navigation under 
bridges which were resulting in considerable loss of time due regulatory measures llcing 
imposed for controlling water born traffic under the bridges. The Sub·Cootmittee also noted 
that Govt. of Goa had never raised any objection> at the time when those bridges wcr~ being 
designed and built. 
21. During deliberations, it was pleaded to the Committee by the State Govt. that the 
resources of the State Government of Goa were inadequate. The State Government could not 
augment its own resources in view of its limited population and there was no scope to tax them 
funher. The State Government had so far found it difficult to get more assistance from the 
Central Government. 

21 
22. Wb<Jn asked about the CenU'ally sponsored schemes, the Sub -Committee was 
infom1ed that the work of capital _ dredging of river Mandovi, Zuary and Mapusa was 
sanctioned under the Centrally sponsored schemes at an estimated cost of Rs. 159.66 lakhs 
which was revised to Rs . 235.00 lakhs. The execution of the scheme was carried out by 
Dredging Corporation of India (D.C. l) and an expenditure of Rs. 189.00 lakhs was incurred 
in this regard. The Corporation failed to carry out the work within the prescribed time limit 
even afler extension was granted. The contract with the corporation was then terminated. 
The same work was rctendered and the lowest tender of M!; M.S. Mitha, D. Paula was 
accepted. The work is likely to be started after tbe cum:nt monsoon. It was also indicated to 
the Sui>-Committee that the recent tende rs hud revealed that dredging by D.C,L was more 
expensive than its competitors in Private Sector. 
22. J The Sub -Comm ittee has observed that failure to the complete tl1e project as per 
the contract even after grant of extensions is a re11ection on the working of D.C.!. The 
working of the DCI needs to be streamline d . The Sub-Committee !las suggested that 
l. W.A.l. who arc working as con~u lrantS for dredging should take all the precautions to help 
the State Govt. so that work does not suffer further. 
' 
23. The Sub-Commiuee has noted that G oa Waterways are fully developed and 
maximum inland water cargo is carl'ied by them. Be~ides, lot of tourist activitie~ are 
dependent on these wa terways. Whe n asked as to whether State Govt. have prepared any 
tourism policy. the Sub-Committee was told that tile State Govt. of Goa does not have a 
tourism policy. Tourism is yet to be dcclarecl as an indumy. The Sub-Committee feels that 
the State Govt. of Goa should have the same m view of increasing number of foreign as "ell 
as domestic tourist~. It further opines that State Govt. should take into account the pressure 
of tourism on the local populatior) and the need to develop bosic infrastructure such as 
roads, electricity, water ~upply and communica tion. 
24. The main obse rvationS'Yecommendation of the Sui>-Committcc in connection wrth 
its visit to Kcrala and Goa m.ty be summed up H> undcr:-
A. National Waterway-Ill should be developed wrthin a time irJme and IWAI should 
positively consider Lhc relaxation rn the Natiomrl WHtcrwHys standards keepin g in 
view the peculiar nature of Wes~ Coast CanaL LW.A .I. should also find out the 
possillilitie~ of connecttng Kollam-Kov.<Jiam re~ ch. 
13. Slow pace in execution of IWAI project~ ha~ been attributed to the shortage of i~;, 
officers & sta ff at prOJCCt officc1>. Consequently the development of waterways 
suffer. Sui>-Commince \Uggc~t; that the Mini\try of Surface Transport should 
actively pur•.ue the matter with the ~linist ry of Frnancc for sanct ion of StafVPost•. 
Meanwhil e the IWAI should take all the as'i'tancc frnm the '\tate Govts. 
C. Minr,try of Surf,tce Transport should exn mrnc tltc po\sibility uf d~veloprng and 
opcruting the Nation.rl W;Ltcrw<ry~ along the ,,,me hne' a' N<rtron~rl llighway, 
wlwre the ,electron and funding pull i' left with Gov t of India :11l<l 
implcmentatron wrth the St;~Le Govt. 
D. Govt, of lndi<r should ••vord lo'' llf revenue to State Govt. rn the eve nt uf 
dcdttring Swtc Wmt:rway,, ·" t'atiLtu,rl W:rtcrway' kceprns rn nund the re,nurLe 
crunch bcrng fa<:cd by the St.Ltc Govr- Snh-Commincc .tho feeb rt is ne<:cs'<•rv tor 
~he Govt. of Go;r tt; have a 'tudv rarn~d out ttl a"c" the lo"cs if ;any. t~ the 
State exchetjucr ahcr <kd:rr ,ttiun uf !herr \\atcrw,,y, as National W;rtcr\\ays. 

Ke 
• 
22 
E. Govt of Kerala and Govt. of Goa should set up separate I.W .T. Department as 
has been done by the Govt. of Andhra Pradesh recently. 
F. Tourism potential of backwaters. is yet to be fully realised in both these States . 
G. Waterside amenities need to be developed along the watei:Ways. Both Department 
of Tourism Gov1. of India and State Govts . sho uld make concerted efforts in lhat 
direction. 
H. Siate of Goa should have a tourism policy. [t should also have a clear cut policy of 
waterways to exploit their tourism potential by laying down Backwater Area 
Tourism Schemes. This is lhe high time to exploit Europeans particularly German 
interests in Water Tourism. 
1. Govt. of Goa should declare tourism an industry. 
J. Both the States should draw up comprehensive plans, laking into account lhe 
pressure of tourists on lhe basic amenities in the States. The Sub-Comnuttec 
suggests, ibat respective Departments of the State Govt. should keep in therr 
mind , the growing pressure on roads , commun ication , power, water etc. that 
tourism will cause while preparing their budgetary proposals. They should make 
some allocation for lhat purpo se. 
K. The Sub-Committee suggests that the State Govts of Kerala and Goa should 
discus.~ the matter pertaining to tourism wtth neighbouring States and chalk out a 
strategy to exploit the same in their fullest form. 
Nt>W lJELHl; 
August ?, 1995 
PRAivtOO MAHAJAN 
C.lwirmt'Ul 
·--- -Sravarra 18, 1917 (Saka) 

• I 
I 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE SUB·COMMITTEE·l OF THE DEPARTMENT 
RELATED PARLlAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND 
TOURISM 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. 011 Wednesday, the 9th August, 1995 in Room 
No. 63, Ftrst Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairman 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
4. Shri Satya Prakash Malavia 
5. Shri Raghavji 
6. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
7. Shri A. Olarles 
8. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
9. Shri lmchalemba 
10. Shri Jangbir Singh 
ll. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
12. PrQf. Prem Dhumal 
13. Shri Chattrap;~l Singh 
14. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri Raja Ram. Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain. Under Secretary 
3. Shri K.P . Singh, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset Chairman welcomed the members of the Sub-Committee-! and 
expressed his thanks to them for their whole beaned co-operation during the Sub· 
Committee's v1sit to Kerala and Goa. 
3. The Sub-Committee then considered and adopted its draft study Report on Inland 
Waterways in Kerala and Goa with some modifications. The Sub·Commiuee desired that the 
study Report of the S1.1b·Committee be circulated to all members of the Committee. 
The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 A.M . 
23 

List of the Witnesses appeared before lhe Sub-Comm;uee-I at Trivandrum and Goa on the 
25th and 27th July, 1995 
l. Shri N. Chandrasekharan Nair, Secretary. Transport Department , Government of 
Kerala. 
2. Shri T. Haridils Menon, Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department, Government of 
Kerala. 
3. Shri Vijaya Kumaran Nair, Deputy Chief Engineer (Mechanical) Irrigation 
Deparunent , Government of Kerala. 
4. Shri K. Jayakumar. Secretary, Tourism Department, Government of Kerala. 
5. Shri Nalini Niuo, Director, Govt. of Kerala Tourism. 
6. Shri Alkesh Kumar Sharma, Add!. Director. Kerala Tourism Development 
Corporation. 
7. Shri Yunus Kunju. Deputy Director, Tou rism Department, Govt. of Kerala. 
8. Shri Purushothaman. Assi~tant Director , Tourism Department , Govt. of Kerala. 
9. Shri R.K. Sharma, Under Secretary. Ministry of Surface Trnnsport. 
10. Shri Pamlian, Director, l. W.A.l. 
11. Shri M.?. Upadhyay, Director Department of Tourism, Govt. of India. 
12. Shri R.C. Gupta, General Manager l.T D.C. (South) 
13. Dr. G.C. Srivastava, Chief Secretary and Secretary. Department of Tourism, 
Govt. of Goa. 
14. Shri Dev Trivedi, Commissioner and Secretary, Finance, Govt. of Goa. 
15. Shri Rakesh Mehta , Development Commissioner, Govt. of Goa. 
!6. Shri C.O. Hegde, Chief Engineer, P.W.D . Govt. of Goa. 
17. Shri P Shri Ram, Chief Engineer. Konkan Railway Corporation, Govt. of Goa . 
18. Shri S. V. Sa1e1kar, Advisor, Konkan R<!ih\'JY Corporation, Govt. of Goa. 
19. Captain P. Mascarenbas, Captain of Ports. Govt. of Goa. 
20. Shd H.D. Kamal, Director. Tourism and Munaging Director, Goa Tou[ism 
Development Corporation. 
2l. Shri A.M. Virgas. Deputy Director, Department of Tourism, Govt. of Goa. 
22. Shri Rajendera Kumar. Surveyer Lncharge, Merchantile·Marine Dcptt. Govt. or 
Goa. 
23. Shri D.A. Prabhudesai. Inspector-General of Police, Govt. of Goa. 
24. Shri S.S. Keshkamat, Joint Secretary, Deptt. of Tourism, Govt. of Goa. 
25. Shri J.B. Singh, Commissioner Excise, Govt. of Goa. 
26. Shri A.B. Patil, Water Spom Consultant, NLWAS 
27. Shri P.O. Karkare, Geuer<tl M;tnager (Hotel> ~nd Markettng, Go~ Tourism 
Development Corpomtion Ltd). 
24 

i 
I 
,-
APPEND LX-II 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction and para 58 of the Report) 
S UB-COMMITTEE-11 
STUDY REPORT 
ON 
INLAND WATERWAYS IN ASSAM, 
WEST BENGAL AND 
BIHAR 
25 

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMliTEE-ll 
1. Shri Sivaji Patnaik-Convenor 
2. Sbri John. F. Fernandes 
3. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
4. Shri Naresh Yadav 
5. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
6. Shri Kalka Das 
7. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
8. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
9. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
3. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
4 .. Shri Syed A usaf Husain, Under Secretary 
5. Shri K.P . Singh, Committee Officer 
26 

STUDY REPORT 
I, the Convenor, of Sub-Commiltee-il of the Committee on Transport and Tourism 
present this Study Repon of the Sub-Commi uee in connection with its visits to Guwahati, 
Calcuna and Patna from 24th to 28th July, 1995 on the development of Inland Waterwa}~ in 
the states of Assam, West Bengal and Bihar. 
2. The Sub-Commiuee-ll ' was constituted by the Committee, at its meeting held on the 
Sth July, 1995 to sutdy the Inland Waterways in Assam, West Benga l and Bihar. It was also 
decided that the Sub-Committee should visit the concerned states Cor an on-the-spot study of 
the waterways in the respective states and hold discussions with the represtentative of the 
concerned State Governments. It was furthe r decided that the Sub-Committee might study 
the possibilities to harness the Inland Waterways for promotion of Tourism in the areas. 
3. The Sub-Committee visited Guwahati on 25th July, Calcutta on 26th July and Pat11a 
on 27th & 28th July, 1995 and held discuss ions with representat ives of the State Govts. 
4. The Sub-Committee conside red and adopted its study Report at its meeting held on 
19th August , 1995. 
!. Assam 
5. The Sub-Committee visited Guwahati on tbc 25th July, 1995 and held discussions 
with the representatives of the Departments of Transport and Tourism, Go\11. of As~m. 
Ministry of Surface Transport, Department of Tourism. Governm ent of [ndia, !.W.A.L. 
C.l.W : r.C. and LT.D.C . 
6. Assam has 768 Kms : stretch of Inland Water on Brahmaputra river which has been 
declared National Waterway No. 2. It covers 508 Km. water di~tance from Guwahati to 
Dibrug3rh and 260 Km. distance £.--om Guwahati to Dbubri. Assam r~ a riwrinc 3~a1e It ts 
bles~d with the oounry .:>f nugnty Brahmaputra and Borak nv.:r~ which ha,·e imm,.r·~·! 
potentialities for transportotion of goods a!lld passenger traffic. 
6.1. The Sub-Committee is constrain~d to observe that c .. r gr) w ... s mrs~u!g <'>1 .k 
Brahmaputra . On enquiry from the officials of the Inland Water Transpon, the Cull1111it.ee 
came to know that cost of transporting cargo on the Brahmaputra river was very high due to 
lack of proper in£rastructural facilities like loadrng and unloadmg facilities, lengthy river 
route , lack of proper vessels etc. The low rates of cargo offered by the State Govt . were not 
attractive to the transport ers due to the above {actors. There was no night navigational 
facility and movement was possible only during the day time and it took 14-15 days upstream 
to reach cargo from Guw~ h ati 10 Calcutta . Br~hmap u tr a and Borak being the rivers of 
unruly and turbulent nature, the safe plying of vessels becomes very difficull particularly 
during the monsoon season. 
7. Both Brahmaputra and Borak accumulate high quanrum or ~ill in the uavig .. blc 
channels during the winter season. The vesscb have to under take long zig-zag routes for 
crossing sma ll distances thereby increasing the cost of operation as well as time of travel. 
Most p~rts t~f river banks are erosion -affected . As a maHer of fact, there is o major 
constraint of developing terminal facililies without which l oading and unloading of goods 
becomes very difficult. As mo;t of these terminJI ; are located where road highway facilities 
are not available, carrying of goods from the terminal points to rhc nearby town is a great 
problem. The terminal points have to be shifted in accordance v.ilh the fluctuating level of 
·~ub·ConUUIIIC:c• l w015 ronst1tuled b) the (Ommhtce 10 !jtudy the lnlund W~lerwoty11A the Su.no of Ker:.la and Ck.111 an.J hold 
c.hscus!'l(ln' wtth the repC'esentmivc~ of the c:on~.:erned S1a1e Gov1c 
27 

28 
water in Brahmapu tra which reaches as high as 9 met res during the monsoon season. This 
results in unwarranted expenditure. 
7.1 The Sub-Committee suggests that even of the banks on the River Brahmaputra and 
Borak are p rone to erosion, less-erosion affected banrs like Guwahati, Dhubri , Pancharatna 
etc. can be converted into permanent terminal stations for loadinW\Jnloading purposes. 
Where this facility is not possible, noating termi nals C3n be provided. 
8. The Sub-Committee does not see any valid reasons for the Assam Govt. hiring its 
vessels to private parties for carrying ferry services. If the private parties .;;an run passenger 
vessels on profitable terms, the State Govt . can also do it. The explanati<>o offered by the 
l WT officials that there was no regu latory and enforcement machinery to monito r running of 
their vessels could not convince the Sub-Comminee. 
9. At pre sent the perma nent terminuls proposed for construct ion are at Guwaha ti. 
Dhubri and Jogighopra. The Sub-Committee urges that the financial assistance required to 
the tune of Rs. 8 crores should be provicled by the Cen tral Govt. The construction of 
permanent terminals will help increase in cargo and revenue of the State. Similarly 
construction of 3 floating sta tions at the cost of Rs. 7.50 crores is proposed at Dhansirimu kh, 
Disangmukh and Dibrugarh. This is a welc:ome step. The Sub-Committee recommend that 
terminal facilities should be provided with approach roads which is the responsibility of the 
' State Govt. This will facilitate load ing-\mloading of ca rgo to nearby places. 
' 10. One of the reasons for poor performance of Water Transport jn Assam is that the 
neet is not modern. The State Govt. should procure modern vessels of steel, shallow draft 
which can run even during the lean season when the depth of water is low in the.~e rivers. 
This will help reduce the expenditure on maintenance and repair of vesseb and will save 
wastage o[ time. For this purpose water-taxi or hovercraft should be arranged by the State 
Govt. 
ll. The Sub-Committee noticed that the rdtes of ferry services run by Assam Govt. and 
cargo were very low. Low charges are also a cause of fi nancial loss to the IWT. The Sub· 
Comm ittee recommends that the charges of ferry ar1d cargo shou ld be revised in such away 
as can make the water transport economically vit~ble. At the same time LWAI should 
facilitate navigation, channel marking and bandalling work regularly. lt should also prov ide 
. nigl!t navigation facility. ' 
12. With the construction of proper terminal facilities and expansion of service, there is 
an :tmple scope for carrying the ma ch ine;ic~ of on going Nunwligar li Refinery project. The 
Govt. has already banned the carriage of machineries and other materials of Numaligarh 
Project by road transport ~ince it will po>t a thrcm to the inhabitants of the Kaltranga 
National Park from the env ironmt:ntal point of view . The only mode of tra nsport le ft for 
~uch a huge project other than road transport is the Brahnwputra, waterway . With proper 
de•clopment of the Hr~hmaputr:> waterway l ol~ml W;ncr I r,m,poot ~an serve the upcoming 
Ga• Cracker l'ro jcct abo . 
lJ. '!he Surface communication by ruil und ro<~d between C•kutta · Guw;~hati·Silcher i~ 
very. uneconomical . (total 1572 krm.) The alternat1~c route by watcrwa~' from Silchcil 
KarimganJ to Calcutta via Banglades h (12111 kms.) i< very cconom•ca l und ~mooth on the 
Borak river. At present navigational facilities are ;~vailablc only upto 6 month' from May to 
November. For rest of the period there i• not , ., fficicnl water to naVI!(<IIe. 1l1c Suh· 
Commi ttee rec omme nd~ that a Feusib1lity >ludy he Iuken up on the nv~r. rol' fad lity o f 
navigation throughout the year, the matter shou ld t>c taken up "-ith the (.iovcrnm cnt uf 
Banglade'h 'Kl thai channels upto Zakirg<~nj (oppo~ite bank of K;tr~mganj) wliich he' 111 

r-
29 
Bangladesh territory are maintained throughout the ye<~r upto reasonable depth and the 
servkes can be extended upto Silchar from where movement to Manipur and Mizoram will 
be more convenient. Outgoing goods whic.h are easily available f0r transportation like 
Timber, tea , coal, cotton, Ginger etc. and incoming food products , machines, building 
materials, oil etc. by way of Borak river will be moved very smoothly. 
14. There are bright prospects of developing water related tourism in the state of 
Assam. For this purpose water-sports have to be developed in the state in a big way. State 
Govt. should pay attention to this aspect of Tourism. 
15. Kaziranga wildlife sanctuary is an at traction for the tourists and the road transport 
irom Guwahati to Kaziranga being unsafe lirom the point o( pollution, accident , the Sub­
Committee feels that water transport will be enjoyable and comfortab le for the tourists for 
going to Kaziranga and also to nearby places of Guwahati like Umanada, Monikareswar. 
Boulgobinda, Sualkuchi etc. It is learnt that at present luxurious boats with all modern 
facilities have been proposed for construction at a cost of Rs. 2.50 crores approximately. 
This is a good step to boost tOurism in the State. 
IT •• West Bengal 
16. The Sub-Committee-II visited Calcutta on the 26th July, 1995 and held discussions 
with the representatives of the departmen t of transport and Tou rism, Govt. of West Bengal 
and Ministry of Surface Transport, Departm ent of Tourism, Government of India, IWA[. 
CiwrC and ITDC in connection with the Inland Waterways System in the State . 
17. The West Bengal has national waterway No. 1 passing from Farakka to Haldia, 
which is 560 Km. downward stretch. Sunderbans are under consideration of the Central 
Govt. for declaration as National Waterway . Sunderbans have 191 Km. distance of 
Waterway. 
18. There 1s a considerable potentilll for cargo-movement on Farakka Haldia waterways 
for petro leum, coal , stone-chips etc. Calcutta being traditional user of Waterways, all the 
major industries are located at river banks. From Pakur, stone-chips are carried to Calcutta 
and sold there . Similu ly coal is required to be taken from Farakka to Katwa for use of 
NTPC. But due to Jack of terminal facility at Paku and Farakka, the entire goods has to be 
shifted to other modes of transport. The cargo movement has been confined on:Jy to 
petroleum products from Haldia to Calcutta , across the river. There has not been cnuch 
movement upward the river. The const raint is that there is no night navigational facility. The 
lransporters are thus not encouraged to move their goods by water transpo.rt. The cargo 
rnov:ement is also hindered by non-availability of adequate draft. The regular services are 
also not assured which is an essential component of any mode of transport. 
18.1 The Sub-Committee feels that there is an urgent need of developing proper 
infrastructural facilities in the State on Waterw ay No. 1. [f these facilities ar,e fully developed 
present status of cargo which i~ 8 la~'l:i .M.T. can be made to reach 15 M.T. in terms of 
petroleum products from Haldia to Budge budge. As far as passenger services are concemed, 
there is a greater scope for plying passenger ferry services in the State. 
19. According to the information furnished by the principal Secretary, Transport, 
Government of West Bengal, various vessels a re daily engaged in carrying 3 lakh commuters 
from different places in the State. According to a study conducted by the State Govt. on 
river Hoogli between Kalyan i and Kokdwjp in Sept. 1994, WBSTC and .Hoogli Nadia 
Jalapath Samabay Samity (HNPSS) together provided the V3rd of the passenger service. 
The study identified 51 Passenger terminals, 86 l~unches and 74 country-boa ts operating in 
the area . Of these 37 terminals are located within the Chief Metropolitan District. Similarly 

-
30 
there are 6000 country boats called bhutbhuties in local parlance fiued with agricultural 
pump-sets operating in the Sunderbans . Local people use them for going and transporting 
goods. 
19.1 The Sub-Committee finds a vast sco pe for enhancement in the passenger traffic on 
the waterway in the State . There is a need for construction of additional ferry tem1inals, 
outside the Chief Metropolical Distt . The State Govt. is in the process of constructing 5 new 
terminals under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) at Geonkhali, Nurpur, 
Diarnand-Harbour Moasumi Island and Haldia. Apart from C.S.S., the State Govt. 
propose additio nal terminals facilities at Bauria, Budgebudge, Barrackpur and Alambazar 
with an investment of Rs. 4 crores. The State Government, the Sub-Comm ittee desires, 
should provide all necessary help to expedite the construction of these terminals. The 
construction of these terminals would help ease the inconvenience of commuters. 
20. Sunderbans arc the only way through which Bangladesh and Assam can be 
connected to Calc u11a region and tea or North Bengal and Assam could be transported to 
Ca lcutta and Haldia Port. Sun derbans being a criss-cross channel, night navigation and 
piloting facility are required for transportation. The Sub-Comm ittee recommends that 
Sunderbans should be declared National Waterway at the earliest and night navigation and 
piloting facility should be provided. there for smooth functioning of vessels. Similarly the 
s~ate Govt. bas proposed jetties for assistance under Centrally Sponsored Scheme s. The 
scheme, when comes into operat ion will help promoting the passenger traCfic on water. 
21. The Sub-Committee finds that a very large number of peop le commute antl carry 
cargo every day across the Sunderban s cana l system by country boats which has no gear 
system. This is very unsafe . The Sub·Comminee recommends that enactmen! for survey, 
registration of countryboats and suitable strengthening of enforcement machinery should be 
undert<1ken and financial assistance shou ld be tnade availab le with some modifications on the 
pattern of moP in loan cum subsidy scheme of IWAI which has been a non s'tartcr every 
where in the country. · 
22 The striking feature of the West Bengal Inland Water Transport is the prwate 
panictpation in a big way. West Beng<~l is one of the States where private sector is playing a 
major role in transportauon of passenger traffic on inl;md water. State Govt. has lea;ed out 
jetties und vessels to the Hoogli, Nadia, J<tlapath Smnubay Sa mity, (IINJSS) a coopera tive 
which are running these vessels . About 6000 countrybouts plying in Sunderbans are priva te 
boats except for tbe cargo transported by the C. l. W.T.C. The entire tramportation of cargo 
is in the hands of private ;ector. Maintenance and service facilities of the vessels have also 
been cr~uted by the private sector and are enough to ~upport a considerably greater vesse l 
population than exist ing at pre.;ent. Tl1e State Govt. i~ interacting with a private organisation 
for setting up L.C.T. facilities at Raichak-Kukra11ati at an approximate cost of Rs. 8 crore$. 
If this comes into being laden tr.ucks cun go on them . There is another proposal for setting 
up a minor port at Kulpi through private seewr parti c1p:ttion. A MOU has already been 
s1gned with a private company for operating first river sel""ice between Calcuita and lla ldia. 
The Sub·Commillec welcomes the first pa~senger ferry :.ervice between Calcutta and lla!d1a 
that is to come up through the help of West Bengal Jndustrial Development Corporation Jnd 
the private ~ector. 
22.1 The Sub-Committee note with satisfaction the role being played by the private 
sector nt present in the State. But there is need for more and more private )e<:tors 
involvement in this field . This will not only help overc ome the com.traints of funds. but also 
lighten the burden of State Govt. to a great extent towards developing water transport. 
23. 1 he <:xisting Crew-Traini ng Centre in West Bengal has been closed down as the land 

31 
on which it was situated had to be returned to the Indian Navy. With the amendment~ 
proposed in thc ·l.V. Act. regarding inclusion of vessels with less tha n 40 13.H.P. and the 
proposed introduction of certificate 'for engine and deckha nds and proposed conversions of 
bhutbhuties (6000 in number) there is immediate need for selling up such centre. A proposal 
to this effect at Timber Pond in How rah was submitted to IW AI in Sept. 1994. The response 
is awaited . The Sub -Committee observes that since then there is going to be oiJ.e year. The 
IW AI shou ld have taken a decision upto this time. The Sub-Comm ittee impresses upon 
IWAl to take early decision In .the matter to set up the cent re w ithout delay . 
24. The Sub-Committee is .not fiappy ah_the_ way !WAl has taken up conservancy work 
at NW No . 1 from Farakka to Pam~ and .fatn:! to -;Allahaba'd. Tite dredging work both at 
Calcutta and Hald ia has been below the requiremen.~ . .Rece ntly lWAl has entrusted dredging 
at one site betwee n Farakka barrage . and Jangipur lock 'gate to Farak}<a Barrage authorities. 
During the lean season, the flow 'of water is not adequat~; resulting in large scale siltatio n . 
On enquiry, the lW Al officia l appris~,:_ji tha t -dredg ing work · at the ·aforesaid places was being 
done by Farakka barrage author ities. :Sb(netimcs theic dredgers are not working . 
25. The Sub-Committee impresses up9i1-IWAl that 45 m. width channel and minimum 
depth of water i.e. 1.5 m. should be m.!!ifit.a.incd in the NW No. 1 throughout the year to 
facilitate smoo th flow of passenger a[Jd gogds tra!'fic' on th" water. Night navigat ional facility 
should also be made available to· wilrd off the delay in carr iage of goods. Regularity of 
services on NW No . 1.. should be ensured by the operat ing agencies. Adequate draft shnuld 
be made availab le by the State there so !.hat g'Oods ar<.: not shifted to other modes of 
transport due to non -availability of suf(iciem draft. 
26. The Sub-Comminee finds it disheC~rtening tha t Farakka barrage Authorities are 
charging Rs. 20 per tonne each way from the goods 'vessel passing through the Farakka 
navigational lock. On a 1,000 tonne barge, the charges levied are Rs . 40,000 on forwarcfand 
return journey which is a huge amounl. The Sub -Committee impresses upon the Miiti!(try of 
Water Resources to reconsider the toll levied on p<tssing vessels and bring it to the minimum 
level. · ·-. 
27. The Sub-Committee also feels tha t State government shou ld _be given representa tion 
by rotati on in IW Ai for greater coord ination and interaction b"tween the Central agency 
and the State Governments. T his way, the states C'dO highligh.}_ the prospects of water 
transport and problems affec ting them . · 
28. West Bengal offers a rich tapestry of tOurist attiacti.9n, places of histor ical 
importance, ~ce nic locations, ethnic cultures and adventure tourism ·. Sunderbans , th~ larges t 
mang rove forest in the world and the home o f the Roya l Bengal tiger is coming up as a new 
popular destination in South Benga l. There is a v~st scope for harnessing ·the potential of lhc 
river Ganges and the estuarines 6f Sund erbans for the purpose of tow·isrn. The Sub ­
Commit te~ appreciates the efforts of the Department of Tou rism for develo ping aquat .ic 
tourism in the State . The 3 luxury launches {or making trips from October ·to March on the 
cs!Uarines of Su nderbans are very p<Jpular: The ir modernizatio n which is underway will add 
anothe r charm to the tourism package. The Sub-Committee was happy to see the float ing 
restaurant on the river Ganges in Calcutta which has been started by West Bengal Tourism 
Development Corporatio n Ltd. in colluborat ion with private sector . Similarly Ma nor floatel 
Ltd. is plan ning tn construct a 5 star floating hote l on a barge imported from Singapor e . 
Opera tion o f 4 hove rcrafls for carrying tourists from Calcu tta to Berhampura in 
Mursb idabad and cruising -palace which will come up shortly will g1ve a tremendous boos t to 
the nver tou rism in the state. 
29. The sub- ~omm i ttee observes that tux structure like luxury tax and sales wx in the 

32 
state is on the high side. The Sub-Co mmittee recommends to the State Government to 
examine if something can be done in the interest of development of tourism with regard to 
this tax structure. 
29.1 The Sub-Cornminee calls upon the State Gov L. to extend all the necessary facilities 
like roads, electricity, water supply e tc. to lhe tourism sector and for this purpose coordinate 
the efforts of Tran spo rt and other Departments with the Department of tourism. 
30. The Sub-Comminee invokes the State Govt. action to accord tourism the status of 
industry and pave the way for facilitating all the concessions/reliefs admissible under it to 
tourism sector. 
30.1 Tite Sub-Committee re!ifets to learn tltat the foreigners have to make themselves 
physically present at the secretari at for gett ing pennit from the forest department for visiting 
Sunderbans. This is very inconvenient for the travellers. The Government should see that 
arrangement for issuing of passes for Sunderbans should be made without any 
inconvenience. 
30.2 The Sub-Committee also recommend that a direct flight on Kathmandu , Bagdo!ifa 
Guwahati-Calcutta route should be imroduced by the Dcptt. of Civil Aviation . 
31. If Water transport is developed fully in the State for the purpose of tourism, it will 
not only diversify the tourism in Wesl Bengal but also prove to be an important source of 
revenue for the Stat e exchequer, a generator or employment opportunities and ~ major 
earner of foreign exchange in the country. Wi~h private Sector participation, Calcutta can be 
developed as a gateway to the South East Asia. 
ill. Bihar 
32. The Sub-Committee visited Patna on the 27th July, 1995,' and mer the 
representatives of the DepartmenL~ ·or the Transport , and Tourism, Govt. of Bihar and the 
Ministry of Surface Tra nsport, Depart ment of Tourism, Government of India, r. W.A.I. in 
connection with the Inland Water Transport System in the State of Bihar. 
33. At present there is no inland waterways ope rative in the state of Bihar except the 
river Ganges which has been delcared Nation al Waterway No. 1. of the total stretch of 1547 
km. from Haldia to Allahabad of the NW No. l, the stretch of 565 Km. from Farakka to 
Buxar falls within the state of Bihar I.W.A.I. is responsible for the development of inland 
navigation on the Natio nal Waterway No. 1. The Authority is doing conservancy works 
providing terminals etc. for the development of lnland Navigation from Farakka to Patna. 
34. The state of present u:affic on the waterway is not very encouraging. There is 
enough scope of moving cargo and passenger vessels on the waterway as there is abundant 
water even during the lean period to ply the vessels on this Waterway But mainly 
C.LW.T.C. vessels are plying between Haldia and Patna to promote the Inland water 
tr<~n)porration on the National Waterw ay. 
35. Similarly, ferry service which is the subject of State Govt. is being aperated in Bibar 
by private parties, Govt. of Bihar possesses no passengers vessels as' it 'is faced with the 
resource crunch. All public ferries are being operated by the private ferry operators who are 
operating only cross ferry on the National Waterway No. 1. 
36. The main reason for the infinitesimally small order of cargo is very high freight 
charged by C.l.W .T.C. For example !.he present rate of cargo movement by C.I.W.T.C. 
from Patna to Calcutta is Rs. 250 per mt. handling charges not included, whereas railway 
freight betwee n Patna and Calcutta is only Rs. 180 per mt. including loading· and unloading. 
The above transport between Patna and Calcutta by road is in the range of Rs. 3501- to 

33 
Rs. 4(Xll. per mt. including all loading and unloading with a door to door service and much 
less time. Time constraint is another factor. It takes 11 days from Calcutta to Patna which is 
upstream movement, and 7 days frOm Patna to Calcutta on dqwn strea m movement. But rail 
or road are less time-consuming than the waterways. The Committee is surprised to know 
that from 1989 to March, 1995, the C.l. W.T.C.'s freight was more or less comparable to the 
railways rate of Rs. 180 per mt. but from March, 95 ClWTC has drastically increased the 
freight which has adversely affected service of the IWT mode of transport. The Sub­
Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Ministry of Sudace Transport · to red11ce the 
freight to the level of the rates being charged by the Railways. 
37. There is an uncertainty looming large over the movement of cargo vessels. Nobody 
would place at risk his goods in such an environment or irregular ~crvices C.l.W.T.C. should 
ply more cargo vesselS on the Patna-Calcutta Waterway and ensure regularity. Also there is 
lack of adequate publicity about the vessels of CI\VfC carrying cargo. Whatever little cargo 
is available is sent through rail or road due to ignorance about the waterway transport unless 
there is n long .term policy there will be no avai labi lity of cargo for water transport. Water 
transport for carrying goods should be popularised with concerted efforts of Cl WTC and 
State Govt. The Sub-Committee recommends that industrial belts by the state government 
along the banks on National Waterway No. 1 should be created to ensure cargo avilability 
for water lransport. 
38. State .Govt. which is not running any ferry services should initiate ferry services to 
offset the load of traffic on rail and roads which has reached saturation point. Bihar Govt. 
has a proposal to start longitudina l ferry service along the River Ganges within the city of 
Patna by Private Ferry Farmen;. The private sector is to be invited very soon. The Sub­
Committee hopes that plan will take off very soon and will help promote the passenger 
traffic on water. 
39. River bank protection is the prime job of the State Govt. The Sub-Committee 
noticed that at many places on river Gange'S heavy bank erosion was going on for years 
without any protective measures being taken by the State Govt. Sands and silts thus eroded 
flow downstream silting the navigational channel. State Govt. as such should pay attention in 
time to prevent such erosion in the interes t of safety of villages on the river bank and 
secondarily for the maintenance of inland navigational channel. 
40. At present there is no permanent 1crminal_.facility in Bihar: IWAI proposes to 
establish a permanent terminal at Gaighat (.Patna) and floating terminals at Munger and 
Bhagalpur very soon. But the Sub-Committee wa~ aghast to know that though the land (3.24 
acre) at Ghaighat for construction or permanent terminal has .been transferred to the IWAl 
on paper, it is still under unauthorised occupation. Its physical possession is yet to be given 
to Lhe IW AI. The state Govt. should expedi te the action and rend er all possible help to the 
lWAl for construction of a pennancnt terminal. Appro ach roud• also to these terminals 
have to be provided by the State Govt. The Committee regrets to know that IWA1 Office at 
Patna continues to be under unauthorised encro;~chment since long · back. The Sub­
Committee has reasons to believe that the approach of the State Govt. for evicting 
unauthorised occupants of the office premises was not result oriented. The Sub·COmmittec 
de£ircs that the State Govt. should make all out efforts to ensure tha t rhe JWA I functions 
without any hindrance. 
40.1 The Sub-Committee noticed that most of the terminals in Bihar are located 'on the 
South bank of the Ganges river The Sub-Committee recommend that the possibility of 
providing terminals on the North hank also should be explored alongwith reviving the old 
termtnab. 
41 Arrangement for night navigation faci lity and permanent chan nel marking during 

34 
the lean season should be proviued by LWAI. Out: to lack of these facilities, the movement 
of cargo dwing night is not feasible. This will not only help in time saving but also ensure 
uninterrupted flow of important cargo to its destination. 1 he major constraint is the control 
of the Navigational Lock by the Ministry of Water Resowces instead of the Mmistry of 
Surface Transport. To avoid any delay in the operation of the Lock, its control should be 
banded over to the IWAJ. Moreover, frequent cases of silting in the U/s mouth of the Lock 
have been reported and the Farakka Darrage Authority i ~ not properly equipped to dredge 
the above siltation. With lWAI's sophisticated dredgers, the lock mouth can be cleared in 
much less time. 
42. The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommends that the control, operation and 
maintenance of tbe Navigational Lock be handed over to the IWAI. 
43. State Govt. 's Transpon Department should ensure that private entrepreneurs not 
only opera te cross river ferry services but also ply long distance serv.ice along the river. This 
will hdp reduce the volume of traffic on rail and roads . 
43.1 The Sub-Committee observed that there is no repair facility at Patna and 
Guwahati. Vessels have to be carried to Calcutta for even minor repair s which is quite 
expensive. ll1c Sub-Committee recommend that such facility should be provided locally. 
~- Water transpon ~bould be interconnected with road and rail services. These modes 
of transport should coordinate to ensure smooth and easy transport on waterways. At 
present water transport by cross ferry_ in river G<1nges at Rajmahul , Bhagalpur, Sultanganj, 
M!illger. Buxar, Kahalga on, Kodhagole only has been coordinated with road and rail in the 
State of Bihar. The State Government should cnswe that integrated s~tem of transport 
shou ld be developed. The Sub-Commiucc also feels that there is n ~ed for greater t O· 
operation and co-ordination between LW.A.I . C.LW .T.C. and State Govts. l'he Sub­
Committee desires that a co-ordinate approach should be developed towards promoting 
Inland Water Transport. 
45. There are immense potentialities of cargo movement on Patna-Calcutta waterway. 
There are great prospects of cargo movement from Nepal between Haldia and Balmiki 
Nagar by tbe JWf. As per commitment by one min i steel plant, (Malvika Steel Pvt. Ltd. of 
U.P.) about I ,50,000 tonnes or coke per annum has to be transported from Haldia ro 
Jagdishpur in U.P. on tbe rivc:r Ghagra. for this stretch of 250 km., river Ghagra from 
Chapra to Jagdishpur (U.P.) has to be bro ught under the navigational activities for the 
movement of above cargo. TI1is is under review by the IWAl, There are possibilities of 
sending Banana cargo also by way of water from Patna to Calcutta. 
46. State Govt. of Bihar should make efforts that its state Departments i.e. industry. 
food supply, commerce. road construction, water resources. and Bihar Chamber of 
commerce make the cargo available ror the wa1er transport. Similnrly WO Surfa ce 
Transport shou ld direct concerning Dcptts. 10 make the goods like newsprint, crude oil, 
foodgrains and essential commodities. fert ili zer~ etc. available to cargo vessels opera ting 
between Calcutta and Patna. 
47. Feas ibility study on the river Gandak has been completed by the RITES but it~ 
report is yet to be submitted to the State Govt. A similar study will be conducted on the 
river Ko5i by the RITES. lf the studic~ made by the RITES are positive, it will give 
tremendous boos t to water transport in, the region . 
48. The Sub-Committee took the opponunity to enquire about the State Govt. ·~ 
Tourism plan related to waterwuys. The Sub-Committee was apprised th3t baseu on the 
survey and project report of the NatiOn;ll lnstilu te of Ws t er-~ports, GOtl, Govcnunent 
propose to introduce watersports facilitic> at Patna (Ganga) with Ooating restaurants and 3 

·-
35 
boats, etc . Hazaribagh (with 10 t'xla!S nnd other equipments) Tilaiya ~with 6 boats and other 
equipments) and Maithan (with 2 bQats etc.) with the help of the pnvate sector in the first 
phase. Central Govt. bas released a tOlal sum of Rs. 4.75 lakhs for developing Watersport s 
activities in the State out of the sanctioped project of Rs. 25.07 lakhs. 
49. The Sub-Committee notes with 'satisfaction that implementation of the report 
submitted by NIWS would increase watetsjl(?rt facilities available to tourist and naturally 
more tourists will enjoy watersports at viable places through out Bihar. Increased number of 
f;teilities for watcrsport lovers will attract a ne"" class of tourists to new destinations. The 
Committee would recommend that alongwith the above schemes, a view of the Ganges river 
should be projected and popularised among such category of tourists for publicity purpose 
through parnphletes, hordings etc. 
49.1 The Sub-Committee recommends that air servi~s on Delhi-Patna-Gaya-Ranchi 
circuit should be augmented to facilitate convenient arrival of tourists to those places. 
SO. The Committee find~ ii e.ncouraging that the Govt. of Bihar has declared tourism as 
an industry in order to promote tourism in the state. Various concessions and incentives 
admissible to the entrepreneurs as a result thereof will help in expanding infrastructural of 
facilities like water, electricity, accommodation, the State, Depu . of Tourism, Bihar has 
taken a decision to iniioduce water sports/adventure like trekking at potential places in 
Bihar. The services of experts from the National lnstitute of Water Sport, Goa were 
obtained for the purpose. The sports which have been identified ' are:-
Ganges ln Pa tna, Tilaya and Masangore Dams, Hazaribagh and R~ncni lakes, Maithan, 
Topchanchi and Parchet water resources. 
The process for procuring of necessary equipments for the purpose has begun. Central 
financial assistance has also been made available. 
51. If these sports are developed and are in full-fledged operation, tourism in the State 
"'111 assume a new dimension and diversified look. Efforts are needed to cn~ure 
operat ionality of the projects with a minimum time-schedu le, and make them public. The 
involvement of private sector is also essential in water sports to overcome the financial boule 
necks for boosting up of the tourism sector. Necessary concessionslfacilittes to the private 
entrepreneurs should be provided wherever necessary. 
52. The Sub-Comminee do not see a necessity to put Tourism Department with 
Irrigation in Bihar Government. Toursism has a closer affinity wit.h the Transport 
Department rather than Irrigation. This would have facilitated better coordination between 
the Tourism and Transport Department of Bihar which the Sub-Committee noticed was 
lacking there. 
NEw DEL.HJ; 
Aug. 19, 1995 
Sravana 28, 1917 (Saka) 
SIVAJI PATNAlK, 
Convenor. 

MINUTES OF TilE MEETING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-II OF THE 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITIE E ON 
TRANSPORT Al"D TOURISM 
1loe Comm ittee met at 03.00 P.M. on Saturday, the 19th August. 1995 in Room No. 
124, First Floor. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
L Shri Sivaji Patnaik-Convenor 
2. Sbri Naresh Yaclav 
3. Shri Ram Sunder Das '. 
SECRETARlAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram , Deputy Secretary, 
2. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain , Under Secretary 
3. Sbri K. P. Singh, Commillce Otricer 
I. The Sul:>-Commitlee considered and adopted its draft study report on [nland 
Waterway~ in Assam , West Bengal and Bihar. with slight modifications. 
2. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. 
36 

List of lhe Witnesses appeared before the Sub-Committee-11 at Guwahali, Calcuua and Patna 
held on 25th, 26th and 27th Jul), 1995 
1. Shri P.P . Verma, Commissioner and Secretary, Transport, Govt. of Assam 
2. Shri K.N. Chetia , Managing Director, Assam State Transpon Corporation 
3. Shri S. Neog, Joint Commissioner, Govt. of Assam 
4. Shri P.K. Dey, Director , I.W.T., Govt. of Assam 
5. Shri N.C. Das, Addl. Director, J. W.T. Assam 
6. Shri Hazari L.al, Under Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transpor t 
7. Shri A.K. Sinharay, MGR (Tech & Opn.) CiwrC Ltd . 
8. Shri A. Sarkar , Director, 1. W.A.l. Guwahati 
9. Shri P.K. Bora, Addl. Chief Secretary and Special Commissioner, 
Tour ism Govt. of A~sam 
10. Shri R.K . Barva, Secretary Tourism , Govt. of Assam 
11. Shri Ravi Kapoor, Add!. Secretary , Tourism, Govt. of Assam 
12. Shrimati Nilima Dutta Deuri, Deputy Secretary, Govt. of Assam 
13. Shri J.N . Goswami. Direc tor , Tour ism, Govt. of Assam 
14. Shri J. Choudhdury , Ac..ldl. Director, Tourism, Govt. of Assam 
15. Shri H.K. Nakvi, Joint Director , Govt. of Assam 
16. Shri K.L. Das, Director, Dept!. of Tourism. Govt. of india 
17. Shri I. Majumdar, Sr. Manager. ITDC, Calcutta 
18. Shri S.N. Roy, Principal Secretary, Transport Depa rtmen t, Govt. of West Bengal 
19. Shri S. Ghosh, Joint Secretary. Transport Dept!., Govt. of West Bengal 
20. Shri B. Basu, Managing Director, West Bengal Surface Transport Corporation & 
Joint Secretary, Tran~port Department, Govt. of West Bengal 
21. Shr i M.K. Chatterjee, Director, 1wr, Govt. of West Benga l 
22. Shri S. Dandapat. Deputy Director, IW A I. Calcutta 
23. Shri S. Mitra, General Manager. C.I.W.T.C . Ltd. Calcutta 
24. Shri A.K. Dev, Secretary, Tourism, Govt. of West Bengal 
25. Shri Prashant, Managing Director, Towism, West Bengal To'urism Development 
Corporati on. 
26. Shri K. Mohapatra. Director, Tourism, Govt. of West Bengal 
27. Shri Mandai, Joim Director, Touri~m. Govt. of West Bengal 
28. Shri S. Bhauacharjec, Deputy Secretary, Tourism Departmeni, Govt. of West 
13engal. 
29. Shri S.M. Gani, Director. Deptt. of Tourism, Govt. of India 
30. Shri J.L Arya , Secretary, Transport, Govt . of Bihar 
31. Shri Vya~Ji , Transport Commissioner, Govt. of Bihar 
32. Shri A.K. Sinha, Tnmsport Commission.er, Govt. of Bihar 
33. Shri A.R . Ghatak, Director. JWAJ, Patna 
34. Shr: A .K. Moiua, Asstt . Director , LWAI, Patna 
35. Shri Harshvarthan. APRO, lWAJ, Patna 
36. Shri M.K. Srivastava , Director, Tour ism, Govt. of Bihar 
37. Shri P. Jajoria, Director, Deptt of Tourism, Oovt. of India, 
38. Shri Ram Bali Sinha. Asm. DirecJor, Govt. of India 
39. Shri Ranjit Duua, General Manager , ITDC, Hotel Patliputra, Palna 
37 

-
APPENDIX-ITI 
List of Witnesses appeared before the Committee 
S.No. Name of Witnesses 
l. Shri C.L. Ramdas, Sccret{lry, 
Ministry of Surface Transport 
2. Shri R. P. Sinha , Chairman, IWAI 
3. Shri <::.S. KhaiJwa1, Joint Secretary. 
(Ports & IWf), M/o Surface Transport 
4. Shri V. Chellappan, Member (Tech.), !WAI 
5. Shri A .K. Chaudhary, Chief Manager 
(Commercial), ClWfC Ltd., Calcutta 
'· 6. 
7. 
s. 
9. 
I 0. 
II. 
12. 
13. 
Shri Khanjanlal , Secretary 
(Transport Deptt.), Government of U.P. 
Shri Naseem Zaidi, Transport Commissioner, 
Government of Unar Prade.~h 
Shri C.P. Singh, Additional Transport 
Commissioner, Government of U.P. 
Shri Vijaya Kumaran Nair, Deputy Chief 
Engineer (Mech.) , Irrigation Department 
Shri S.N. Roy, Principal Secretary, 
Home (Transport) Deptt ., Govt. of W. Bengal 
Shri Basu, Joint Secretary & Manag~ng 
Director, Government of West Bengal 
Smt. Chandana Khan , Secreta f) , Transport 
Road Buildings Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh 
Shri S.S. Yechury , Honorary Advisor, lWAJ, 
Governme nt of Andhra Pradesh 
38 
Date 
5.7.95 
5.7.95 
5.7.95 
5.7.95 
5.7.95 
20.7.95 
20.7.95 
20.7.95 
20.7.95 
20.7.95 
20.7 95 
20.7.95 
20.7 .95 

I 
.r.. 
APPEND! X-V 
(Vide Pant 23 of tht> Rcpon ) 
.... 
" 
... 
--------------
·.~ 
( 
I 
/ ' .1\ 
I ' I 
I / 
BRAHMAPUTRA RIVER 
(Nf,T IONAL WATERWAY N<;?-11) 
' s I 
; 
• I 
< I 
I I 
1.< 
' 
) 
I 
' / 
/ 
I 
/ 
_, 
8 H 
( H ~ A 
~ 
1 I B£1 _,_ 
I ' 
.../ .._ -·) ,.... / 
\ 
) 
I 
u A \H 
' ' " ' - / 
I -
' 
~ \ 
~ \ 
~'­
'/ 
' I 
> 
1\ u 
I 
) 
,, 
) , ... \ .. . -~ · ..... 
, S-- r-·- "' - GA).<Ar~l 
... 
.,_ I 
\ 
' -~- I ; . ~ -! 1 Cl PUR -:;:;.---
WE~i 
, _ 
' r' 
..,, ,9 . 
8~ fiG.'\.L 
--- ~ 
" 
-- j • s~ . 
I 
OUBf{ I 
JOC.I-IjQrt/. ~· ·/ ~ ,·/' __...---. -~{.UW~lthll 
_,..--- . ~ PAIIOU 
--
. I - -1-, . - · 
(
;-;./ .. ······ :, . ... 
I \ 
(/1 . · ··• 
1/ .. 
'\ 
~~~ I 
M E G 
J
:C1f·- _._ 
( - -. -r:. 
l &-•\ ~~ ~ . > ' 
I ' :r ' ·, 
I ' 
H A A I 
0 s K 
A 
~ 
. 
I~ 
--
,.. 
I 
') 
' ' , ·. -' 
' ... ~ 
A 
. 
• 
', ) 
;/J "f"(ll'tJii."o ... I':' I, A t-• 
/ 
, 
I 
.f ; 
~ 
...... (: 
J 
I 
I 
I 
, 
--~-
(~" , .. '\ . 0 
~"· " t " '>-Y 
' 
:! Sf 
~ 
< •. ---(' N 
'· A 
) \ 
'- ,, . \. 
SAOIYA 
,, I , ,.. 
- -·' 
. ' 
I 
<:> I 
+ I 
~ I 
.... 
' I 
-.\ 0 
O><t.'ttStRl• Mux>< ·: :' : ,. 
" ' ~ 
~ u 
·· ~ 
., 
~ 'i _. N 1.1 J. P 
; 
' DISTANCES · / .. .. ~ .. ·: .. 
.. B BORDER - TEZ PUI'l 
T EZPUR - 018RUC,AilH 
Ot8RUGARH - SA 0 • YA 
2SO 
SC8 
12 3 
""'' I otms O"S \ i<I'T"$ 
,.,.,, I .. 
I 
4t.N IPL' A 
• ...., - I ','./ , ___ . 
I 
RE.fERENC E 
1 'lt.."';'IQNA.l WATERW.~v LJf-··'d fS 
'' "i iE:,...PORARY TE;:IMINACS 
IV;f TEHM INAL5( 5=anr.lio t'!el 
1\v1 TEAMINALS(Ptopo~e z 

APPENDIX-VI 
(Vide Para 27 of the Report) 
WEST COAST CANAL 
( KOTTAPUHAM · KOL LAN!, UOYOGAf-IA~~-A L;;;....;.&.:...CHAM PAKKAR A CANAL 5) 
NATIONAl. WATEI'W/\Y ;g? Ill 
I I•[O!JAIC <t 
iKO llAP URAMw~~"''AI'"'H 
~ IAITAPAL In 
•• 
0 
tJI~l~t'll;~2 -
K01lAPURA~I-KQ(I II 
!(()CHI· Al t..Pf'UlHA 
ALAPPUZHt..-KOLLAM 
CHAMPAKKARA (ANAl 
LOYOGJ\MA~Al CANIIl 
REFERENCE: 
WATfRWAY AUGI'.MEN r 
0 30 l<ms 1 
Jo - n 1<ms l 92 -1f.A kms 20S ~,... < 
1~ kms 
2J kms 
TERMINAL LOCATION (PROPOSED) 0 
41 
f( 
E 
R 
A 
L 

MINUTES 
....... 

r-
•vm 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P. M. on Tuesday, the 20th September , 1994 in Room No. 
139, First Floor, Parliament House Anne"e• New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairma n 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John F. Fern andes 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
S. Snri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
7. Shri Ra~havji 
8. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
9. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
10. Snri Vilasrao Nagnathr ao Gundewar 
II. 'Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Snri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
13. Shri A. Char les 
14. Snri Peter G. Marbaniang 
15. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
16. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
17. Shri Jangbir Singh 
18. Shri Santosh Kum ar Gangwar 
19. Prof. Prcm Dhumal 
20. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
21. Shri Kalka Das 
22. Shr! Vishwanath Das Shastri 
23. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
24. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
25. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
26. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
27. Shri Uday Prata p Singh' 
SECRE TARIAT 
I. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husa in, Under Secrewy 
4. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
2. • • 
3. • • 
4. • • 
5. The Committee also decided to take 
Waterways. 
6. • 
• 
• 
• 
up 
• 
The Commit tee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
(i) National 
•t to VIJ mectinp of the Commiue-e rela1e 10 m-ilft:rs no1 1oduckd tn this Repon. 
••• Rel.ates lo mBitets not inCJ\Idcd in' this Report. 
• • 
• • 
• • 
Highway and National 
• 

'IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The CommiUee met at 3.00 Y.M. on Wednesday, the 24th May, 1995 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground floor, Parli~ment House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Muhajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John F. Fernandes 
4. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviyu 
5. Shri Raghavji 
LOK SAUUA 
6. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
7. Shri A. Charles 
8. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhuhoor 
9. Shri K.M. M:tthcw 
10. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
J 1. Shri lmchalcmba 
12. Shri s~ntosh Kumar Gangwar 
13. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
14. Shri Vi~hwanath q~s Shu~tri 
15. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
16. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
17. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
18. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
19. Shri S.M. uol Jan Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sat ish Kumar. Joont Secretary 
2. Sbri Raj~ Rum. Deputy Secretary 
3. Shn Syed Au~:•f Husain . Under Secretary 
4. Sh11 K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
2. ••• ••• 
3. . .. ~ 4 l t 
4. ...... *";t 
5. • •• • •• 
6. u • • •• 
7 • • • ••• 
• •• 
••• 
••• 
• •• 
••• 
... 
8 The Committee decided to hold ots next meeung on Tuesday. the 20th June, 1995 to 
consider Inland Waterways in the L'QUiltl y . 
• The Commiuec then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. 
'"11..: Cumnltlt.:O<": ""3S rt:u>c\\UIUttd ., t ( !< ..; JYJ!\ and I tO Ill flliet:li•~ «»f -~ Comrniucc r~latt 10 msUtn no1 ltw:ludtd tn th.l\ 
R<ro¥1 
...... Rt'l.tlt'S to nt:JUCC\ n()t mtludcd tn thl\ fiq)('rl 

v 
FIFTH MEETiNG 
The Cornmillee met at 3.00 P.M . on Tucsda)', the 20th June . 1995 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
l. Shn Pramod Maitapn-Chairman 
RAJ)' A SA I>l:!t\ 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John F. Fernandes 
4. Shri Bhadreswa r Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prcsad Gup ta 
6. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
'· Shri Ra&ha·tji 
d. Shrima\i Bassntl Sarma 
9. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SAilHA 
10. Shri Yilasrao NagnathrarJ G undewu 
11. Shri K. Muralcedharan 
12. Shri A. Charles 
13. Shri Ourcharan Singh Dar.Jhahoor 
14. Shri K.M . Mathew 
15. Shri Peter G . Marbaniang 
16. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
17. Shri Imchalemba 
JS. Shri Manphool Singh 
19. Shri Jangbir Singh 
20. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
21. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
22. Shri Chaurapal Singh 
23. Slu:i Kalka Das 
24. Shri Sivaji l'a tnaik 
25. Shri Sukl1endu Khan 
26. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
27. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
28. Shri Ram Sund er Das 
29. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Join t Secreta ry 
2. Shri Nand Lal . Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain , Under Secretary 
4. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
2. ..... • .. ., ••• ••• 
J. The:"af ter, ihe Committee took up the !JJiand Waterways ior consideration . Some of 
the members e;;pressed their concern on the low priority given to the lnla.nd Wat~rways 
despite the fact' that i' was the chMpest and environr~~nt ~rie.1dly mode of transport. 
4. The Committee jecici~rl 10 hear the Secretary , Ministry of Surface Transport, and 
also the Chaimu:n. ln land Waterways Author i1y of india (I.W .A.l.) in tite matter at its 
..... Rcbtcs to mau ers not jnc1ut.Scc1 in lhi:. Report. 
47 

m~eting to be held on the 5th July, 1995. The Committee also decided to bear the 
representatives of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam, 
Kerala, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa in the matter. 
5. The Committee directed the Secretar iat ' to issue a Press CommWlique inviting views 
of individuals/organisations and institutions in writing for consideration of the Committee. 
6. The Comminee decided to hold its next meeting on the 5th July, 1995. 
The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 P.M . 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. ou Wednesday, the 5th July, 1995 m Committee 
Room 'C', Grou nd Floor, Parl iament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Prarn od Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABBA 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri JoiUl F. Fernandes 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Na rain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya. 
7. Shri Raghavji 
8. Shri Iqbal Singh 
9. Shri Nares h 'i'adav 
LOK SABRA 
\0. Shri Vilusrao Nagnathrao Gundew~r 
I I. Shri K. Mural eedharan 
12. Shri A . Charles 
13. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
14. Shri Swamp U p.aql}ay~y 
15. Shri C. K. Kuppu.~wam y 
H). Shri lmcha lemba 
17. Shri Manphool Singh 
18:. Shri K. D. Sultan puri 
19. Shri Jangbi r Singh 
20. Prnf. Prem Dhuma l 
21. Shri K:tlka Das 
22. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
23. Shri Yishwana th Das Shustri 
24 . Shri Sivaj i Patna ik 
25. Shr i Sukhendu Kh<lll 
26. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
27. Shri Ram Naresh S ingh 
28. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
29. Shr i Uctay Pra wp Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri Satis h Kumar, Joint Secreta ry 
2. Shri Raja Ra nt, Depu ty Secretary 
J. Shri Syed Au~af Husain, Under Secretary 
4. Shri K. P. Singh, Committee Office r 
MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPOltT 
1. Shr i C. N. Ramda~. Secretary (S.F.T.) 
2. Shri R. P. Sinb<t. Chairman IWAI. 
3. Shri C. S. Khn11w<tl, Jt. Secy . (Port> & lWT) 
~- Shli Y. Chellapp~n, Member (Tech .) l'INAI 
5. Shri A. K. Chaudhary , Chief Manager (Commercial) Cl\VfC Ltd. Calcuua 
6. Slui JZ. K. Sharma. Under Secrctury, (IWT ) 
2. The Cocnm iuee he<Hd the Secre tar y, Ministry of Sutface T •·ansport and the 

.. 
50 
Chair man, Inland Waterways Authority of india (IWAI) on the National W;o t erway~ in the 
country and muuer~ connected with it. The members then ~ought clanricatious from th~ 
representatives 
A verbatim record or the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Comm ittee then ded<.lcd to cons titute its two Sui>-Commiuees to study the 
Nationa l Waterways and other ln lun<.l Waterway~ and mailers connected the rewith. The Sub· 
Commillees consi>t of following members: 
SUB-COMi\tiTl'EFr-1 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Ciwirman 
2. Shr i J"IW Singh Dard 
3. Shri 13hadrcswar Gohain 
4. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Sbri Raghavji 
6. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
7. Shri A . Charles 
8. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
9. Shri Jmchalemba 
10. Shri Jangbir Singh 
II. Prof. Prem Ohumal 
12. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
SUB-COMMITIEFr-ll 
l. Shri Lokanath Choudhury•-Convenor 
2. Shri John F. Fernandc> 
3. Shrimati Dasanti Sarma 
4. Shri Narcsh Yadav 
5. Shri Vilasmo Nagnalhrao Gundcwar 
6. Shri Kalka Das 
7. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
8. Shri Sukhcndu Khan 
9. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
4. The Commiuee also decided that Sub-Commiuee -I will hold disciJssions with the 
representatives of State Governments of K.erala and Goa al Trivandrum and Panaji 
respec tively. Whereas lhe Sub-Comm iuee-11 will hold d iscussions with representatives of the 
Government of A~am , Wc~ t Bengal and Bihnr at Guwahati, Calculla and Patna 
respectively. The Committee further decided lhat the Sub-Commiuces would simultaneously 
visit the Respective States in the last week of lhe month. 
S. The Commiuee then decided to hold its next meetings on 20th and 21st July. 1995. 
The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M • 

vn 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The CollUllittee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesd.ay, the 20th July, 1995, in Room No. 53, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Sbri Prarnod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Sbri S. Austin 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Buras.ohain 
5. S]lri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
6. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
8. Shri Raghavji 
9. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
10. Shri Iqbal Singh 
11. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
12. Sbri fo{aresh Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
13. Shri Vilasrao Nagnatbrao Gundewar 
14. Sbri A. Charles 
15. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
16. Sbri Peter G. Marbaniang 
17. Sbri Imchalemba 
18. Sbri Manphool Singh 
19. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
20. Sbri Jangbir Singh 
21. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
22'. Prof. Prem Dhwnal 
23. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
24. Shri Kalka Das 
25. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
26. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
27. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
28. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
' 29. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
30. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
31. Shri Krishna Marandi 
51 

52 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausai Husain, Under Secretary 
4. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee OUicer 
GOVT. OF UTTAR PRADESH (TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri Khanjanlal, Secretary 
2. Shri Naseem Zaidi, Transport Commissioner 
3. Shri C.P. Singh, Additional Transport Commissioner 
GOVT. OF KERALA (IRRIGATION DEPARTMENT) 
Shri Vijaya Kumaran Nair, Deputy Chief Engineer 
GOVT. OF WEST BENGAL, HOME (TRANSPORT) DEPARTMENT 
1. Shri S.N. Roy, Principal Secretary 
2. Shri Basu, Joint Secretary & Managing Director 
GOVT. OF ANDHRA PRADESH (TRANSPORT, ROADS AND BUILDING DEPTT.) 
l. Smt. Chandana Khan, Secretary 
2. Shri S.S. Yechury, Honorary Advisor, Inland Water TranspGrt, Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh, Hyderabad. 
2. The Committee heard the Secretary Transport Department, Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, the Principal Secretary, Home (Transport Department), Government of West 
Bengal, Chief Engineer. Irrigation Department, Government of Kerala and the Secretary 
(Transport, Roads and Buildings), Government of Andhra Pradesh on Inland Water 
Transport and matters connected therewith. 
A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee, thereafter decided to appoint the following members to the Sub­
Committee- !. 
1. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
• 2. Shri Iqbal Singh 
3. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
$. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
6. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.. 

• 
vm 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd August, 1995 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
l. Shri Prumod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Jugir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
4. Sbri Rughavji 
5. Sbri Iqbul Singh 
6. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SADHA 
7. Sbri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
8. Shri A. Charles 
9. Sbri Gurcharan Singh DadhahooL 
10. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
11. Sbri lmchalemba 
12. Shri Santosh Kumar Gungwar 
13. Prof. Prem DhumHI 
14. Sbri Arvind Trivedi 
15. Sbri Sivuji Putnaik 
16. Sb.ri Sukhendu Khan 
17. Sb.ri Rum Naresh Singh 
18. Shri S.M. Lal Jun Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
l. Shri Ashok Tomar , Director 
2. Shri Ruja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husuin, Under Secretary 
4. Shri K. P. Singh. Committee Officer 
2. The Committee consid ered and adopted its 18th Report on 'Inland Waterways '. The 
Committe e authorised tho Chairman und in his absence Slui N~~re:;h Yadav to present the 
Report in Rajya Sabhu and Shri A. Charles and in his absence Shri Sivaji Patnuik to lay the 
Report on the Table of Lok Subha . 
3. • •• ... • •• • •• 
4. ••• ••• • •• • •• 
The Committee then adjourned at 6.05 P.M . 
53 