R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
REPORT
 
CHARTERING AND MANAGEMENT OF FLIGHTS FOR HAJ PILGRIMS
            India is a multilingual, multicultural and multi-religious country.  A large number of people visit religious places
 within and outside the country.  Haj pilgrimage is also one such important annual event and every year a large number
 of people from India and all over the world visit Jeddah for Haj pilgrimage.  As per Government estimates, nearly
 72,000 people from India performed Haj pilgrimage in 2000 through the arrangement of the Central Haj Committee. 
2.         Before 1995, the transportation of Haj pilgrims to Jeddah and back was undertaken by air and sea.  The sea
 transportation was through Mugal Line Limited till June 1986, after which the Shipping Corporation of India Limited
 took over.  Some difficulties were faced in the provisioning of ships for Haj operations since this caused the diversion
 of the regular ships from the mainland-island services.  As the subsidy by sea passage was more than the subsidy for air
 passage, it was considered to continue Haj operations by air alone and stop sea travel altogether and since 1995 Haj
 pilgrims are being transported to Jeddah by air only. 
3.         The Ministry of Civil Aviation, while giving the details of history of Haj operations, informed the Committee
 that as a policy, the Government of India has been subsidizing the Haj charter operations to facilitate performance of
 Haj pilgrimage even by socio-economically weaker sections of Society.  The amount charged as airfare from the
 pilgrims has more or less remained the same in the last ten years whereas the Government’s subsidy has shown a
 tremendous increase.  The information regarding the number of pilgrims, number of flights, fares and the subsidy per
 pilgrim since 1991 is as under:-
Year Total No. of
 Pilgrims
Total No. of
 Flights
Total cost
(Rs.)
Fare charged
from each
pilgrim (Rs.)
Subsidy per
pilgrim (Rs.)
1991 18199 -- 14,056 10,000 4,056
1992 19495 61 15,300 10,500 4,800
1993 20621 59 18,000 11,000 7,000
1994 21017 72 17,000 12,000 5,000
1995 30503 69 17,500 12,000 5,500
1996 50347 120 19,403 12,000 7,403
1997 53766 137 26,600 12,000 14,600
1998 63648 176 29,518 12,000    17,518 *
1999 62103 157 29,640 12,000    17,640 *
2000 71924 191 31,044 12,000    19,044 *
*  Provisional
 
4.            However, since the last few years, there have been a lot of complaints regarding the chartering of flights,
 condition of aircraft deployed and the gross mismanagement in the facilities provided to the Haj pilgrims.  Keeping in
 view the enormity of the event and the fact that the most of the Hajis are senior citizens and that there had been a lot of
 discontentment among the pilgrims who had undertaken the pilgrimage in Haj-2000, the Committee took up the subject
 for examination and report and held discussions with the various agencies involved in the organisation of Haj
 pilgrimage.  The Committee also undertook study visits to Calcutta, Mumbai, Cochin, Chennai and other places to
 gather first hand information and interacted with the representatives of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, External
 Affairs, Air India, Airports Authority of India, Central Haj Committee, various State Haj Committees and NGOs
 working to help in organizing the Haj pilgrimage.
5.         During its deliberations with the various agencies involved with the Haj operations, State Haj Committees/NGOs
 etc. informed the Committee about the problems faced by the Haj pilgrims since the last few years.  Some of these are
 condition of aircraft, delay/dislocation of flights, lack of information to the Hajis, lack of basic amenities at airports,
 loss/mishandling of baggage, language communication problems, behaviour of cabin crew of the aircraft, late receipt of
 visa from the Saudi Arabian Embassy, communication gap between the Central Haj Committee and the State Haj
 Committees, lack of accommodation for pilgrims due to delay/cancellation of flights etc. 
6.            Regarding the management of Haj operations, the Committee was informed that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 was handling the movement of Haj pilgrims to/from Saudi Arabia upto 1995.  However, in 1996, the Government took
 a decision enabling the Central Haj Committee to take over the function of wet leasing of aircraft from outside charter
 operators.  But the Central Haj Committee was unsuccessful in procuring aircraft for Haj operations in time and,

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
 therefore, Air India had to deploy its own aircraft as well as aircraft wet leased on emergency basis from three other
 parties for operating the Haj charter flights.  Thereafter, the Government decided to restore the earlier procedure for
 Haj-1997 entrusting the task to Air India in association with representatives of the Central Haj Committee, Ministry of
 External Affairs, Department of Civil Aviation and Directorate General of Civil Aviation. 
7.         During the period from 1992 to 2000, the names of the parties who operated the Haj charter flights alongwith the
 aircraft type are given as under :-
Year Name of the operator Aircraft type
1992 Air India/Indian Airlines AI-B747/IC-A310
1993 Aeroflot IL-86
1994 European Airlines AB4
1995 Tower Air B747
1996 Air India/Okada Air/Air Atlanta/America Intl. B747
1997 Air India B747
1998 Air Charter World B747/DC10/L1011
1999 MIDO Aviation Group B747/L1011
2000 MIDO Aviation Group B747/L1011
 
8.         Haj operation is not a new event.  However, it appears that the Government is still experimenting with the Haj
 operations in so far as its operation is concerned.  Allocating the management of Haj operations to the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation and then to the Central Haj Committee and again to the Ministry of Civil Aviation shows adhocism on the part
 of the Government.  The Committee feels that by now the Government agencies involved in the management of Haj
 operations must have achieved expertise to handle these operations efficiently and taking benefit thereof, sincere efforts
 are required to make the Haj operations smooth and successful.  Therefore, instead of adhoc arrangements, there should
 be some regular arrangements for undertaking Haj operations.
9.         In a reply to a point regarding evolution of chartering of aircraft for Haj operations, the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation informed the Committee that prior to 1993, Air India/Indian Airlines undertook the Haj operations by
 deploying their own aircraft.  This resulted in innumerable cancellations of the scheduled flights, badly affecting the
 image of the airline with regard to operational reliability and resulting in loss of revenue and goodwill.  Therefore, from
 1993 onwards (except 1997), the arrangements for Haj operations were made by Air India with wet leased aircraft from
 charter companies.  The following are the reasons for chartering of aircraft for undertaking Haj operations: -
The entire Haj travel operations involve a heavy volume of traffic in a limited space of time every year.  Therefore, it is
 not economical to have dedicated aircraft devoted only to Haj operations.  The aircraft are very costly equipment and
 their economic viability depends on their optimal utilization.  If aircraft are purchased and kept specifically for the
 purpose of undertaking a time limited operation, it will prove to be much more expensive exercise as compared to the
 cost of chartering.
The current requirement is approximately 2400 seats a day.  Air India cannot deploy this capacity owing to its small
 fleet size.  Further, the whole fleet is optimally deployed for economic considerations.  However, in 1997, Haj
 operations had to be undertaken by Air India with its own aircraft.  This led to massive cancellation/reduction of its
 services to various stations.  This disruption in Air India’s scheduled flights because of the Haj movement invited
 criticism from all quarters and also caused a loss of reputation/image of the Airline, which it can ill-afford. 
 Consequently, it was decided that in future, the disruption of Air India’s scheduled flights be avoided and Haj
 operations be undertaken with chartered aircraft.
The deployment of Air India’s own aircraft for Haj may also entail the modification of seat configuration of Air India’s
 aircraft to suit these operations and this modification, both costs a lot of money and also needs a sufficient time period
 of around a month.  This would imply withdrawal of Air India’s aircraft not only for the period of Haj operations, but
 also for the modification period before and after these operations.
In high tourist seasons around the world, the extra passenger loads are carried on tourist charters.  Accordingly, the
 Central Haj Committee is organizing charter operations for the Haj traffic.
10.       The Committee also had the opportunity to peruse relevant para of C&AG Report on Haj operations.  Audit
 scrutiny of Haj operations of Air India for the period from 1993 to 1998 revealed that even though the operations were
 supposed to be conducted on no-profit-no-loss basis, substantial expenditure on these operations was absorbed by Air
 India itself.  The table below gives the details of the costs incurred by Air India and the amounts that could not be
 recovered by it thereagainst:
Cost of operation of Haj Charter flights

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
Particulars/Year 1993 1994 1995 1996 *1997 1998 Total
1. Total No. of       
 pilgrims
20621 21017 30503 50347 53766 63648 239902
2.Gratis passengers
 
206 600 600 -- -- -- 1406
3.Cost of
 operation                     
 (Rs. in crore)
37.27 34.80 53.42 97.69 144.13 187.59 554.90
* Operated through own aircraft.
 
Costs absorbed by Air India
(Rs. in lakh)
 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 Total
1. Giveaways to
 Pilgrims
20.00 @ 36.60 60.42 80.65 197.67
2. Catering on
 ground
19.00 @ 61.01 95.95 120.97 296.93
3. Ground handling
 of leased aircraft in
 Indian stations
181.88 219.59 213.24 357.19 # 971.90
4. Costs of carrying
 passengers on gratis
 basis
22.66 72.00 72.00 0 0 166.66
5. Variable
 cost/indirect fixed
 cost not charged
 (60%) on own
 operation
0 0 0 0 1945.80 1945.80
6. Discount offered
 by the      Chairman,
 AIL
0 0 100.00 0 0 100.00
7. Loss of Interest on delayed payments
A. Government ## 241.32 340.93 202.78 801.98 1587.01
B. Central Haj
 Committee
## 65.95 565.74 26.28 610.69 1268.66
8. Govt. dues waived
 by the Company.
*38.54 0.05 -- 0.02 -- 38.61
9. Loss of pool
 revenue
*50.17 13.23 NA 18.41 NA 81.81
Total 332.25 612.14 1389.52 761.05 3560.09 6655.05
@      Reimbursed by the Government.
#        Included in the cost of operation.
##      Details of dates of receipt not furnished by the Company. Interest (Simple) for the remaining years worked out @
 18% p.a. upto 31
st December 1998.
*        For 1992 and 1993.
 
11.       The Committee strongly disapproves delay/non-payment of dues to the Air India which resulted in loss to it
 because Air India was compelled to absorb a part of cost incurred on Haj operations such as giveaways to pilgrims,
 catering on ground, ground handling of leased aircraft on Indian stations, variable cost/indirect fixed cost not charged
 on own operation etc.  The Committee is concerned to note that the Government not only ignored the Air India’s
 difficult financial situation but by delay/non-reimbursing the cost of Haj operations incurred by Air India, the
 Government has committed an act which is against the fairness of reimbursing Air India for the services rendered by it,
 as pointed out in the C&AG report. 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
 
CHARTERING OF AIRCRAFT
12.       In a reply to a question regarding the procedure for chartering of aircraft, the Committee was informed that each
 year the Government of India constitutes the Haj Tender Committee comprising of representatives from the Central Haj
 Committee, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of External Affairs, Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Air
 India.  The Haj Tender Committee meets to decide on the arrangements for the Haj operation and to review the
 previous performance so as to bring about improvement.  The Tender process/procedure involves inviting of tender
 offers from airlines/charter operator for wet-lease capacity to transport the Haj pilgrims by means of Tender
 Enquiry/Notice, advertisement in Flight International magazine and insertion on Air India’s web-site.
13.       The Tender offers are required to be submitted within the stipulated deadline for both the financial aspects and
 the technical aspects.  The Haj Tender Committee meets to review the tender offers received.  The offers containing
 technical bids are opened and evaluated by a team of DGCA/Air India officials.  The financial offers of only those
 parties who are found to be technically suitable are opened and the operator selected for the Haj operation is as per the
 standard tender procedures.  In case the aircraft offered by the operator are more than 15 years old, the DGCA carries
 out inspection of the aircraft with the assistance of Air India Engineering personnel to establish the airworthiness of
 these aircraft.
14.       The Committee feels that the delay in the finalisation of the tender process is one of the major factors
 responsible for the delay in finalisation of flight schedule of the Haj pilgrims.  Haj operation is a planned annual event
 and the delay in award of contract for charter operations can certainly be avoided.  The Committee recommends that
 tenders for aircraft for Haj operations should be invited in advance and agreement signed with the operator at least three
 months prior to the commencement of operations so as to avoid the consequent delays and mismanagement.
 
DELAY/DISLOCATION OF FLIGHTS
15.       The Haj movement has been in operation for a long time but till now a large number of complaints with regard
 to the various aspects of management of Haj operations keep occurring.  In this connection, the Committee enquired
 about the dislocation/delay of flights during Haj 2000.  Giving the details in this regard, the representatives of Air India
 informed the Committee that the number of pilgrims transported from India to Jeddah and back for the Haj operations
 has increased substantially from approximately 10,000 in the year 1991 to around 72,000 in the year 2000.  Thus the
 entire Haj travel operations involve a heavy volume of traffic in a limited space of time every year.  Air India has
 claimed that the transportation of over 70000 pilgrims within a limited period of around 30 days on a no-profit-no-loss
 basis tantamount to a major operation where some delays etc. on account of technical snags etc. are inherent inspite of
 maximum planning.  For Haj movement 2000, the Ministry of Civil Aviation had earlier decided to give the contract to
 the same operator as per provision contained in the agreement for 1999 Haj operation.  Subsequently, the Ministry
 decided to go in for fresh tenders in order to inject transparency in the deal.  However, after a series of deliberations,
 M/s MIDO Aviation Group, UK, the same operator who had undertaken the Haj movement-1999, was selected for
 undertaking Haj movement-2000.  The operator deployed six wide-bodied aircraft for Haj movement. 
16.       Air India have also informed that during phase-I of Haj operation 2000, there had been certain problems.  Two
 aircraft were supposed to report at Delhi reported late by two days.  As for the remedial action, Air India aircraft were
 pressed into service and operations were not allowed to delay.  The collision to one of the 747 aircraft at IGI Airport,
 Delhi had also caused delay.  Further, two aircraft collided while taxing at Jeddah, which led to dislocation of the
 service.  Again there was another dislocation, which occurred on 14.4.2000, and it was a major engine trouble after it
 landed at Cochin and for three days the Engineers of MIDO Aviation group had to work on it.  This led to four days of
 dislocation of services of aircraft meant for Haj operations from Cochin. 
17.       As regards the airworthiness of aircraft, Air India has claimed that the question of selection of any aircraft whose
 performance is even remotely suspected does not arise.  It was also informed that the Management Committee for Haj
 2001 has decided to go in for younger aircraft.  In the first tender, Air India had asked for aircraft below 15 years age,
 but they did not get any response.  In the second tender, Air India has asked for aircraft below 20 years age.  Air India
 have stated that if aircraft below 15 years age do not become available, then they would go in for aircraft below 20
 years. 
18.       Air India has informed that private aircraft are chartered on ACMI (Aircraft, Crew, Maintenance and Insurance)
 basis and fuel.  It was brought to the notice of the Committee that during Haj 2000, the maintenance of the aircraft was
 very poor.  The food served was not good.  Water was not available and even the toilets were not clean.  The cabin
 crew displayed a rude behaviour.  The passengers were asked to keep sitting even when they wanted to go to the toilet. 
 The cabin crew of the aircraft was also not familiar with the language spoken by the Hajis, which also led to

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
 communication gap between the Hajis and the crew members.  At this point of time, the Committee was informed that a
 provision has been added in the new agreement that Indian crew would be present in all the Haj flights. 
19.       The Committee observes that there was a provision of penalty of US $ 1000 if the delay to the flight is more than
 four hours.  The Committee has not been informed of the quantum of the damages claimed from the defaulting airline
 and what further action the Government proposes to undertake against the airline in view of its poor performance.  The
 Committee observes that the damages claimed by Air India were not utilized for providing relief to the Hajis who had
 suffered a lot due to the dislocation of services and that the money was kept by the Government itself. Hajis were
 required to wait for a long time at the Airport itself and no proper accommodation was provided to them. The
 Committee feels that if there is a delay in flight, it is not the fault of the Hajis.  The Committee recommends that in case
 of delay in flights, the Hajis should be treated like the regular passengers and should be provided adequate boarding,
 lodging and catering facilities.  The Committee feels that Air India has been involved with the chartering of flights for
 Haj pilgrims for quite a long period and that instead of merely handing over chartering operations to another company,
 it can use its own vast experience in guiding the contracted company in providing better services. 
20.       The Committee notes that the Haj pilgrims had to face a lot of hardships and problems due to delay/dislocation
 of flights etc.  The Committee feels that the poor airworthiness of the aircraft has also led to dislocation of flights
 during Haj operations.  To ensure the qualitative airworthiness of aircraft, the Committee recommends that the terms
 and conditions while chartering of aircraft should be very clear and that there should be very hefty penalties for the
 charter companies for changing the aircraft at a later date. 
 
SELECTION OF AIRPORTS FOR HAJ FLIGHTS
21.       As regards the centres for transportation of pilgrims, the Committee was informed that at present the pilgrims are
 being transported to Jeddah from seven locations i.e. Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta, Chennai, Ahmedabad, Cochin &
 Bangalore and hub-and-spoke operations from Srinagar and Jammu to Delhi.  The details of the total number of flights
 and the number of pilgrims travelled from various centres in India during the last three years are as under :
 1998 1999 2000
 Total No.
of Flights
No. of
 Pilgrims
Total No.
of Flights
No. of
Pilgrims
Total No.
of Flights
No. of
 Pilgrims
MUMBAI 67 20,093 63 19,584 46 14,193
DELHI 53 25,277 55 25,350 56 26,818
CALCUTTA 8 3,552 9 3,955 12 4,810
CHENNAI 30 8,907 16 7,162 8 3,660
BANGALORE 18 5,819 14 6,052 18 7,963
COCHIN -- -- -- -- 24 7,193
AHMEDABAD -- -- -- -- 27 7,287
 
This year Hyderabad has also been added to the list.  Hence, now there are eight locations from where the Haj flights
 would operate.  The Committee desired to know the parameters/criteria laid down for the selection of airports for the
 Haj flights, whether it depends upon the number of Haj pilgrims or number of applications or the muslim population of
 the States.  The Committee was informed by Ministry of Civil Aviation that the selection of airports is based on the
 recommendation from the Central Haj Committee and thereafter, a feasibility study is carried out to know whether
 wide-bodied aircraft can operate from these airports.
22.       During its Study Visit to Kerala, the Committee was informed that although 70-80% of the Hajis from Kerela
 belong to the Malabar region, no flights are operated from Calicut.  The Committee pointed out that earlier the flights
 were operative from Calicut also but now that flight has been disconnected, which has resulted in a lot of problems. 
 Also, a substantial number of pilgrims are from Thiruvananthapuram but there are no Haj flights from
 Thiruvananthapuram.  The Committee was informed that airport runway expansion was yet to be completed at Calicut
 airport and wide-bodied aircraft can be operated only after the runway expansion work is over.
23.       The Committee also pointed out that nearly 3000 pilgrim from Nagpur have to go all the way to Mumbai and put
 up there to catch the Haj flights.  These people generally belong to the middle class.  The Committee also took note of
 the difficulties being faced by Haj pilgrims from Jammu & Kashmir.  The Hajis have to go Delhi to take the flights to
 Jeddah.  But there are problems for Hajis from Kashmir, which is a snowbound area.  They have to travel by road for
 about 12 hours to Jammu and then halt there for three days.  Kashmir being a snowbound area, they are required to be
 in possession of blanket and other woollen clothing and after their flights from Jammu to Delhi, they have to leave all
 the clothing brought by them. 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
24.       The Committee is surprised to note that selection of airports for the Haj flights is done merely on the basis of the
 recommendation of the Central Haj Committee, which is having no guidelines/criteria but acting arbitrarily while
 recommending any centre for operation of Haj flights.  The Haj pilgrims, who are mostly senior citizens, have to travel
 a lot to reach the respective airports to catch Haj flights.  The Committee recommends that some guidelines should be
 framed for selection of airports based on the number of Hajis from a particular centre.  Efforts should be made that the
 airports selected are not very far off from the native places of the Hajis so that, in case of delay, they could go back to
 their homes.  The Committee feels that it will go a long way in reducing the hardships of the Haj pilgrims in case of
 delay of flights.  The Committee also recommends that some more centres should be created for undertaking Haj
 operations.  There should be Haj flights from Thiruvananthapuram and Nagpur and the frequency of flights should be
 increased from Cochin too.  The Committee further recommends that Haj flights from Calicut may be restored since a
 Haj House and a Musafirkhana are already in existence near the Calicut airport.  Efforts should also be made to explore
 the possibility of direct flights from Jammu and Srinagar to Delhi separately. 
 
BAGGAGE PROBLEMS
25.       One of the major problems faced by the pilgrims during the Haj 2000 was of return of baggage.  The problem of
 return of baggage has also been faced during the last few years and this problem is compounding every year.  During
 Haj 2000, on the return flights the baggage of several persons was missing and necessary information was not
 available.  As a result, the pilgrims had to wait at the airport for getting their baggage before they could start return
 journey for their hometown.  It has been informed that every Haj pilgrim is permitted to take 30 kg luggage to Jeddah. 
 On return journey, the quantum of luggage goes up.  Air India has suggested that standard bags should be provided to
 the pilgrims which will restrict the weight of the baggage on the return flights.  The Committee was informed that the
 Saudi Airlines have given permission for 50 kg luggage, 15 kg for hand baggage and 35 kg for check in and 10 kg for
 ‘zum-zum’ water. 
26.       In response to a suggestion of the Committee that the Airlines should bring the ‘zum-zum’ water and distribute it
 at the airport itself, it was informed that Indian Mission in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has made arrangements for
 procuring ‘zum-zum’ water, which will be transported to India on the Phase I return flights.  Such ‘zum-zum’ water
 will be handed over to the local Haj Authorities for distribution to the returning pilgrims.  Air India has also informed
 that Airports Authority of India is making the necessary arrangements to provide the storage space for the ‘zum-zum’
 water.
27.       The Committee feels that with the arrangement for storage and distribution of ‘zum-zum’ water having been
 made at Indian airports, the problem of distribution of ‘zum-zum’ water would be solved.  The Committee notes with
 concern the problem of missing/delayed arrival of baggage on return journey. The Committee feels that proper attention
 has not been paid at all to this aspect more so since Air India, which has been in this business for so long, should have
 anticipated this problem and taken appropriate measures.  The problem with regard to return baggage also worsened
 due to the fact that the Hajis were totally in the dark about the fate of their baggage.  The Committee hopes that
 henceforth Air India and other agencies involved in the Haj operations would be more careful and would take
 corrective measures to ensure that this does not recur.  As regards the excess baggage, the Committee is of the view that
 it is not expected that while coming back a pilgrim will have the same luggage which he was having while going.  The
 restriction on the weight of the baggage while coming back from Jeddah has also created a lot of problems.  The
 Committee understands the constraints of the airlines in allowing excess baggage.  But keeping in view the sentiments
 of the Haj pilgrims, the Committee recommends that the Haj pilgrims may be permitted to bring back a reasonable
 amount of excess baggage, thereby reducing the hardships faced by the Haj pilgrims.  
 
LACK OF INFORMATION
28.            Another major area in Haj operations where the authorities completely failed was the utter lack of
 information regarding flight schedule to Haj pilgrims at Jeddah and their relatives in India.  There has been delay and
 the consequent dislocation in the operation of both outward/inward flights.  Even the local authorities were helpless in
 coordinating mechanism at control room set up at Air India headquarters and at Jeddah.  Lack of information about
 departure/arrival of flights aggravated the problem.  The officials of Air India stated that a large number of problems
 were from Jeddah on the return leg of the operations due to inadequate infrastructural facilities such as aircraft
 departure bays, check in counters etc.   It was informed that some of the aircraft collided in the darkness at Jeddah
 airport as the bays were not even lit up.  That also caused some delay.  Air India have also desired that additional bay
 should be provided to Air India at Jeddah and the matter may be taken up with the Saudi Arabian authorities through
 Ministry of External Affairs.  The Committee has also been informed that due to the congregation of people from all

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
 over the world, there is a lot of congestion at the Jeddah airport.  Thus, the reporting time at Jeddah is 48 hours before
 the departure of the flight but there is a lack of proportionate facilities at the airport.
29.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation have also informed that during Haj 2001, Saudi Arabia Airlines will pick up
 20500 people from India & Jeddah, which will ease the pressure on the chartered airline in carrying the Hajis.  They
 will also use Medina airport for return journey, which will also ease the congestion at the Jeddah airport. 
30.       The other reason for chaos at Jeddah was that Air India staff in full strength was not allowed to go to Jeddah and
 also there was delay in their departure due to the late receipt of the Visa from Saudi Arabian embassy.  This year it has
 been confirmed by Saudi Arabian authorities that if the names of Air India staff are provided in advance by Air India,
 there shall be no problem of Visa.  That will help a lot in managing ground handling at Jeddah.  The Committee was
 also informed by Air India that during Haj 2001, they would be appointing a ground handling agent who is supposed to
 have the best communication equipments and facilities, which will definitely help improve the ground handling
 operations.  Moreover, the Jeddah Airport Authority has also informed that this time checking of baggage of pilgrims
 will be carried out at a spacious place and the baggage checking would be done in 6 to 8 hours.  The benefit of this will
 be that the Hajis will be allowed to check in with the hand baggage only. With the hand baggage alone, the checking
 will be much faster and the flights would operate within one and a half hours instead of 5 to 6 hours.  
31.       In Haj 2000, Air India was not having a control room at Madina.  The Hajis leave Madina 24 hours before the
 departure from Jeddah.  However, next year they shall be having control room in Madina and Jeddah and there will be
 close connectivity between Mecca, Madina, Jeddah and the 8 airports in 8 cities in India. 
32.       The flight schedules are prepared on the basis of station-wise breakup of pilgrims to be carried, which is advised
 by the Central Haj Committee/Ministry of External Affairs and the type of aircraft/capacity offered by the operator. 
 The schedules are filed with Presidency of Civil Aviation (PCA) in Saudi Arabia.  The necessary arrangements for
 handling of these flights are made by Traffic Services Division of Air India for smooth operation of Haj flights. 
 However, It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that flight schedule for the departing Haj pilgrims is
 intimated to them at a very late stage.  Even the State Haj Committees are not aware of the departure schedule of the
 Hajis.  The inconvenience to the Hajis is multiplied due to the frequent change of flight timings.  The Committee feels
 that the flight schedule for the Hajis should be State Haj Committee friendly and Hajis friendly.  The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that finalisation of flight schedule should be done in consultation with the Central and State Haj
 Committees.  Any unavoidable change in the flight schedules should be intimated in advance to respective Haj
 Committee Headquarters and the Airports Authority of India at the airports by Air India.  At airports, necessary
 arrangements should be made to display the change in time on Flight Information Display (FID) system and there
 should be repetitive announcements in different languages on Public Address System.  The Committee also feels that
 the reporting time of 48 hours both from Indian airports and from Jeddah is on the higher side.  The Committee
 recommends that efforts should be made to reasonably reduce the reporting time at the airports. 
33.       The Committee recommends that before a flight takes off from Saudi Arabia, the relevant information regarding
 the passengers on board a flight should be available at Indian airports.  The Central Haj Committee and the State Haj
 Committee should also be involved in the process and they should coordinate for passing on the necessary information
 to the Hajis/their near & dear ones in India.
34.       The Committee is surprised to know that Air India employees could not get Visa from Saudi Arabian authorities
 due to some bureaucratic problems and feels that such incidents can be avoided.  The Committee feels that information
 dissemination should be such that all disembarkation points are in a position to know in advance the flight timings. The
 Committee recommends that the resource requirement to handle this operation should be assessed in advance and the
 necessary arrangements should be made to ensure the smooth and effective handling of the Haj flights.  Haj House, Air
 India booking offices, all the disembarkation airports and Air India headquarters should be linked electronically to
 provide instant information to the pilgrims.  Control rooms should be set up at Jeddah, Mecca and Madina and these
 rooms should be manned round the clock to enable the pilgrims and their relatives to access latest and current
 information with regard to the flight movement.  Also, there should be improvement in coordination level.
 
ORIENTATION/TRAINING CAMPS FOR HAJ PILGRIMS
35.       The Committee is aware of the training programmes organized every year by the Haj Committees to educate the
 prospective Haj pilgrims.  Some of the Hajis are first time air travellers who are not aware of the formalities of air
 journey.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that well-illustrated information booklets in different languages
 containing information regarding air journey may be provided to the Hajis well in advance to reduce the hardships
 faced by them.   The Committee also recommends that the State Haj Committee should organise orientation/training
 camps for the Haj pilgrims to apprise them of the different situations during the Haj pilgrimage so that they could

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
 handle some situation themselves.  Haj volunteers and officers from concerned agencies should also be present during
 such trainings so that the Hajis could be acquainted with the various services available at airports, aircraft etc. 
 Interaction with the volunteers who would be present at Jeddah would help in reducing the communication gap between
 the Hajis and the volunteers at Jeddah.  The Hajis may also be made aware of the limitations and pressure on the
 infrastructural facilities available at the airports and in the aircraft.  They should also be advised to carry less baggage.
 
ADEQUATE REGIONAL REPRESENTATION AMONG HAJ OFFICIALS
36.       During its discussion with various agencies, the question of regional representation of Haj officials/volunteers
 also cropped up.  The representatives of various State Haj Committees, particularly Kerala & Chennai, suggested that
 there should be some more local/regional representation among the volunteers/officials/doctors deputed to Jeddah.  The
 representative of Ministry of External Affairs has informed that selection of officials for Haj is made from the requests
 received from Government servants for the purpose.  He also informed that there were a total 362 volunteers from the
 Government side apart from the State Haj Committee volunteers and all the regional languages are given due
 importance on receipt of applications.
37.       The Hajis belong to different places and speak different languages. The constitution of the Haj officials selected
 for the Haj pilgrimage should be representative in nature to bridge the communication gap between the Hajis and the
 Haj officials/volunteers.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that
 people from all the States/languages are given due representation in the selection of Haj volunteers/officials/doctors.
 
HAJ OPERATIONS AFTER DISINVESTMENT OF AIR INDIA
38.            Ministry of Civil Aviation have informed that the Cabinet in its meeting held on the 8
th February 2000 has
 directed that a Group of Ministers consisting of Minister of External Affairs, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs,
 Minister of Finance and Minister of Civil Aviation should review the advisability of continuing the present practice of
 chartering aircraft by Air India or other Government agencies for a huge movement vis-a-vis the other options
 available, the fare and subsidy to be applicable for Haj-2001 and the policy to be followed thereafter.  The process of
 disinvestment of Air India has already begun.  The Committee, therefore, wanted to know who will be responsible for
 the Haj operation after Air India has been privatized and whether any decision has been taken in this regard.   The
 Ministry in their reply informed the Committee that Ministry of External Affairs is of the view that any
 adjustment/change necessitated by its disinvestment will be looked into on completion of Haj-2001.  In any case, the
 role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation may not diminish substantially over Air India.  Directorate General of Civil
 Aviation (DGCA) and Airports Authority of India, which are equally involved in the management of Haj flights, will
 also remain under the control of the Ministry.  However, it is felt that after the disinvestment of Air India, the new
 shareholders may or may not agree to undertake Haj charter operation on “no-profit-no-loss” basis.  In all probability,
 privatized Air India may undertake Haj operations only if there is a profit margin and commercial viability.  They may
 procure wet-lease aircraft on their own and quote all-inclusive per pilgrim price keeping in mind the profit element. 
39.       Haj operations are a national commitment of the Government of India to the people of India and, therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the present practice of chartering aircraft by the government agencies should continue and
 the government should leave no doubt in the minds of the future pilgrims regarding their Haj pilgrimage. 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
40.            Airports Authority of India have informed that they provide the various facilities required for smooth
 transition of Haj operation at the different airports in the country.  Some of the facilities provided by the Airports
 Authority of India are as under :-
For departure flights, to facilitate Hajis and their accompanying visitors, special shamiyana was erected near the
 terminals. Separate enclosures for ladies & gents were made in the shamiyana. Carpets, sitting arrangements, lighting &
 air circulators were provided.
Drinking water facility and free passenger baggage trollies were made available near the shamiyana.
At some airports, exclusive aircraft parking stand were made available both for departing and arriving Haj charter
 flights.
At some airports, special enclosure at mezzanine floor (transit lounge) was made available for performing vazu and
 offering prayers by departing Hajis.
Public Address system at cityside was made available to Haj Committee volunteers for facilitation of pilgrims and
 visitors at IGI airport, New Delhi.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
At some airports, tea/coffee was provided to Haj pilgrims and visitors in the shamiyana by AAI.
41.       The Committee had visited the Indira Gandhi International airport at Delhi where a special Haj Terminal has
 been commissioned near export cargo terminal.  This terminal had been specially designed for processing of Haj
 pilgrims.  The terminal has all requisite facilities used by international passengers.  These facilities inter-alia include
 prayer and dining halls, specially designed toilets for washing purposes in addition to an exclusive car/coach parking
 area on cityside.  Adequate water supply, toilet facility, tea/coffee/cold drink at reduced rates, STD facility and food
 items at cheaper rates were made available. 
42.       The Committee feels that Haj terminal like the one built in Delhi would help a lot in smooth and speedy
 clearance of Haj pilgrims and recommends that the facilities provided to the Haj pilgrims at Delhi should be extended
 to the other airports also.  Haj terminals, on the lines of the one constructed in Delhi, may be constructed at the other
 airports also.
 
ROLE OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS/CENTRAL HAJ COMMITTEE
43.       During its interaction with the various agencies associated with the Haj pilgrimage, the role of the Ministry of
 External Affairs/Central Haj Committee also came up for discussion.  The Committee enquired from the representative
 of the Central Haj Committee as to the action taken by them when the complaints regarding mismanagement of flights,
 lack of information to the Hajis at the airports etc. are received by them and whether any accountability has been fixed
 in respect of those responsible for mismanagement in Haj flights.  The Committee was informed that such complaints
 are passed on the concerned agencies. 
44.       The Committee finds it very surprising that the Central Haj Committee simply passes the complaints to the
 concerned agencies without pursuing the matter as to whether any action has been taken/initiated against those who fail
 to provide satisfactory services.  The Committee feels that the Central Haj Committee should not merely act as a
 passive spectator of the events but has an important role to play in successful organisation of Haj flights in coordination
 with other concerned agencies.  The Committee recommends that Central Haj Committee should take notice of the
 problems being faced by the Haj pilgrims and set up control rooms at various disembarkation centres for Haj pilgrims
 so that in case any help is required, they can be contacted. Ministry of External Affairs, being the nodal agency for the
 Haj operations, should define the responsibilities of the various organisations concerned with the Haj operations such as
 who will manage ground operations, who will be in-charge of the control rooms etc. and the guidelines in this context
 should be circulated in black and white.  All the organisations should take collective responsibility and accountability
 should be fixed individually. Ministry of External Affairs should take the responsibility for coordination among the
 various agencies concerned with the Haj operation since lack of coordination gives a bad impression not only of
 agencies/individuals involved but also of the whole country.
45.            Although there are several agencies working together for operation of Haj flights, yet the hardships and
 problems of the Haj pilgrims have been increasing since the last few years.  Since Haj is a regular annual phenomenon,
 instead of an adhoc arrangement there should be some regular arrangements for Haj pilgrims.  The Haj pilgrims are
 paying for their journey and, in some cases, even higher than what is being charged by some private agencies.  So many
 Government agencies with able officers from External Affairs, Civil Aviation, Air India and Airport Authority of India
 are engaged in these operations but the Hajis are not provided with satisfactory services. 
46.       The Committee feels that the annual Haj operation is an occasion for Air India to establish its credentials as a
 professional and world-class airline.  Its ability to provide satisfactory services to the Hajis can earn it a big name
 internationally, since the Hajis come across millions of people from all over the world and the event can be used as an
 instrument to publicise, at no cost, the services provided by Air India in a big way.  Haj is an international event and the
 Hajis are the cultural ambassadors of the nation.  Ministry of External Affairs and Air India combined together, by
 successfully organizing the Haj pilgrimage and providing good facilities, can exploit this opportunity for creating
 goodwill among the muslim population all over the world and attracting foreign tourist arrival.  The Committee hopes
 and expects that Haj-2001 will be smoother and better in comparison to previous operations.  
  
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
Haj operation is not a new event.  However, it appears that the Government is still experimenting with the Haj
 operations in so far as its operation is concerned.  Allocating the management of Haj operations to the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation and then to the Central Haj Committee and again to the Ministry of Civil Aviation shows adhocism on the part
 of the Government.  The Committee feels that by now the Government agencies involved in the management of Haj
 operations must have achieved expertise to handle these operations efficiently and taking benefit thereof, sincere efforts

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
 are required to make the Haj operations smooth and successful.  Therefore, instead of adhoc arrangements, there should
 be some regular arrangements for undertaking Haj operations.
(Para 8)
 
The Committee strongly disapproves delay/non-payment of dues to the Air India which resulted in loss to it because Air
 India was compelled to absorb a part of cost incurred on Haj operations such as giveaways to pilgrims, catering on
 ground, ground handling of leased aircraft on Indian stations, variable cost/indirect fixed cost not charged on own
 operation etc.  The Committee is concerned to note that the Government not only ignored the Air India’s difficult
 financial situation but by delay/non-reimbursing the cost of Haj operations incurred by Air India, the Government has
 committed an act which is against the fairness of reimbursing Air India for the services rendered by it, as pointed out in
 the C&AG report. 
(Para 11)
 
CHARTERING OF AIRCRAFT
The Committee feels that the delay in the finalisation of the tender process is one of the major factors responsible for the
 delay in finalisation of flight schedule of the Haj pilgrims.  Haj operation is a planned annual event and the delay in
 award of contract for charter operations can certainly be avoided.  The Committee recommends that tenders for aircraft
 for Haj operations should be invited in advance and agreement signed with the operator at least three months prior to
 the commencement of operations so as to avoid the consequent delays and mismanagement.
(Para 14)
DELAY/DISLOCATION OF FLIGHTS
The Committee observes that there was a provision of penalty of US $ 1000 if the delay to the flight is more than four
 hours.  The Committee has not been informed of the quantum of the damages claimed from the defaulting airline and
 what further action the Government proposes to undertake against the airline in view of its poor performance.  The
 Committee observes that the damages claimed by Air India were not utilized for providing relief to the Hajis who had
 suffered a lot due to the dislocation of services and that the money was kept by the Government itself. Hajis were
 required to wait for a long time at the Airport itself and no proper accommodation was provided to them. The
 Committee feels that if there is a delay in flight, it is not the fault of the Hajis.  The Committee recommends that in case
 of delay in flights, the Hajis should be treated like the regular passengers and should be provided adequate boarding,
 lodging and catering facilities.  The Committee feels that Air India has been involved with the chartering of flights for
 Haj pilgrims for quite a long period and that instead of merely handing over chartering operations to another company,
 it can use its own vast experience in guiding the contracted company in providing better services.
 
The Committee notes that the Haj pilgrims had to face a lot of hardships and problems due to delay/dislocation of flights
 etc.  The Committee feels that the poor airworthiness of the aircraft has also led to dislocation of flights during Haj
 operations.  To ensure the qualitative airworthiness of aircraft, the Committee recommends that the terms and
 conditions while chartering of aircraft should be very clear and that there should be very hefty penalties for the charter
 companies for changing the aircraft at a later date. 
(Paras 19 & 20) 
SELECTION OF AIRPORTS FOR HAJ FLIGHTS
The Committee is surprised to note that selection of airports for the Haj flights is done merely on the basis of the
 recommendation of the Central Haj Committee, which is having no guidelines/criteria but acting arbitrarily while
 recommending any centre for operation of Haj flights.  The Haj pilgrims, who are mostly senior citizens, have to travel
 a lot to reach the respective airports to catch Haj flights.  The Committee recommends that some guidelines should be
 framed for selection of airports based on the number of Hajis from a particular centre.  Efforts should be made that the
 airports selected are not very far off from the native places of the Hajis so that, in case of delay, they could go back to
 their homes.  The Committee feels that it will go a long way in reducing the hardships of the Haj pilgrims in case of
 delay of flights.  The Committee also recommends that some more centres should be created for undertaking Haj
 operations.  There should be Haj flights from Thiruvananthapuram and Nagpur and the frequency of flights should be
 increased from Cochin too.  The Committee further recommends that Haj flights from Calicut may be restored since a
 Haj House and a Musafirkhana are already in existence near the Calicut airport.  Efforts should also be made to explore
 the possibility of direct flights from Jammu and Srinagar to Delhi separately. 
(Para 24)
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
BAGGAGE PROBLEMS
The Committee feels that with the arrangement for storage and distribution of ‘zum-zum’ water having been made at
 Indian airports, the problem of distribution of ‘zum-zum’ water would be solved.  The Committee notes with concern
 the problem of missing/delayed arrival of baggage on return journey. The Committee feels that proper attention has not
 been paid at all to this aspect more so since Air India, which has been in this business for so long, should have
 anticipated this problem and taken appropriate measures.  The problem with regard to return baggage also worsened
 due to the fact that the Hajis were totally in the dark about the fate of their baggage.  The Committee hopes that
 henceforth Air India and other agencies involved in the Haj operations would be more careful and would take
 corrective measures to ensure that this does not recur.  As regards the excess baggage, the Committee is of the view that
 it is not expected that while coming back a pilgrim will have the same luggage which he was having while going.  The
 restriction on the weight of the baggage while coming back from Jeddah has also created a lot of problems.  The
 Committee understands the constraints of the airlines in allowing excess baggage.  But keeping in view the sentiments
 of the Haj pilgrims, the Committee recommends that the Haj pilgrims may be permitted to bring back a reasonable
 amount of excess baggage, thereby reducing the hardships faced by the Haj pilgrims.  
(Para 27)
 
LACK OF INFORMATION
The Committee feels that the flight schedule for the Hajis should be State Haj Committee friendly and Hajis friendly. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that finalisation of flight schedule should be done in consultation with the
 Central and State Haj Committees.  Any unavoidable change in the flight schedules should be intimated in advance to
 respective Haj Committee Headquarters and the Airports Authority of India at the airports by Air India.  At airports,
 necessary arrangements should be made to display the change in time on Flight Information Display (FID) system and
 there should be repetitive announcements in different languages on Public Address System.  The Committee also feels
 that the reporting time of 48 hours both from Indian airports and from Jeddah is on the higher side.  The Committee
 recommends that efforts should be made to reasonably reduce the reporting time at the airports. 
 
The Committee recommends that before a flight takes off from Saudi Arabia, the relevant information regarding the
 passengers on board a flight should be available at Indian airports.  The Central Haj Committee and the State Haj
 Committee should also be involved in the process and they should coordinate for passing on the necessary information
 to the Hajis/their near & dear ones in India.
 
The Committee is surprised to know that Air India employees could not get Visa from Saudi Arabian authorities due to
 some bureaucratic problems and feels that such incidents can be avoided.  The Committee feels that information
 dissemination should be such that all disembarkation points are in a position to know in advance the flight timings. The
 Committee recommends that the resource requirement to handle this operation should be assessed in advance and the
 necessary arrangements should be made to ensure the smooth and effective handling of the Haj flights.  Haj House, Air
 India booking offices, all the disembarkation airports and Air India headquarters should be linked electronically to
 provide instant information to the pilgrims.  Control rooms should be set up at Jeddah, Mecca and Madina and these
 rooms should be manned round the clock to enable the pilgrims and their relatives to access latest and current
 information with regard to the flight movement.  Also, there should be improvement in coordination level.
(Paras 32, 33 & 34)
 
ORIENTATION/TRAINING CAMPS FOR HAJ PILGRIMS
The Committee, therefore, recommends that well-illustrated information booklets in different languages containing
 information regarding air journey may be provided to the Hajis well in advance to reduce the hardships faced by them.  
 The Committee also recommends that the State Haj Committee should organise orientation/training camps for the Haj
 pilgrims to apprise them of the different situations during the Haj pilgrimage so that they could handle some situation
 themselves.  Haj volunteers and officers from concerned agencies should also be present during such trainings so that
 the Hajis could be acquainted with the various services available at airports, aircraft etc.  Interaction with the volunteers
 who would be present at Jeddah would help in reducing the communication gap between the Hajis and the volunteers at
 Jeddah.  The Hajis may also be made aware of the limitations and pressure on the infrastructural facilities available at
 the airports and in the aircraft.  They should also be advised to carry less baggage.
(Para 35)
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/46threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:51:08]
ADEQUATE REGIONAL REPRESENTATION AMONG HAJ OFFICIALS
The Hajis belong to different places and speak different languages. The constitution of the Haj officials selected for the
 Haj pilgrimage should be representative in nature to bridge the communication gap between the Hajis and the Haj
 officials/volunteers.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that people
 from all the States/languages are given due representation in the selection of Haj volunteers/officials/doctors.
(Para 37)
 
HAJ OPERATIONS AFTER DISINVESTMENT OF AIR INDIA
Haj operations are a national commitment of the Government of India to the people of India and, therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the present practice of chartering aircraft by the government agencies should continue and
 the government should leave no doubt in the minds of the future pilgrims regarding their Haj pilgrimage.
(Para 39) 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee feels that Haj terminal like the one built in Delhi would help a lot in smooth and speedy clearance of
 Haj pilgrims and recommends that the facilities provided to the Haj pilgrims at Delhi should be extended to the other
 airports also.  Haj terminals, on the lines of the one constructed in Delhi, may be constructed at the other airports also.
(Para 42)
 
ROLE OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS/CENTRAL HAJ COMMITTEE
The Committee finds it very surprising that the Central Haj Committee simply passes the complaints to the concerned
 agencies without pursuing the matter as to whether any action has been taken/initiated against those who fail to provide
 satisfactory services.  The Committee feels that the Central Haj Committee should not merely act as a passive spectator
 of the events but has an important role to play in successful organisation of Haj flights in coordination with other
 concerned agencies.  The Committee recommends that Central Haj Committee should take notice of the problems being
 faced by the Haj pilgrims and set up control rooms at various disembarkation centres for Haj pilgrims so that in case
 any help is required, they can be contacted. Ministry of External Affairs, being the nodal agency for the Haj operations,
 should define the responsibilities of the various organisations concerned with the Haj operations such as who will
 manage ground operations, who will be in-charge of the control rooms etc. and the guidelines in this context should be
 circulated in black and white.  All the organisations should take collective responsibility and accountability should be
 fixed individually. Ministry of External Affairs should take the responsibility for coordination among the various
 agencies concerned with the Haj operation since lack of coordination gives a bad impression not only of
 agencies/individuals involved but also of the whole country.
 
Although there are several agencies working together for operation of Haj flights, yet the hardships and problems of the
 Haj pilgrims have been increasing since the last few years.  Since Haj is a regular annual phenomenon, instead of an
 adhoc arrangement there should be some regular arrangements for Haj pilgrims.  The Haj pilgrims are paying for their
 journey and, in some cases, even higher than what is being charged by some private agencies.  So many Government
 agencies with able officers from External Affairs, Civil Aviation, Air India and Airport Authority of India are engaged
 in these operations but the Hajis are not provided with satisfactory services. 
 
The Committee feels that the annual Haj operation is an occasion for Air India to establish its credentials as a
 professional and world-class airline.  Its ability to provide satisfactory services to the Hajis can earn it a big name
 internationally, since the Hajis come across millions of people from all over the world and the event can be used as an
 instrument to publicise, at no cost, the services provided by Air India in a big way.  Haj is an international event and the
 Hajis are the cultural ambassadors of the nation.  Ministry of External Affairs and Air India combined together, by
 successfully organizing the Haj pilgrimage and providing good facilities, can exploit this opportunity for creating
 goodwill among the muslim population all over the world and attracting foreign tourist arrival.  The Committee hopes
 and expects that Haj-2001 will be smoother and better in comparison to previous operations. 
(Paras 44,45 & 46)
 