Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2013/Kartika, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
 
REPORT NO. 
202
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SECOND REPORT
The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2013/Kartika, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—9
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ...................... 10—13
6. A NNEXURE–I ........................................................................................................................ 15—29
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 1—39
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 40—55

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Second Report on “The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2013*.
2. In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
19
th August, 2013 and pending therein, to the Committee on 20 th August, 2013 for examination and
report within three months.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and other senior
officers at its meeting held on the 3 rd August, 2013 on various provisions of the Bill. The
Committee also heard the views of the stakeholders viz. National Union of Seafarers of India,
Indian National Ship-Owner’s Association, Forward Seamen’s Union of India, Indian National Trade
Union Congress, Trade Union Coordination Centre, Seafarers Confederation of India and Bhartiya
Mazdoor Sangh on the 1
st October, 2013. The Committee also sought clarifications through two
sets of the questionnaire on the various issues related to the Bill and heard the Secretary, Ministry
of Shipping and concerned officers again at its meeting held on the 22
nd October, 2013. A press
advertisement was published to that effect on the 11 th September, 2013 in all important national and
regional daily newspapers.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministries of Shipping; Law
and Justice; Labour and Employment; External Affairs and Agriculture for placing before the
Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying
the points raised by the Members on various issues related to the Bill.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 31
st October, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI Chairman,
31st October, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartika 9, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 20.8.2013.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 51174, dated 20.8.2013.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
CS – Classification Society
DA VP – Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
GT – Gross Tonnage
IACS – International Association of Classification Societies
ILO – International Labour Organisation
IMO – International Maritime Organization
MLC – Maritime Labour Convention
RO – Recognized Organizations
RPS – Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers
STCW – S tandards of Training, Certification and Watch-keeping
(iv)

1
REPORT
Introduction
1. The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013 (Annexure-1) was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August 2013. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill on the
20th August, 2013 to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture for examination and Report within three months.
2. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, as amended from time to time, governs matters relating
to merchant shipping in India. The main objective of the Act is to ensure the development and
efficient maintenance of the Indian mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the national
interests. The said Act has been amended over the period in the light of the experiences gained in
its implementation as also to give effect to the provisions of various international Conventions to
which India has acceded in relation to the maritime sector.
Objective of the proposed Amendment Bill
3. The Bill seeks to make enabling provisions for implementation and enforcement of the
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the MLC, 2006). It provides for
International standards for the living and working conditions of seafarers which include safe and
secure work place on a ship, fair terms of employment, decent working and living conditions on
a ship, health protection, medical care and other social protection. The Bill aims at making
mandatory for ‘Indian flag vessels’ to comply with it. The Bill seeks to ensure that rights of all
seafarers regardless of their nationality are protected.
4. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping on the
24
th September, 2013. A detailed Background Note and clause-by-clause comments on the Bill were
also received from the Ministry for consideration.
5. The Ministry informed the Committee that India is a member of International Labour
Organization (ILO) and takes an active part in the deliberations at the meetings of various fora of
the ILO. India has acceded to various ILO Conventions. Now, India intends to accede to the ILO’s
instrument C-186, known as the Maritime Labour Convention. This Convention is considered as
the ‘Bill of Rights’ for the seafarers across the world, given the fact that shipping, as an industry,
is intrinsically global in nature. The MLC, 2006 provides for international standards for the living
and working conditions of seafarers, including the provision for their food, accommodation,
medical care, repatriation, social security, and recruitment. The main objectives of the said
Convention are:
(i) To bring the system of seamen’s protection contained in the existing labour standards
closer to the workers concerned, in a form consistent with the rapidly developing and
globalized sector; and
(ii) To improve the applicability of the system so that ship owners and governments interested
in providing decent conditions of work to their respective national seafarers do not have
to bear an unequal burden in ensuring their protection.
6. Except as expressly provided or otherwise, this Convention applies to all ships, whether
publicly or privately owned, ordinarily engaged in commercial activities, other than ships engaged
in fishing or in similar pursuits and ships of traditional build such as dhows and junks. This
Convention does not apply to warships or naval auxiliaries.

2
Advantages of the Bill, if passed
7. India, by ratifying the MLC 2006, will ensure an improvement in the working and living
conditions and employment rights of Indian national seafarers and provide, inter alia , the following
benefits to them:
● Safe and secure workplace on a ship;
● Fair terms of employment;
● Decent working and living conditions on a ship; and
● Right to health protection, medical care and other social protection.
8. ILO Convention No.186 on the Maritime Labour Standards is developed mainly to provide
decent conditions of work for seafarers and the ratifying countries will have the advantage of
protecting their seafarers against unfair competition from substandard ships and will benefit from
a system of certification, avoiding or reducing the likelihood of lengthy delays related to inspections
in foreign ports. The Convention requires registered ratifications by at least 30 Members with a
total share in the world gross tonnage of ships of 33 per cent, after which it shall come into force
for any member country 12 months after the date on which its ratification has been registered.
Already 55 member countries (as on 22-10-2013) with 70 per cent of world tonnage have ratified
the Convention. Having satisfied the limit of ratification of 30 member countries with 40 per cent
of world tonnage, the MLC 2006 has now come into force on the 20
th August, 2013.
9. The Union Cabinet has since recommended the ratification of the MLC, 2006. Consequently,
it is proposed to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, to provide enabling provision for
implementation and enforcement of the MLC 2006, and thereby making it mandatory for Indian flag
vessels to comply with the provisions of the said convention and to obtain a Maritime Labour
Certificate to that effect for the Indian flag vessels. In this context, under the provisions of the
proposed Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013, every Indian flag vessel of 500 gross tonnage
or more and engaged in international voyage(s), would be issued with a Maritime Labour Certificate
after an inspection of the ship concerned. This will enable them to get preferential treatment and
exemption from their inspection for this purpose at foreign ports thereby reducing the operational
time[otherwise due] and transaction costs for them and Indian EXIM [export – import] trade in
general. Further, India will be able to ensure that all foreign flag vessels entering the territorial
waters of India, or any marine areas adjacent thereto, over which India has, or may hereafter have
an exclusive jurisdiction, are subject to an inspection under the MLC, 2006 by which the rights
of all seafarers regardless of their nationality are protected. The Convention is in its advanced stage
of ratification by India. The draft Bill has been approved in principle by the Ministry. It is submitted
to Parliament for passage. Since, the convention has entered into force with effect from the
20
th August, 2013 India should ensure that the Indian ships and the seafarers get the favourable
treatment as envisaged in the MLC, 2006. Hence, the Indian Maritime Administration, i.e. the
Directorate General of Shipping has already facilitated the Indian ship owners to comply with MLC
2006 by enabling them to obtain for their ships a ‘Statement of Compliance’ under MLC 2006 for
their ships. It will help their ships to get a favourable treatment especially, in foreign ports.
10. The Committee in its meeting held on the 1 st October, 2013 heard the views of the
important stake holders and considered all the relevant written memoranda received from them.
11. In addition, the Committee also elicited comments/suggestions from the public. A press
advertisement was published to that effect on the 11 th September, 2013 in all important national and
regional daily newspapers through Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DA VP), Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting.

3
12. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping again on the
22nd October, 2013 on various provisions of the Bill. Based on the above, the recommendations
made by the Committee on the relevant Clauses  of the Bills are given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Recommendations/Observations
13. The Clause 2
13.1 The Clause 2  of the Bill proposes for substitution of sub-heading with a detailed sub-
heading, i.e., “Classification of seamen, seafarer, maritime labour standards and prescription of
minimum manning scale”  in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The Ministry has informed that this
has been done in order to have greater clarity on the applicability of the section. If not specified,
it will appear as though the section is meant for deciding the manning scales of seamen.
13.2 The Ministry further clarified that there is a subtle difference between a seaman and a
seafarer. “A seaman is only a member of the crew of a vessel, whereas a seafarer can be any
person who may be engaged/employed/carried to sea, in any capacity, and the latter includes a
supernumerary also, apart from a member of the crew. Hence, both the said definitions are required
to be retained in the said Act.”
13.3 The Committee also agrees to retain the term “seafarer” in the Act. The Committee
feels that in order to make the legislation gender neutral replacing the term “seamen” with
“sea persons” may be considered.
14. The Clause 3
14.1 The Clause 3 proposes for insertion of new Sections 88A and 88B in the Act. The Section
88-A defines the terms which are used in the Convention like ‘Maritime Labour Certificate’,
‘Maritime Labour Compliance Declaration’, ‘Maritime Labour Convention’ and ‘Seafarer’. The
Section 88-B prescribes for the application, exceptions, etc. of the MLC, 2006 to Indian Ships
operating under the authority of India. The Ministry clarified that every Indian ship as defined in
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, whether publicly or privately owned, ordinarily engaged in
commercial activities shall be subject to an application of this amending legislation. However, as per
the Convention, the following ships are not included-
(a) Ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters or waters within or closely adjacent
to sheltered waters or areas where any law relating to ports apply;
(b) Ships engaged in fishing;
(c) Traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks; and
(d) Ships of war or naval auxiliaries.
14.2 The Committee observes that as per the definition and scope of application under
Article II of the MLC, 2006, Para 4, the Convention should be made applicable to all ships
whether publicly or privately owned, ordinarily engaged in commercial activities except
explicitly exempted in the Act itself. The Committee feels that interest of the persons
working on ships of less than 500 GT should also be protected and it is not forbidden by
the MLC. Therefore, as far as possible, the benefits flowing from the adoption and
implementation of the provisions of the MLC should reach the maximum number of
seamen/seafarers engaged in Merchant shipping. At the same time, the Committee also
apprehends that as it involves multi level delegation, it might result in procedural delays.

4
Therefore, abundant care should be taken to ensure speedy issuance of Maritime Labour
Certificates.
14.3 The Committee also notes that there is no mention of periodicity of Declaration,
Certificate etc. issued under Section 88 A of the Bill and recommends that if this has not
been provided, it should also be suitably included in the Bill.
14.4 It was brought before the Committee that powers pertaining to the Declaration of
Compliance under proposed Section 88A(a) has been given to DG Shipping only, whereas
powers pertaining to the issuance of Maritime Labour Certificate under clause 88A(b) has
been further delegated to officers, authorities or organizations authorized for this purpose.
It was contended before the Committee that both should be same in order to avoid delays
and inconvenience to the seafarers. The Committee feels that provision of 88(A)(a) is
restrictive rather than exhaustive as in the case of Section 88(A)(b) and both should have
been similarly worded i.e. delegation of authority in both the cases should be the same.
14.5 The Committee notes an apparent error and recommends that the word “singed” be
corrected and made “signed” in the Section 88(A) ( c). The Committee observes that
Maritime Labour Convention is basically a convention of International Labour Organisation
(ILO) and it should also be mentioned in the definition portion given under Clause 3
inserting new Section 88 A (c) so as to read as “Maritime Labour Convention” means the
Convention of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) on Maritime Labour Standards
signed in Geneva on the 23
rd February, 2006.
14.6 The Committee further notes an obvious error and recommends that the word
“works” be corrected and made “work” in the Section 88(A) ( d) ( i).
15. The Clauses 4 and 5
15.1 The Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend the Section 91 of the principal Act. Accordingly
in Section 91 of the principal Act, for the words “boys not under fifteen – years of age”, the
words “young persons not under the age of sixteen years” shall be substituted. Similarly, the Clause
5 of the Bill also amends the Section 92 of the principal Act by substituting “any boy” with “any
young person”, “ the boy is a minor” with “such young person”, “fifteen years” with “sixteen
years” and “a minor” with “an young person”.
15.2 The Mi nistry clarified that these amendments were proposed to maintain the parity with the
MLC, 2006 Convention. The new provisions will be inserted to bar person less than 16 years of
age to be engaged on board any ships. The Convention directs that persons below 16 years of age
shall not be engaged or work in any capacity on board any ships. The change is to comply with
the above recruitment.
15.3 This has been proposed in the Bill under Clause 5 (a) (ii) that for the words “the boy
is a minor”; the words “such young person” shall be substituted. The Committee notes that
this formulation does not convey the meaning fully. Therefore, only the words “the boy”
should be substituted with the words “such young person” to read the sentence as “...or on
his behalf by his guardian, if such young person is a minor...” In sub section 92 sub clause
(3) (b) the substituted word should be “a young person” and not “
an young person.”
16. The Clause 8
16.1 The Clause 8 amends the Section 101 of the principal Act. It is proposed to add details
regarding the hours of work and rest and entitlement of leave. Moreover, under this provision
payment of compensation to the seafarer for injury or death has also been prescribed.

5
16.2 The Ministry clarified that the Convention prescribes detail guidelines as regards the hour
of work and rest and also entitlement of leave to a seafarer after completing a contract. Moreover,
the proposed amendment also includes payment of compensation during the entire period of
contract to comply with the requirement of the Convention.
16.3 The Committee feels that Trade Unions should be recognized under the statute as
important stake holders in deciding about payment, leave, compensation, etc. to the
seafarers. The recommendation made at para 22.5 of this Report may also be considered in
this regard.
17. The Clause 9
17.1 Under Clause 9, the Section 109 of the principal Act shall be substituted with new
Section 109 (1) and (2) dealing with prohibition of engagement of underage persons in certain
cases.
17.2 Accordingly it is stated that “no person under the age of sixteen years shall be engaged or
carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship”.
17.3 It has been observed that Sub Section (a) of Section 109 mentioned that “no young person
shall be engaged in night work” and Sub Section (b) of the same Section mentioned that “the
period of night work shall be such, as may be prescribed”. Therefore, the provisions of (a) and
(b) appear to be self contradictory. When it is mentioned that no young person shall be engaged
in night work then how can the period of night work be prescribed. The MLC is very clear that
nobody under sixteen years of age should be employed. These amendments cover that effectively.
“Young person” is defined in the Merchant Shipping Act, to be under 18 years of age.
17.4 The Committee feels that at times for the purpose of training or gaining experience
a young person may also be sent on board during night and notes that such exemptions are
provided in the MLC. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the amendment to
Section 109 (a) which presently states that “no young person shall be engaged in night
work” should instead read as, “no young person shall be engaged in night work unless with
exceptions made by the competent authority in regards to effective training or specific
nature of duty that requires performance of duties at night which in no case should be
detrimental to their health or well being.”
17.5 The Ministry, therefore, has to ensure that ‘young persons’ are on board of a ship
under regulated and supervised conditions.
18. The Clause 11
18.1 The Clause 11 provides for substituting a new Section in the place of Section 113 regarding
the issuance of Medical Certificate.
18.2 However, this has been observed that Sub Section 1(c) and (d) of old Section 113 have
become new provisions of Section 113, Sub Section 1(a) and ( b). Moreover, Sub Section 2 of
old Section 113 which reads as, “Rules under Clause (b) of Sub Section (1) shall be made after
consultation with such organizations in India as the Central Government may consider being most
representatives of the employers of seamen and of seamen.” has been completely deleted.
18.3 The Committee feels that consultation with representative organizations is necessary
and, therefore, Sub section 2 of old Section 113, which has been deleted, should be retained.
Or, the intent of this deleted provision should find its way in generic terms under Clause
16, proposing insertion of new Section 218A on page 4 of the Bill.

6
19. The Clause 12
19.1 The Clause 12 provides for amending the Section 132 prescribing the Monitory limit for the
seafarers to approach the Shipping Master for settling the dispute. The Committee noted that the
amount has been increased from Rs.3,000/- to Rs.3,000,00/-. The Committee, in view of the
demand placed by various stake holders, asked the Ministry to explore the possibility to increase
the amount to more than Rs. 3,00,000/-. The Ministry replied that initially they had proposed to
increase the said limit to Rs.10,000,00/-. However, the representatives of the Ministry of Law and
Justice had limited the amount to Rs. 3,00,000. The Ministry of Law and Justice during the
evidence held on the 22
nd October, 2013 clarified that the competence of the Master of the Ship
is equivalent to the competence of an Under-Secretary of Government of India and accordingly the
financial powers have been restricted with the ceiling of Rs.3,00,000/-.
19.2 The Committee feels that in the present context, even the limit of Rs.3,00,000 is
meagre and observes that the competence of the Master of the Ship may be increased
beyond Rs.3,00,000 and the upper limit should be prescribed from time to time.
20. The Clause 17
20.1 The Clause 17 seeks to omit the penalties provided in Section 436, at Serial No. 25 of the
principal Act.  This penalty is imposed for carrying any person to sea to work in contravention of
Sections 109, 111 or for false representation by his parent or guardian regarding age and the
penalty for which is only Rs.50. / The Ministry of Shipping explained that since Section 110 in
the principal Act is now proposed to be omitted, the penalty imposed also is proposed to be
omitted.
20.2 On being asked to clarify why these penalty amounts should not be revised, the Ministry
of Shipping stated that as regards the revision of penalties available in Section 436 supra, a
proposal to further amend the Merchant Shipping Act is currently under examination. The proposal
will require inter-ministerial consultations and will, thereafter, be taken up for consideration of the
Union Cabinet.
20.3 With regard to other penalties imposed under Section 436, the Committee feels that
these are too meagre to be retained and therefore need to be raised substantially. For
example, if a Master of an Indian ship commits an offence under sub-section 4 of Section
35 and uses or attempts to use a navigation certificate of registry not legally granted in
respect of the ship, the fine for such serious offence may extend only to 1000 rupees. The
Committee notes that the penalties imposed on violation of provisions of the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958 are very meagre and have almost become redundant to deter the
violations. Therefore, the entire Section 436 may be revised suitably with a focus on having
penalties reasonable enough to secure stricter compliance of the Act.
21. Legal Implications, if any, of providing for an age of 16 years in the proposed
Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment)  Bill, 2013.s
21.1 On being asked about the legal implications of increasing the minimum age of a young
person to work on a ship from 15 years to 16 years in  the Bill, the Ministry of Shipping clarified
that the Section 91 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, prescribed 15 years for apprentices
entering the seafaring profession. Hence, the minimum age limit for getting into the seafaring
profession is more than the extant limit of 14 years set under the labour laws of the country, for
various vocations. An exception, however, thereto was made into the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958,
in relation to the Indian maritime shipping industry. However, it has been clarified by the Ministry
of Labour and Employment that the Government has now, in-principle, agreed to raise the minimum

7
age of employment under the labour laws also to 16 years and is consequently, also taking
necessary action to ratify the ILO Conventions 138 and 182 on minimum age and child labour
exploitation. Hence, the enhancement of age upto 16 years now proposed under the MLC for the
shipping industry is in line thereof. Every eligible entrant/candidate has to undergo a pre-sea training
component for an entry into the seafaring profession. Such formal and institutionalized human
resource development training is governed for the global maritime industry by the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) London’s Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and
Watch-keeping (STCW). India has since adopted this Convention, upon ratification and follows it,
wherein 16 years of age is the prescribed minimum entry level age for this vocation.
21.2 The Committee finds the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping very convincing.
But also feels at the same time that minimum age of a young person to be employed is
different under different Acts. Therefor e, the instant statutory provision should be amended in
the same perspective so that there remains no confusion in its interpretation and application.
Moreover, it should not put children also into disadvantage in any manner. Accordingly, the
Committee recommends that the provisions made under Clauses 4, 5 and 9 of the Bill should
be uniformly amended. Other Acts and Rules administered by various Ministries/Departments
prescribing minimum age limit for young persons to be employed should also be suitably and
uniformly amended. The Ministry may take up the matter with Ministry of Law and the
Ministry of Labour to remove all anomalies arising therefrom or consequential thereto.
22. Recognition of Trade Unions and National Maritime Board
22.1 The Committee was informed that many of the ship owners are not making payment of
wages to seafarers including the officers. The Committee received memoranda regarding many
cases wherein the manning agents did not pay the full wages including emoluments, etc. as per
the industry wage agreement. As a result, seafarers are deprived of their legitimate wages.
22.2 The Committee received a memoranda, inter alia , mentioning that Section 150 (9) of the
M. S. Act in the matter of Power of the Central Government to constitute Tribunal states that
“Nothing contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, shall apply to any dispute between seamen
or any class of seamen or any union of seamen and the owners of ships in which such seamen
are employed or are likely to be employed.” In the absence of recognition of trade unions in the
M. S. Act, the interests of the seafarers and also the ship owners remain unprotected. This leaves
scope for unscrupulous ship owners to take advantage of the situation to exploit the seafarers. This
also leads to chaos in this sensitive and strategically important industry. When negotiations on
charter of demand are to be considered, often these issues land up in court.
22.3 The Committee asked the Ministry whether trade unions in the maritime field are made part
of the MS Act, 1958 and whether those should be recognized as per the Act.
22.4 The Ministry admitted that the Trade Union paradigm in the maritime field has not been
made an expressed part of the MS Act, 1958 from the outset barring under its Section 113(2)
which provided prior consultations with most representatives of the ship owners and seamen, for
the purpose. However, for every purpose of the Act, the Trade Unions are being consulted, as
important stakeholders for engagement. The recognition of the Trade Union is made as per the
procedures by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India.
22.5 The Committee takes a view that the role of Trade Unions should be clearly
recognised in the MS Act, 1958 in the mutual interest of both seafarers and ship owners
for which express provisions be made in the MS Act. In addition to the recommendation
made with regard to Clause 12 above, the Committee further suggests that Shipping Master
should be given powers to penalize the manning agents or the ship owners in case they fail

8
to make due payment of wages to seafarers. The Government should protect the seafarers
from the exploitation by manning agents and the ship owners. Besides, the National
Maritime Board which is presently a key dispute resolution mechanism should be
incorporated under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act. Presently, references of the
National Maritime Board are already there in the form filled by seafarers when they sign
the Articles of Agreement under Section 100 and 101 of the M.S. Act.
23 Regarding the designated authority
23.1 On being asked by the Committee to explain why the designated authority to carry out
inspection and survey of ships has not been defined in the legislation itself, the Ministry of Shipping
replied that ships of Member States have to be periodically inspected and issued Maritime Labour
Certificates (MLC) under the Convention. Given the volume and nature of work associated with
vessel inspections, this task is proposed to be delegated to a Recognized Organization (ROs)/
Classification Society (CS), which is permissible under Regulation 5.1.1. of the Convention.
Inspection of ships is carried out by the qualified Surveyors. As per Sections 9 (1)and 9(1A) of
the M. S. Act, 1958, the Central Government by notification may appoint a person or body of
persons as Surveyors to inspect and survey ships, for the purpose of this Act.
23.2 Further, the Government of India through a Gazette Notification to this effect has been
authorising such International Association of Classification Societies (IACS) as Recognised
Organisations to be surveyors, for carrying out surveys and for issuing and endorsing certificates,
etc. under M. S. Act, 1958. The necessary control and safeguards are built-in the respective
agreements to be entered between the Central Government and such organisations.
23.3 The Committee observes that safeguards are critical to surveys and inspections and,
therefore, these should be built into the legislation itself instead of being left out to be
determined by respective agreements, as is being currently done. Further, while determining
the designated authority, the quality and competence of such authority should be
periodically reviewed by the Government to ensure greater credibility of the existing
institutional arrangements.
24 Use of discretionary power by the competent authority
24.1 The Committee noted that the Bill has provided for a lot of discretionary powers to the
competent authority. Where the competent authority determines that it would not be reasonable or
practicable at the present time to apply certain details of the Code referred to in Article VI,
Paragraph, 1, to a ship or particular categories of ships flying the flag of the Member, the relevant
provision of the Code shall not apply to the extent that the subject matter is dealt with differently
by national laws or regulations or collective bargaining agreements or other measures. Such a
determination may only be made in consultation with the ship owners’ and seafarers’ organizations
concerned and may only be made with respect of ships of less than 200 gross tonnage not engaged
in international voyages.
24.2 The Committee recommends that the discretionary powers in this regard may be
used sparingly and judiciously by the competent authority on a case to case basis with due
deference to the existing national and international laws and practices as also the available
consultative mechanism for the purpose.
25 Regarding delay in bringing the legislation and framing of rules
25.1 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the specific reasons for bringing this
legislation now, as the Maritime Labour Convention was adopted way back in the year 2006.The

9
Ministry explained that the MLC 2006, is an entirely labour oriented Convention, framed for the
creation of a legal framework for facilitating and promoting decent working conditions and safe
guards for the welfare of seafarers. It is a Convention which benefits the three important
stakeholders i.e., the seafarers, the ship owners and the Government. Tripartite consultations and
consensus were, therefore, essential. Seminars and consultations were, accordingly, held over the
years. Draft amendments to the M.S. Act, 1956, as amended were, consequently, prepared after
working out a detailed gap analysis between the MLC and the provisions of Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958. Therefore, a Bill thereto was submitted to Parliament and the whole process took time.
25.2 The Committee while taking note of the explanation given by the Ministry feels that
there has been some delay and the Ministry should have expedited it keeping in mind the
importance of the Convention to the Indian maritime sector. The Committee feels that
implementation of the Bill, when passed, should not be further delayed due to delayed rule-
framing. The Committee emphasises the need for timely rule-framing for the early
implementation of the Statute.
25.3 The Committee specifically notes that under Clause 16, the proposed new Section 218
prescribes power of the Central Government to make rules with respect to the Maritime
Labour Convention; manner of issuance of certificate; hours of work and rest; period of
night work; standard for the quality and quantity of food; the manner of conducting
inspections etc. The procedures for the specifications of the aforesaid Convention will be
prescribed in the rules, from time to time, as per the changes whenever made to the
Convention. The Committee strongly recommends that all such rules should be framed and
put into effect expeditiously in the interest of the seafaring community.
26 Regarding Changes in the  Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers (RPS) Rules
26.1 The Committee enquired from the Ministry that whether the present amendment would bring
change in the Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers Rules, 2005. To this, the Ministry confirmed
that it would be changed consequent upon the present amendment Bill and stated that the Merchant
Shipping (Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers: RPS) Rules, 2005, is proposed to be amended,
consequentially, under sections 95 and 457 of the M.S. Act. This will bring in changes to the
licensing norms and functioning of the RPS entities. The obligations of the RPS towards seafarers’
recruitment; procedures to be adopted for such recruitment; responsibility of the RPS towards
seafarers’ recruitment; procedures to be adopted for such recruitment, responsibility of the RPS
towards welfare of seafarers, etc., have increased due to the MLC provisions. Such changes have
to be brought in through amendments thereto. However, since elaborate provisions and changes in
procedures have to be brought in resultantly, it is not possible to confine the same only within the
M.S. Act and, therefore, amendment (s) in the subordinate legislation [Rules] would be needed. The
same stands worked upon in the proposed MS [RPS Amendment] Rules, which is under examination
in the Ministry of Shipping and will be finalized in consultation with the Legislative Department,
Ministry of Law, and Government of India. The Committee also took note of the apprehensions
expressed by a stakeholder that the changes may adversely affect the interest of the seamen/seafarers.
26.2 In view of the above, the Committee recommends that while framing the RPS rules,
abundant care should be taken to safeguard the welfare of the Indian seafarers/seamen
working in outside Indian waters and also those working for outside Indian ship owners.
The proposed amendment in the RPS rules should be in tune with the Convention and also
the recommendations of the Committee given in this Report.
27. The Committee recommends that in view of above recommendations necessary
amendments may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Bill, as amended, be passed.

10
10
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Clause 2
The Committee also agrees to retain the term “seafarer” in the Act. The Committee
feels that in order to make the legislation gender neutral replacing the term “seamen” with
“sea persons” may be considered. (Para 13.3)
The Clause 3
The Committee observes that as per the definition and scope of application under
Article II of the MLC, 2006, Para 4, the Convention should be made applicable to all ships
whether publicly or privately owned, ordinarily engaged in commercial activities except
explicitly exempted in the Act itself. The Committee feels that interest of the persons
working on ships of less than 500 GT should also be protected and it is not forbidden by
the MLC. Therefore, as far as possible, the benefits flowing from the adoption and
implementation of the provisions of the MLC should reach the maximum number of
seamen/seafarers engaged in Merchant shipping. At the same time, the Committee also
apprehends that as it involves multi level delegation, it might result in procedural delays.
Therefore, abundant care should be taken to ensure speedy issuance of Maritime Labour
Certificates. (Para 14.2)
The Committee also notes that there is no mention of periodicity of Declaration,
Certificate etc. issued under Section 88 A of the Bill and recommends that if this has not
been provided, it should also be suitably included in the Bill. (Para 14.3)
It was brought before the Committee that powers pertaining to the Declaration of
Compliance under proposed Section 88A(a) has been given to DG Shipping only, whereas
powers pertaining to the issuance of Maritime Labour Certificate under clause 88A(b) has
been further delegated to officers, authorities or organizations authorized for this purpose.
It was contended before the Committee that both should be same in order to avoid delays
and inconvenience to the seafarers. The Committee feels that provision of 88(A)(a) is
restrictive rather than exhaustive as in the case of Section 88(A)(b) and both should have
been similarly worded i.e. delegation of authority in both the cases should be the same.
(Para 14.4)
The Committee notes an apparent error and recommends that the word “singed” be
corrected and made “signed” in the Section 88(A) ( c). The Committee observes that
Maritime Labour Convention is basically a convention of International Labour Organisation
(ILO) and it should also be mentioned in the definition portion given under Clause 3
inserting new Section 88 A (c) so as to read as “Maritime Labour Convention” means the
Convention of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) on Maritime Labour Standards
signed in Geneva on the 23
rd February, 2006. (Para 14.5)
The Committee further notes an obvious error and recommends that the word
“works” be corrected and made “work” in the Section 88(A) ( d) ( i). (Para 14.6)
The Clauses 4 and 5
This has been proposed in the Bill under Clause 5 (a) (ii) that for the words “the

11
boy is a minor”; the words “such young person” shall be substituted. The Committee notes
that this formulation does not convey the meaning fully. Therefore, only the words “the
boy” should be substituted with the words “such young person” to read the sentence as
“…..or on his behalf by his guardian, if such young person is a minor……” In sub section
92 sub clause (3) (b) the substituted word should be “a young person” and not “
an young
person.” (Para 15.3)
The Clause 8
The Committee feels that Trade Unions should be recognized under the statute as
important stake holders in deciding about payment, leave, compensation, etc. to the
seafarers. The recommendation made at para 22.5 of this Report may also be considered in
this regard. (Para 16.3)
The Clause 9
The Committee feels that at times for the purpose of training or gaining experience
a young person may also be sent on board during night and notes that such exemptions are
provided in the MLC. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the amendment to
Section 109 (a) which presently states that “no young person shall be engaged in night
work” should instead read as, “no young person shall be engaged in night work unless with
exceptions made by the competent authority in regards to effective training or specific
nature of duty that requires performance of duties at night which in no case should be
detrimental to their health or well being.” (Para 17.4)
The Ministry, therefore, has to ensure that ‘young persons’ are on board of a ship
under regulated and supervised conditions. (Para 17.5)
The Clause 11
The Committee feels that consultation with representative organizations is necessary
and, therefore, Sub section 2 of old Section 113, which has been deleted, should be retained.
Or, the intent of this deleted provision should find its way in generic terms under Clause
16, proposing insertion of new Section 218A on page 4 of the Bill. (Para 18.3)
The Clause 12
The Committee feels that in the present context, even the limit of Rs.3,00,000
is meagre and observes that the competence of the Master of the Ship may be
increased beyond Rs.3,00,000 and the upper limit should be prescribed from time to
time. (Para 19.2)
The Clause 17
With regard to other penalties imposed under Section 436, the Committee feels that
these are too meagre to be retained and therefore need to be raised substantially. For
example, if a Master of an Indian ship commits an offence under sub-section 4 of Section
35 and uses or attempts to use a navigation certificate of registry not legally granted in
respect of the ship, the fine for such serious offence may extend only to 1000 rupees. The
Committee notes that the penalties imposed on violation of provisions of the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958 are very meagre and have almost become redundant to deter the
violations. Therefore, the entire Section 436 may be revised suitably with a focus on having
penalties reasonable enough to secure stricter compliance of the Act. (Para 20.3)

12
Legal Implications, if any, of providing for an age of 16 years in the proposed Merchant
Shipping (Second Amendment)  Bill, 2013
The Committee finds the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping very
convincing. But also feels at the same time that minimum age of a young person to be
employed is different under different Acts. Therefore, the instant statutory provision should
be amended in the same perspective so that there remains no confusion in its interpretation
and application. Moreover, it should not put children also into disadvantage in any manner.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the provisions made under Clauses 4, 5 and
9 of the Bill should be uniformly amended. Other Acts and Rules administered by various
Ministries/Departments prescribing minimum age limit for young persons to be employed
should also be suitably and uniformly amended. The Ministry may take up the matter with
Ministry of Law and the Ministry of Labour to remove all anomalies arising therefrom or
consequential thereto. (Para 21.2)
Recognition of Trade Unions and National Maritime Board
The Committee takes a view that the role of Trade Unions should be clearly
recognised in the MS Act, 1958 in the mutual interest of both seafarers and ship owners
for which express provisions be made in the MS Act. In addition to the recommendation
made with regard to Clause 12 above, the Committee further suggests that Shipping Master
should be given powers to penalize the manning agents or the ship owners in case they fail
to make due payment of wages to seafarers. The Government should protect the seafarers
from the exploitation by manning agents and the ship owners. Besides, the National
Maritime Board which is presently a key dispute resolution mechanism should be
incorporated under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act. Presently, references of the
National Maritime Board are already there in the form filled by seafarers when they sign
the Articles of Agreement under Section 100 and 101 of the M.S. Act. (Para 22.5)
Regarding the designated authority
The Committee observes that safeguards are critical to surveys and inspections and,
therefore, these should be built into the legislation itself instead of being left out to be
determined by respective agreements, as is being currently done. Further, while determining
the designated authority, the quality and competence of such authority should be
periodically reviewed by the Government to ensure greater credibility of the existing
institutional arrangements. (Para 23.3)
Use of discretionary power by the competent authority
The Committee recommends that the discretionary powers in this regard may be
used sparingly and judiciously by the competent authority on a case to case basis with due
deference to the existing national and international laws and practices as also the available
consultative mechanism for the purpose. (Para 24.2)
Regarding delay in bringing the legislation and framing of rules
The Committee while taking note of the explanation given by the Ministry feels that
there has been some delay and the Ministry should have expedited it keeping in mind the
importance of the Convention to the Indian maritime sector. The Committee feels that
implementation of the Bill, when passed, should not be further delayed due to delayed rule-
framing. The Committee emphasises the need for timely rule-framing for the early
implementation of the Statute. (Para 25.2)

13
The Committee specifically notes that under Clause 16, the proposed new Section 218
prescribes power of the Central Government to make rules with respect to the Maritime
Labour Convention; manner of issuance of certificate; hours of work and rest; period of
night work; standard for the quality and quantity of food; the manner of conducting
inspections etc. The procedures for the specifications of the aforesaid Convention will be
prescribed in the rules, from time to time, as per the changes whenever made to the
Convention. The Committee strongly recommends that all such rules should be framed and
put into effect expeditiously in the interest of the seafaring community. (Para 25.3)
Regarding Changes in the  Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers (RPS) Rules
In view of the above, the Committee recommends that while framing the RPS rules,
abundant care should be taken to safeguard the welfare of the Indian seafarers/seamen
working in outside Indian waters and also those working for outside Indian ship owners.
The proposed amendment in the RPS rules should be in tune with the Convention and also
the recommendations of the Committee given in this Report. (Para 26.2)
The Committee recommends that in view of above recommendations necessary
amendments may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Bill, as amended, be passed. (Para 27)

ANNEXURE

Vide Para-A
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
19 Aug, 2013
Bill No. XLIX of 2013
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in PART  VII, under the heading, for the sub-
heading, the following sub-heading shall be substituted, namely:––
‘‘Classification of seamen, seafarer, maritime labour
standards and  prescription of minimum manning scale’’.
3. In the principal Act, after section 88, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
‘88A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance”
means a declaration issued by the Director-General of Shipping,
17
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
sub-heading
in PART VII.
44 of 1958.
Insertion of
new sections
88A and 88B.
Definitions.

18
in respect of a ship that it meets with the requirements and
standards set out in the provisions of the Maritime Labour
Convention;
(b) “Maritime Labour Certificate” means the
certificate issued by the Director-General of Shipping or by
any officer, authority or organisation authorised by him in this
behalf, in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime
Labour Convention;
(c) “Maritime Labour Convention” means the
International Convention on Maritime Labour Standards singed
in Geneva on the 23rd February, 2006;
(d) “seafarer” means any person who is employed or
engaged or works in any capacity on board a sea going ship,
but does not include—
(i) the employment or engagement or works on
board in any capacity by any person in a ship of war;
or
(ii) any Government ship used for military or
non-commercial purposes.
88B. ( 1) The provisions relating to maritime labour
standards as contained in the Maritime Labour Convention,
shall apply to all seafarers and ships engaged in commercial
activities, but does not include—
(a) ships which navigate exclusively in inland
waters or waters within, or closely adjacent to,
sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time
being in force relating to ports apply;
(b) ships engaged in fishing activities;
(c) traditionally built ships such as dhows and
junks;
(d) ships of war or naval auxiliaries.
(2) Subject to the provisons of sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may, on the recommendation of the Director-General of
Shipping, by order, extend the provisions of the said sub-section to
ships not engaged in commercial activities with such exceptions and
modifications as it may consider necessary.’.
4. In section 91 of the principal Act, for the words “boys not
under fifteen years of age”, the words “young persons not under
the age of sixteen years” shall be substituted.
5. In section 92 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the words “any boy”, the words “any
young person” shall be substituted;
Application
of maritime
labour
standards to
seafarers and
ships.
Amendment
of section 91.
Amendment
of section 92.

19
(ii) for the words “the boy is a minor”, the
words “such young person” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 3),—
(i) in clause ( a), in sub-clause ( iii ), for the
words “fifteen years”, the words “sixteen years” shall
be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the words “a minor”, the
words “an young person” shall be substituted.
6. In section 95 of the principal Act, in the Explanation ,
clause ( b) shall be omitted.
7. In section 99A of the principal Act, the Explanation thereto
shall be omitted.
8. In section 101 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) after clause ( c), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(cc) hours of work and rest in a week, as may
be prescribed;”;
(ii) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“( ff ) the entitlement for leave, as may be
prescribed;”; and
(iii) in clause ( j), for the words “arising out of and”,
the words “arising out of employment or” shall be substituted.
9. For section 109 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“109. ( 1) No person under the age of sixteen years
shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in
any ship.
(2)( a) No young person shall be engaged in night work.
(b) The period of night work shall be such, as
may be prescribed.”.
10. Section 110 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
11. For section 113 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“113. The Central Government may make rules for the
purposes of employment of young persons, prescribing—
(a) the authorities, whose certificates of physical
fitness shall be accepted for the purposes of section 111;
Amendment
of section 95.
Amendment of
section 99A.
Amendment of
section 101.
Substitution of
new section for
section 109.
Prohibition of
engagement of
underage persons
in certain cases.
Omission of
section 110.
Substitution of
new section for
section 113.
Power to make
rules respecting
employment of
young persons.

20
(b) the form of register of young persons to be
maintained in ships where there is no agreement with
the crew.”.
12. In section 132 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in
clause ( a), for the words “three thousand rupees”, the words “three
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
13. In section 168 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 6),
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(7) The master of the ship or any person having
charge over the ship shall maintain such standards, in
accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour
Convention, for the quantity and quality of food and drinking
water, and the catering standards applicable to food provided
to the seamen on ships, as may be prescribed.
(8) The master of the ship or any person having charge
over the ship shall undertake educational activities to promote
awareness and implementation of the standards referred to in
sub-section ( 7).”.
14. In section 173 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1) ,
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Every foreign-going ship carrying—
(a) more than the prescribed number of persons
(including the crew), shall have on board as part of her
complement a medical officer possessing such qualifications;
and
(b) less than the prescribed number of persons shall
have such medical facilities, as may be prescribed, in
accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour
Convention.”.
15. After section 176 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“176A. ( 1) All ships of five hundred tons gross or more
and engaged in international voyage or operating from a port,
or between ports, in another country, shall possess a Maritime
Labour Certificate and a Declaration of Maritime Labour
Compliance.
(2) Ships not covered under sub-section ( 1) shall,
unless exempted by the Central Government, possess such
certificate in such manner and form, as may be prescribed.
(3) The shipping master, surveyor, seamen’s welfare
officer, port health officer, Indian consular officer or any
other officer at any port duly authorised in this behalf by the
Central Government, may inspect any ship, in such manner as
Amendment
of section
132.
Amendment
of section
173.
Amendment
of section
168.
Insertion of
new section
176A.
Ships to
possess
Maritime
Labour
Certificate
and
Declaration
of Maritime
Labour
Compliance.

21
may be prescribed, and the master of the ship or any person
having charge over the ship shall make available to such
inspecting officer, the Maritime Labour Certificate and the
Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance.”.
16. After section 218 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“218A. ( 1) The Central Government may, having regard
to the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any
of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the hours of work and rest in a week under
clause ( cc) of sub-section ( 2) of section 101;
(ii) the entitlement for leave under clause ( ff) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 101;
(iii) the period of night work under clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 109;
(iv) standards for the quantity and quality of food
and drinking water, including the catering standards that
apply to food provided to the seamen on ships, under
sub-section ( 7) of section 168;
(v) the qualifications of medical officer under
clause ( a) and the medical facilities under clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 173;
(vi) the manner and form of certificate to be
provided to ships under sub-section ( 2) of section 176A;
(vii) the manner of conducting inspection in a
ship to verify possession of the Maritime Labour
Certificate and the Declaration of Maritime Labour
Compliance under sub-section ( 3) of section 176A;
(viii) any other matter which may be or is to be
prescribed relating to the Maritime Labour Convention.”.
17. In section 436 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in
the Table, against serial number 25,—
(a) in column (2), the word and figures “section 110”,
occurring at both the places shall be omitted; and
(b) in column (3), the figures “110”, shall be omitted.
Insertion of
new section
218A.
Power to
make rules
for purposes
of Maritime
Labour
Convention.
Amendment
of section
436.

22
22
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, as amended from time to
time, provides for matters relating to merchant shipping in India.
The objective of the said Act is to ensure the development and
efficient maintenance of the Indian mercantile marine in a manner
best suited to serve the national interests.
2. India is a member of International Labour Organisation
(ILO), Geneva. India has acceded to various ILO Conventions.
Now, India intends to accede to the International Labour
Organisation’s instrument C-186, known as the Maritime Labour
Convention, 2006 (herein referred to as the MLC). This Convention
is considered as the ‘Bill of Rights’ for the seafarers across the
world, given that shipping, as an industry, is, intrinsically, global in
nature. The MLC provides for international standards for the living
and working conditions, of seafarers, including their food,
accommodation, medical care, repatriation, social security, and
recruitment.
3. The main purposes of the said Convention are:
(i) to bring the system of seamen’s protection
contained in the existing labour standards closer to the
workers concerned, in a form consistent with the rapidly
developing and globalised sector; and
(ii) to improve the applicability of the system so that
ship owners and Governments interested in providing decent
conditions of work to their respective national seafarers do
not have to bear an unequal burden in ensuring their
protection.
4. Paragraph 4 of Article II of the said Convention provides
that except as expressly provided for otherwise, the provisions of
the said Convention applies to all ships, whether publicly or privately
owned, ordinarily engaged in commercial activities, other than ships
engaged in fishing or in similar pursuits and traditionally built dhows
and junks, but does not apply to warships or naval auxiliaries.
5. On ratification of the MLC, India will ensure an
improvement in the working and living conditions, and employment
rights of Indian national seafarers, and provide, inter alia , the
following benefits to them:
(a) safe and secure workplace on a ship;
(b) fair terms of employment;
(c) decent working and living conditions on a ship; and

23
(d) right to health protection, medical care and other
social protection.
6. The Central Government has approved the ratification of
the MLC. Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958, to make enabling provisions for implementation and
enforcement of the MLC; and thereby making it mandatory for
Indian flag vessels to comply with the provisions of the said
Convention and to obtain a Maritime Labour Certificate to that effect
for the Indian flag vessels.
7. Under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013, every Indian flag vessel of 500 gross
tonnage or more and engaged in international voyage(s), would be
issued with a Maritime Labour Certificate after an inspection of the
ship concerned. This will enable them to get preferential treatment
and exemption from their inspection for this purpose at foreign
ports thereby reducing operational time and transaction costs for
them. Further, India will be to ensure that all foreign flag vessels
entering the territorial waters of India, or any marine areas adjacent
thereto, over which India has, or may hereafter have an exclusive
jurisdiction, are subject to an inspection under the MLC, by which
the rights of all seafarers regardless of their nationality are
protected.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; G . K. V ASAN
The 12th July, 2013.

24
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 218A
relating to power to make rules for the purposes of Maritime Labour
Convention in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. Sub-clause ( 1) of
the said new section 218A empowers the Central Government,
having regard to the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention,
2006, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of Part VII
relating to seamen and apprentices. Sub-clause (2) specifies the
matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These
matters, inter alia , include : ( i) the hours of work and rest in a
week under clause ( cc) of sub-section ( 2) of section 101; ( ii) the
entitlement for leave under clause ( ff) of sub-section ( 2) of section
101; ( iii ) the period of night work under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 109; ( iv) the standards for the quantity and
quality of food and drinking water, including the catering standards
that apply to food provided to the seamen on ships, under sub-
section ( 7) of section 168; ( v) the qualifications of medical officer
under clause (a) and the medical facilities under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 173; ( vi) the manner and form of certificate
to be provided to ships under sub-section ( 2) of section 176A;
(vii) the manner of conducting inspection in a ship to verify
possession of the Maritime Labour Certificate and the Declaration of
Maritime Labour Compliance under sub-section ( 3) of section 176A;
and ( viii) any other matter, which may be or is to be prescribed
relating to the Maritime Labour Convention.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are
matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

25
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE M ERCHANT S HIPPING A CT, 1951
(44 OF 1958)
** * * *
PART VII
SEAMEN AND APPRENTICES
Classification of seamen and prescription of minimum manning scale
** * * *
Apprenticeship to the sea service
91. All shipping masters shall give to persons desirous of
apprenticing boys not under fifteen years of age to the sea service
or requiring apprentices not under that age for the sea service such
assistance as may be in their power, and may receive from those
persons such fees as the Central Government may fix.
92. (1) The apprenticeship of any boy to the sea service shall
be by contract in writing between the apprentice or on his behalf by
his guardian, if the boy is a minor, and the master or owner of the
ship requiring the apprentice.
** * * *
(3) Every such contract shall be executed in the presence of,
and shall be attested by, the shipping master of the port, who shall,
before the execution of the contract, satisfy himself—
(a) that the intended apprentice—
** * * *
(iii) has attained the age of fifteen years; and
** * * *
(b) if the intended apprentice is a minor, that his
guardian’s consent has been obtained to his being bound as an
apprentice.
** * * *
Seamen’ s employment Offices
95. (1) It shall be the business of the seamen’s employment
offices—
** * * *
Assistance for
apprenticeship
to sea service.
Special
provisions as
to apprenticeship
to the sea
service.
Business of
seamen’s
employment
offices.

26
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
** * * *
(b) “seafarer” means any person who fulfils the
conditions to be employed or engaged in any capacity
on board a sea-going ship other than a government ship
used for military or non-commercial purposes.
** * * *
99A. (1) No person shall engage or carry to sea any seafarer
in any ship, unless the seafarer is in possession of seafarer’s
identity document.
(2) The seafarer’s identity document under sub-section ( 1)
shall be issued in such form and manner and on payment of such
fees as may be prescribed.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “seafarer”
means any person who is employed or engaged or works in any
capacity on board a sea going ship ordinarily engaged in maritime
navigation, other than a ship of war.
** * * *
101. (1)* * * * *
(2) The agreement with the crew shall contain as terms
thereof the following particulars, namely:—
** * * *
(j) payment of compensation for personal injury or
death caused by accident arising out of and in the course of
employment;
** * * *
109. No person under fourteen years of age shall be engaged
or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship, except—
(a) in a school ship, or training ship, in accordance
with the prescribed conditions; or
(b) in a ship in which all persons employed are
members of one family; or
(c) in a home-trade ship of less than two hundred tons
gross; or
(d) where such person is to be employed on nominal
wages and will be in the charge of his father or other adult
near male relative.
110. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-sections ( 2) and
(3), no young person shall be engaged or carried to sea to work as
a trimmer or stoker in any ship.
Prohibition
of engagement
of seafarer
without
seafarer’s
identity
document.
Form and
contents of
the
agreement.
Employment
of
children.
Engagement of
young persons
as trimmers or
stokers.

27
(2) Sub-section ( 1) shall not apply—
(a) to any work of trimming or stoking done by a
young person in a school ship or training ship in accordance
with the prescribed conditions; or
(b) to any work of trimming or stoking done by a
young person in a ship which is mainly propelled otherwise
than by steam; or
(c) to the engagement or carrying to sea of a person
over sixteen years of age to work as a trimmer or stoker on
a coasting ship, provided he is employed in accordance with
the prescribed conditions.
(3) Where in any port a trimmer or stoker is required for any
ship other than a coasting ship, and no person over eighteen years
of age is available, two young persons over sixteen years of age
may be engaged and carried to sea to do the work which would
otherwise have been done by one person over eighteen years of age.
(4) There shall be included in every agreement with the crew
in ships to which this section applies a short summary of the
provisions of this section.
** * * *
113. (1) The Central Government may make rules prescribing—
(a) the conditions of employment of young persons in
any capacity in school ships and training ships, and the
authorities by whom and the manner in which the inspection
of their work shall be carried out;
(b) the conditions of employment of young persons as
trimmers or stokers in coasting ships;
(c) the authorities whose certificates of physical fitness
shall be accepted for the purposes of section 111; and
(d) the form of the register of young persons to be
maintained in ships where there is no agreement with the
crew.
(2) Rules under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall be made
after consultation with such organisations in India as the Central
Government may consider to be most representative of the
employers of seamen and of seamen.
** * * *
132. (1) Where under the agreement with the crew any
dispute arises at any port in India between the master, owner or
agent of a ship and any of the crew of the ship, it shall be
submitted to the shipping master,—
Power to make
rules respecting
employment of
young persons.
Decision of
questions by
shipping
masters.

28
(a) where the amount in dispute does not exceed three
thousand rupees, at the instance of either party to the
dispute;
** * * *
173. (1) Every foreign-going ship carrying more than the
prescribed number of persons (including the crew), shall have on
board as part of her complement a medical officer possessing such
qualifications as may be prescribed.
** * * *
PART XVI
P
ENALTIES AND P ROCEDURE
Penalties
436. (1)* * * * *
(2) The offences mentioned in the second column of the
following table shall be punishable to the extent mentioned in the
fourth column of the same with reference to such offences respectively.
Certain ships
to carry
medical
officer.
Penalties.
Serial Offences Section of Penalties
No. this Act to
which offence
has reference
*** * *
25 If any person—
(a) is carried to sea to 109, 110, The master shall be
work in contravention of 111. liable to a fine which
section 109, section 110 or may extend to fifty
section 111; or rupees;
(b) is engaged to work The parent or guardian
in any capacity in a ship in shall be liable to a fine
contra-vention of section 109, which may extend to fifty
section 110 or section 111 on rupees.
a false representation by his
parent or guardian that the
young person is of an age at
which such engagement is not
in contravention of those
sections.
** * * *

29
29
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
(Shri G.K. Vasan, Minister of Shipping )

MINUTES

32

33
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd August, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
10. Yogi Adityanath
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Chairman informed the Committee about the reference of the Merchant Shipping
(Second Amendment) Bill, 2013 to the Committee for examination and Report. After a brief
discussion the Committee decided to issue a Press Release through DA VP to invite the views/
suggestions from all concerned stakeholders and those interested in the subject.
6. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
33
*** Relate to other matters.

34
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 1 st October, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
LOK SABHA
8. Yogi Adityanath
9. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
10. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
14. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
National Union of Seafarers of India
Shri Abdulgani Y . Serang, General Secretary
34

35
Indian National Ship-owners’ Association
Shri S.M. Rai, Director
Forward Seamen’s Union of India
1. Shri Naresh Birwadkar, General Secretary
2. Shri Naresh Lal, Secretary
Indian National Trade Union Congress
Shri Mahendra Gharat, Vice-President
Seafarers Confederation of India
1. Shri K.S. Anil Kumar, General Secretary
2. Shri Biju K. Satyavratan, Capt. Merchant Navy
Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh
Shri Yogender Rai, General Secretary, SSK Mahasangh
***
2. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of various stakeholders in connection with the
examination of the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013. The Committee also
directed them to submit any further points related to the Bill before the Reports is finalized.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

36
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22 nd October, 2013 in Main Committee
Room (MCR), Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
9. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
10. Shri Subrata Bakshi
11. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
12. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
13. Shri Prabodh Panda
14. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri K. Sudhakaran
18. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
36

37
*** Relate to other matters.
2. Shri M.C. Jauhari, JS (S)
3. Shri Gautam Chatterjee, Director-General (Shipping)
4. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Director (Parl.)
5. Shri R. Srinivasa Naik, Director
6. Shri Deepak Shetti, Joint Director-General (Shipping)
7. Shri C. Rethinadas, Deputy-Director-General (Shipping)
8. Shri B. Krishnamoorthy, Deputy Secretary
Ministry of Labour
1. Shri Anil Kumar Kachi, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vinod Kumar, Director
Ministry of External Affairs
Shri M.K. Rao, Director
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Fisheries)
Shri Ajaya Srivastava, Director
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri Inder Kumar, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
2. Shri Mahesh Tyagi, Deputy Legal Advisor
***
2. At the outset the Committee decided to met next at 11.30 
A.M. on the 31 st October, 2013
to consider and adopt draft Reports on the ‘Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013’
and on the ‘Privatisation of Services at Airports’.
3. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary and other
officials of the Ministry of Shipping and the officials from the Ministries of Law and Justice,
Labour and Employment, External Affairs and Agriculture (Department of Fisheries). The
Committee undertook clause-wise detailed discussion and examined the replies furnished by the
Ministry of Shipping on the questionnaire and various issues raised by the stakeholders. The
Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and other concerned officials from the Ministry of Law and
Justice, Labour and Agriculture replied to the queries raised by the Committee.
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.

38
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 31 st October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
6. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and requested them to offer their
comments/suggestions on the draft 202
nd and 203 rd Reports on the ‘Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013’ and ‘Privatization of services at Airports’ respectively circulated to them.
After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Report on the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013 without any change and Privatization of services at Airports with some additions.
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that the time given to the Committee for presenting
the Report on the Bill will be expiring before the ensuing Session of Parliament. Therefore, the
38

39
Committee decided that both the reports may be presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
during the inter-session. The Committee accordingly authorized its Chairman to present both the
reports to the Hon’ble Chairman.
4. * * *
5. The Committee decided to hold its meeting on 21
st November, 2013.
6. The meeting adjourned at 12.15 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

40
40
LIST OF REPORTS
Sl.
No.
1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Report No.
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Report’s Name
3
Demands for Grants, 1993-94 Department of
Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings
and Repeal) Bill, 1992
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of Department
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North East
National Highway System
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of Department
of Tourism
Date of Presentation
4
30.4.1993
17.8.1993
08.12.1993
08.12.1993
16.3.1994
19.4.1994
19.4.1994
21.4.1994
22.4.1994
25.4.1994
24.8.1994
20.3.1995
25.4.1995
26.4.1995

41
1
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
2
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
3
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of Department
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill, 1995
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of Department
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98) Department of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of Ministry
of Surface Transport
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance Air
Demands for Grants of Department of
Tourism for the year 1998-99
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
4
26.4.1995
10.5.1995
26.5.1995
25.8.1995
04.12.1995
28.2.1996
28.2.1996
07.3.1996
27.8.1996
04.09.1996
09.9.1996
15.5.1997
15.5.1997
15.5.1997
24.7.1997
14.8.1997
03.7.1998
06.7.1998

42
1
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
2
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
3
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
The Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants of Ministry of Civil
Aviation for the year 1999-2000
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) Ministry of
Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at the
Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-01) of Ministry of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-01) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Surface Transport
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd.
Chartering and Management of flights for Haj
Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of Lighthouses
and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of Department
of Culture
4
06.7.1998
04.12.1998
08.3.1999
04.3.1999
19.4.1999
19.4.1999
19.4.1999
07.3.2000
19.4.2000
19.4.2000
19.4.2000
22.8.2000
15.12.2000
15.12.2000
23.3.2001
26.4.2001
26.4.2001

43
1
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
2
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
3
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry
of Shipping
The Aircraft (exemption from taxes and duties
on fuel and lubricants) Bill, 2000
Function of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-03), (Demand
No. 79) of the Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-03), (Demand
No. 80) of the Department of Culture
Demands  for Grants (2002-03), (Demand
No. 77) of the Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-03), Demand
No. 7) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-03), (Demand
No. 76) of the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways
Development of Tourism in the country
The Airports Authority of India  (Amendment)
Bill, 2000
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2001
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-Eighth Report
on Demands for Grants 2002-03 of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-Seventh Report on
Demands for Grants 2002-03 of Ministry of
Shipping
4
26.4.2001
26.4.2001
26.4.2001
27.11.2001
12.12.2001
24.4.2002
24.4.2002
24.4.2002
24.4.2002
24.4.2002
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.2.2003
25.2.2003
25.2.2003

44
1
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
2
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
3
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04), (Demand
No. 91) of Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04), (Demand
No. 76) of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04), (Demand
No. 90) of Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04), (Demand
No. 83) of Ministry of Shipping
The Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report on
Development of Tourism in the Country
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-Sixth Report
on Demands for Grants (2003-04), (Demand
No. 91) of Department of Tourism
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-Seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventieth Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of
Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-Eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Culture
4
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
03.12.2003
03.12.2003
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004

45
1
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
2
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
3
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-Ninth Report on Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Civil
Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05), (Demand
No. 93) of Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05), (Demand
No. 20) of Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05), (Demand
No. 86) of Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05), (Demand
No. 79) of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways
Eighty-Third Report on functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06), (Demand
No. 86) of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for grants (2005-06), (Demand
No. 20) of Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) (Demand
No. 85) of Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06), (Demand
No. 93) of Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modem Airports
Functioning of the Archaeological Survey
of India
4
03.02.2004
18.8.2004
26.8.2004
26.8.2004
26.8.2004
26.8.2004
06.12.2004
29.4.2005
29.4.2005
29.4.2005
29.4.2005
29.4.2005
27.7.2005
23.8.2005
25.11.2005

46
1
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
2
92
93
94
95
96
97
98.
99
100
101
3
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Fifth Report
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry
of Culture
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Sixth Report
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth Report on
the ‘Development of Airport Sector with
Special Emphasis on New Modern Airports’
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the Commission
of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage by Road Bill, 2005
4
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
21.3.2006
21.3.2006
17.3.2006
21.3.2006

47
1
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
2
102.
103.
104.
105.
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
3
Demands for Grants (2006-07), (Demand
No. 85) of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07), (Demand
No. 19) of Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07), (Demand
No. 92) of Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07), (Demand
No. 84) of Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07), (Demand
No. 84) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-First Report
on functioning of the Archaeological Survey of
India
Functioning and Performance of India Tourism
Development Corporation Limited
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2006
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Second Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Road Transport
and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of Department of Culture
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred and Fourth Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
Department of Tourism
4
22.5.2006
22.5.2006
22.5.2006
22.5.2006
22.5.2006
22.5.2006
15.12.2006
13.3.2007
20.3.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007

48
1
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
2
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
3
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred and Fifth Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
Department of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred and Sixth Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08), (Demand
No. 84) of Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08), (Demand
No. 85) of Department of Road, Transport
and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry
of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch
of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of East
Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai
River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway Kakinada-Pondicherry
Stretch of Canals and The Kaluvelly Tank,
Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River
Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch
of River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
11.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.9.2007
17.10.2007
20.11.2007

49
1
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
2
126
127
128.
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
3
The Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of The
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Department of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports
and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Department
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Department
of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Culture
4
20.11.2007
04.3.2008
04.3.2008
04.3.2008
04.3.2008
05.3.2008
17.4.2008
17.4.2008
17.4.2008
28.4.2008
28.4.2008
28.4.2008

50
1
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
2
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
3
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicles Amendment Bill, 2007
Promotion of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the related
Issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of The Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of The
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of The Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism
One Hundred and Forty-Sixth Report on
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of The Ministry of Civil Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
4
28.4.2008
28.4.2008
20.8.2008
20.8.2008
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
17.2.2009

51
1
149.
150.
151.
152.
153.
154.
155.
156.
157.
158.
159.
2
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
3
Development of Tourism Infrastructure and
Amenities for the Commonwealth Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage Sites
Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
impact on the Civil Aviation Sector (updated
on 03 March, 2010)
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fortieth Report on Promotion of Tourism in
Jammu And Kashmir
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Forty Ninth Report on Development of
Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for the
Commonwealth Games 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) Ministry of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-l1) of Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty First Report on Closure of Bangalore
and Hyderabad Airports; One Hundred and
Forty First Report on Modernisation of
Airports; and One Hundred and Forty Second
Report on Functioning of Private Airports
4
24.2.2009
23.11.2009
03.3.2010
03.3.2010
03.3.2010
20.4.2010
20.4.2010
22.4.2010
22.4.2010
22.4.2010
06.5.2010

52
1
160.
161.
162.
163.
164.
165.
166.
167.
168.
169.
170.
171.
2
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
3
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Fifty
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) -
Issues and Challenges
Helicopter Operations in India
Modernization of Major Ports
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National
School of Drama
4
28.7.2010
01.3.2011
04.3.2011
04.3.2011
04.3.2011
04.3.2011
04.3.2011
11.3.2011
04.5.2011
04.5.2011
11.8.2011
17.8.2011

53
1
172.
173.
174.
175.
176.
177.
178.
179.
180.
181.
182.
2
172
173
174.
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
3
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of
Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
One Hundred Seventy Ninth Report on Action
Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty
Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of National
Museum’
One Hundred Eightieth Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred and Seventy Second report on
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
One Hundred Eighty First Report on Action
Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty
Eighth Report on the Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty
Ninth Report on the Helicopter Operations in
India
4
17.8.2011
15.3.2012
27.4.2012
07.5.2012
07.5.2012
07.5.2012
07.5.2012
21.5.2012
21.5.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012

54
1
183.
184.
185.
186.
187.
188.
189.
190.
191.
192.
193.
2
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
3
Action Taken by The Government on The
recommendations/observations of The
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy Seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of The
Committee Contained in its One Hundred
Seventy Sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Seventy Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Seventy Fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Seventy Eighth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety
Development of National Waterways-Potential
and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
27.2.2013
27.2.2013
27.2.2013
03.5.2013
03.5.2013
03.5.2013

55
1
194.
195.
196.
197.
198.
199.
200.
201.
2
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
3
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Tourism
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region : Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Eighty Ninth Report on the Development of
National Waterways-Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National Highways
and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin
Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and other
Cultural Institutions : Issues and Challenges
4
03.5.2013
03.5.2013
07.8.2013
07.8.2013
27.8.2013
27.8.2013
27.8.2013
17.10.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.