 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
366
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty-Third Report on the subject“Issue of Fixing of Airfares” 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th  February, 2024) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTHREPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty-ThirdReport on the subject“Issue of Fixing of Airfares” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th  February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS        iii 
4. REPORT         1-53 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   54-59 
    6. ANNEXURE        60-61 
7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
62-64

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
 Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26th September, 2023 
 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Sixty Sixth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Fifty-Third Report on the subject “Issue of Fixing of Airfares” 
2. The Three Hundred Fifty-Third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the10th August, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifty-Third Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation  on 
2ndNovember, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
February, 2024. 
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
February 06, 202 4                                              Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Magha 17, 1945 (Saka)                                  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                            Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
ACI Airports Council International 
AI Express Air India Express 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
ASA Air Services Agreement 
ATF Aviation Turbine Fuel 
BRS Baggage Reconciliation System 
CCI Competition Commission of India 
CGF Concessional Ground Facilities 
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and 
Monitoring System 
CUTE Common Use Terminal Equipment 
CUSS Common Use Self Service 
DARPG Department of Administrative Reforms and 
Public Grievances 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
FEGP Fixed Electrical Ground Power 
FY Financial Year 
FSCs Full-Service Carriers 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
IATA International Air Transport Association 
ICCR Integrated Central Control Room 
INGRAM Integrated Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism 
Corporation 
LCCs Low-Cost Carriers 
MOPAG Mean of Platts Arab Gulf 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MYTP Multi Year Tariff Proposal 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal 
NCAP National Civil Aviation Policy 
PSF Passenger Service Fee 
RBD Reservation Booking Designator 
RDGs Route Dispersal Guidelines 
RNFC Route Navigation and Facilitation Charges 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India 
TDSAT Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal 
TNLC Terminal Navigation Landing Charges 
UDAAN Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik (also mentioned 
as RCS-UDAN Scheme) 
UDF User Development Fees 
UDAN Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fifty-Third 
Report on “Issue of Fixing of Airfares” which was presented to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 10th August, 2023.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 2nd November, 2023 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 17, 25, 26, 41, 42, 43, 45, 59, 71, 72, 104, 105, 
118, 152 and 189.    
Total: 21 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 22, 28, 49, 50, 73, 80, 84, 88, 89, 106, 119, 121, 127, 128, 135, 136, 
145, 146, 161, 162, 168, 169, 170, 177, 179, 182, 188, 191 and 192.    
Total: 29 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 18, 19, 32, 44, 46, 51, 60, 77, 85, 99, 110, 113, 117, 120, 125, 
138, 153, 171, 175, 190 and 193. 
Total: 22 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
  
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Airfare Regulations in the Past  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes the Airfare regulations that existed in the past and observes that 
the Air Corporations Act, 1953 required the various airline corporations to seek approval of 
Central Government for fixing airfares. Thereafter, on 21 st March, 1994, the said Act was 
repealed and the Indian Domestic Aviation Sector was totally deregulated and the airlines 
had the freedom to fix airfares. 
 (Para 4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that as per the airfare regulations existing earlier, the airfares 
were fully regulated by the Government which had put in place a mechanism to keep airfares 
under check. Thereafter, deregulation of airfares effectively came into effect from 21st March, 
1994 with the repeal of the Air Corporation Act, 1953 and the various airlines were free to 
fix airfares. 
(Para 5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes the amendment in Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 on 16 th 
April, 2009, which presently forms the basis of the legislation for airfare regulations. It also 
notes that as per the Rule 135(1), the airlines shall establish tariff, keeping in mind factors 
such as reasonable profit besides cost of operation, character istics of service and generally 
prevailing tariff, to rationalise airfares despite its deregulation, consequent upon repeal of 
Air Corporations Act, 1953. 
 (Para 8) 
 

3 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee also observes that Rule 135(2) requires the publication of the tariff by 
the airlines on its website/ daily newspapers or displaying it conspicuously in their office/ or 
the agent‟s office. Further, Section 135(2A) requires the airlines to sh ow the total amount 
payable by the passenger including the breakup such as taxes, fees for services/ facilities or 
other charges, which should be mentioned in the passenger ticket vide Rule 135 (2B). 
 (Para 9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee notes another significant requirement in Rule 135(3), wherein every 
airline is required to maintain all records relating to tariff and the requirement to produce 
such records to Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) for inspection. The Committee 
observes that the aforesaid Rule provides for supervision and inspection of DGCA (Ministry 
of Civil Aviation) on air tariffs being fixed by the airlines. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. Rule 135 (4) also empowers the DGCA to issue directions to airlines, if it is satisfied 
that the airlines have charged excessive/ predatory airfares or indulged in oligopolistic 
practice. Further, as per Rule 135 (5), the aforesaid directions of DGCA have to be compiled 
with by the airline concerned. 
 (Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Observation has been Noted. 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
Power of DGCA to Regulate Tariffs  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee observes that DGCA has a Tariff Monitoring Unit that monitors 
airfares on certain routes at regular intervals to ensure that the airlines do not charge 
airfares outside a range declared by them. However, the DGCA does not have any power to 
regulate tariffs based on the data generated by the Tariff Monitoring Unit as the process of 
airfare regulation has been dispensed with, consequent upon the repeal of the Air 
Corporation Act, 1953. 
(Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that presently airlines are free to charge reasonable airfares as 
per their operational viability subject to compliance of Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 
1937. Besides, currently, there is no provision under which Government is required to 
monitor the seat booking fees of airlines and the airlines sell tickets as per their respective 
distribution system, which is as per the global practice. 
 (Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee also observes that most of the airlines except AI Express had 
accumulated losses from FY 2019 -20 to 2021 -22. The Committee is aware that the Civil 
Aviation Industry had suffered a major setback on account  of Covid-19 pandemic and needs 
to recover its losses and regain its pre-pandemic level and then grow at an even faster rate to 
realise its    set targets. As such, the Committee is of the opinion that a fine balance needs to 
be maintained so that the interests of the airlines as well as the passengers are kept in mind.  
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
Reasonable Profit, Generally Prevailing Tariff and Mechanism followed for Fixing 
Airfares  
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes the replies of the representatives of various airlines as regards 
its query on the mechanism adopted by them to calculate the quantum of „reasonable profit‟. 
The airlines had commented that the prevailing air tariff on a particular  route is a result of 
demand-supply balance. Besides, airlines work on a „Cost Recovery Model‟, so as to recover 
all costs related to flight operations, rather than on a set target to achieve „reasonable 
profit‟. One of the airlines had also stated that th ey do not set a target „reasonable profit‟ 
and the practice of „Revenue Management‟ is followed which takes into account demand and 
supply. Representatives of an airline had also stated that pricing aspects depend on market 
situation and the ticket fares cannot be quantified in advance. 
 (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. As regards, the Committee‟s query regarding the minimum number of tickets needed 
to be sold on a particular route for airlines to break -even, the airlines were of the opinion 
that since most of the airlines have been unprofitable for most parts of their existence, the 
airlines were not able to achieve break -even point. Hence, currently, no such system exists in 
India. Airline representatives opined that the number of tickets sold for break -even depends 
on demand-supply dynamics based on which Revenue Management System does the pricing. 
 (Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee observes that though the concept of establishing tariffs on basis of 
„reasonable profit‟ is ingrained in the Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, yet none of the 
airlines has adopted a mechanism to calculate  the quantum of „reasonable profit‟. All the 
airlines are instead following the demand -supply dynamics through the „Revenue 
Management System‟ and hence, airfares are fixed accordingly. 
 (Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The observation has been noted. 
 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee also analysed the financial information in respect of Capital 
Investment; Working Capital; Revenue Expenditure; Fixed Cost; Operating Expenditure; Net 
Income; and Profit/Loss, as received from various airlines viz., Air Asia, Air India and 
Indigo. The Committee notes that over the last three financial years (2020 -21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23), the Operating Expenditure of Air India has increased every year, however, the Net 
Income has reduced from -7,084 crore to -11,381 crore over this period. Air Asia has also 
reported a steady increase in the Operating Expenditure and an increase in the Net Income 
as well, over the last three financial years. In respect of Indigo, the total expenses incurred 
by the airline have inc reased from 2020 -21 to 2022 -23, whereas the losses have drastically 
reduced from a staggering Rs. 5,818.1 crores in 2020 -21 and Rs. 6,153.7 crores in 2021 -22 
to a meagre Rs. 304.4 crore in 2022 -23. For SpiceJet, the Operating Expenditure has 
increased by around 45% from 2020-21 to 2021-22, while, the Net Income has reduced from 
Rs. 1,107.8 crores to Rs. 60.2 crore in this period. As regards Vistara, the Operating 
Expenditure has increased approximately three times from Rs. 4,312 crores in 2020 -21 to Rs. 
12,753 crores in 2022 -23, whereas the airline has reported losses amounting to Rs. 1,612 
crores in 2020-21 which reduced to Rs. 1,393 crore in 2022-23. 
 (Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Publication of Information on Website  
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee notes the replies received from various airlines wherein they have 
informed that none of these airlines are displaying misleading information on their websites 
and they are selling tickets as per the practice being followed worldwide. The Committee also 
notes the reply of the Ministry stating that DGCA has not received any such complaints 
substantiating that airlines are misleading the public with incorrect information. It, however, 
notes the reply of an airline stating that sometimes the online flight booking portals may 
show fares which are more than the fares fixed by the airlines. 
 (Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Analysis of Global Practice for Ticket Pricing  
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee observes that the IATA Rules are only a suggested framework to 
harmonize industry practices in the air -transport sector. While IATA is not a governmental 

7 
 
organization and has therefore, no competence for legislation, their RPs are internationally 
recognized references and generally have a non -binding character. Airlines across the world 
have adopted these RPs and also modified them to suit their own commercial practices. 
 (Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee further notes that globally, ticket pricing is a well -developed, evolving 
process, controlled by algorithms. Presently, ticket pricing is based on airline experience and 
set parameters, and airlines legitimately seek to maximize profits made through ticket sales. 
Airline price algorithms are not made public and are a closely guarded secret. 
 (Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Dynamic Pricing and Global Standards  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee notes that depending on the market demands, a significant portion of 
the seats in a particular flight is sold even below the average cost per seat to be able to 
attract customers who may have low affordability. It also notes that dynamic fare pricing 
models are derived from the Standard Revenue Management System and practised globally. 
These models are based on forecasting and optimizat ion tools. It also observes that there are 
many Revenue Management Systems available in the market and the airlines may choose any 
of these or may develop its own methods to forecast and allocate inventory. 
 (Para 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Observation of the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee further notes that no fixed model or formula is being followed by the 
airlines for airfare fixation. However, a vacant seat being a perishable inventory, airlines 
may offer seats at discounted rates, if the ticket is purchased sufficiently in advance. Thus, it 
benefits the passengers who have lower affordability. 
 (Para 105) 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and Taxes on ATF  
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee further notes that the pricing of „Aviation Turbine Fuel‟ is primarily 
influenced by the international product prices, depreciating value of Rupee and other market 
conditions. The Committee also observes the hig h ATF prices prevailing in the country, is 
further aggravated by high taxes such as customs duty, excise duty, sale/State tax, Value 
Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon. 
 (Para 118) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Statement of fact. 
 
Capping of Airfares – Upper and Lower  
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee notes that the Ministry introduced price caps as a temporary measure 
during COVID pandemic and these caps were removed w.e.f. 31 st August, 2022, after 
reviewing the situation. The implementation of price caps indicates that the Ministry/ DGCA 
is empowered to keep a check on the airfares, if deemed necessary. The Committee also 
analysed the replies received from various airlines and notes that all the airlines have opined 
against implementing upper and lower fare caps. They have added that most airlines prefer 
to function, without any restrictions, in an open market condition. The Committee also notes 
that due to the absence of any cap ping on airfares, the prices of tickets increase manifolds, 
especially during the holidays and festival season, so much so that at times the domestic 
sector fares are more than the fares on the international routes. 
 (Para 152) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Observation of the Committee. 
 
Bankruptcy of GoFirst  
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee is also aware that due to the suspension of operations of GoFirst, 
their lessor would now want to recover aircrafts from the operator. Due to this, the 
Committee opines that this may lead to lowered world ranking of India, on leasing aircraft  

9 
 
index, by the world rating agencies. This may subsequently lead to increased cost of lease 
rentals impacting the air tariff adversely. 
 (Para 189) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The observation has been noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Power of DGCA to Regulate Tariffs  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee took exception to the Ministry‟s concluding remarks during the  
presentation and during their deposition in the meeting of the Committee held on 8 th May, 
2023, and their written replies that regulation of airfare is not desirable for the overall 
growth of the aviation sector. The Committee reiterates its view that passengers should 
receive a fair deal at all times and recommends that the Ministry shou ld have a relook in its 
policy regarding regulation of airfare tariff in view of the sudden surge in airfares in normal 
times as also during disasters and calamities and take appropriate actions in consonance 
with the powers delegated to it under Rule 135 of the Aircraft Act, 1937. 
 (Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Internationally civil aviation has a highly seasonal market. The Indian Market is also 
characterized by high (May to mid -July and October to mid -January) and low (mid July to 
September and mid -January to April) seasons. Traffic is usually high in the month s of May 
and June, thru mid -July the international traffic flows are high, thus contributing to the 
domestic feed as well. July through September is traditionally leaner period as travel is 
restricted due to monsoon and other religious reasons. In October,  with the festive season 
starting Dussehra, traffic picks up again and by middle of January the demand diminishes. 
Till about the last week of April, this trend of softening of demand continues and again, due 
to summer holidays, the demand increases.  
1.2 Passengers are extremely price-sensitive. Price is the primary driver to pick an airline 
especially for leisure travel. All airlines compete on price with other carriers in the respective 
markets. Airlines adopt dynamic pricing by changing prices often dep ending on the day of 
the week, time of day, and number of days before the flight factoring in different components 
such as, how many seats a flight has, departure time, and average cancellations on similar 
flights. Dynamic pricing plays a crucial role in d etermining how airlines recover its cost and 
improve their revenue per flight. 
1.3 DGCA operates a Tariff Monitoring Unit, which monitors airfares on select routes 
including operationally constrained routes and prepares a report on a monthly basis to ensur e 
that airlines do not charge airfares outside the fares declared by them and any abnormally 
high airfare on such sector was brought to the notice of the respective airline for their self -
regulation.  

11 
 
1.4 DGCA has been asked to examine the relevant CAR/Circular in respect of Sub Rule 2 
as the existing provision under Sub Rule 2 doesn‟t specify any frequency of publication of 
tariff. The period of 24 h ours is also to be examined to arrive at suitable time period to avoid 
frequent and last day changes in tariff, bringing any surge in airfare. 
1.5 Moreover, Government has adopted a proactive approach to address the concerns 
emerging from rising of airfares. Consultation s with airlines are carried out on regular basis 
and airlines are asked to exercise moderation in pricing and keep passengers interest in mind. 
1.6 Also, airlines have committed to ensure that airfares do not surge during events such 
as natural disasters, calamities, civil unrest, etc. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) has a 
mandate to determine tariff for aeronautical services of Major Airports only, vide Section 
13(1) (a) of the AERA Act, 2008. Since the tariff for aeronautical services is one of the 
components for airfares , the Committee desires to know how airfare is determined across 
Airports even though aeronautical service charges are applicable only to Major airports. 
 (Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Aeronautical charges are applicable on all the airports. Tariff d etermination for 
aeronautical services provided by the airport operator for all the „major airports‟ across the 
country is being done by AERA. Aeronautical tariff for „non-major airports‟ is determined by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. The aeronautical charges are one of the components of the air fare 
being collected by airlines from the passengers, which are applicable for all the airports. 
 
Global Data Analysis  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes the analysis of the ACI, which highlights the progressive 
increase in airfares both in domestic and international routes both in Indian as well as in 
other international markets. The Committee also notes the concerns of the ACI on excessive 
airfares which in the long term would reduce the demand for a ir travel and have a 
detrimental effect on its future growth. 
(Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 ACI is a consortium of airports and not a government organization. The observation is 
based on the report of ACI which is n ot based on factual parameters. It is based on 
presumptions. The airfare is cyclic and seasonal and it varies from place to place. Moreover, 
it also depends on the financial/revenue management of the airlines. It is also to mention that 

12 
 
airlines deploy their available capacity on the basis of market demand, supply parameters and 
RBD. There are multiple players in the market. 
3.2 Further, reasonableness of airfares in India can be judged from the fact that airfares in 
India are much lower than those charged by airlines in most countries, for the same distance. 
3.3 There is no study showing any adverse impact of airfare on reduction in air travel. 
Rather, the domestic passenger traffic is showing an upward trend. As per traffic data 
published by DGCA, the passenger growth for the Month of August, 2023 is 22.81% 
compared to August, 2022. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee also notes ACI‟s advice to the Airlines to exercise fair pricing that 
supports recovery and safeguards consumers‟ interests. ACI also advises the airlines agains t 
exploiting the supply-demand imbalance at the expense of customers by restricting capacity. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 ACI is a consortium of airports and not a government organization. Airline industry 
functions on a cost recovery model. Airlines commit to operating flights long in advance 
without any assurance that revenues will cover costs. Airlines deploy all their available 
capacity on the basis of market demand, supply parameters with multi -players and RBD. In 
case airlines are not in  a position to recover their cost and marginal profit, they will not be 
able to invest in additional aircraft, staff or routes. Further, cost structure of airlines is under 
tremendous pressure, and on revenue front, there is very little scope to gain windf all profit by 
airlines. 
 
Analysis of Global Practice for Ticket Pricing  
Recommendation/Observation 
5. It is evident that as per the international practices, though IATA Recommended 
Practices (RPs) are non -binding, yet these are acknowledged by the various  international 
airlines as a guiding factor. However, each airline modifies it to suit their own commercial 
practices, subject to National laws which get priority over the IATA RPs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure the prop er implementation of the 
existing Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 which is the National Law in India for fixing of 
reasonable airfares by the airlines, for the benefit of the passengers. 
 (Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 DGCA is a safety regulator and has a Tariff Monitoring Unit that monitors airfares on 
certain routes on monthly basis and on sector specific basis on 52 sectors to ensure that the 
airlines do not change airfares outside a range declared by them. 

13 
 
5.2 DGCA being the safety regulator, ensures that the airlines publish their Tariff Sheet 
on their websites, in compliance to Rule 135 (2) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, in order to bring 
transparency for the passengers.   DGCA also ensures that the airfares charged by airlines‟ as 
displayed on their websites are as per Sub Rule 2A i.e. the total amount payable by passenger 
along with a complete break -up of the total amount. Complete break -up of airfare is printed 
on passenger tickets as per sub -rule 2B. The above are checked on a daily basis and  airlines 
are in compliance of these Rules.  
5.3 DGCA has been directed to examine the relevant CAR/Circular i.r.o Sub Rule 2 as the 
existing provision under Sub Rule 2 doesn‟t specify any frequency of publication of tariff. 
The period of 24 hrs also to be  examined to arrive at suitable time period to avoid changes in 
tariff bringing surge in airfare 
5.4 The airlines maintain records of the airfares charged by them. In the last 10 years, all 
airlines have been in compliance to Rule 135(1) and (2) and hence,  no inspection of records 
(domestic or international carrier) relating to tariff established by an airline has been carried 
out by DGCA. 
5.5 Provisions of Sub -Rule 4 on predatory/ excessive pricing are primarily the remit of 
Competition Commission of India  (CCI). CCI carried out investigation regarding excessive 
airfares during periods of force -majeure conditions in year 2011. However, CCI in its order 
no. 01/2011 dated 11.01.2012 noted that there was no contravention of rules by airlines 
regarding airfares and fares are subject to market conditions of demand and supply  
5.6 Hon‟ble Delhi High Court in Federation of Indian Airlines Vs DGCA &  Anr. (2017) 
has also held that DGCA cannot determine the tariff for airlines or their products. In the 
judgement, Hon‟ ble High Court of Delhi ordered that DGCA cannot determine tariff for 
specified flight product and set aside the provision of “Check -in baggage charges” contained 
in Air Transport Circular 02 of 2016 titled “Unbundling of services and fees by scheduled 
airlines”. As per the order, it has been expressly provided that DGCA would not fix the fee 
for „unbundled services‟ as airfare is determined by market forces. 
 
Effect of Seasonality/Holidays on Airfares  
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee, during its deliberations, highlighted the concerns expressed by 
passengers at the surge of airfares during festive seasons, summer vacations, when a large 
number of people travel across the Country for religious/ leisure purposes or other reasons 
and thus promoti ng domestic tourism and boosting the economy. The Committee notes that 
affordable air transport is a must for the growth of tourism in India, which is presently 
reviving after facing a steep decline due to Covid pandemic. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may devise suitable monitoring mechanism to keep a check on the sudden surge 
in prices during the festive season or holidays or natural calamities, as it has a negative 
impact on tourism. 
 (Para 80) 

14 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The Indian Market is characterized by high (May to mid -July and October to mid -
January) and low seasons (mid -July to September and mid -January to April). Traffic is 
usually high in the months of May and June, thru mid -July the international traffic flows are 
high, thus contrib uting to the domestic feed as well. July through September is traditionally 
leaner period as travel is restricted due to monsoon and other religious reasons. In October, 
with the festive season starting Dussehra, traffic picks up again and by middle of Jan uary the 
demand diminishes. Till about the last week of April, this trend of softening of demand 
continues and again, due to summer holidays, the demand increases. Passengers are 
extremely price-sensitive. Price is the primary driver to pick an airline esp ecially for leisure 
travel. All airlines compete on price with other carriers in the respective markets. Airlines 
adopt dynamic pricing by changing prices often depending on the day of the week, time of 
day, and number of days before the flight factoring i n different components such as, how 
many seats a flight has, departure time, and average cancellations on similar flights. Dynamic 
pricing plays a crucial role in determining how airlines recover its cost and improve their 
revenue per flight. 
6.2 DGCA operates a Tariff Monitoring Unit, which monitors airfares on select routes 
including operationally constrained routes and prepares a report on a monthly basis to ensure 
that airlines do not charge airfares outside the fares declared by them and any a bnormally 
high airfare on such sector is brought to the notice of the respective airline for their self -
regulation.  
6.3 However, DGCA has been directed to examine the relevant CAR/Circular  in respect 
of Sub Rule 2 as the existing provision under Sub Rule 2 doesn‟t specify any frequency of 
publication of tariff. The period of 24 h ours is also to be examined to arrive at suitable time 
period to avoid frequent and last day changes in tariff, bringing any surge in airfare. 
6.4 Airlines have been sensitized to exercise moderation in pricing, and to keep passenger 
interest in mind. Moreover, airlines have committed to ensure that airfares do not surge 
during events such as natural disasters, calamities, civil unrest, etc. 
 
Impact of Airport Tariff on Airfares  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee observes that there is a lot of variation in User Development Fees 
(UDF), for domestic passengers, ranging from Nil to Rs. 480 and for International 
passengers, from Rs. 52.56 to Rs. 1200. The Committee desires to know the reasons for the 
wide variation in UDF rates both for domestic and international passengers which is one of 
the components of airfares, leading to rise in airfares. 
 (Para 84) 
 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Government of India has set up Airports Econ omic Regulatory Authority of India 
(AERA) under the AERA Act, 2008. AERA has a mandate to determine tariff for 
aeronautical services provided by Airport Operators at „Major Airports‟. 
7.2 AERA determines aeronautical charges of „Major Airports‟ such as Landing, Parking, 
UDF etc. considering the following factors:- 
(i) Return on Investment; 
(ii) Operating Expenditure; 
(iii) Depreciation; and 
(iv) Tax paid to the Government. 
7.3 For determination of airport tariffs, the Airport Operator submits the Multi Year 
Tariff Proposal (MYTP)/annual Tariff Proposal (ATP) to AERA.  AERA determines the 
aeronautical tariffs of major airports under price cap mechanism in accordance with AERA 
Guidelines issued from time to time. Under „Price Cap mechanism‟ the required rev enue of 
the Operator for a control period is calculated as a measure of return on Investment, O&M 
Cost, Depreciation, Tax and 30% of the non -aeronautical revenue (Hybrid Till) factored for 
cross subsidization. The Regulator also aims to balance, optimally, the interests of the service 
provider and the end user.  Entitled revenue for the Airport Operator is recovered through the 
levy of:- 
 Landing and Parking Charges  
 User Development Fees (UDF) 
7.4 It is also submitted that each airport has different capital expenditure profile, return on 
capital employed, operational expenditure, traffic inflows, under/over recovery in previous 
control period and non -aeronautical as well as CGF revenue collections. These factors 
translate to different entitled revenue and res ultant landing/parking and UDF for different 
airports. 
7.5 Proportion of recovery between Landing, Parking and UDF depends on past ratio, 
views of the stakeholders including the Airport Operator during consultation process. AERA 
maintains a balanced approach keeping interest of all stakeholders in mind and tries to ensure 
that aeronautical charges are not increased exorbitantly in any of the above categories. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes wide variation in terms of varied fees being charged by the 
airport operators. For instance, the Fuel Infrastructure Charges are being levied by only 
four airports out of the aforementioned 12 airports, with the price range between Rs. 670/KL 
to Rs. 1,830/KL. The Committee also observes a considerable variation in the Parking 
Charges being levied by different operators wherein the minimum charge is a meagre Rs. 
3/MT per hour, whereas the maximum being Rs. 98.60/MT per hour. Similarly, th ere is a 
major difference in the Landing Charges being levied for aircrafts wherein one airport 

16 
 
charges Rs. 113/MT and the maximum charge for landing an aircraft at one of the airports is 
Rs. 1,450/MT. The Committee desires to know the reasons for the wide variations.  
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 AERA determines Tariff for Fuel Infrastructure Services as per the provisions of the 
AERA Act 2008 and Guidelines issued therein. AERA, while determining the tariffs of the 
regulated services considers the Capital invested on the development of Fuel Infrastructure 
Facility, Operating Expenses, Depreciation and Tax paid to the Government, to ascertain the 
amount collectable by the Service Provider from service users in the form of Aggregate 
Revenue Requiremen t. Further, Fuel Infrastructure Charges in respect of newly created 
Facility generally tends to be on higher side due to comparatively higher capital costs and 
depreciation thereon vis-à-vis old infrastructure. 
8.2 It is relevant to mention that the Fuel Infra Charges vary from airport to airport, due to 
the variation in volume of the Aircraft Movement and Fuel uptake by the Airlines. For 
example, in case of Delhi, Mumbai & Bangalore airports the Fuel Infrastructure Charges are 
lower than the airports like  Kannur who have very low Aircraft Traffic and Fuel uptake as 
compared to aforesaid airports, who are having large aircraft traffic volumes to spread the 
capital and operating costs. 
8.3 The variation in landing and parking charges levied by different airp orts depends on 
the entitled revenue requirement determined for and collected by the Airport operator through 
the aforesaid charges, which is based on the different capital expenditure profile of the airport 
operator, return on capital employed, operating expenditure, taxation, traffic inflows etc. 
These factors translate into different revenue requirement entitlement vary from airport to 
airport and recovered through landing and parking charges, UDF etc. AERA, while doing so, 
maintains a balanced approach keeping interests of all stakeholders in mind and tries to 
ensure that aeronautical charges are not increased exorbitantly in any of the above categories. 
8.4 Moreover, parking charges constitute less than 1% of the total entitled revenue 
requirement, thereby having negligible impact on the total aeronautical charges. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee also notes that as regards the other charges viz., X -ray Screening, 
PSF, FEGP, CUTE/CUSS/BRS etc., are being levied at only certain airports at var ied rates. 
The Committee is also aware that all such charges levied by airport operators are governed 
by the orders issued by the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA). The Committee 
recommends that as far as possible, there should be broader unifo rmity in terms of various 
fees being charged across all the airports in the Country. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to look into the matter and issue necessary guidelines to all the airport operators to 
rationalise the fee/charges at different airports. 
 (Para 89) 

17 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The passenger Service Fee – Security is determined by the MoCA/ Government of 
India and is applicable as prescribed by the Government of India from time to time.  
9.2 The charges for FEGP (or Bridge Mounted Equipment) are determined by the AERA 
as and when any proposal for fixation of tariff is received from the Airport Operator as per 
the tariff determination methodology of AERA. 
9.3 The other charges such as X -ray Screening, CUTE/CUSS/BRS services are gener ally 
provided by the third - party concessionaire at the Major Airport, appointed by the Airport 
Operator through a bidding process. However, upon receipt of proposal from the Airport 
Operator for fixation of tariff for providing such services by Airport Op erator itself or third - 
party concessionaire, AERA examines the same and ap proves the tariff rates for 
CUTE/CUSS/BRS and x-ray screening in the tariff orders. 
9.4 It is not possible to maintain uniformity in charges determined for this service as each 
service has different Capital structure due to the nature of the service, maintenance Expenses, 
Depreciation etc., to ascertain the amount collectable by the Service Provider from the airport 
users in the form of Aggregate Revenue Requirement. 
9.5 It is al so relevant to mention that the Charges for  any service including 
CUTE/CUSS/BRS vary from airport to airport, due to the variation in passenger throughput 
and Aircraft traffic movement. Therefore, the aspect of uniform tariff rates may not be 
possible for this service across all airports including major airports. 
 
Dynamic Pricing and Global Standards  
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee is of the opinion that in absence of a credible formula for the pricing 
of airfares, there remains a wide variati on in the pricing of seats. Though sometimes, it may 
benefit the customers, however, at times, it may lead to very high fares. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that feasibility of devising a formula may be examined to regulate 
excessive surge in fares as per the extant rules. 
 (Para 106) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 With the repeal of The Air Corporation Act 1994, Airfares have been deregulated and 
are determined by market forces. Consultations are held with Airline Operators time to time 
to observe the self-regulations. Airlines are committed to self-regulate themselves.  
10.2 The airline pricing system runs in multiple levels (buckets) which are in line with 
practices being followed Globally. The prices are fixed by airlines keeping in mind the 
market, demand, seasonality and other market forces. The airfare increase s with increase in 
demand of seats as the lower fare buckets get sold out fast when bookings are offered by 
airlines Some of the airlines have introduced Apex -90, in addition to existing advance 
purchase schemes of 60 days, 30 days, 14 days etc. in which d iscounted fares are being 

18 
 
offered which would entail travelling even during peak seasons on low fares. The fare 
structures stated above have been displayed by airlines on their websites. The airlines are 
compliant to the Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Air craft Rules, 1937 as long as fares 
charged by them is in line with tariff displayed on their website. 
10.3 Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has a Tariff Monitoring Unit that 
monitors airfares on certain routes on random basis to ensure that the  airlines do not charge 
airfares outside a range declared by them. The analysis has shown that the airlines remained 
well within the fare bucket uploaded by the airlines on the respective websites. 
10.4 Differential seat pricing is a global practice. Seat selection pricing is an element of the 
practice of unbundling of fares that is followed by all airlines and is done to reduce the cost 
of travel for consumers who desire only the basic product, viz., air  travel without any frills. 
Offering such vanilla airfares not only makes air travel more affordable, it also reduces the 
cost of air travel, thereby stimulating the demand for air travel – a factor that has contributed 
significantly to the high growth rate and continued prospects for air travel in India.  
10.5 Airline fixes prices for seats in line with overall market dynamics, type of seat (e.g. 
extra leg-room), etc, and the price so fixed is unique to each airline in line with each airline‟s 
own cost base. 
 
Dynamic Pricing and Global Standards  
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee has been given to understand that the cost of ATF nearly accounts for 
approximately 40% of the total operating cost of airlines and impacts the financial viability 
of their operations and affects their competitiveness because Indian carriers are unable to 
compete against their global counterparts on account of the exorbitantly higher prices of 
ATF. The Committee recommends that all-out efforts should be made to lower the taxes being 
levied on the ATF. Rationalization of VAT rates will be very crucial in reducing the operating 
cost which will further improve the economic and operational viability of the airlines. 
 (Para 119) 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes the wide variation of ATF prices across the various States of the 
country, which has led to airlines fuelling their aircrafts from States with low taxes, which 
reduces the passenger load and also results in increase in airfares. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the possibility of enacting a law to ensure uniform rate of taxes on ATF 
across the country, may be examined. 
 (Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The decision to bring ATF under the ambit of GST pertains to MoF/ GST Council. 
MoF has stated that Article 279 A (5) of the Constitution prescribes that the GST Council 
shall recommend the date with effect from which the GST would be levied on petroleum 

19 
 
crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (petrol), natural gas and ATF. As per the section 9(2) of 
the CGST Act, 2017, inclusion of these products in GST will require recommendation of the 
GST Council. So far, the GST Council, in which the states are also repr esented, has not made 
any recommendation for inclusion of these goods under GST. 
12.2 MoCA has taken up the issue of inclusion of ATF under the ambit of GST with MoF 
on various levels. Most recently, a meeting was held between Hon'ble Minister of Civil 
Aviation and Hon'ble Finance Minister on 26/06/2023. During the meeting, various taxation 
issues related to the Civil Aviation sector were discussed and it was agreed that MoF shall 
consider the request for reduction in Central Excise Duty on ATF to 5% to pro vide some 
relief to the cash strapped airlines, till such time as ATF is brought under GST. 
12.3 Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the matter with states to reduce VAT on ATF. 
As a result, VAT on ATF has been reduced by 19 States/ UTs. The issue has been again taken 
up with the States/ UTs which have not reduced VAT on ATF viz. Assam, Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi. 
12.4 VAT is a state subject and each state levies VAT on ATF based on state's own policy. 
However, taking cognizance of the hig h value added tax (VAT) on ATF levied by States/ 
UTs, Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the matter with them to reduce VAT on ATF. 
As a result, VAT on ATF has been reduced by 19 States/ UTs.  
12.5 The issue has been again taken up with the States/ UT s which have not reduced VAT 
on ATF viz. Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi.  
 
Action taken by the Government for Affordable Air Travel 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee commends the steps taken by the Government to rationalise the 
airfares. The Committee recommends that monitoring at the ground level may be carried out 
to ensure the proper implementation of all the initiatives taken by the Government. The 
Committee desires to know the status of Ministry‟s efforts to bring ATF under the ambit of 
GST and reduction in excise duty on ATF. 
 (Para 127) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The decision to bring ATF under the ambit of GST pertains to MoF/ GST Council. 
MoF has stated that Article 279 A (5) of the Constitution prescribes that the GST Council 
shall recommend the date with effect from which the GST would be levied on petroleum 
crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (petrol), natural gas and ATF. As per the section 9(2) of 
the CGST Act, 2017, inclusion of these products in GST will requir e recommendation of the 
GST Council. So far, the GST Council, in which the states are also represented, has not made 
any recommendation for inclusion of these goods under GST. 
  

20 
 
13.2 MoCA has taken up the issue of inclusion of ATF under the ambit of GST wi th MoF 
on various levels. Most recently, a meeting was held between Hon'ble Minister of Civil 
Aviation and Hon'ble Finance Minister on 26/06/2023. During the meeting, various taxation 
issues related to the Civil Aviation sector were discussed and it was ag reed that MoF shall 
consider the request for reduction in Central Excise Duty on ATF to 5% to provide some 
relief to the cash strapped airlines, till such time as ATF is brought under GST. 
13.3 Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the matter with states to reduce VAT on ATF. 
As a result, VAT on ATF has been reduced by 19 States/ UTs. The issue has been again taken 
up with the States/ UTs which have not reduced VAT on ATF viz. Assam, Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee also commends that the Civil Aviation Advisory Group has advised 
the airlines to bring in sensitivity while framing their RBDs and deploy additional aircrafts to 
meet the increased demand of the passengers. The Committee desires to know the  details of 
the steps taken by the Ministry and the airlines, in this regard. 
 (Para 128) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Consultations are held with airlines on regular basis. Airlines are advised to keep 
passenger interest in mind and exercise moderation 
14.2 All the domestic airlines are advised to self -regulate airfares and maintain reasonable 
price levels and also to operate additional flights to meet the increased demand of the 
passengers.  
14.3 In the aftermath of the suspension of operations by GoAir,  all the domestic airlines 
were advised to self-regulate airfares and maintain reasonable price levels on sectors that had 
a substantial number of Go First flights and also to operate additional flights on the sectors 
operated by Go First. As a result of the same, there was a substantial decline in the airfares on 
these sectors. Moreover, airlines introduced new flights on these sectors which further helped 
in reduction of the airfares. 
 
Role of Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA)  
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee notes the contradictory replies received from the Ministry and the 
APAO. While the AERA claims that extensive consultation is being done with stakeholders for 
tariff determination, the APAO have stated that airp ort operators have limited opportunity to 
be heard by the AERA during the consultation process. The Committee is of the opinion that 
the consultation process of the AERA should be fully transparent and all the concerns of the 
stakeholders should be heard and after due examination, their suggestions should be effected 
in the tariff determination process. 

21 
 
(Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 AERA had consultation with APAO and after consultation, AERA has stated that 
APAO has no reservations/issues on the consultation process being followed by AERA for 
determination of aeronautical tariffs in respect of Major airports. Further, APAO has never 
raised such an issue in any of the Consultation process held in past. 
15.2 APAO is the most regular stakeholder part icipating in the consultation 
process/meetings being scheduled by AERA as and when the Consult ation Paper issued by 
AERA in respect to  the Tariff determination exercise of Major Airports. APAO not only 
gives verbal comments during the meeting but also furn ishes written comments on the 
various proposals of the AERA which are addressed on merits. 
15.3 APAO has never raised any issue in respect of the consultation process being 
followed by AERA in any of the consultation meetings/process. It transpires that AP AO is 
satisfied with the consultation process being followed by AERA. 
15.4 Notwithstanding above, AERA reiterates that it follows transparent and robust 
consultation process, as mandated under ICAO principles, AERA Act and AERA Guidelines 
and is placed at Annexure-I. In this background, all the proposals of AERA are put forth in 
public domain by issuance of a Consultation Paper and comments are invited from all the 
stakeholders by giving reasonable time followed by an ample opportunity to the Airport 
Operator for submission of counter comments. Upon receipt of the same, AERA, after 
detailed deliberations and discussions, finalizes its decisions and issues the Tariff Order. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee also notes the long drawn out proc ess for approaching TDSAT or the 
Supreme Court for appeal against orders of the AERA. The Committee recommends that a 
mechanism may be devised by the Ministry in consultation with all the airport operators/ 
stakeholders to hear the genuine concerns/ sugges tions of the airport operators in the first 
instance itself, so that the need for appealing against the orders of the AERA in TDSAT or 
Supreme Court can be avoided. 
 (Para 136) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 AERA follows a transparent and robust consultation process, as mandated under 
ICAO principles, AERA Act and AERA Guidelines. In this background, all the proposals of 
AERA are put forth in public domain by issuance of a Consultation Paper and comments are 
invited from all the stakeholders by giving reasonable time followed by an ample opportunity 
to the Airport Operator for submission of counter comments. Upon receipt of the same, 
AERA, after detailed deliberations and discussions, finalizes its decisions an d issues the 
Tariff Order. Therefore, it is submitted that there is no need/requirement to bring or devise 
another layer which may further delay the process, once a very robust and transparent 

22 
 
consultation mechanism is available as per Section 13(4) of AER A Act 2008, enacted by the 
Hon‟ble Parliament of India. 
 
Price Lock Option  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee notes the replies furnished by the Ministry and various airlines on the 
price lock option. The Committee also notes that airlines across the world are offering lock -
in option and even in India, airlines such as Air India is already working towards building 
the necessary infrastructure to implement fare lock as an option for customers. The 
Committee desires to know the details about the „free look-in‟ option exercised by the airlines 
as per the DGCA mandate. 
 (Para 145) 
18. Further, the Committee opines that exploring the feasibility of implementing the 
option of „price lock‟ would be a favorable step for customers, which, in turn, can  spike the 
demand for air travel. The feature would help the customers make better travel decisions by 
allowing them to book tickets by reserving seats without paying for the actual price of the 
ticket upfront. Keeping in mind the high fee charged for canc elling or rescheduling a flight 
and built-in uncertainties in the market driven dynamic nature of fare, the Committee opines 
that the option of „price lock‟ would provide the customers some time to confirm the ticket 
depending on finalization of their travel plans, besides protecting them against any fare hike. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should devise a mechanism to 
encourage all the airlines to implement the „price lock‟ option wherein customers can reserve 
their booking with or without paying a nominal fee. 
 (Para 146) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 DGCA has issued CAR Section 3, Series M, Part II. The CAR states that “The airline 
shall provide „Look -in option‟ for a period of 24 hours after booking ticket. During this 
period passenger can cancel or amend the ticket without any additional charges, except for 
the normal prevailing fare for the revised flight for which the ticket is sought to be amended. 
This facility shall not be available for a flight whose departure is less th an 7 days from 
booking date. Airline shall not levy any additional charge for correction in name of the same 
person when the error is pointed out by the passenger within 24 hours of making the 
booking.” Such a provision is similar to the „free look-in‟ option offered by airlines globally. 
18.2 There are no regulations issued by the Government for airlines to offer „Price Lock‟ 
option; however, it is purely an airline‟s commercial decision. Mandating such a commercial 
practice will be contrary to the demand and supply theory and may hamper airline‟s growth. 
18.3 Some airlines and a few travel agents provide „price lock‟ option on certain sectors 
wherein passengers have the option to lock the price of ticket with a minimal fee (non -

23 
 
refundable). Any regulation by the Government in commercial matters of the airlines may 
lead to market disruption. 
18.4 The airline operator such as Indigo, Spice Jet offers „Price Lock‟ option to customers 
while the other airlines are exploring this option to make it available to the passengers. 
 
Display of Seat-wise Fares on website  
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee notes the comments furnished by the Ministry and the private airlines 
as regards displaying of seat -wise fares on the airline website. The Committee desires to 
know whether any study has been carried out to examine the feasibility of displaying of 
airfare of each of the seats offered to the customers at the time of booking. The Committee is 
of the opinion that the display of seat -wise fares will provide utmost  transparency to the 
customers, making the airfare system being followed, more credible and trust-worthy. 
 (Para 161) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Observations noted.  Further, no such study has been carried out to examine the 
feasibility of displaying of airfare of each of the seats offered to the customers at the time of 
booking. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may 
explore the possibility of implementing the practice of displaying details of the available 
number of seats in various categories in an aircraft, alongwith the prices, as is being 
displayed by Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) on their website 
for railway bookings. By doing so, the airlines can also take into account the dynamic pricing 
mechanism as prescribed by their respective Revenue Management System, while 
establishing reasonable fares. The price of tickets on a certain flight may increase closer to 
the departure date as in the case of railway seats. 
 (Para 162) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 During the consultation with the airlines, it emerged that IRCTC being a monopoly 
can afford such practice. For an airline, it will lead to competitive disadvantage and can also 
lead to other airlines indulge in  artificial surge, in case the inventory position of any airlines 
in known. 
20.2 This will be anti -competitive and anti -consumer as competition will come to kno w 
about the available seats vis-a-vis market demand resulting in a higher fare for the end 
consumer. It will be anti -consumer as the airlines with enough seats left vis-a-vis market 
demand, will be able to charge substantially higher. 

24 
 
Passenger Grievance Redressal  
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee notes and appreciates the steps being taken by the Ministry to address 
and resolve passenger grievances. The Committee would like to be apprised whether the 
existing Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) include a separate clause of redressa l of 
complaints arising due to exorbitant airfares. If not, the Ministry may examine the feasibility 
of incorporating such a provision. 
 (Para 168) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The aggrieved passengers can lodge their grievances through Centralized Public 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS), an online portal administered by 
the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG). These 
grievances are taken up with the concerned airlines for redressal. If the petitioner is not 
satisfied with the resolution of grievance by the airline, he/ she has option to file an appeal. 
Disposal of the grievances is monitored at various levels. Every airline appoints a nodal 
officer and an appellate authority and displays their contact details o n their respective 
websites. 
21.2 Ministry has also launched an initiative named AirSewa to offer people a convenient 
and hassle -free air travel experience. It operates through an interactive web portal 
(airsewa.gov.in) as well as through a mobile app for both android and iOS platforms. The 
portal includes a mechanism for grievance redressal, back -office operations for grievance 
handling, flight status/schedule information, airport Information and FAQs. For the smooth 
functioning of AirSewa, an Integrated C entral Control Room (ICCR) was set up for close 
monitoring & disposal of grievances related to aviation sector stakeholder and providing 
assistance to air passengers  in respect of their grievances and flight/airport information. 
AirSewa initiative has inte grated various stakeholders in aviation sector with whom an air 
traveller has to interact during the air travel.  
21.3 Grievances are also received through Integrated Grievance Redressal Mechanism  
(INGRAM) of Department of Consumer Affairs. The same are pr ocessed for redressal 
through the concerned organizations in the Ministry. 
21.4 Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) does not have a separate clause of redressal of 
complaints arising due to exorbitant airfares. In view of the grievance redressal mechanism 
already in place, a separate clause may not be required in the CAR. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee feels that to protect passengers against unreasonably high airfares, 
there is a need to ensure that a proper and effective mechanism is in plac e to redress their 
grievances in a time -bound manner. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
strengthen the mechanism to monitor the instances of non-compliance of applicable CARs. 

25 
 
 (Para 169) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) do not have a separate clause of redressal of 
complaints arising due to exorbitant airfares. In view of the grievance redressal mechanism 
already in place, a separate clause may not be required in the CAR. 
22.2 Government monitors the g rievances through Centralized Public Grievance Redress 
and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS). The grievances were sent to DGCA to take up with the 
concerned airlines for redressal of the issue. Passengers are also having the option to file their 
grievance/compliant on Air Sewa App. 
22.3 Grievances are also received through Integrated Grievance Redressal  Mechanism 
(INGRAM) of Department of Consumer Affairs. The same are processed for redressal 
through the concerned organizations in the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee also feels that there is a need to popularize the existence of grievance 
redressal mechanism such as CPGRAMS or AirSewa Portal as most of the passengers are 
not aware of it. The Committee recommends that these p ortals should be advertised through 
social media and other available modes. 
 (Para 170) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) is an 
online portal administered by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances (DARPG). DARPG takes necessary steps for popularisation of the system. 
23.2 AirSewa portal is live on web platform and mobile apps. However, in regard to 
advertising through social media and other available modes, it is noted for compliance. 
Details regarding Air Sewa are announced on every flight. 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee observes that only GoFirst, Indigo and SpiceJet have participated in 
RCS- UDAN Scheme, till date. However, post the recent bankruptcy of GoFirst, only two 
airlines viz., Indigo and SpiceJet will remain in RCS. The Committee also notes that Air India 
Express Connect is planning to participate in the RCS Scheme. The Committee would like to 
know the reasons as to why the other major airlines are not participating or plan to 
participate in future. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should rollout new bids 
for the Scheme in future, after due consideration of the suggestions of the stakeholders and 
ensure maximum participation from airlines to ensure improved air connectivity in the 
country. The Committee also recommends that for the future s uccess of the Scheme, the 

26 
 
difficulties being faced by certain airlines under RCS and their suggestions thereof, may be 
looked into. 
 (Para 177) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 The Scheme is based on the discovery of routes and prices by the open market. 
Airlines participate in RCS UDAN depending on their business models and commercial 
decisions.  
24.2 For players such as Indigo and Spicejet, it may be commercially viable to part icipate 
in RCS as they are low -cost carriers and can align their operations easily with the 
requirements and demographics of RCS flights viz -a-viz compared to their full -service 
counterparts. 
24.3 The Ministry has just recently concluded UDAN 5.0 round where 6 scheduled 
operators have participated and 148 routes have been awarded in phase 1. The Ministry is 
also conducting 2 more rounds, UDAN 5.1 and 5.2 as of now for routes with helicopter and 
small aircraft operations respectively. These 3 rounds have been/ are being conducted after 
elaborate stakeholder consultations with the airlines during the scheme design and pre bid 
stages. These have addressed most of the difficulties besides incorporating suggestions in the 
latest Scheme document. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee also notes the concessions being extended by the airport operators to 
the airlines operating under the RCS -UDAN Scheme. The Committee appreciates the steps 
being taken for reducing the cost of operations by not levying Landi ng and Parking Charges 
on RCS flights and desires to know the quantum of concession that has been provided to the 
airlines in this regard, since the inception of the Scheme, year-wise. 
(Para 179) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Promoting affordability of regional air connectivity is envisioned under UDAN by 
supporting Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) through concessions by the Central 
Government, State Governments/UTs and airport operators to reduce the cost of operations 
on regional routes and providing financial (Viability Gap Funding or VGF) support to meet 
the gap. The concessions offered under the scheme are as under:-  
Airport operators:  
 Airport operators will not levy Landing and Parking Charges on RCS Flights.  
 AAI shall not levy any Terminal Navi gation Landing Charges (TNLC) on RCS 
Flights.   
 Route Navigation and Facilitation Charges (RNFC) will be levied by AAI on a 
discounted basis @ 42.50% of Normal Rates on RCS Flights.   

27 
 
 Selected Airline operators (SAO) will be allowed self -ground handling for operations 
under the Scheme at all airports.  
Central Government:  
 Excise Duty at the rate of 2% will be levied on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) 
purchased by SAOs from RCS Airports for  initial period of three years from the date 
of notification of this scheme.  
 SAOs will have the freedom to enter into code sharing arrangements with both 
domestic as well as international airlines.  
States Government at RCS Airports within their States:  
 Reduce VAT to 1% or less on ATF at RCS Airports located within the states for a 
period of 10 years.  
 Provide minimum land, if required, free of cost and free from encumbrances for 
development of RCS Airports and provide multi -modal hinterland connectivity as 
required.  
 Provide security and fire services free of cost at RCS Airports.  
 Providing or cause to be provided, electricity, water and other utility services at 
substantially concessional rates at RCS Airports. 3574.  
 Provide a certain share (20% for St ates other than North -Eastern States where the 
ratio will be 10%) of determined VGF. 
  
25.2 Amount of Rs. 2800 Crores have been disbursed till 10.08.2023 as VGF to SAOs 
under UDAN Scheme. 
 
Access to Reserved Lounges at Airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee recommends the Ministry to issue guidelines, directing all the airport 
operators to ensure that only the entitled Dignitaries/ Government Officials can access the 
reserved lounges at airports. The Committee further recommends that the sai d guidelines 
should also include the provision of comfortable seating; quieter environment; and better 
access to customer service representatives at these reserved lounges for entitled persons. 
(Para 182) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 The access to reserved lounge is facilitated based on the list of dignitaries issued by 
MoCA. Further, airport operators have been directed to provide facilities and extend 
necessary support to the entitled dignitaries. 
 
 

28 
 
Bankruptcy of GoFirst  
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee notes the replies provided by the Ministry and airlines in respect of 
bankruptcy of GoFirst and notes that the situation has resulted in the surge in airfares on 
certain routes, leading to increase in monopolistic practices. As per the recent Me dia 
Reports, the prices of tickets on sectors being earlier operated by GoFirstviz., Delhi -Leh, 
Delhi-Srinagar, Delhi -Bagdogra and others have increased exorbitantly in a mere span of 
two months. 
(Para 188) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 All the domestic airlines were advised to self -regulate airfares and maintain 
reasonable price levels on sectors that had a substantial number of Go First flights and also to 
operate additional flights on the sectors operated by Go First. As a result of the same, there 
was a substantial decline in the airfares on these sectors. Moreover, airlines introduced new 
flights on these sectors which further helped in reduction of the airfares. 
 
Grant of ‘Point of Call’ Status to Airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee feels that the decision of the Ministry to not grant „Point of Call‟ 
status to international airports is preventing the international airlines to operate in the 
country, leading to a situation of monopolistic/oligopolistic market by the domestic airline 
operators wherein they are charging high airfares. The Committee opines that a broad parity 
should be maintained between the international and domestic carriers for aviation operations 
in the country. 
(Para 191) 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should identify a balanced 
approach to liberalize the guidelines for granting of „Point of Call‟ status to the airports to 
enhance air connectivity. The Committee is of the view that better connectivity to  
international airports in the country will provide more options to passengers, to choose from 
and aid in rationalising airfares. 
(Para 192) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 It is submitted that currently, due to a significant imbalance in the number of points of 
call in favour of foreign carriers, the Government of India follows a policy of promoting 
more international operations by Indian carriers from non -metro points either directly or 
through their own domestic and international operations. Accordingly, the  current policy is 
not to grant any non-metro airport as a new point of call in the ASAs to any foreign carrier. 

29 
 
29.2 Also, grant of non -metro points as points of call to foreign carriers aids in the 
development of hubs in neighbouring countries and hinders the creation of hub airports in 
India. As such, it is not in the overall interest of the country to allot any non -metro point as a 
point of call to foreign carriers. 
29.3 However, in accordance with Air Services Agreements (ASA), Indian designated 
carriers are free to mount operations to/from any international airport to foreign destinations 
under the ambit of bilateral air service agreements concluded by India with foreign countries 
as per mutually agreed capacity limits. 
29.4 As such, the governme nt has provided an enabling environment for growth of civil 
aviation sector but does not interfere in the operational plans of the airlines. Airlines are free 
to select whatever markets and networks they wish to service and operate within the ambit of 
bilateral agreements. The airlines provide air services to specific places depending upon the 
traffic demand and commercial viability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee, therefore, observes that ever since the amendment made in Rule 135 
of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 in April, 2009, sufficient legislative safe guards have been made in 
the Aircraft Rules, 1937, to ensure that airfares are affordable and in case of any violation by 
the airlines, the Government can take action against the said airline regardless of the 
deregulation of the airfares, due to repeal of Air Corporation Act, 1953. The Committee calls 
upon the DGCA, Ministry of Civil Aviation to safeguard the interests of the air commuters by 
invoking the overriding powers vested on it in the Rules. 
 (Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      Airlines are free to establish their airfares as per their operation viabilities. With the 
repeal of Air Corporations Act in March 1994, the Indian domestic aviation was totally 
deregulated. As per prevailing regulation, airfares are not regulated by the Government. 
1.2 The domestic airline pricing runs in multiple levels (bucket or RBD) which is in line 
with the practice followed globally. The lower fare in the fare bucket is available for advance 
booking much earlier. As time lapses and date of journey approaches clos er, the fare in 
higher side of fare bucket is made available as per the respective airline policy. The airfares 
remain affordable for air commuters booking much earlier from the date of departure. 
1.3 DGCA ensures that the airlines publish their Tariff Sheet on their websites, in 
compliance to Rule 135 (2) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, in order to bring transparency for the 
passengers.  DGCA also ensures that the airfares charged by airlines as displayed on their 
websites are as per Sub Rule 2A, i.e., the  total amount payable by passenger along with a 
complete break-up of the total amount. Complete break -up of airfare is printed on passenger 
tickets as per sub-rule 2B. The above are checked on a daily basis by DGCA and airlines are 
found in compliance of these Rules. 
1.4 However, DGCA has been asked to examine the relevant CAR/Circular  in respect of 
Sub Rule 2 as the existing provision under Sub Rule 2 doesn‟t specify any frequency of 
publication of tariff. The period of 24 h ours is also to be examined to a rrive at suitable time 
period to avoid frequent and last day changes in tariff bringing any surge in airfare. 
1.5 The airlines maintain records of the airfares charged by them. In the last 10 years, all 
airlines have been in compliance to Rule 135(1) and ( 2) and hence, no inspection of records 
(domestic or international carrier) relating to tariff established by an airline has been carried 
out by DGCA. 

31 
 
1.6 Provisions of Sub-Rule 4 on predatory/ excessive pricing are primarily in the domain 
of Competition Co mmission of India (CCI). CCI carried out investigation regarding 
excessive airfares during periods of force -majeure conditions in year 2011. However, CCI in 
its order no. 01/2011 dated 11.01.2012 noted that there was no contravention of rules by 
airlines regarding airfares and fares are subject to market conditions of demand and supply.  
1.7 Moreover, Hon‟ble Delhi High Court in Federation of Indian Airlines Vs DGCA &  
Anr. (2017) has also held that DGCA cannot determine the tariff for airlines or their products. 
In the judgement, Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi ordered that DGCA cannot determine tariff 
for specified flight product and set aside the provision of “Check -in baggage charges” 
contained in Air Transport Circular 02 of 2016 titled “Unbundling of servic es and fees by 
scheduled airlines”. As per the order, it has been expressly provided that DGCA would not 
fix the fee for „unbundled services‟ as airfare is determined by market forces. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee notes that DGCA 
has not inspected the records of airlines over the last 10 years and without any 
inspection, it has stated that airlines have complied with the rules. Hence, it does not 
agree with the reply and reasons given  by the Ministry. The Committee opines that a 
case of violation by airlines can only be detected, in case the records are inspected by 
DGCA. While the Ministry mentions that fares are subject to market conditions of 
demand and supply, the Committee feels t hat this explanation might be exploited by 
airlines to justify excessive pricing during unforeseeable conditions. Further, while the 
Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry, it feels that the period of 24 
hours which needs to be examined to a rrive at suitable time period to avoid frequent 
and last day changes in tariff bringing any surge in airfare may be examined in 
consultation and implemented at the earliest. 
  
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that Section 135(3) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 empowers the 
DGCA to inspect the records of tariff as produced by the airline operators and also 
empowers it to issue directions in case it has established excessive tariff [Section 135(4)]. 
The Committee observes that though Tariff Monitoring Unit of DGCA has been setup to 
maintain oversight, yet the airlines are charging excessively, leading to surge in airfares. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should evolve a mechanism to reconcil e between 
„tariff monitoring‟ by DGCA and „deregulation of airfare‟ to tilt the balance in favour of 
empowering the DGCA to regulate air tariff as per Rule 135(3) and expanding its 
responsibility beyond monitoring tariff only. The Committee desires to know  whether a Unit 
or Agency like Tariff Monitoring Unit (TMU) exists in other countries as well and mechanism 
adopted by them to regulate fares. 

32 
 
 (Para 18) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      DGCA operates a Tariff Monitoring Unit, which monitors airfares on select routes 
including operationally constrained routes and prepares a report on a monthly basis to ensure 
that airlines do not charge airfares outside the fares declared by them and any abnormally 
high airfare on such sector is brought to the notice of t he respective airlines for their self -
regulation. 
2.2 DGCA ensures that the airlines publish their Tariff Sheet on their websites, in 
compliance to Rule 135 (2) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, in order to bring transparency for the 
passengers.  DGCA also ensu res that the airfares charged by airlines‟ as displayed on their 
websites are as per Sub Rule 2A i.e. the total amount payable by passenger along with a 
complete break-up of the total amount. Complete break -up of airfare is printed on passenger 
tickets as per sub-rule 2B. The above are checked on daily basis by DGCA and airlines are 
found in compliance of these Rules. 
2.3 However, DGCA has been asked to examine the relevant CAR/Circular  in respect of 
Sub Rule 2 as the existing provision under Sub Rule 2 doe sn‟t specify any frequency of 
publication of tariff. The period of 24 h ours is also to be examined to arrive at suitable time 
period to avoid frequent and last day changes in tariff bringing any surge in airfare. 
2.4 During Ministry‟s consultation with air lines, the representatives were advised to self -
regulate and keep passengers‟ interest in mind while fixing the airfares. 
2.5 As per the information available, no major country is carrying out airfare regulation or 
monitoring as most countries have de -regulated their aviation sector, i.e., removing 
government-imposed price restrictions on airlines. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.6      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry wherein it has been stated that 
airlines do not charge airfares outside the fares declared by them and any abnormally 
high airfare on such sector is brought to the notice of the respective airlines for their 
self-regulation. The reply, however, does not elaborate on the consequences or actions 
taken if airlines are found charging airfares outside the declared range. The Committee 
has come across various instances where there has been abnormal increase in airfare s 
especially during festivals or holidays, and is of the opinion that self -regulation by 
airlines has not been effective. The Committee, therefore, again recommends that a 
mechanism may be evolved whereby DGCA is empowered to regulate air tariffs.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is also aware that the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), 
an autonomous body, has been setup for regulating the securities market and to protect the 

33 
 
interest of investors. The Committee opines that on  similar lines, the feasibility of setting up 
of a monitoring and controlling body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation may be examined, 
to monitor and keep a check on the surge in airfares to protect the interests of the commuting 
public. The Committee, t herefore, recommends the Ministry to constitute a separate 
monitoring body like the SEBI, with quasi -judicial powers to enforce the collection of 
reasonable airfares from the passengers. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      Airline industry functions on a cost recovery model and hence cannot be compared to 
any other industry.   Airlines commit to operating flights long in advance without any 
assurance that revenues will cover costs.  In case airlines are not in a position to recover their 
cost and marginal profit, they will not be able to invest in additional aircraft, staff or routes. 
Further, cost structure of airlines is under tremendous pressure, and on revenue front, there is 
very little scope to gain windfall profit by airlines. 
3.2 DGCA with quasi -judicial powers has been entrusted with the task of monitoring 
airfares charged by the airlines. Further, Anti -competitive practices are kept in check by the 
Competition Commission of India (CCI). As such, there is no requirement for another 
separate body to monitor airfares. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.3      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and opines that DGCA has 
already been entrusted with various responsibilities and tasks . The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation and urges the Ministry to explore the 
feasibility of establishing a separate entity with quasi -judicial powers to exercise control 
over airfares being charged by the airlines.    
  
Reasonable Profit, Generally Prevailing Tariff and Mechanism followed for Fixing 
Airfares  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee notes that though the term „reasonable profit‟ is given under Rule 
135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, yet there i s no specific definition or Rule or any other 
guidelines to define it and these expressions are liable to be misunderstood, besides 
encouraging arbitrary actions. The Committee is of the opinion that the term „reasonable 
profit‟ should be clearly defined i n the Rules, taking into account various financial and 
operational factors, as it is the most significant aspect for controlling surge in airfares, 
which affects the common man. 
 (Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 

34 
 
4.1      With the repeal of The Air Corporation Act 1994, Airfares have been deregulated and 
are determined by market forces. During the consultation with airlines, it has emerged that 
„reasonable profit‟ is a part of airlines revenue management which is based on demand and 
supply model. Airlines globally work on a cost recovery model rather than on a set target to 
achieve reasonable profit. 
4.2 The reasonableness of tariff is a function of demand and supply, variations in demand 
by season, during the day of the week, time of day, directional ity, number of days before the 
flight, capacity deployed on the route, variations in cost of operations, etc. 
4.3 Reasonableness of airfares in India can be judged from the fact that airfares in India 
are much lower than those charged by airlines in most c ountries, for the same distance. 
Average airfares in India are also quite low.  While it is the core goal of every enterprise to 
maximise shareholder value, the fact remains that the Indian airline industry continues to face 
considerable financial distress. 
4.4 Reasonableness of pricing also needs to be viewed in the context of overall network 
profitability as airlines may also operate on loss making routes to generate network feeds.  
Revenue management enables airlines to stimulate demand by offering low far es to price -
sensitive travellers and higher airfares to price-insensitive corporate travellers. 
4.5 Few of major financial and operational factors relevant in determination of airfares 
are as follows:- 
 ATF Accounts for about 40% of the operational cost of airlines. ATF prices have 
experienced high volatility. ATF prices doubled within an year (Rs. 69,060/KL in 
July 2021 to 141,233/KL July 2022) and are still at Rs. 118,199/KL which is 171%  of 
July, 2021 price level. Airfares have not increased in same propo rtion with the 
increase in ATF prices.  
 Internationally civil aviation has a highly seasonal market. The Indian Market is also 
characterized by high (may to mid -July and October to mid -January) and low seasons 
(mid July to September and mid January to April). 
 The airline pricing is highly elastic. Pricing of air tickets by airlines is pegged against 
key competitors on the given route, keeping in view relative product strengths. 
 Indian aviation market is price competitive due to multiple players, seasonal ma rket 
depending on demand and supply.  
4.6 Keeping in mind the above factors, it is noted that: 
a. Cost structure of airlines is under tremendous pressure, and 
b. On revenue front, there is very little scope to gain windfall profit by airlines.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.7      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, but is still of the opinion that the 
term ‘reasonable profit’ which is specified under the Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 
1937 should be clearly defined and should not be left to market forces. Hence, the 

35 
 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and stresses that the Ministry should frame 
guidelines to define ‘reasonable profit’ for ensuring control on the sudden surge in 
airfares. Besides, while the reply asserts that ai rfares in India are lower than those in 
most countries, it lacks specific data or comparative analysis to support this claim.  
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee understands that the fixing of airfares depends on various conditions 
which are subject to variation of the demand -supply dynamics of the market and the airlines 
have to account for these factors for maintaining economy of operations. The Committee is, 
however, of the opinion that a balance has to be maintained between the commercial 
interests of the airlines as well as the interests of the passengers. It is of the opinion that to 
fix airfares at reasonable and affordable rates, the airlines need to adopt the concept of 
„reasonable profit‟ drawing from the best international practices.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry in consultation with the airlines should devise a mechanism or 
a formula, so that the concept of „reasonable profit‟ as provided explicitly in Rule 135(1) of 
the Aircraft Rules, 1937 is adhered to. 
 (Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      The Ministry held consultations with airlines on the subject. During the consultations, 
it emerged that „reasonable profit‟ is a part of airlines revenue management which is based on 
demand and supply model. Airlines  globally work on a cost recovery model rather than on a 
set target to achieve reasonable profit. 
5.2 The reasonableness of tariff is a function of demand and supply, variations in demand 
by season, during the day of the week, time of day, directionality, number of days before the 
flight, capacity deployed on the route, variations in cost of operations, etc.  Reasonableness of 
airfares in India can be judged from the fact that airfares in India are much lower than those 
charged by airlines in most countries, for the same distance. Average airfares in India are also 
quite low. 
5.3 While it is the core goal of every enterprise to maximise shareholder value, the fact 
remains that the Indian airline industry continues to face considerable financial distress . 
Reasonableness of pricing needs also to be viewed in the context of overall network 
profitability as airlines may also operate on loss making routes to generate network feeds.  
Revenue management enables airlines to stimulate demand by offering low fares to pri ce-
sensitive travellers and higher airfares to price-insensitive corporate travellers. 
5.4 Few of major financial and operational factors relevant in determination of airfare are: 
(i) ATF Accounts for about 40% of the operational cost of airlines. ATF pric es have 
experienced high volatility. ATF prices doubled within an year (Rs. 69,060/KL in 
July 2021 to 141,233/KL July 2022) and are still at Rs. 118,199/KL which is 171% of 
July, 2021 price level. Airfares have not increased in same proportion with the 
increase in ATF prices.  

36 
 
(ii) Internationally civil aviation has a highly seasonal market. The Indian Market is also 
characterized by high (may to mid -July and October to mid -January) and low seasons 
(mid July to September and mid January to April). 
(iii) The airline pricing is highly elastic. Pricing of air tickets by airlines is pegged against 
key competitors on the given route, keeping in view relative product strengths. 
(iv) Indian aviation market is price competitive due to multiple players, seasonal mark et 
depending on demand and supply.  
5.5 Keeping in mind the above factors, it is noted that: 
 Cost structure of airlines is under tremendous pressure, and 
 On revenue front, there is very little scope to gain windfall profit by airlines. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.6      The Committee notes that Revenue Management and commercial  
interests such as maximizing shareholder’s value determines the fixing of  
airfares and passenger interests do not play a role in airfares fixation. Hence, it st rongly 
recommends that Ministry may formulate a mechanism to ensure the compliance of 
Rule 13(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and thereby ensuring a control on surge in 
airfares. Again the term "reasonable profit" is used without a clear definition or 
specific criteria, making it a subjective measure. More clarity on how airlines define 
and determine "reasonable profit" would strengthen the reply.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. As per the information provided by the various airlines, the Committee notes that in 
most of the cases, the Operating Expenditure has increased substantially, while the income 
has reduced, leading to net losses for most of the airlines. It also notes that Air Asia has 
incurred a net income despite incurring an increase in Operating  Expenditure. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons, why Air Asia has been an exception and could 
post increase in net income despite incurring increase in Operating Expenditure, like other 
airlines. The Committee opines that it is crucial to scruti nise the audited financial data 
furnished by the airlines on a regular basis and DGCA should take cognisance of any 
discrepancies reported by the airlines and take corrective actions. 
 (Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      AIX Connect Private (Air Asia) Limited  has informed that the word „Net Income‟ 
mentioned in the Financial details given to the Committee may be read as Total 
income/Revenue. AIX Connect has submitted that they continue to make losses over the last 
3 years. In the year FY21 & FY22, the losses mainly on account of lower demand & in the 
FY23, the fuel prices increased over 60% as compared to FY22 resulting in higher losses to 

37 
 
airlines. AIX Connect Private (Air Asia) Limited has highlighted the Year to Year fin ancial 
comparison which is as below:- 
(Rs. Cr) A B C A-B B-C 
Particulars 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 % variation % variation 
Revenue 1,483 1,914 4,361 29% 128% 
Fixed Cost (Depreciation, 
Finance Cost, Employee 
Benefits, Forex Loss) 
1,256 1,436 1,867 14% 30% 
Operational Revenue 
Expenditure 1,759 2,656 5,244 51% 97% 
Total Costs 3,015 4,092 7,111 36% 74% 
Profit/(Loss) -1,532 -2,179 -2,750 -42% -26% 
Profit/(Loss) % -103% -114% -63% 
  
 
6.2 The loss percentage of AIX Connect has been reduced from 114% in FY 2021-22 to 
63% in FY 2022 -23. This is on account of increase in revenue i.e., 128% from operation in 
the FY 2022-23 comparing to FY 2021-22. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.3      The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply but still reiterates its recommendation 
and urges the Ministry/ DGCA to scrutinise the audited financial particulars of all the 
airlines on regular intervals so that  corrective actions may be taken on any  
discrepancies reported upon by the airlines.    
 
Global Data Analysis  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes the observations of the ACI and is of the opinion that the 
airlines need to take a relook at the high pricing of the airfares keeping in view the long -term 
aspects. It also recommends that the Ministry may formulate policies to encourage the 
airlines to increase capacity and induct more aircrafts, which will rectify the supply - demand 
imbalance, and further benefit the passengers besides aiding the recovery of the Civil 
Aviation sector in India. 
 (Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      With regard to deployment of additional aircraft to meet the increased demand of the 
passengers, it is submitted that with the repeal of Air Corporation Act in March, 1994 the 

38 
 
Indian domestic aviation was totally deregulated. Airlines are free to induct capacity with any 
aircraft type, free to select whatever markets and network they wish to service and operate 
with the compliance of Route Dispersal Guidelines  (RDGs) issued by Government. Hence, it 
is up to the air line operator to consider the introduction of air services to/from any airport 
with number of aircraft in the country depending on their operational & commercial 
viabilities.  
7.2 Further, during consultation, airlines have informed that induction of aircr aft is a time 
consuming affair as well  as highly capital intensive. Aircraft are typically ordered years in 
advance, and pilots take years to train. Airlines commit to operating flights long in advance 
without any assurance t hat revenues will cover costs.  The less certain airlines are about 
recovering costs, the less aircraft they will risk acquiring or deploying. If airlines cannot 
consistently achieve profit they will not be able to invest in additional aircraft, staff or routes. 
7.3 Government has been e ncouraging airlines to acquire aircraft including wide -body 
aircraft and operate more flights. Air India has recently placed orders for 470 aircraft which 
includes 70 wide-body aircraft (40 Airbus 350, 20 Boeing 787, 10 Boeing 777 -9s). Indigo is 
also expected to induct about 500 aircraft. These aircraft are to be delivered over a period of 
time in a staggered manner. This will ease out the demand-supply situation. 
7.4 Akasa Air had started its Scheduled operations with 01 Aircraft in 2022 and presently, 
they are operating with 20 aircraft. In 2022, airline has acquired 14 Aircraft and in 2023, it 
added 06 more aircraft in its fleet. Two Scheduled Commuter Operators, namely M.s Just 
Udo Aviation and Ms Jettwings Airways Pvt. Ltd and 01 Scheduled (Cargo) Opera tor i.e. 
SpiceXpress and Logistic Private Ltd. were given Initial NOC by MoCA in the year 2023. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.5 The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply regarding induction of new  
aircrafts by airlines and would like to know the details of the new Scheduled  
Operators (both passenger and cargo) which have started operations in the  
last three years and also those which are in the pipeline to commence  
operations. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry  
should striv e to create a conducive environment for both the existing and the new 
operators through liberalized regulations and ease of induction of new aircrafts, which  
will lead to increased capacity of the airlines and the Indian Civil Aviation sector as a 
whole. The Committee also notes that the Ministry's response focuses on the 
deregulated nature of the aviation industry and the freedom of airlines to induct 
capacity. However, it does not directly address the committee's concern about high 
airfares. The reply co uld provide more insight into how the Ministry plans to ensure 
fair pricing practices by airlines. 
 
Publication of Information on Website  
Recommendation/Observation 

39 
 
8. The Committee recommends that a mechanism should be put in place by the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation in coordination with Ministry of Tourism and airline companies to regularly 
monitor the flight booking portals/ aggregators so that they do not indulge in unscrupulous 
practices by publishing incorrect information under the guise of selling “last seats”. In such 
cases, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider issuing necessary 
guidelines to Airlines to direct these portals/apps to not publish such incorrect information 
and create an avoidable panic situation amongst the public. The Committee also recommends 
setting up of a grievance redressal mechanism to deal with such complaints. 
 (Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Ministry held consultations with airlines on the subject. Airlines have informed 
that they neither share any information nor have authorized any of the intermediaries (online 
travel agents, offline travel agents, meta -search portals) to publish the number of seats left in 
any Revenue Booking Designator (RBD). However, airlines have assured that they would 
advise their distribution partners to refrain from publishing any such information which may 
be incorrect or misleading. Further, airlines also continuously monitor the fares being 
published by travel agents on their portals to ensure that the airfare shown o n the travel 
agency portal is not misleading in any way for the customers. 
8.2 DGCA has issued instructions to all the airlines to regularly monitor their booking 
portals/ travel agents so that they do not indulge in to publishing any incorrect or misleadi ng 
information under the guise of selling “last seats” to avoid panic situation amongst the public. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.3      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and is of the opinion  that mere 
assurance by airlines seeking to refrain their distribution partners  from publishing 
incorrect information is not sufficient enough to  stop unscrupulous practices. The 
Committee recommends that  the Ministry should formulate guidelines in this regard 
and instruct the airlines for strict compliance and also include a provision for penalizing 
the distribution partners, in case of any  deviation. The Committee urges the Ministry to 
introduce a  dedicated grievance redressal mechanism where such  complaints may be 
flagged and resolved. 
  
Components and Drivers of Airfare  
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes the various components of airfares being charged to passengers 
and observes that the components of airfares are the same across various airlines. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the percentage of various components of airfares 
which are retained by the airlines themselves. 
 (Para 77) 

40 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 During consultation with airlines, it emerged that the total airfare is essentially 
composed of the following elements:  
(i) Airfare and airline-imposed surcharges that are retained by airlines;  
(ii) Pass-through components mandated by authorities (UDF, P SF, etc.), that are remitted 
to the agency/ entity on whose behalf these components are being collected by the 
airlines; and  
(iii) GST, which is remitted to the concerned Government authorities.  
9.2 Different airlines have their own percentage of various components which varies from 
airline to airline. Therefore, the fixed percentage of various components of airfares applicable 
to all airlines cannot be determined. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.3 The Committee takes a note of the reply furnished by the Ministry regarding 
different components of airfare and feels that airfare and airline -imposed charges 
should not vary to a large extent and should be almost similar. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to have an  approximate idea of airfare percentage that is retained 
by the airlines alongwith the reserved profit margin percentage on every seat per flight.  
  
Impact of Airport Tariff on Airfares  
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee notes that fees mandated by the AERA being charged to the Airlines 
and Passengers, are determined based on the Regulatory principles laid down by the Airport 
Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) and airports are bound to charge only those fees and 
charges that are determi ned and published by the AERA. It is, therefore, evident that the 
AERA exercises control of various components of airfares charged to airlines or passengers. 
The Committee observes that the AERA, being the statutory regulator for the airports sector 
should endeavour to strike a balance between the interests of the airlines and the passengers. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the AERA in consultation with the various stakeholders 
may look into the feasibility of reducing the various components of airfare , which may result 
in decrease in airfares. 
 (Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 As per Section 13(1) (a) of AERA Act, 2008, AERA has a mandate to determine tariff 
for Aeronautical services provided by the Airport Operators at the „Major Airports' only.  
AERA determines aeronautical charges of „Major Airports‟ such as Landing, Parking, UDF 
etc. considering the following factors:- 
i) Return on capital invested. 
ii) Operating expenditure. 

41 
 
iii) Depreciation. 
iv) Tax paid to the Government. 
10.2 It is relevant  to mention that as per the audited annual accounts of one of the Major 
Airlines of India, Airport fees and charges constitute around 7 % (incl. of Landing, Parking 
and Navigation charges as determined by MoCA) of the total expenses for the Airlines. 
Major Component of airline cost inter alia constitutes fuel expenses, Aircraft Maintenance, 
Employee Cost and Depreciation.  Thus, the Airport Charges are not a major factor for the 
airfare of an airline. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.3 The Committee notes the  Ministry’s  reply and feels that airport charges may 
not be major factor, but airport charges do impact airfares . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibilities and reduce the airport 
charges, wherever possible, so that the overall prices are reduced as well.    
 
Low-Cost Carriers vs. Full-Service Carriers  
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes that the reason for the higher fares charged by low -cost airlines 
on the same routes vis -à-vis their full-service counterparts despite offering fewer services to 
the passengers is mainly due to the fact that airfares are fixed according to market dynamics. 
The difference primarily lies in services and deliverables offered i.e., free meals on board, 
different cabins, seat comfort, loyalty benefits, etc. The Committee notes that there is no fixed 
criterion for fixing airfares for Low -Cost Carriers as compared to the Full -Service Carriers 
and the airfares are determined on the basis of market forces and airli nes do not have any 
control over them. The expression „market dynamics‟ being vast and uncertain, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor such instances of high fares of 
LCCs and take remedial action. 
 (Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    Airfares are neither established nor regulated by the Government. Under the 
provisions of Sub Rule (1) of Rule135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every air transport 
undertaking engaged in scheduled air services is required to establish tariff having re gard to 
all relevant factors including cost of operation, characteristic of services, reasonable profit 
and the generally prevailing tariff. 
11.2 Fares for any flight are a function demand supply dynamics and are based, inter alia, 
on factors such as:- 
(i) Schedule advantage/disadvantage – Flights with better timings see higher customer 
demand; 

42 
 
(ii) Available Seats – If very few seats are available on a flight, the fares may be higher. 
Therefore, it is possible at times that the flight of a low-cost-carrier (LCC) is in higher 
demand that a full -service-carrier (FSC) and hence may see a higher fare being 
offered at a particular booking period. 
11.3 Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has a Tariff Monitoring Unit that 
monitors airfares on certain rout es on random basis to ensure that the airlines do not charge 
airfares outside a range declared by them. The analysis has shown that the airlines remained 
well within the fare bucket uploaded by the airlines on the respective websites. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.4    The Committee is not satisfied with the justification of the Ministry regarding 
higher fares being charged by the Low -Cost Carriers (LCCs) vis -à-vis Full -Service 
Carriers (FSCs). It is aware that there have been instances where the  LCCs have 
charged higher fares as compared to their Full -Service counterparts for the flights on 
the same route and similar timings. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation and urges the Ministry to monitor such instances and take correctiv e 
actions, if necessary. The response mentions that DGCA's Tariff Monitoring Unit 
monitors airfares on certain routes on a random basis. However, it lacks details on the 
frequency and regularity of such monitoring. The Committee, therefore, calls for more 
transparency and details on the monitoring process. 
 
Differential Pricing  
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that the reason for variation in prices of seats on the same flight 
is due to the system of „unbundling‟, which is a global practice whereby the airlines charge 
the lowest possible fare for the basic product and charges for various other amenities as per 
the choice of the passenger. The Committee, however, feels that the issue needs a relook as 
variable costs for the seats in the same flight, goes against the very principle of equity. 
 (Para 110) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    Differential seat pricing is a global practice. Seat selection pricing is an element of the 
practice of unbundling of fares that is followed by all airlines and is done to reduce the cost 
of travel for consumers who desire only the basic product, viz., air travel without any frills. 
Offering such vanilla airfares not only makes air travel more affordable, it also reduces the 
cost of air travel, thereby stimulating the demand for air travel – a factor that has contributed 
significantly to the high growth rate and continued prospects for air travel in India.  
12.2 Airline fixes prices for seats in line with overall market dynamics, type of seat (e.g. 
extra leg-room), etc., and the price so fixed is unique to each airline in line with each airline‟s 
own cost base. 

43 
 
12.3 Hon‟ble Delhi High Court in Federation of Indian Airlines Vs DGCA &Anr. (2017) 
has also held that DGCA cannot determine the tariff for airlines or their products. In the 
judgement, Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi ordered that DGCA cannot determine tariff for 
specified flight product and set aside the provision of “Check -in baggage charges” contained 
in Air Transport Circular 02 of 2016 titled “Unbundling of services and fees by scheduled 
airlines”. As per the order, it has been expressly provided th at DGCA would not fix the fee 
for „unbundled services‟ as airfare is determined by market forces. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.4 The Committee notes the reply, but it is still of the opinion that the policy on 
variation in prices of seats for the same flight, needs a relook as it is against the 
principle of equity. The Committee, further, feels that the claim that unbundling 
reduces the cost of air travel for consumers who desire only the basic product needs to 
be scrutinized. While it may redu ce costs for some passengers, it may also lead to 
increased costs for others who end up paying for various add-ons. 
Challenges in the Rationalisation of Airfares  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee notes various challenges being faced for rationalisation of airfares as 
aviation sector is a capital intensive business and faces unforeseen challenges such as 
continuous unsustainable operating losses. It notes that most of the challenges are beyond the 
control of the airlines. However, the issue of the steep increase in ATF prices as compared to 
global prices and GST levied by the Government depends on factors which are under the 
ambit of the Central Government. The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be 
taken to lower the taxes levied on ATF in consultation with Ministry of Finance. 
 (Para 113) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    The decision to bring ATF under the ambit of GST pertains to MoF/ GST Council. 
MoF has stated that Article 279 A (5) of the Constitution prescribes that the GST Council 
shall recommend the date with effect from which the GST would be levied on petroleum 
crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (petrol), natural gas and ATF. As per the section 9(2) of 
the CGST Act, 2017, inclusion of these products in GST will requir e recommendation of the 
GST Council. So far, the GST Council, in which the states are also represented, has not made 
any recommendation for inclusion of these goods under GST.  
13.2 MoCA has taken up the issue of inclusion of ATF under the ambit of GST wit h MoF 
on various levels. Most recently, a meeting was held between Hon'ble Minister of Civil 
Aviation and Hon'ble Finance Minister on 26/06/2023. During the meeting, various taxation 
issues related to the Civil Aviation sector were discussed and it was agr eed that MoF shall 
consider the request for reduction in Central Excise Duty on ATF to 5% to provide some 
relief to the cash strapped airlines, till such time as ATF is brought under GST. 

44 
 
13.3 Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the matter with states to reduce VAT on ATF. 
As a result, VAT on ATF has been reduced by 19 States/ UTs. The issue has been again taken 
up with the States/ UTs which have not reduced VAT on ATF viz. Assam, Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.4 The Committee notes the Ministry‟s reply and is of the strong view that Aviation 
Turbine Fuel (ATF) is a major component of airfare. Therefore, it is imperative to reduce the 
Central Excise Duty on ATF and bring it under the ambit of GST. The Ministry may provide 
the details of the recent meeting held with the Ministry of Finance in this regard. The 
Committee observes that the reply mentions that the issue of including ATF under GST has 
been discussed at various levels, including a meeting on 26/06/2023, but it doesn't provide a 
specific timeline or deadline for when a decision might be expected. While the Ministry 
states that VAT on ATF has been reduced by 19 States/UTs, it does not provide details on the 
extent of the reduction or the overall impact on airline costs. The Committee would like to be 
kept abreast of the latest updates on this issue. 
 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and Taxes on ATF  
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee notes the increase in expenditure on ATF from 2016-17 onwards, with 
the exception of years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, when the demand for ATF decreased due to 
pandemic induced slowdown in aviation sector. In the year 2022 -23, it has sharply increased 
again, surpassing the expenditure on ATF during the previous year s. The Committee opines 
that lowered rates of VAT on ATF may result in reduced price of air tickets and enhanced air 
connectivity. Also, the resultant increase in revenue from sale of aviation fuel may aid in the 
growth of tourism, better employment opportunities in the States/UTs. 
 (Para 117) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 VAT is a state subject and each state levies VAT on ATF based on state's own policy. 
However, taking cognizance of the high value added tax (VAT) on ATF levied by States/ 
UTs, Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the matter with them to reduce VAT on ATF. 
As a result, VAT on ATF has been reduced by 19 States/ UTs. The issue has been again taken 
up with the States/ UTs which have not reduced VAT on ATF viz. Assam, Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.2 The Committee commends the Ministry for taking up the matter of reduction of 
Value Added Tax (VAT) on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) with various State 
Governments which has resulted in numerous Stat es having reduced the VAT rates. 

45 
 
However, the Committee observes that some states are still charging high rates of VAT 
on ATF but the reply does not elaborate on the reasons for their hesitation or the efforts 
being made to address their concerns. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to take up the matter once again with those States which are still charging 
higher rates of VAT and also explore the possibilities of further reduction in the rates 
by the remaining States.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee also commends the Ministry for adopting initiatives such as MOPAG 
mechanism of pricing to rationalise prices and bring in more parity between prices of global 
crude oil and ATF in India. The Committee opines tha t it will decrease the cost of ATF and 
hence, decrease airfares in the country. The Committee also desires to know the details of 
ATF prices being charged in other countries across the world and the countries with low 
ATF prices. 
 (Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed that Data regarding international 
ATF pricing is not maintained by them or the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs). Pricing of 
each Airline in foreign countries are specific to individual airlines  and is also confidential in 
nature. This is commercial agreement between airlines and OMCs which are not available in 
public domain. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.2 The Committee would like to be apprised of the ‘Mean of Platts Arab Gulf’ 
(MOPAG) pricing mechanism and a note in this regard may be furnished  for 
Committee’s information . The Committee may also be informed about the Ministry’s 
plans to implement this mechanism in the country.  
  
Pratt & Whitney Engines  
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee notes that aircrafts with an Indian airline operator having Pratt and 
Whitney engines were grounded due to lack of spare parts leading to incurring of losses. The 
Committee would like to know whether there are a ny provisions to seek damages from the 
said engine manufacturer, and if so, the details of action taken by the airlines as well as the 
Ministry in this regard to avoid the recurrence of such a problem in future. 
 (Para 125) 
Reply of the Ministry 

46 
 
16.1 Provisions for seeking damages from engine manufacturer (P&W) are governed by 
the Purchase Agreement between the airline and the manufacturer and are proprietary 
documents. Contract of the airline with Pratt and Whitney requires them to maintain 
confidentiality of the contractual provisions. Airline has informed airline management is 
continuously engaging with Pratt and Whitney management to mitigate the Aircraft on 
Ground (AOG) situation due to engines shortages. 
16.2 However, DGCA has taken up the matter with P&W for making overhauled engines 
available to the Indian operators and advised the manufacturer to enhance their maintenance 
capability. DGCA is continuously following up the matter with the Engine Manufacturer. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.3    The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that various aircrafts were grounded 
due to the persistent issues re lated to the Pratt and Whitney e ngines manufacturer. The 
Committee understands that there is a contract between the engine manufacturer a nd 
the airlines, however, this Aircraft on Ground (AOG) situation arising due to engine 
shortages has lead to significant problems in the Civil Aviation sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should intervene and impose strict follow -up 
in the matter to ensure that such a situation does not arise in the future.  
 
Role of Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA)  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee takes note of the observation of the APAO that though the AERA Act 
has provisions regarding the need to formulate regulations, yet the regulations are yet to be 
formulated. The Committee notes the delay in formulation of regulations by  the AERA and 
desires to know the reasons thereof. The Committee recommends that the regulations may be 
formulated at the earliest. The details of the measures that are sought to be introduced 
through the said regulation to regulate airports may also be explained. 
 (Para 138) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    It is relevant to mention here that for carrying out the function of tariff determination, 
AERA, incompliance of Section 15 of the AERA Act, 2008, has finalized the following 
Regulatory Guidelines through an exhaustive Consultation process under which tariff for 
aeronautical services are determined:-  
(a) Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Terms and Conditions for 
Determination of Tariff for Airport Operators) Guidelines, 2011" vide Direction No. 
05/2010-11 dated 28.02.2011. 
(b) “Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Terms and Conditions for 
Determination of Tariff for Airport Operators) Guidelines, 201 1” vide Direction No. 
04/2010-11 dated 10.01.2011. 

47 
 
17.2 The above Guidelines have been meticulously followed by AERA for determination 
of tariff for aeronautical services since 2011 and APAO has never raised any issue since then. 
Further, it is also submitted that the issue of notification of above regulatory guidelines is 
under process and shall be completed shortly.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
17.3    The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply and would like to be kept updated 
about the progress in the matter. It also recommends that the Ministry should expedite 
and issue the notification of regulatory guidelines regarding determination of tariff for 
airport operators, at the earliest. 
  
Capping of Airfares – Upper and Lower  
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee is of the view that certain factors, including the capacity constraints, 
demand-supply situation and fuel prices, should be taken into consideration for determining 
prices. The Committee also understands that it is necessary to give an open opportunity to the 
airlines to operate in the market; however, int erests of common man should also be 
considered. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to promote the accessibility of air 
transport to the common man, the Ministry should introduce reasonable upper fare caps on 
all the airlines, taking into account all  relevant factors including the cost of operation, 
characteristics of service, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff as envisaged 
in Rule 135 (1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937. The Committee feels that it is essential to 
maintain a pricing di scipline to protect the interests of both the airline operators and the 
commuting public. 
 (Para 153) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    Airlines are free to establish their airfares as per their operation viabilities. With the 
repeal of Air Corporations Act in  March 1994, the Indian domestic aviation was totally 
deregulated. As per prevailing regulation, airfares are not regulated by the Government. 
18.2 Covid Pandemic had adversely impacted the revenue streams of business including 
Aviation Sector. Due to those unprecedented circumstances, fare bands with upper and lower 
limits were introduced by the Government having a special measure. The fare bands served 
the dual purpose of protecting the interest of the travellers as well as the airlines. The 
Government has uplifted the fare bands in August, 2022 when the market normalized. 
18.3 Establishing an upper cap on airfares causes the airlines to raise the lower fare 
buckets, thereby making the lowest fares unavailable. This will raise the average cost of 
tickets sold in a sector/flight. For peak period, weekend, Diwali, New Year etc. the seats will 
be sold out up to a week before travel making it impossible for emergency travellers to find a 
seat at any price a day before departure. Additionally, the revenue fr om high yield 

48 
 
international tourist and from corporates (profit focused) will drop, impacting the financial 
health of loss making airlines while giving undue advantage to corporate travel by highly 
profitable industries. Impact of fare caps is as follows:-  
 reduced seat availability close to departure; and 
 will lead to unavailability of low fares for advance purchase for price sensitive 
common man. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
18.4 The Committee is of the opinion that a route specific fare ceiling can be 
examined, keeping in mind the interests of both the airlines and the customer. It also 
recommends that in order to protect the commercial interests of the airlines, t he 
feasibility of modifying the ceiling during the peak/festival season, with prior  
intimation, may be examined.   
 
Passenger Grievance Redressal  
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee also opines that airlines need to create awareness and educate the 
passengers who do not travel frequently, about the working of the airline system  in general 
viz., ticketing procedure, fares, luggage handling and other issues which may emerge during 
travelling. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may direct the airlines to create 
awareness and educate passengers about the varied aspects of the travelling procedures. 
 (Para 171) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 During the consultation with the airlines, it emerged that Airlines try and guide the 
passengers on every step right from check in to boarding to security on -board service and 
arrivals. They assist the passengers at gate while departing and on arrival crew on board do 
not allow them to disembark till the coaches arrive for transfers to and from the aircraft. Such 
passengers are informed for any delays in real-time on ground and in cabin as well. They also 
inform to passengers in cabin about the luggage conveyer belt no, etc. details. Ministry has 
also advised these airlines during the meeting to create awareness and educate passengers 
about the varied aspects of the travelling. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
19.3 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and opines that the 
passengers, who do not travel frequently, still face lot of difficulties in travelling by air. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate a 
mechanism to ensure that the airlines or the concerned airport take utmost care in 

49 
 
ensuring that real time updates are conveyed to the passengers. The possibility of 
devising a mobile application may also be explored.  
  
Regional Connectivity Scheme (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik)  
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee notes that there is a capping as regards the number of seats on RCS 
flights, which stands at 40 at present. Besides, the initial capped airfare of Rs. 2,500/ - has 
also increased. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the possibility of 
increasing the number of RCS seats and also lowering the capped airfare, so as to cater to 
the increasing demand for a ir travel in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, as the cardinal objective of 
this Scheme is to connect the unserved and under -served airports and make it affordable for 
the common man. The Committee would like to know the details of the present capping 
amount for RCS flights, for different duration of flights. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry should publish such airfare caps applicable for RCS, for ensuring transparency 
of fares. 
 (Para 175) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 The capping on the number of RCS Seats was brought in so that the risk and reward 
of operating any route are shared by the bidder and the Implementing Agency. Furthermore, 
as this is a scheme to connect the unserved and underserved regions of the country, it was 
envisaged that a base leve l of connectivity should be subsidized, and any incremental 
capacity may be based on an operator‟s assessment of demand. 
20.2 NCAP-2016 had mandated an Airfare Cap of ₹2,500 for a distance of 500 -600 km. 
Accordingly, ₹2,500 had been applied to a stage leng th of 500 km. This has then been 
indexed to Inflation, Aviation Turbine Fuel and Exchange Rates to ensure that airline 
operators are equitably compensated. The current indexed values for UDAN 4.3 can be found 
in the table below:- 
Stage Length (km) Airfare Caps (INR) 
1-50 2,193 
51-75 2,193 
76-100 2,193 
101-125 2,193 
126-150 2,193 
151-175 2,193 
176-200 2,316 
201-225 2,441 

50 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.3 However, the airlines are free to sell the tickets at any airfare below these caps which 
is determined by the demand on these routes. It may be noted that Airlines receive both VGF 
and Airfare Capped Ticket Prices as their revenue for RCS Seats, in case the Airfare Cap is 
reduced, the VGF component will have to be increased to ensure that they are able to recoup 
their cost of operations. This suggestion has already been incorporated in UDAN 5.1, which 
is focused on helicopter operations. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
20.4 The Committee commends the steps taken by the Ministry to further the 
primary objective of the Regi onal Connectivity Scheme  (RCS) and takes a note of the 
current indexed airfare caps. The Committee may be apprised of the current number of 
reserved seats on RCS flights; guidelines issued in this regard; and whether the airlines 
are complying with the se instructions. The Committee would also like to know if the 
Ministry or the airlines are publishing the airfare caps applicable for RCS on their 
website or elsewhere, for ensuing transparency of airfares.     
  
226-250 2,579 
251-275 2,703 
276-300 2,826 
301-325 2,965 
326-350 3,089 
351-375 3,212 
376-400 3,352 
401-425 3,476 
426-450 3,598 
451-475 3,736 
476-500 3,861 
501-525 3,861 
526-550 4,000 
551-575 4,139 
576-600 4,279 

51 
 
Bankruptcy of GoFirst  
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee notes that even Directorate General of Civil Aviation was not made 
aware by GoFirst about its plan to suspend services, which amounts to a violation of 
applicable rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
and DGCA should intervene, take cognizance of this grave situation and issue necessary 
guidelines to the other airlines to keep a tab on the affected operations and airfares. The 
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should look into the possibility of developing a 
contingency plans to deal with such situations, arising due to the sudden exit of any airline in 
the future. 
 (Para 190) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1    Regarding the possibility of developing   contingency plans to deal with such 
situations, arising due to the sudden exit of any airline in the future, it may be seen that 
capacity shortfall created due to sudden exit of an airline cannot be replaced by the other 
airlines immediately and is bound to be disruptive and leading to higher air fares. Some of the 
possible mitigation measures in such situations may include the following:- 
(i) Capacity augmentation by the other airline, by transfer of the aircraft of the exiting 
airline, like it was done in the case of  Jet Airways stopping their operations suddenly. 
However, this would require the commercial arrangements by the airlines with the 
lessors for transfer of leased aircraft to other carriers. However, this is feasible only in 
the situation where the aircraft are available to lessors for leasing to other airlines. In 
the instant case of Go First, aircraft are subject to a protracted legal cases between Go 
First and the lessors at NCLT and High Court of Delhi. 
(ii) Provision for Short term wet leasing by other a irlines to cater for such disruption. 
However, this may also have limitation in terms getting aircraft on wet lease by the 
other airlines as well as the airports where such aircraft can operate. For instance, 
such wet leased aircraft cannot operate to Leh and such other critical airports.    
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
21.2 The Committee notes the mitigation measures suggested by the Ministry in the 
event of sudden exit of an airline. The Committee may be informed of the applicable 
rules issued by  the Ministry regarding the suspension of operations by an airline. The 
Committee would also like to know whether these rules were adhered to, by GoFirst 
before the airline went bankrupt. Further, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should develop a  contingency plan in consultation with all the scheduled 
airline operators to deal with such situations, in the future. The Committee observes 
that the Ministry's response does not address the accountability or consequences for 
GoFirst's failure to comply with rules and inform the regulatory authority. 

52 
 
Improper Behaviour of Airline Staff and other Passenger Grievances 
 Recommendation/Observation 
22. On many occasions, the Committee has deliberated upon and taken cognizance of the 
instances of unruly behavior of airline staff and manhandling of passengers. The Committee 
takes note of such cases as highlighted in the recent Media Reports. The Committee is also 
aware that the airline buses used to ferry passengers from the airport terminal to the aircraf t 
and vice -versa, are often crowded due to lack of sufficient bus services provided by the 
airlines. The Committee is of the view that concrete steps should be taken to address such 
issues. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry/DGCA to take not e and examine 
such complaints and take corrective actions against the concerned airline. 
 (Para 193) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1   During the consultation with airlines, it emerged that some of the Airlines have taken 
action in the matter. Further, airlines  also informed that normally they do not receive 
complaints of unruly behaviour of airline staff and manhandling of passengers. However, 
airlines have a laid down procedure to handle such cases. 
22.2 The coach services at airports are provided by ground ha ndling partners of airlines. 
Airlines assure enough coaches are provided on the basis of pax load and aircraft handled at 
remote parking stands. The numbers of pax per coach is determined for each coach type 
provided by ground handler, hence may differ at different stations, However the maximum 
number of pax boarding per coach is controlled by the ground handling staff. This is 
reviewed from time to time. 
22.3 Airlines have also noted the advice of C ommittee of requirement of coach facilities at 
specific stations for taking appropriate actions. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
22.4 The Committee notes that the airlines have also noted the advice of Committee of 
requirement of coach facilities at specific stations for taking appropriate actions. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status and actual number of coaches made 
available at each station, till date. The response relies on information obtained during 
consultations with airlines, where the airlines claim they normally do not receive 
complaints about unruly behavior or manhandling. The Committee is of the opinion 
that this reliance on self -reported data may not capture the full extent of passenger 
experiences and concerns. 
 
   
  
 

53 
 
 CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
   
-Nil- 
 
***** 

54 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee notes that DGCA has 
not inspected the records of airlines over the last 10 years and without any inspection, it 
has stated that airlines have complied with t he rules. Hence, it does not agree with the 
reply and reasons given by the Ministry. The Committee opines that a case of violation 
by airlines can only be detected, in case the records are inspected by DGCA. While the 
Ministry mentions that fares are subje ct to market conditions of demand and supply, 
the Committee feels that this explanation might be exploited by airlines to justify 
excessive pricing during unforeseeable conditions. Further, while the Committee 
appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry, i t feels that the period of 24 hours which 
needs to be examined to arrive at suitable time period to avoid frequent and last day 
changes in tariff bringing any surge in airfare may be examined in consultation and 
implemented at the earliest. 
(Para 1.8) 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry wherein it has been stated that airlines 
do not charge airfares outside the fares declared by them and any abnormally high 
airfare on such sector is brought to the notice of the respective airlines for their se lf-
regulation. The reply, however, does not elaborate on the consequences or actions taken 
if airlines are found charging airfares outside the declared range. The Committee has 
come across various instances where there has been abnormal increase in airfare s 
especially during festivals or holidays, and is of the opinion that self -regulation by 
airlines has not been effective. The Committee, therefore, again recommends that a 
mechanism may be evolved whereby DGCA is empowered to regulate air tariffs.                                                  
(Para 2.6) 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and opines that DGCA has already been 
entrusted with various responsibilities and tasks . The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
its recommendation and urges the  Ministry to explore the feasibility of establishing a 
separate entity with quasi -judicial powers to exercise control over airfares being 
charged by the airlines.                         
        
(Para 3.3) 
  

55 
 
Reasonable Profit, Generally Prevailing Tariff and Mechanism followed for Fixing 
Airfares  
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, but is still of the opinion that the term 
‘reasonable profit’ which is specified under the Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft  Rules, 1937 
should be clearly defined and should not be left to market forces. Hence, the Committee 
reiterates its recommendation and stresses that the Ministry should frame guidelines to 
define ‘reasonable profit’ for ensuring control on the sudden surge  in airfares. Besides, 
while the reply asserts that airfares in India are lower than those in most countries, it 
lacks specific data or comparative analysis to support this claim.       
(Para 4.7) 
The Committee notes that Revenue Management and commercial  
interests such as maximizing shareholder’s value determines the fixing of  
airfares and passenger interests do not play a role in airfares fixation. Hence, it strongly 
recommends that Ministry may formulate a mechanism to ensure the compliance of 
Rule 13(1)  of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and thereby ensuring a control on surge in 
airfares. Again the term "reasonable profit" is used without a clear definition or 
specific criteria, making it a subjective measure. More clarity on how airlines define 
and determine "reasonable profit" would strengthen the reply.     
    
(Para 5.6) 
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply but still reiterates its recommendation and 
urges the Ministry/ DGCA to scrutinise the audited financial particulars of all the 
airlines on regular intervals so that corrective actions may be taken on any 
discrepancies reported upon by the airlines.          
   
(Para 6.3) 
 
Global Data Analysis  
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply regarding induction of new  
aircrafts by airlines and would like to know the details of the new Scheduled  
Operators (both passenger and cargo) which have started operations in the  
last three years and also those which are in the pipeline to commence  
operations. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry  
should strive to create a conducive environment for both the existing and the new 
operators through liberalized regulations and ease of induction of new aircrafts, which  
will lead to increased capacity of the airlines and the Indian Civil Aviation sector as a 
whole. The Committee also notes that the Ministry's response focuses on the 
deregulated nature of the aviation industry and the freedom of airlines to induct 
capacity. However, it does not directly address the committee's concern about high 

56 
 
airfares. The  reply could provide more insight into how the Ministry plans to ensure 
fair pricing practices by airlines. 
(Para 7.5) 
 
Publication of Information on Website  
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and is of the opinion that mere assurance 
by airlines seeking to refrain their distribution partners  from publishing incorrect 
information is not sufficient enough to  stop unscrupulous practices. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should formulate guidelines in this regard and  instruct 
the ai rlines for strict compliance and also include a  provision for penalizing the 
distribution partners, in case of any  deviation. The Committee urges the Ministry to 
introduce a  dedicated grievance redressal mechanism where such  complaints may be 
flagged and resolved.         
  
(Para 8.3) 
 
 Components and Drivers of Airfare  
The Committee takes a note of the reply furnished by the Ministry regarding different 
components of airfare and feels that airfare and airline -imposed charges should not 
vary to a large extent and should be almost similar. The Committee, therefore, would 
like to have an  approximate idea of airfare percentage that is retained by the airlines 
alongwith the reserved profit margin percentage on every seat per flight.                              
(Para 9.3) 
 
Impact of Airport Tariff on Airfares  
The Committee notes the Minist ry’s  reply and feels that airport charges may not be 
major factor, but airport charges do impact airfares. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibilities and reduce the airport 
charges, wherever possible, so that the overall prices are reduced as well.     
   
(Para 10.3) 
 
Low-Cost Carriers vs. Full-Service Carriers  
The Committee is not satisfied with the justification of the Ministry regarding higher 
fares being charged by the Low -Cost Carriers (LCCs) vis -à-vis Full -Service Carriers 
(FSCs). It is aware that there have been instances where the LCCs have charged higher  
fares as compared to their Full -Service counterparts for the flights on the same route 
and similar timings. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation and urges 

57 
 
the Ministry to monitor such instances and take corrective actions, if necessary. The 
response mentions that DGCA's Tariff Monitoring Unit monitors airfares on certain 
routes on a random basis. However, it lacks details on the frequency and regularity of 
such monitoring. The Committee, therefore, calls for more transparency and details on 
the monitoring process. 
(Para 11.4) 
Differential Pricing  
The Committee notes the reply, but it is still of the opinion that the policy on variation 
in prices of seats for the same flight, needs a relook as it is against the principle of 
equity. The Committee, further, feels that the claim that unbundling reduces the cost of 
air travel for consumers who desire only the basic product needs to be scrutinized. 
While it may reduce costs for some passengers, it may also lead to increased costs for 
others who end up paying for various add-ons.       
    
(Para 12.4) 
Challenges in the Rationalisation of Airfares  
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply and is of the strong view that Aviation 
Turbine Fuel (ATF) is a major component of airfare. Therefore, it is  imperative to 
reduce the Central Excise Duty on ATF and bring it under the ambit of GST. The 
Ministry may provide the details of the recent meeting held with the Ministry of 
Finance in this regard. The Committee observes that the reply mentions that the issue of 
including ATF under GST has been discussed at various levels, including a meeting on 
26/06/2023, but it doesn't provide a specific timeline or deadline for when a decision 
might be expected. While the Ministry states that VAT on ATF has been reduce d by 19 
States/UTs, it does not provide details on the extent of the reduction or the overall 
impact on airline costs. The Committee would like to be kept abreast of the latest 
updates on this issue.       
(Para 13.4) 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and Taxes on ATF  
The Committee commends the Ministry for taking up the matter of reduction of Value 
Added Tax (VAT) on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) with various State Governments 
which has resulted in numerous States having reduced the VAT rates. However, the 
Committee observes that some states are still charging high rates of VAT on ATF but 
the reply does not elaborate on the reasons for their hesitation or the efforts being made 
to address their concerns. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take 
up the matter once again with those States which are still charging higher rates of VAT 
and also explore the possibilities of further reduction in the rates by the remaining 
States.     
(Para 14.2) 

58 
 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the ‘Mean of Platts Arab Gulf’ (MOPAG)  
pricing mechanism and a note in this regard may be furnished for Committee’s 
information. The Committee may also be informed about the Ministry’s plans to 
implement this mechanism in the country.             
(Para 15.2) 
 
Pratt & Whitney Engines  
The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that various aircrafts were grounded due to 
the persistent issues related to the Pratt and Whitney engines manufacturer. The 
Committee understands that there is a contract between the engine manufacturer and 
the airlin es, however, this Aircraft on Ground (AOG) situation arising due to engine 
shortages has lead to significant problems in the Civil Aviation sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should intervene and impose strict follow -up 
in the matter to ensure that such a situation does not arise in the future.   
    
(Para 16.3) 
 
Role of Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA)  
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply and would like to be kept updated about the 
progress in the matter. It als o recommends that the Ministry should expedite and issue 
the notification of regulatory guidelines regarding determination of tariff for airport 
operators, at the earliest.          
(Para 17.3) 
Capping of Airfares – Upper and Lower  
The Committee is of the  opinion that a route specific fare ceiling can be examined, 
keeping in mind the interests of both the airlines and the customer. It also recommends 
that in order to protect the commercial interests of the airlines, the feasibility of 
modifying the ceiling  during the peak/festival season, with prior intimation, may be 
examined.   
(Para 18.4) 
 
Passenger Grievance Redressal  
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and opines that the passengers, who 
do not travel frequently, still face lot of difficulties in travelling by air. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate a mechanism to ensure that 
the airlines or the concerned airport take utmost care in ensuring that real time updates 

59 
 
are conveyed to the passengers. The possibility of devising a mobile application may 
also be explored.            
(Para 19.3) 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik)  
The Committee commends the  steps taken by the Ministry to further the primary 
objective of the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) and takes a note of the current 
indexed airfare caps. The Committee may be apprised of the current number of 
reserved seats on RCS flights; guidelines i ssued in this regard; and whether the airlines 
are complying with these instructions. The Committee would also like to know if the 
Ministry or the airlines are publishing the airfare caps applicable for RCS on their 
website or elsewhere, for ensuing transparency of airfares.        
     
(Para 20.4) 
 
Bankruptcy of GoFirst  
The Committee notes the mitigation measures suggested by the Ministry in the event of 
sudden exit of an airline. The Committee may be informed of the applicable rules issued 
by the Ministry regarding the suspension of operations by an airline. The Committee 
would also like to know whether these rules were adhered to, by GoFirst before the 
airline went bankrupt. Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
develop a cont ingency plan in consultation with all the scheduled airline operators to 
deal with such situations, in the future. The Committee observes that the Ministry's 
response does not address the accountability or consequences for GoFirst's failure to 
comply with rules and inform the regulatory authority.         
   
(Para 21.2) 
 
Improper Behaviour of Airline Staff and other Passenger Grievances 
The Committee notes that the airlines have also noted the advice of Committee of 
requirement of coach facilities at specific stations for taking appropriate actions. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status and actual number of coaches made 
available at each station, till date. The response relies on information obtained during 
consultations with airlines, where the airlines claim they normally do not receive 
complaints about unruly behavior or manhandling. The Committee is of the opinion 
that this reliance on self -reported data may not capture the full extent of passenger 
experiences and concerns. 
(Para 22.4) 

60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
  

61 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Stakeholders consultation process followed by AERA for determination of Tariffs for 
Aeronautical Charges at Major Airports  
 
Step 1: The Airport Operator/Service Provider submits Multi Year Tariff Proposal in respect 
of determination of tariff for aeronautical service at the Major Airport. 
 
Step 2: AERA floats a Consultation Paper (CP) putting forward its proposals (duly supported 
by r easons, assumptions, and, analysis for each proposal) which is placed on the website 
along with the Airport Operator's tariff proposal (MYTP) inviting comments from 
stakeholders. AERA gives a stipulated timeline of one month to the stakeholders for the 
comments. 
 
Step 3: During this period, AERA also holds an interactive session (physical or virtual) of 
consultation with all the stakeholders giving them equal opportunity to provide verbal/written 
comments on the Consultation paper within the stipulated timeline. 
 
Step 4: Minutes of the stakeholders meeting are issued and uploaded on the AERA's website. 
 
Step 5: The stakeholders give verbal/written comments to the Authority within the stipulated 
time. Stakeholder's comments including that of t he Airport Operator and counter  comments 
on other stakeholder comments are also placed in the public domain. 
 
Step 6: AERA follows a robust and transparent Consultation process while determines tariff 
for the Aeronautical services by ensuring the following:- 
 Holding due consultations with all the Stakeholders.  
 Allowing all the Stakeholders to make their submissions to the Authority in a 
stipulated timeline.  
 Making all the decisions of the Authority fully documented and explained in the final 
Tariff Order. 
 
Step 7: In the tariff order itself the comments of the stakeholders, Airport Operator and the 
counter comments by the Airport Operator are analyzed  vis-à-vis the Authority's proposals. 
Thus, the interest of all the consumers /stakeholders are addressed through this  extensive and 
transparent consultation process. 
 
Step 8: AERA Act, 2008, also provides an opportunity to the Stakeholders to appeal before 
the Appellate Tribunal against any Orders issued by AERA. 
 
***** 

62 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

63 
 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Wednesday, the 6th February, 2024 in 
Committee Room -2, First F loor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider a nd adopt 
the following draft Reports of the Committee: - 

64 
 
1) ***1 
2) *** 
3) Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty -Third Report on the subject 'Issue of 
Fixing of Airfares' 
4) *** 
5) *** 
6) *** 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a 
brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid six draft Reports and authorized the 
Chairman to carry out minor modifications o f typographical and factual errors and 
formatting, if needed in all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A. A. 
Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. 
Muraleedharan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                      
New Delhi,                                                                                      D. S. Prasanna Kumar 
6th February, 2024                                                                                    Joint Secretary 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 