PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA



_E-mail:rse-tt@sansad.nic.in _
Website: http://rajyasabha. nic.in



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE

ONE HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT
ON

THE CARRIAGE BY ROAD BILL, 2005

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 215° MARCH, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 215" MARCH, 2006)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

MARCH, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927 (SAKA)


ey SF Ye LN

CONTENTS

Compostrton or TE ComMITTEE,

INTRODUCTION ,....................................

Revorr oF tie Commarr

Onszrvanions/ConcLusions/RECOMMENDATIONS — At A Giance,

ANNENURE ....



COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)

1. Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

Shri 5.5. Chandran

Shrimati Hema Malini

Shri Janardhana Poojary

Shri Satish Kumar Sharma

Shri Shatrughan Sinha

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri Janardan Dwivedi

LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ramdas Athawale
12, Shri Raj Babbar
13, Shri Anil Basu
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S,V, Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K, Dhanaraju
18. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20, Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23. Shri Samik Lahiri
24. Shri Sudam Marandi
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27. Shri Manabendra Shah
28. Shri Dushyant Singh
29. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30. Shri Chengara Surendran
31. Shri Umakant Yadav

Seen awewn

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director

Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary

Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

* Nominated wef 8.3.2006 vice Smt. Ambika Soni.

6)


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this
One Hundred and First Report of the Committee on the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005*

2, Inpursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon'ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 7° December, 2005 and
pending therein, to the Committee on 14% December, 2005 for examination and report within three months.
‘On the request being made by the Chairman of the Committee, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had

granted extension of time upto 30th April, 2006 for the presentation of the Report of the Committee on the
aforesaid Bill.

3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Road
Transport & Highways and Ministry of Law and Justice at its meeting held on the 12th January, 2006

4 In order to got wider views on the subject, the Committee invited the views of individuals, organisations
and institutions on the subject through advertisement in all major national dallics and vernacular newspapers
all over the country, The advertisement evoked tremendous public response and the Committee received
memoranda on the subject for consideration of the Committee. The Committee also heard the views of the
representatives of the Centre for Science and Environment, All India Transporters Welfare Association, All
India Confederation of Goods Vehicles Owners Association and All India Motor ‘Transport Congress on the
Provisions of the Bill at its meeting held on the 23rd January 2006.

5. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill during its mecting held on the
17" March, 2006. The Committee also considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same with
minor modifications on 17" March, 2006 itself.

6. — The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Department of
Road Transport & Highways and Ministry of Law and Justice for the assistance provided during deliberations
on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of the representatives of
various Associations/Stakcholders who submitted their valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.

NILOTPAL BASU
New Deu ; Chairman,
March 17,2006 “| Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Phalguna 26, 1927 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture

5 Published in the ताप of loa Exaoilnay Pan Wy Seon 2 ded TE Exuaordinary Part 11, Section 2, dated 712.2008
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part 11, No. 42711 dated 14 12 2005,

(ui)


REPORT

‘The Carriage by Road Bill, 2005 (Annexure) was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 7" December, 2005
The Bill was referred to. this Committee on the 14" December, 2005 by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
for examination and report, As per that mandate, Committee presents its report as under; —

2. The movement of goods from the place of production to the ultimate consumers through an organized
system is an important and an integral part of the economic actiyity in the country. The movement or
transportation of goods is carried by roads through trucks and similar modes, by rail, by air as air cargo and
by ships through sea routes as cargo. The proper regulation of such movement of goods and the role of
various players in the entire chain of activities is therefore necessary for the economic development of the
nation; Road transport for carriage of goods is not only viable but also a popular mode amongst the
entrepreneurs and traders of the country.

3 Despite the importance of Road Transport Industry in the economic sector, the Department of Road
Transport and Highways has unfortunately no definite information on the estimated number of “common
carriers” operating in the country, the estimated percentage of national cargo handled by common carriers,
the estimated proportion of taxed and non-taxed cargo being carried by common carriers and the estimated
annual freight charge on the cargo being handled by common carriers. On the queries made by the Committee
in this context, the Department has informed that it has no information on the number of common carriers
operating in the country as the transport industry in the country is un-organized sector and there is no system
of registration of common carriers at present. There is also no categorization of operators into ‘big’ and
‘small’ as at present ‘big’ and ‘small’ operators have not been defined. Further, the Department has also
informed the Committee that precise estimate on cargo handled by road sector is not available. However,
basing on the freight carried by the railways (for which figures are kept and published by the Ministry of
Railways), and the fact that road freight has been gaining ground in terms of larger share of the incremental
traffic (evidence for which are the growth in the sale of commercial vehicles, tyres and diesel), it has been
estimated that at present road sector accounts for around 65% of the total cargo movement in the country,
The percentage of the cargo handled by the common carriers cannot be ascertained, as there is no record for
the same. There has been no survey on the subject as per information available with the Ministry. However,
feedback from Transporters’ Associations indicates that a major part of the transport (almost 80 to 90%) is
handled by intermediaries who would be covered under the definition of ‘common carrier’, As regards the
proportion of taxed and non-taxed cargo being carried by common carriers, this information is also not
available with the Department as in the present situation, non-registration of common carriers and non-use of
standard documents would make it difficult for the States to collect such information. The information on
the estimated annual freight charge on the cargo being handled by common carriers is also not available with
the Department.

4. At present, the law relating to the rights and liabilities of the common carrier is contained in the Carriers
Act, 1865 which was enacted during the British regime on 14% February 1865, The principal purpose of the
Act, as set out in the Preamble, was to define and limit the liability of the common carrier for the loss of or
damage to consignments under their charge owing to their or their servant’s/agent’s negligence or criminal
acts.

5. The existing Act does not define consignor, consignee, consignment, registering authority, etc, It does
not contain any requirement for registration of common carrier or provision in respect of documents, which
are essential in the context of modem-day commerce like Goods Receipt, Goods forwarding Note, etc, The
liability of the common carrier in the Carriers Act was fixed as Rs.100/- at the time of enactment of the Act.


This bears no relation to the value of consignments now being carried, The Act does not have any provision
pertaining to carriage of dangerous or hazardous goods nor does it contain any provision pertaining to Force
Majeure.

6. With the passage of time many changes have taken place in the Road Transport Industry and most of
the provisions of the Act have become obsolete in meeting the present day requirements of trade and
transportation, Further, the Road Transport Industry has grown manifold and middlemen like brokers and
agents have come into existence. A need was therefore felt to repeal the Carriers Act, 1865 and to cnact a
new Act for mecting the present-day, requirements of trade and transportation.

7 Accordingly the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005 was introduced in. the Rajya Sabha on the 7" December 2005.
The long ttle of the Bill highlights the purpose of the Bill as to provide for the regulation of common carriers,
limiting their liability and declaration of value of goods delivered to them to determine their liability for loss of,
or damage to, such goods. occasioned by the negligence or criminal acts of themselves, their servants or
agents and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

8. The Department of Road Transport and Highways has informed the following brief history of the
proposed Carriage by Road Bill, 2005:—

8.1 “On the basis of feedback received in the year 2000, from Transport Operator/Association, Ministry
of Shipping (now Department of Shipping), All India Motor Transport Congress, General Insurance
Corporation, ¢tc,, the limitations of the provisions of the existing Carriers Act were examined and a
draft legislation was prepared and circulated in May 2001 for comments to various States/UTs. Comments
were received from Government of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Mizoram, Chhattisgarh, Punjab and U.T. of
Chandigarh, These were examined and appropriately incorporated in the draft Bill

8.2 Thereafter, in October, 2001 comments of the concerned Ministries/Departments of the Central
Government namely. Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Ministry of
Home Affairs, Ministry of Shipping (now Department of Shipping), Ministry of Railways, Planning
Commission, Department of Economic Affairs (Insurance Division), Department of Revenue, Ministry
of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises and Department of Posts on the proposed Carriage by Road
Bill were invited. The comments received have been examined and appropriately incorporated in the
Bill

8.3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) have
concurred in the proposal to repeal the Carriers Act, 1865 and enact the new Carnage by Road Act,

2005. The Legislative Department, Ministry of Law has prepared the draft Bill in consultation with this
Ministry.”

9. — Some of the changes that have taken place in the Road Transport Industry have been mentioned in the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005 as under: —

“{a) Various modes of transport now have separate enactments; for example, transport by the railways
is being regulated by the Railways Act, 1989. It has therefore, become necessary to re-define the
scope and applicability of the Act to road transport industry.

{b) The transport industry also has undergone a sea change since 1865. A number of players and
middlemen like brokers and agents have come into existence and play an increasing role in the
movement of goods by road.

(c) The liability specified in the existing Act of one hundred rupees has also become grossly inadequate
and irrelevant,”

10, The need for a comprehensive enactment is indicated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Carriage by Road Bill, 2005 as follows: —


10.1 “A number of deficiencies have been noticed in the course of the enforcement of the provisions of the
Carriers Act, 1865. The Act has no provision for registration of Common Carriers. The Act also had
not forescen the sophistication and complexity of the transport trade, as it exists today. The Transporters
Associations have time and again demanded that the existing Act be repealed and new Act be enacted
to cater to the present day requirements of transport, trade and commerce.

10,2 The Commission on Review of Administrative Laws constituted by the Central Government under the
Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain in its Report submitted to the Government in September, 1998 has also
recommended review of the Act.”

10.3 Keeping in view the fact that other modes of transport are already covered under separate enactments
and the need for redefining the common carrier regulation of the common carriers by the State and
provision of a transparent framework of rights and liabilities 10 govern the transactions between the
common carriers and the customers has been felt, the Government set up a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri M. Koteeswaran, the then Executive Director, Association of State Road ‘Transport
Undertakings (ASTRU) comprising members from Central Institute of Road Transport (CIRT), erstwhile
Ministry of Surface Transport, representative of All India Motor Transport Congress (AIMTC). The
Committee had recommended for repeal of the Carriers Act, 1865 and its re-enactment incorporating
the above requirements.”

11, The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Carnage by Road Bill, 2005 has outlined the objectives
sought to be achieved by the Bill as follows: —

(1) To regulate and limit the liability of the common carriers,
(i) To provide for a registration of common carriers.

(ii) To ensure proper statistical reporting in the transport sector by persons involved in transportation
business,

(iv) To regulate carriage of hazardous and dangerous goods,

(v) To provide for rule making powers to deal with emerging and changing scenario from time to
time.

(vi) To repeal the Carriers Act, 1865

12. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Road Transport and Highways on this
Bill in its sitting held on the 12th January, 2006. Thereafter, the Committce decided to invite the views of
individuals, organisations and institutions on the subject matter of the Bill through advertisement in all, major
national dailics and vernacular newspapers all over the country. Moreover, the Committee also heard the
views of various stakeholders and trade unions on the Bill in its sitting held on 23 January 2006, In response
to the public advertisement, the Committee received 32 memoranda on the subject, The Committee took up
Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on 173.2006. The Clause-hy-Clause consideration
of the Bill has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.

Clause 1(3) (Commencement)

13, Clause 1 (3) reads —“It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any
reference in this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be construed as-a reference
to the coming into force of this Act in that State,”

13.1 This Sub-Clause provides for the commencement of the proposed legislation when it is enacted. As


certain preparatory steps are required to be taken before the proposed legislation is brought into force, it is
proposed to empower the Central Government to bring it into force from a date to be notified by it.

13.2 The stakeholders have demanded that the new enactment should come into force all over India on the
same date. In response to a query by the Committee regarding the preparatory steps required prior to
bringing. into force the proposed legislation and the reasons for this provision for appointing different dates
of its commencement in different States, the Department of Road Transport and Highways has informed as
under:

“The Central Government would not require much preparation to bring the legislation into force. The
enforcement machinery for the Act is the same as that for the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. This is
already in place in all the States/UTs. The Central Government has to merely notify in the Gazette
Notification the date of commencement of the legislation.

The power to specify different dates is with the Central Government and this is only an enabling
provision to deal with unforeseen developments preventing bringing the legislation into force in some
of the States, while the rest of the country is ready for the legislation. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
also had an identical provision.”

13.3 The Committee notes that the Department has not detailed the probable impediments in bringing
the legislation into force in some of the States, while it is enforced in the rest of the country.
Moreover, the Department has categorically stated that the enforcement machinery for the proposed
enactment, which is same as that for the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, is already in place in all the
States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, feels that the commencement date of the proposed legislation
should be same throughout the country, otherwise the basic purpose of the enactment to bring
uniformity in matters connected to common carriers will be defeated. The Committee
recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 1 may be modified accordingly.

Clause 2 (Definitions)
14, Clause 2 reads —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

14.1 (a) “common carrier” means a person engaged in the business of collecting, storing, forwarding or
distributing goods to be carried by goods carriages under a goods receipt or transporting for hire of
goods from place to place by motorised transport on road, for all persons undiscriminatingly and
includes a goods bocking company, contractor, agent, broker and courier agency engaged in the
door-to-door transportation of documents, goods or articles utilising the services of a person, cither
directly or indirectly, to carry or accompany such documents, goods or articles, but does not include
the Government,

14.1,1 The Committee was informed that the present definition of the common carricr under the Carriers
Act, 1865 is as under:

“common carrier” denotes a person other than the Government, engaged in the business of transporting
property under multinodal transport document or of transporting for hire property ftom place to
place, by land or inland navigation, for all persons indiscriminately;

“person” includes any association or body of person, whether incorporated or not.”

14.1.2 The Committee was further informed that the definition of common carrier has now been modified
and expanded to include all the players providing the transportation service by road through motorized
transport.

14.1.3 The Committee feels that the above explanation furnished by the Department is satisfactory.
The Sub-Clause (a) of Clause 2 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any change,


14.2... Sub-Clause 2(b) reads - “consignee” means the person named as consignee in the goods forwarding
note;

14.2.1 Thestakeholders have suggested that the definition may be made elearer by specifying that “consignee”
means the nominated recipients of the goods on behalf of the consignor.

14.2.2 The Committce considered the suggestion and feels that the proposed definition of “consignee”
as contained in Sub-Clause (b) of Clause 2 is sufficient. The Sub-Clause (h) of Clause 2 was considered
and adopted by the Committce without suggesting any change.

14.3 Sub-Clause 2(c) reads - “consignment” means goods entrusted by the consignor to the common
carrier for carriage, the description or details of which are given in the goods forwarding nolc.

14.4 Sub-Clause 2 (0) reads - “‘consignor” means a person, named as consignor in the goods forwarding
note, by whom or on whose behalf the goods covered by such forwarding note are entrusted to the
common carrier for carriage thercof.

14.4.1 The stakeholders have pointed out to the Committee that the definition is insufficient as the common
carrier, as defined in Sub-Clause 2 (a) includes agencics involved in door-to-door transportation of documents,
goods or articles. It has been suggested that the definition of consignment may be modified as - “consignment”
means documents, goods or articles entrusted by the consignor to the common carrier for carriage, the
description or details of which are given in the goods forwarding note.

14.4.2 The Committee finds that definition of ‘consignment’ is incomplete as it docs not reflect
properly all the goods to be carried/transported by the common carrier which has been included in
Sub-Clause (a) of Clause 2 relating to the definition of “common carrier”. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the definition of ‘consignment’ may be modified as under:

“consignment” means documents, goods or articles entrusted by the consignor to the common
carrier for carriage, the description or details of which are given in the goods forwarding
note.

14.4.3. The Committee further recommends that in Sub-Clause (9) of Clause 2 also, for the words
“goods covered by such forwarding note” the words “documents, goods or articles covered by such
forwarding note” may be substituted.

14,5 Sub-Clause 2 (e) reads - “goods” includes —

(6). containers, pallets or similar articles of trarisport used to consolidate goods: and

(i) animals or livestock.
14.6 Sub-Clause 2 (f) reads - “goods forwarding note” means the document executed under section 8.
14.7 Sub-Clause 2 (2) reads - “goods receipt” means the receipt issued under section 9

14.8 Sub-Clause 2 (h) reads - “person” includes any association or body of persons, whether incorporated
or not, a road transport booking company, contractor and an agent or a broker carrying on the business of
a common casrier.

14.9 Sub-Clause 2 (i) reads - “prescribed” means prescribed by rules mad« under this Act.

14.9.1 The Committee feels that the above Clauses are self-explanatory, The Sub-Clauses (९) to (i)
of Clause 2 were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any changes.


14.10 Sub-Clause 2 (|) reads - “registering authority” means a State Transport Authority or a Regional
Transport Authority constituted under section 68 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988

14.10.1 The stakeholders viz, Transporters Associations, demanded that there should be one central regulatory
authority on the lines of TRAI ete., under the Department of Road Transport and Highways for all registration
and control oyer the transport operators under this proposed legislation. They have argued that the registering
authority or motor tribunals etc, under Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 have a totally different domain and expertise
as issues before them are totally different and therefore they are not at all equipped to handle the responsibilities
under this enactment,

14,10.2 The Committee feels that in view of the countrywide network of common carriers, the
setting up of a Central regulatory authority would give rise to practical difficulties in the working of
the proposed legislation. Further, it would be easier to enforce the provisions of the new enactment
through the enforcement machinery already in place under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The
Committee, therefore, considers that the proposed Clause needs no modification.

14,10.3 The Sub-Clause (j) of Clause 2 was accordingly considered and adopted by the Committee
without suggesting any change.

14.11 Sub-Clause 2 (k) reads - “registration” means the registration granted or renewed under sub-section
(5) of section 4.

14.11.1 The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clause (k) of Clause
2 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change,

Clause 3 (Persons not to engage in business of common carrier without registration)

15. Clause 3 reads - (1) No person shall engage in the business of a common carrier, after the commencement
of this Act, unless he has been granted a certificate of registration.

(2) Any person who is engaged, whether wholly or partly, in. the business of a common carrier,
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall,

{a) apply for a registration within ninety days from the date of such commencement:

(b) cease to engage in such business on the expiry of one hundred and cighty days from the date
of such commencement unless he has applied for registration and the certificate of registration
has been granted by the registering authority.

15.1 The Committee observes that this Clause provides that after the commencement of the proposed
legislation, no person will engage, whether wholly or partly, in the business of common carrier
without obtaining a registration under the proposed legislation.

15.1.1 The Sub-Clauses (1), (2)(a) and (2)(b) of Clause 3 were considered and adopted by the
Committee without suggesting any change,

15.2 Sub-Clause 3(3) reads - The registering authority shall take decision on the application for registration
within ninety days from the date of receipt of the application.

15.2.1 This provision makes it mandatory for the registering authority to “take decision” on the application
for registration within ninety days from the date of receipt of the application. In response to a specific query,
the Committee was informed by the Department as under: —

“The decision on application does not necessarily mean grant of certificate of registration. However,


the registering authority has to decide whether to grant certificate of registration or not within 90 days
from the date of receipt of the application, In case, the decision is in the negative, he has to indicate in
writing the reasons for refusal and he has to provide an opportunity to the applicant of being heard
This has to be done within 60 days from the receipt of the application.

A period of 90 days is the outer-most limit for the registering authority to take a decision. It does not
mean that the decision can not be given before this period.”

13.2.2 The Committee notes that as per the proviso to Sub-Clause (5) of Clause 4 of the Bill, no
application for the grant or renewal of a certificate of registration shall be refused by the
registering authority unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard and reasons
for such refusal are given in writing by the registering authority within sixty days from the date of
receipt of such application. It is quite clear that the procedure for dealing with an application for
registration provided in the proposed enactment makes it incumbent on the registering authority to
take a decision to refuse an application for grant or renewal of registration much before the period
of sixty days from the receipt of the application. The registering authority has to take such decision
to refuse the grant/renewal of registration and thereafter give the applicant an opportunity of being
heard and give reasons for refusal in writing within sixty days from the date of receipt of the
application. Therefore, if sixty days haye elapsed from the date of receipt of an application without
any speaking orders regarding refusal of registration, the only course of action left for the registering
authority is to grant the certificate of registration to the applicant.

15.2.3. The Committee further notes that the basic objective of Clause 3 as indicated in notes on
Clauses is that after the commencement of the proposed legislation no person will engage, whether
wholly or partly, in the business of common carrier without obtaining a registration under the
Proposed legislation. It is the Clause 4, which sets out the procedure for application for grant or
renewal of registration by issuance of appropriate certificate for carrying on the business of common
carrier. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 3 should be omitted.
However, Sub-Clause (5) of Clause 4 should be modified to make it mandatory for the registering
authority to grant a certificate of registration or renew it within ninety days of receipt of such
application,

Clause 4 (Application for grant or renewal of registration)

16. Clause 4 reads - (1) Any person, who is engaged or intends to engage in the business of a common
carrier. shall apply for the grant or renewal of a certificate of registration for carrying on the business of
common carrier to the registering authority.

16.1 The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clause 4 (1) was
considered and adopted by the Committce without suggesting any change.

16.2 Sub-Clause 4(2) reads - An application under sub-section (1) shall be made, to the registering authority
haying jurisdiction in the area in which the applicant resides or has his principal place of business in
such form and manner and accompanied by such fees payable to the registering authority as may be
prescribed.

16.2.1 The stakeholders have suggested that the maximum amount of fees for registration and renewal of
registration should be prescribed in the enactment itself.

16.2.2 The Committee feels that such matters, as per the normal practice, is best left to subordinate
legislation, The Committee, however, expects that while making rules, a reasonable amount of fees
will be fixed for the purpose of registration. The Committee also desires that keeping in view the


increasing use of Internet in today’s trade and commerce, the electronic submission of application
for registration may also be encouraged by making provisions therefor in the rules.

16.2.3 The Sub-Clause (2) of Clause 4 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any change subject to the above observations,

16.3 Sub-Clause 4(3) reads - An application for grant or renewal of registration for carrying on the business
of a common carrier from a branch office which is outside the jurisdiction of the registering authority
referred to in sub-section (2) shall be made to such registering authority in whose jurisdiction the
branch office is situated in such form and manner and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed

Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where an applicant intends to
have two or more branch offices or main office and branch office or offices within the jurisdiction of
4 single State or Union Territory he shall be required to make only one application for registration of
such offices,

16.3.1 The stakcholders have submitted that the concept of multiple registrations for carrying out business
of common carrier from branch offices is undesirable. It has been suggested that there should be only one
registration, /.e., for the principal place of business and the details of the branch offices, if any, should be
endorsed on the Certificate itself or the Registration Certificate should have an Annexure showing the list of
branches, if any. Further, the application for registration of a branch office/offices should be made to the
registering authority in respect of the principal place of business itself. The stakeholders have contended that
the relevant provision in the Bill as it exists at present would result in cumbersome procedure and unnecessary
harassment and they feel that the Suggestions made above would simplify the procedure.

16.3.2 The Committee apprehends that the provision for multiple registrations would make the
procedure unnecessarily lengthy and cumbersome, which can be easily avoided. Moreover, as provided
in the pro’ to Sub-Clause. (6) of Clause 4, the validity of the registration in respect of branch
offices is restricted to the validity of the registration granted in respect of the main office. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be only one registration, i.c., for the principal
place of business and the details of the branch offices, if any, should be endorsed on the Registration
Certificate itself and such endorsement should be made by the registering authority which issued
the Registration Certificate.

16.3.3 The Committee recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 4 and the explanation thereunder
may be modified in the light of the above observations.

16.4 Sub-Clause 4(4) reads - A registering authority shall, before granting or renewing a certificate of
registration, satisfy itself that —

(a) where the applicant is an individual, he has not been convicted of any offence involving moral
turpitude;

(b) the applicant has intimate knowledge of goods or freight business;

(c) the office of the applicant is either owned by the applicant or is taken on lease by him or it or is
hired in his or its name and the premises has adequate space and facilities for warehousing of
goods and to handle the loading, unloading, storage and transhipment of goods;

(d) the financial resources of the applicant are sufficient to meet the liability for any loss of, or
damage to, consignment and for the efficient management of business of the common carrier;

(९) the applicant fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed.


16.4.1 The stakeholders have pointed out that the criteria/conditions specified in the Bill to be verified by
the registering authority prior to grant or renewal of a certificate of registration are vague and gives discretionary
power to the officials thereby making the entire processes susceptible to corruption. Further, the present
language of the provision would result in multiple legal interpretations, which will lead to unnecessary and
avoidable litigations, They have suggested that the criteria for grant or rejection of application for Certificate
for Registration should be clearly defined. The suggestions put forward by the stakcholders in respect of the
conditions specified in sub-Clause (4) of Clause 4 are as under: -

(i) The Sub-Clause 4(4)(a) has nothing to do with the business of common carriers and is totally
discretionary and it also amounts to unwanted moral policing. Therefore, this Clause should be
omitted,

(i) In Sub-Clause 4(4)(b), the words “intimate knowledge of goods or freight business” should be
defined as having at least 2 officials having more than one year experience in any transport
organization or 2 officials having diploma/degree in transportation or logistics courses

(ili) With reference to Sub-Clause 4(4)(c), the office of a common carrier and its warehouse for
storing the goods may be different premises and therefore, these two distinct premises should be
reflected in the Clause, The present language of the Clause requires that the office of the applicant
itself should have adequate warchousing facilities, Further, the “adequate space and facilities for
warehousing of goods” needs to be clearly defined as it could become a bone of contention at .the
time of registration. It has been suggested that adequate space can be minimum of 500 sq. ft. on
road not 1655 than 20 ft. wide and adequate facility can be one weighing machine. one fire
extinguisher and one official with table and chair and necessary documents.

(iv) In Sub-Clause 4(4)(d), the meaning of sufficient financial resources needs to be clearly defined,
otherwise it lead to confusion and therefore, it would be appropriate to quantify the “financial
resources” in some objective manner. It has been suggested that it should be refined as the
applicant being the owner of atleast one truck in the name of the company or partner or director
and/or haying a working capital of atleast Rupees Five lacs.

(v) ॥ Sub-Clause 4(4)(e), the conditions should be prescribed only in consultation with the transport
organizations and these conditions should be clear, well defined and practically enforceable

16.4.2, It has also been requested by the stakeholders that suitable provisions should be added to facilitate
the initial registration of the existing common carriers overriding the conditions specified in sub-Clause (4) of
Clause 4, In this context, it has been suggested that if any existing common carrier fulfills any one of the
following conditions, it should be granted the Certificate of Registration, overriding any other criteria mentioned
in Sub-Clause (4) of Clause 4:

(i) Existing Transportation work with any organization on the date of commencement of this act

(ui) Owner of at least one registered goods vehicle in name of the transport company or in name of its
proprictor, partner or director etc

(iit) Member of All India Transporters Welfare Association or any other registered transport association,

16.4.3 The Committee agrees that the terms used in Sub-Clause (4) of Clause 4, namely, offence
inyolying moral turpitude; intimate knowledge of goods or freight business; adequate space and
facilities ior warchousing and sufficient financial resources are vague and allows unbridled powers
and unrestricted discretion to the registering authority, The conditions are also susceptible to varied
legal interpretations and thereby inciting avoidable litigation. The Committee also notes that no


rule making power has been given to the Central Government to cover these aspects and Clause 20
empowers the Central Government only to frame rules prescribing the “other conditions” as
mentioned at Sub-Clause (4)(c) of Clause 4. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Sub-
Clause (4) of Clause 4 should be modified by omitting Sub-Clauses (4)(a) to (4)(d) of Clause 4 as
under:

4(4) A registering authority shall, before granting or renewing a certificate of registration,
satisfy itself that the applicant fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed.

164.4 The Committee expects that while making the rules under this Clause, unambiguous
conditions will be prescribed in future.

16.4.5 As regards the suggestion for a new Clause for easy initial registration for the existing
common carriers, the Committee feels that the purpose of the Bill to provide for regulation of
common carriers will be defeated if the process of registration of persons already engaged in the
business of common carrier is allowed without ensuring the compliance of the rules proposed to be
framed under the enactment.

16.5 Sub-Clause 4(5) reads - The registering authority may, on reccipt of an application under sub-section
(2) or sub-section (3) and after satisfying itself that the applicant fulfils the requirements of sub-
section (4), grant the certificate of registration or renew it, as the case may be, for carrying on the
business of a common carrier, in such form and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:

Provided that no application for the grant or renewal of a certificate of registration shall be refused by
the registering authority unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard and the reasons for
such refusal are given in writing by the registering authority within sixty days from the date of receipt of
such application.

16.5.1 As already recommended by the Committee at para 15.2.3 above, Sub-Clause (5) of Clause 4
should be modified to make it mandatory for the registering authority to grant the certificate of
registration or renew it within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the application.

16.6 Sub-Clause 4(6) reads - A certificate of registration granted or renewed under sub-section (5) shall be
valid for a period of ten years from the date of such grant or renewal, as the case may be:

Provided that in the case of registration in respect of branch offices referred to in sub-section (3), the
validity of such registration shall be restricted to the validity of the registration granted in respect of the main
office.

166.1 The Committee feels that the above Clause is self -explanatory. The Sub-Clause (6) of
Clause 4 was considered and adopted by the Committce without suggesting any change.

16.7 Sub-Clause 4(7) reads - The holder of a certificate of registration shall-
(a) maintain a register in such form and manner as may be prescribed;

(b) not shift the main office mentioned in the certificate of registration without the prior approval in
writing of the registering authority which granted the registration;

(c) submit to the registering authority under whose jurisdiction the main office is located and the
Transport Research Wing of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with
road transport and highways such information and return as may be prescribed within one hundred
and twenty days after the thirty-first day of March every year;



(d) display at a prominent place in his or its main office or branch offices, the certificate of registration
in original or certified copy thereof attested by the concerned registering authority.

16.7.1 The Sub-Clause (7) (a) of Clause 4 was considered and adopted by the Committce without
suggesting any change.

16.7.2 With reference to Sub-Clause (7)(b) of Clause 4, the Committee feels that it will be prudent
to specify a time frame within which the registering authority has to give its approval for the shifting
of the main office. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Sub-Clause (7)(b) of Clause 4 should
be modified on the lines indicated below:

(b) submit an application for shifting the main office mentioned in the certificate of registration
to the registering authority which granted the registration and such registering authority
shall grant or refuse permission for the same within thirty days from the date of receipt
of such application:

Provided that no application for shifting the main offics shall be refused unless the applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard and reasons for such refusal are given in
writing by the registering authority.

16.7.3 The Sub-Clause 4 (7)(c) was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any change subject to the observation that the rules to be framed thereunder should encourage
clectronic submission of the information/returns.

16.7.4 With reference to Sub-Clause (7)(d) of Clause 4, the Committee is of the view that the
Certification of Registration should be displayed in the main office and in each branch office, if any.
The requirement of the certified copy to be attested by the concerned registering authority can be
waived and instead it may be provided that the copy of the Certification of Registration should be
attested by the concerned registering authority or by a notary or by a gazetted officer of the
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that at Sub-Clause (7)(d) of Clause 4 may be
modified on the lines indicated below:

(d) display at a prominent place in his or its main office and each branch office, if any, the
certificate of registration in original or certified copy thereof attested by the concerned
registering authority or a notary or a gazetted officer of the Government.

Clause 5 (Suspension or cancellation of registration)

17. Clause 5 reads - (1) If the registering authority is satisfied that the holder of a certificate of registration
has failed to comply with any of the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 4 or a complaint is made
against such holder by any consignee or consignor, it may give a notice by registered post or through
electronic media or by any other verifiable means to the holder of the registration to rectify the same
within a period of thirty days and in case such holder fails to do so, it may-

(i) suspend the registration for a specified period pending an inquiry; or

(४). revoke the registration of the main office or of a. particular branch office in case there are five or
more complaints in succession which are proved to be true after an inquiry

Provided that when the registration. is suspended or revoked, the holder of the registration shall
surrender the certificate of registration to the registering authority.

(2) No registration shall be suspended or revoked under sub-section (1) unless the holder of the


12

registration is given an opportunity of being heard in the inquiry and the reasons for such
Suspension or revocation, as the case may be, are given in writing by the registering authority.

(3) The holder of a registration may, at any time, surrender the registration to the registering
authority which granted the registration, and on. such surrender the registering authority
shall, after obtaining declaration from the holder of the registration that no liability is
outstanding against him and, he would discharge such liability if he is held liable, revoke the
registration.

171 With reference to Sub-Clause (1)(i) of Clause 5, the Committce is of the opinion that the
common carriers should also be penalized for contravention of the provisions pertaining to axle load
und gross vehicle weight, as contained in Section 113 and 114 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The
Committce desires that the Department should not let go off the opportunity presented through the
proposed legislation to tackle the menace of overloading. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Department towards the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the matter of
persistent overloading by trucks and the undesirable compounding of offences by the various State
Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Sub-Clause (1)(1) of Clause 5 should
be modified to include the failure of the common carrier to comply with the provisions of Sections
113 and 124 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 as a ground for the suspension or revocation of
registration.

17.2 In this context, the Committee feels that despite improvement in the quality and network of
roads and technical upgradation of vehicles, the load bearing capacity of the trucks has not been
revised since Independence, which is restricting the ton per K.M. capacity. Further, if the Registered
Laden Weight (RLW) is increased by amending the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, there would be an
increase in Government revenuc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should consider enhancing the axle weight/RLW for goods carriers.

17.3 With reference to Sub-Clause (1)(ii) of Clause 5, the Committee sought specific clarification from the
Department that if four successive complaints haye been proved true upon enquiry and the fifth complaint is
proved as not established, whether the registration is liable to be revoked if the sixth complaint is also proved
to be truc. In response, the Department informed the Committee that by a strict reading of the provision as
it stands, the registration is not to be revoked if five complaints do no occur in succession and that perhaps
the words ‘in succession’ in the present formulation needs to be deleted.

174 The Committee is of the view that the proposed procedure of having five valid complaints in
succession may defeat the spirit of the legislation which stipulates the regulations of common carrier
and सा may encourage erring operators, The Committce, therefore, recommends that the words
“in succession” appearing in Sub-Clause (1) (ii) of Clause 5 may be deleted. The Committee also
desires that the Department may also review the proviso under said Sub-Clause and consider whether
in a time-frame should be included for the surrender of the registration certificate after the
registration is suspended or revoked.

17,5 The Committee feels that Clause 5, Sub-Cluuse (2) is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clause (2) of
Clause 5 was considered and adopted by the Committce without suggesting any change.

17.6 In the context of suspension/revocation of registration provided at Sub-Clause (3) Clause 5, the
Committee asked the Department whether the holder of registration can carry on the business of a common
carrier from another branch office if the registration in respect of a particular branch office is revoked by the
concemed registering authority. The Department informed that since the certificate of registration is common
for a State, the common carrier cannot carry on business in the State in which the certificate of registration
has been revoked. However, it is possible that he may not have committed any breach of the legislation in


13

other States, and therefore he could carry on business in other States till the State Authorities similarly
prosecute the common carrier and revoke the certificate of registration of common carrier.

17.7 It was also enquired by the Committee whether a common carrier, whose certificate of registration has
been revoked, can again apply for registration with the same or different registering authority. The Department
has replied that this is not specifically covered in the Bill and that it is proposed that in the rules to be made
under the Act [under Section 4(4)(e)] disclosure of revocation and the reasons therefor would be obtained
from the applicant in the application form, which would cnable the registering authorities to take appropriatc
decision im terms of Clause 4(4) of the Bill.

17.8 The Committee finds that the situation, wherein a common carrier prosecuted in one State
being allowed to carry on the business in other State, to be anomalous as an offender can use the
shield of multiple registrations to carry on the business. As recommended by the Committee, this
situation can also be tackled if there is only one registration, ie., in respect of the principal place of
business and the branch offices are endorsed in the certificate of registration. In this manner, if a
common carricr is found to have contravened any of the provisions of the enactment or if five or
more complaints against it are found to be established, the common carricr can be made to stop his
business altogether as his registration certificate will be surrendered to the concerned registering
authority. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable provisions should be inserted in
the proposed legislation to ensure that offenders are dealt with strictly and put out of business
altogether.

17.9 The Committee also expects that while framing rules, the disclosure of revocation and the
reasons therefor would be obtained from the applicant in the application form.

17.10 With reference to Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 5, the Committee has already recommended at
para 16.3.2 above that registration in respect of branch office/offices should be endorsed in the
certificate of registration for the main office itself. The Committee recomimends that a proviso
should be added to Sub-Clause 5(3) to provide for the deletion of an endorsement in respect of a
branch office also.

Clause 6 (Appeal)

18. Clause 6 reads - (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering authorily refusing to grant or
renew a certificate of registration or suspending or revoking a registration under this Act, may, within
sixty days from the date of such order, appeal to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal constituted
under sub-section (2) of section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.

(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred in duplicate in the form of a memorandum
setting forth the grounds of objection to the order of the registering authority and shall be
accompanied by such fee as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the
Official Gazette,

{3) Without preyudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2), the provisions of sub-sections
(1) and (2) of section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, as in force immediately before the
commencement of this Act, with regard to appeal, shall, as far as may, apply 10 every appeal as
if the provisions aforesaid were enacted by this Act subject to the modification that any reference
therein to the “permit” shall be construed as a reference to the “registration”

18.1 With reference to Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 6, the Committee feels that the business of common
carrier, the nature of disputes likely to arise ete. would be alien to tribunals set up under the Motor


14

Vehicles Act, 1988. Therefore, the Conynittee has reasonable doubts about the expertise available
in the tribunals to deal with the cases under the Proposed enactment. The Committee desires that
the Department should duly consider this aspect and recommends that the Department should take
adequate steps to equip the tribunals with necessary competence to handle all the issues of common
carriers likely to be brought before it under the proposed enactment,

18.2 As regards Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 6, the Committee feels that the same are self
explanatory. The Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 5 were considered and adopted by the Committee
without suggesting any changes.

Clause 7 (Submission of annual return)

19, Clause 7 reads - The State Transport Authority in respect of each State or Union Territory shall
submit annually, 10 the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with road transport
and highways a consolidated annual return giving the details of the goods carried by the common
carriers in that State or the Union Territory, as the case may be, on the basis of the returns received
from the holders of the registration as specified under Clause (०) of sub-section (7) of Section 4.

19.1 The Committee notes that a provision for submission of annual returns to the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government dealing with road transport and highways already exists in
the proposed enactment [Sub-Clause (7) (c) of Clause 4]. Further, Clause 7 also neither provide for
prescription of any format for submission of annual returns nor stipulates any time-frame-therefor,
as mentioned at Sub-Clause (7) (c) of Clause 4. The Committee feels that the information/returns
envisaged under Sub-Clause (7) (0) of Clause 4 would be voluminous and the additional annual
returns sought under Clause 7 would be repetitive in nature. This situation can be avoided by
prescribing suitable formats under Sub-Clause (7)(c) of Clause 4 itself and omitting Clause 7
altogether, The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 7 may be omitted and the information
Proposed to be collected under that Clause may be obtained by prescribing suitable formats under
Sub-Clause (7)(c) of Clause 4, The Committee also recommends that the succeeding Clauses namely,
Clauses 8 to 22 may be renumbered as Clauses 7 to 21,

Clause 8 (Goods forwarding note)

20, Clause 8 reads - (1) Every consignor shall execute a goods forwarding note, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, which shall include a declaration about the value of the consignment.

(2) The consignor shall be responsible for the correctness of the particulars furnished by him in the

goods forwarding note.

(3) The consignor shall indemnify the common carrier against any damage suffered by him by
reason of incorrectness or incompleteness of the particulars on the goods forwarding note.

20.1 In respect of Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 8, the Committee notes that the goods forwarding note,
to be prescribed by the rules, executed by the consignor will give details of the consignment. The
Committee recommends that the goods forwarding note should also contain a declaration whether
the goods are of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. The consignor, who deals with the
goods, would be in a better position to declare the nature of the goods and it would not be appropriate
to shift the burden of verifying the nature of goods to the common carriers, The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 8 may be modified on the lines indicated below:

8... (1) Every consignor shall execute a goods forwarding note, in such form and manner as
may be prescribed, which shall include declarations about the value of the consignment
and goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life.



16

20.2 The Committee feels that Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 8 are self explanatory. The Sub-
Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 8 were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any changes.

Clause 9 (Goods receipt)
21. Clause 9 reads - (1) A common carrier shall,
(a) in case where the goods are to be loaded by the consignor, on the completion of such loading: or

(b) गा any other case, on the acceptance of the goods by him, issue a goods receipt in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The goods receipt shall be issued in triplicate and the original shall be given to the consignor

(3). The goods receipt shall be prima facie evidence of the weight or measure and other particulars of
the goods and the number of packages stated therein.

21.1 The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clauses (1)(«), (1)(b),
(2) and (3) of Clause 9 were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any
changes.

21.2 The stakeholders have requested that in the interest of free trade and commerce, the liability of the
common carrier for loss of or damage of any consignment or delay in delivery thereof should be allowed to
be settled between the consignor and the common carrier. They have, therefore, raised objections to the
Clause 10 of the proposed legislation, which fixes liability at a maximum of ten thousand rupees: They have
also submitted that if the freedom to settle the liability is allowed to the interested parties viz. the consignor
and common carrier, there would be no need for the provisions contained in Clause 11 which provide for
payment of higher rate of charge or undertaking higher risk.

21.3 The Committee feels that in order to ensure formal agreements between the parties in the
matter of liability of the common carrier for the loss of or damage of any consignment or delay in
delivery thereof, suitable provision needs to be added in Clause 9. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a new Sub-Clause may be added under Clause 9 on the following lines:

(4) The goods receipt shall include an undertaking by the common carrier about the amount
of its liability for the loss of or damage of any consignment or delay in delivery thereof.

21.4 The attention of the Committce was also drawn by the stakcholders to the existing use by the common
carriers of goods note/consignment note approved by the Indian Bank Association (IBA). They have demanded
that such notes should henceforth be not applicable to transporters and that the transactions of transporters
should be governed by the format of goods forwarding note and goods receipt as proposed in the Bill,

21.5 The Committee expects that the Department will take suitable measures to stop all formal
and informal arrangements existing in the transport industry at present and will strictly implement
the provisions of the proposed enactment uniformly throughout the country.

Clause 10 (Liability of common carrier)
&
Clause 11 (Rates of charge to be fixed by common carrier for carriage of
consignment at a higher risk rate)

22. Clause 10 reads - (1) The liability of the common carrier for loss of, or damage to any consignment,
shall be limited to ten thousand rupees or the value of consignment declared in the goods forwarding


16

note, whichever is less, unless the consignor or any person duly authorised in that behalf have expressly
undertaken to pay higher risk rate fixed by the common carrier under section 11.

(2) The liability of the common carrier in case of. any delay up to such period as may be mutually
agreed upon by and between the consignor and the common carrier and specifically provided in
the goods forwarding note including the consequential loss or damage to such consignment shall
be limited to.the amount of freight charges where such loss, damage or delay took place while the
consignment was under the charge of such carrier:

Provided that beyond the period so agreed upon in the goods forwarding note, compensation
shall be payable in accordance with sub-section (1) of Section 11;

Provided further that the common carrier shall not be liable if such carrier proves that such
loss of, or damage to, the consignment or delay in delivery thereof, had not taken place due to his
fault or neglect or that of his servants or agents thereof,

23. Clause 11 reads - Every common carrier may require payment for the higher risk undertaken by him
In Carrying a particular consignment at such rate of charge as he may fix and correspondingly, his
liability would be in accordance with the terms as may be agreed upon with the consignor:

Provided that to entitle such carrier to claim Payment at a rate higher than his ordinary rate of charge,
he should have exhibited a printed or written notice, in the vernacular language of the State, of the
higher rate of charge in the place or premises where he carries on the business of common carrier,

23.1 In addition to the observation made in respect of Clause 9, the Committee was informed by the
stakeholders that there is no necessity for fixing any limit on the liability of the common carrier as the
common carrier is fully liable for safe and timely delivery of the cargo irrespective of its cost/value against
charging certain freight. It has also been pointed out that already there is free play of market forces and
freight rates can vary from one consignment to another, from one consignor to another depending upon the
freight size, distance and other services rendered to the consignor. This position has also been supported by
the Indian Foundation of Transport Research and Training (IFTRT), and independent body engaged in the
field of research and analysis in transport and automotive sector. This organization has submitted that the bill
has unnecessarily dragged the linkage of liability and risk with freight rates and that this should be left to the
mutual understanding of the common carrier and consignor as is being practiced today. It has been contended
that nothing new has happened to segregate liability and risk in relation to freight charge in the bill. The
stakeholders are also unanimous in their request for the omission of Clause 11 in foto. It has been submitted
that the deletion of any high risk rate is most equitable and appropriate and that the ‘competition in the market
can take care of the so called high risk or low risk situation,

23.2 The Committee also enquired from the Department the rationale for limiting the liability to ten thousand
Tupecs under Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 10 as the liability of the common carriers for loss/damage to any
consignment or delay in delivery thercof can be determined by contract between the parties. In reply, the
Department informed as under: -

“It is envisaged that in most cases, there may not be a formal contract between consignor and the
common carrier. In such cases, the ‘goods forwarding note’ would constitute the sole contract document
The consignor may settle for lower limits to carriers” liability in case the value of the consignment
carried is not more than Rs.10,000/- or there is lower probability of loss or damage and lower freight
tates are to be obtained. The rationale for limiting liability at Rs.10,000/- is that Rs.100/- in the existing
Act is too low and that there is a need to strike a balance between the right of the consignor and the
responsibility of the common carrier to provide for an acceptable middle-ground for low freight rates


in the country. In case, the consignment is of a high-value nature or the consignor is risk-averse, he
could go for higher compensation, under Clause 11",

23.3 The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department and feels that the amount
and extent of liability of the common carrier for the loss of or damage of any consignment or delay
in delivery thereof can be regulated by an agreement/undertaking to be reflected in the goods
receipt as already recommended by the Committee. It is therefore recommended that Sub-Clauses
(1) and (2) of Clause 10 and proviso thereunder should be substituted by a modified Clause 10 on the
following lines:

10. The liability of the common carrier for the loss of, or damage of any consignment or delay
in delivery thereof shall be limited to the amount mutually agreed upon by and between
the consignor or any person duly authorised in that behalf and the common carrier or any
person duly authorised in that behalf and expressly undertaken by the common carrier,
as specifically mentioned in the goods receipt:

Provided that the common carrier shall not be liable if such carrier proves that such loss
of, or damage to the consignment or delay in delivery thereof, had not taken place due to
his fault or neglect or that of his servants or agents thereof.

23.4 The Committee also recommends that Clause 11 may be omitted in view of the observations/
recommendations of the Committee regarding the provision for mutual agreement between the
consignor and the common carricr on the amount and extent of liability for the loss of, or damage of
any consignment or delay in delivery thereof. The Committee further recommends that the subsequent
Clauses may be renumbered accordingly.

Clause 12 (Conditions limiting exonerating the liability of the common carrier)

24. Clause 12 reads - (1) Every common carrier shall be liable to the consignor for the loss or damage to
any consignment in accordance with the goods forwarding note, where such loss or damage has
arisen on account of any criminal act of the common carrier, or any of his servants or agents

(2) In any suit brought against the common carrier for the loss damage or non-delivery of consignment,
it shall not be necessary for the plaintiff to prove that such loss, damage or non-delivery was
owing to the negligence or criminal act of the common carrier, or any of his servants or agents

(3) Where any consignment has been detained for examination or scrutiny by a competent authority
and upon such examination or scrutiny it is found that certain prohibited goods have been entrusted
to the common carricr by the consignor which have not been described in the goods forwarding
note, the cost of such examination or scrutiny shall be borne by the consignor and the common
carrier shall not be liable for any loss, damage or deterioration caused by such detention of the
consignment for examination or scrutiny:

Provided that the onus of proving that such incorrect description of goods in the goods
forwarding note was received from the consignor shall be on the common carrier.

Explanation- For the purposes of this section, “competent authority” means any person or
authority who is empowered to examine or scrutinize goods by or under any law for the time
being in force to secure compliance of provisions of that law.

24.1 The Committee fecls that in Clause 12, Sub-Clauses (1) and (2) are self-explanatory. The Sub-
Clauses (1) and (2) of Clause 12 were considered and adopted by the Committce without suggesting
any changes.


18

24.2 In respect of Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 12, the stakeholders have pointed out that it is quite common
for the consignor to hand over such goods to the common carrier on which due taxes like Sales Tax, Excise
or Customs Tax are unpaid or insufficiently paid. It has been requested that sub-Clause (3) of Clause 12
should be modified to shift the burden of such goods on the consignor.

24.3. The Committee agrees that a common carrier should not be penalized for the fault of a consignor
and therefore recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 12 may be modified on the following lines:

(3)

Where any consignment has been detained for examination or Scrutiny by a competent
authority and upon such examination or scrutiny it is found that certain prohibited goods
or goods on which due tax was not paid or insufficiently paid have been entrusted to the
common carrier by the consignor which have not been described in the goods forwarding
note, the cost of such examination or scrutiny shall be borne by the consignor and the
common carrier shall not be liable for any loss, damage or deterioration caused by such
detention of the consignment for examination or scrutiny:

Provided that the onus of proving that such incorrect description of goods in the
goods forwarding note was received from the consignor shall be on the common carrier.

£xplanation- For the purposes of this section, “competent authority” means any person
or authority who is empowered to examine or scrutinize goods by or under any law for the
time being in force to secure compliance of provisions of that law.

Clause 13 (Provision for carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life)

25. Clause 13 reads - (1) No goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life shall be carried bya
common carrier except in accordance with such procedure and after complying with such safeguards
as may be prescribed,

(2)

७)

The Central Government may, by rules made in this behalf, specify the goods of dangerous or
hazardous nature to human life and the label or class of labels to be carried in, or displayed on, the
motor vehicle or such goods in the course of transportation,

Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every common
carrier shall scrutinise and ensure before starting transportation of any consignment containing
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life that the consignment is covered by, one or
more insurance policies under a contract of insurance in respect of such goods providing relief in
case of death or injury to a person or damage to any property or the consignment, if an accident
takes place.

25.1 In connection with the provisions of Clause 13, during the oral evidence of the Director, Centre for
Science and Environment (CSE) held on the 23४ January 2006, it was submitted before the Committee as

under:

“Currently, the transportation of hazardous material is covered under:

1,

The Environment Protection Act 1986 and the Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling)
Amendment Rules, 2000;

The Motor Vehicle Act 1988;
The Public Liability Insurance Act 1999.

Under the Central Motor Vehicle Rules 1989, the responsibility of the transporters or owner of
goods carriage is clearly defined (see section 132). It says that it shall be the responsibility of the


19

owner of the goods carriage transporting any dangerous or hazardous goods to ensure the following;
namely;

a. That the goods carriage has a valid registration to carry the said goods and the said vehicle is safe
for the transport of the said goods, and

b. The vehicle is equipped with necessary first aid, safety equipment, toolbox and antidotes as may
be necessary to contain any accident.

Every owner of the goods carriage shall, before undertaking the transportation satisfy himself
that the information given by the consignor is full and accurate in all respects and corresponds to
the classification of such goods specified in rule 137,

The owner has to ensure that the driver is given all relevant information in writing and has
sufficient understanding of the nature of such goods and is capable of taking appropriate action
in case of emergency,

The owner of the goods carriage and the consignor shall lay down the route for each trip; and
timetable for each trip to the destination and back.

In addition, section 129 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, lays down the conditions which
need to be complied with by the owner of the goods carriage transporting any dangerous or
hazardous goods,

It is important to note that the Motor Vehicles Act clearly stipulates that “provided that in the case
of a vehicle carrying or meant to carry. dangerous or hazardous goods, there shall also be a policy
of insurance under the Public Liability Act 1991 .”

The Public Liability Insurance Act 1991, says: “Every owner shall take out, before he starts
handling hazardous substances, one of more insurance policies.” In addition, that no insurance
policy taken out or renewed by an owner shall be for an amount less than the amount of paid-up
capital of the undertaking handling any hazardous substance and owned or controlled by that
owner, and more than the amount, not exceeding fifty crore rupees, as may be prescribed,”

This act also provides for the verification and publication of any accident by the Collector and the
award of relief It is stipulated and the award to the affected parties will be given expeditiously and
within 15 days from the date of the award. The award will be paid by the insurance company
within 30 days and from the Relief Fund (set up through compulsory contributions from owners
of hazardous material). The act also provides for strict liability of the owners, specifying that in
case of default by the insurer or owner, the amount shall be recovered from the owner or as the
case may be, the insurer as arrears of land reyenue or of public demand.

It is therefore, necessary that at the very least the relevant provisions of these existing acts are
specified in the proposed Bill.”

25.2 The attention of the Commitice was also drawn to the fact that the, proposed Icgislation does not
address the emerging concerns about hazardous wastc. It was submitted before the Committee that
Government regulations for transportation of hazardous substances are beginning to require end-use certificates
from the consignor to ensure that the destination of the hazardous waste is clearly stipulated. This is to make
sure that the consignor or transporter docs not dump the hazardous waste or dispose off it in manners that

can 1080 to health and safety concerns. It was therefore requested that such a provision should be added to
the Bill.


20

25.3 It was also submitted by the stakcholders before the Committee that owner of goods /.¢., the consignor,
is knowledgeable about all the intricacies of carriage of dangerous/hazardous goods as he is exclusively
dealing and using such goods while the common carriers is not qualified to scrutinise such goods and decide
about all the precautions needed for the transport of such goods. It has therefore been requested that the
consignor should be made responsible to suitably inform the common carrier about the nature of the goods
and the precautions to be taken while transporting such goods.

254 The Committee agrees with the suggestions mentioned in the above paras about the need to
tread more cautiously in respect of the carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to
human life. The Committee is also of the opinion that suitable linkages with the provisions relating
to carriage of such goods in the existing Acts need to be made in the proposed enactment, The new
enactment should in fact aim to strengthen the existing legal machinery to erase the threat to
human lives by the handling and carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Clause 13 may be redrafted and made comprehensive taking into account
the existing Acts which contain provisions for regulating to handling, carriage and insurance of
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life.

25.5 The Committee has already recommended that the consignor should give an undertaking
about the goods of dangerous/hazardous nature to human life in the Goods Forwarding Note. It is
further recommended that while redrafting Clause 13, the Department should also include a provision
that where a consignor has declared about the presence of dangerous/hazardous goods in the
consignment, he should also inform in writing, in vernacular language, the precautions required to
be taken while handling/transporting the goods.

Clause 14 (Power of Central Government to prohibit carriage of certain class of goods)

26. Clause 14 reads - The Central Government may, by notification in. the Official Gazette, specify, in
public interest, the goods or class or classes of goods which shall not be carried by a common carrier.

26.1 The Committee feels that the above Clause is self explanatory. Clause 14 was considered and
adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change.

Clause 15 (Right of common carrier in case of consignee’s default)

27. Clause 15 reads - (1) If the consignee fails to take delivery of any consignment of goods within a
period of thirty days from the date of notice given by the common carricr, such consignment may be
decmed as unclaimed:

Provided that in case of perishable consignment, the period of thirty days shall not apply and the
consignment shall be deemed unclaimed after a period of twenty-four hours of service of notice or any
lesser period as may be mutually agreed to by and between the common carrier and the consignor.

{2) In the case of an unclaimed consignment under sub-section (1), the common carrier may,
(a) if such consignment is perishable in nature, have the right to sell the consignment: or

(b) if such consignment is not perishable in nature, cause a notice to be served upon the consignee or
upon the consignor if the consignee is not available, requiring him to remoye the goods within a
period of fifteen days from the date of reccipt of the notice and in case of failure to comply with
the notice, the common carrier shall have the right to sell such consignment without any further
notice to the consignee or the consignor, as the case may be.

(3) The common carrier shall, out of the sale proceeds received under sub-section (2), retain a sum


val

equal to the freight, storage and other charges due including expenses incurred for the sale, and
the surplus, if any, from such sale proceeds shall be returned to the consignee or the consignor,
as the case may be

27.1 The Committee was apprised by the stakeholders about the need to incorporate suitable provisions,
which will expressly provide that the common carrier shall have a lien on goods entrusted to it for carriage
The stakeholders have submitted that the road transport industry is facing serious problems of delayed
payments/nonpayment of freight by service users. The Railways havea system of commercial restrictions in
case of non-payment of freight. When the commercial restriction is imposed then Railways gets the lien on
all goods of the party in transit. Therefore, a similar provision for road transport industry is required and the
proposed enactment should allow for lien on goods for non-payment of freight,

27.2 As regards the goods of perishable nature, the Committee specifically sought clarification from the
Department as to whether the goods of perishable nature are required to be specified in the ‘goods forwarding
note’ or the ‘goods receipt’ by the consignor or the common carrier respectively. In response, the Department
has informed the Committce that if the goods are of perishable nature, the same are to be mentioned in the
goods forwarding note. This is proposed to be taken care of while prescribing format of goods forwarding
note and goods receipt under the Rules

27.3 The Committee recommends that suitable additions should be made in the Bill to specifically
provide for lien on goods in favour of the common carrier on the goods that are entrusted by the
consignor to it for carriage.

27.4 The Committee considered and adopted Sub-Clauses (1), (2)(a), (2)(b) and (3) of Clause 15
without suggesting any change subject to the observations and recommendations made above.

Clause 16 (Notice for institution of a suit)

28, Clause 16 reads - No suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against a common carrier for any
loss of, or damage to, the consignment, unless notice in writing of the loss or damage to the consignment
has been served on the common carrier before the institution of the suit or other legal proceeding and
within one hundred and eighty days from the date of booking of the consignment by the consignor.

28.1 The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. Clause 16 was considered and
adopted by the Committce without suggesting any change.

Clause 17 (General responsibility of common carrier)

29. Clause 17 reads - Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a common carrier shall be responsible for
the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration in transit or non-deliyery of any consignment entrusted
10 him for carriage, arising from any cause cxccpt the following, namely: -

(a) act of God;
(b) act of war or public enemy; (0) riots and civil commotion;
(c) arrest, restraint or scizure under legal process;

(e) order or restriction or prohibition imposed by the Central Government or a State Government or
by an officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or a State Government authorised
by it in this behalf;

(f) fire, explosion or any unforescen risk:


22

Provided that. the common camier shall not be relieved of its responsibility for the loss, destruction,
damage, deterioration or non-delivery of the consignment if the common carrier could have avoided
such loss, destruction, damage or deterioration or non-delivery had the common carricr exercised duc
dcligence and care in the carriage of the consignment.

29,1 The Committee notes that this Clause secks to list out the force-majeur conditions under
which the common carricr would be exonerated from liabilities. These conditions include acts of
God, acts of war or public enemy, fire, explosion, riots or civil commotion and orders of restriction or
prohibition by Government. The Clause 17 was considered and adopted by the Committce without
suggesting any change.

Clause 18 (Punishment for contravention in relation to non-registration, carrying
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature, or prohibited goods)

30, _ Clause 18 reads - (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3, section 13 or a notification
issued under section 14 shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, and for the second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.

(2) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, every person who, at the time
the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly;

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be proceeded,
against and punished accordingly.

Explanation. - For the purpose of this section,-

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals:
and

(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

30.1 With reference to Clause 18, where punishment with fine is provided, the Committee enquired from
the Department whether the proposed amounts of fine would serve the purpose or is there any need to
enhance the fine to serve as a useful deterrent. In reply, the Department informed that-

“the purpose of the Act is to move transport industry from its present unorganized State to an
organized State, Thus, the provisions for penalties have to be devised in such a manner that they
achieve the legislative goal without scaring the common carrier. It is envisaged that a common carrier
who is to be penalized, irrespective of the quantum of the punishment, would feel that such punishment
is reputation-harming event and therefore, would be careful to avoid such a fate. Enhancement of the
fine could be taken up subsequently based on such experience,”

30.2 It was also felt by the Committee that contravention of the provisions of Clause 13 and notification
issued under Clause 14 is of serious nature in comparison to that of Clause 3. The provision of fine of Rs,
1000/- for the first offence and Rs, 5000/- for second or subsequent offences is not commensurate to the


23

offence. Therefore, it is felt that more stringent punishment may be prescribed. The views of the Department
thercon was sought and they have informed as under:

~The quantum of punishment was decided in consultation with Ministry of Law. The Judicial Magistrate
of First Class at the level of Sub-division of District Headquarter and Metropolitan Magistrate can
impose fine up to Rs. 5,000/whereas Judicial Magistrate of Second Class sanctioned in the different
areas of the State Territory and also Special Magistrates appointed for different areas by the Government
in consultation with High Courts can impose fine not exceeding Rs, 1,000/-. The above limit has been
fixed keeping in view the powers of the trial Magistrates to avoid piling up of cases at Sr. Magistrates/
Judges level and also to avoid delay in hearing of such cases Enhancement of the fine could be taken
up subsequently based on such experience.”

303 The Committee is of the opinion that the fines contemplated in the proposed enactment should
have real deterrent value, which should override any other consideration albeit, legal convenience,
The Committee desires that the Department should reconsider the need to prescribe higher amount
of fine for the contravention of the provisions of Clause 13 and notification issued under Clause 14
as compared to the fine for contravention of Clause 3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 18 may be modified accordingly. Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 18 and
the Explanation thereunder were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any
changes.

Clause 19 (Composition of offences)

31. Clause 19 reads - (1) Any offence committed under section 18, may cither before or after the institution
of the prosccution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for such amount as the State
Government may, by notification. in the Official Gazette, specify,

(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), the offender shall be discharged
and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.

31.1 The stakcholders pointed out to the Committee that the power conferred 10 compound an offence of
overloading under the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 has been misused. The Supreme Court had to step in to
highlight the menace of overloading by trucks and has ordered that the State Governments cannot allow
trucks and other goods transport yehicles to carry excess weight on roads and highways. The apex Court
directed States that had issued notifications under Section 200 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 condoning
the offence of overloading to withdraw such notifications forthwith. In this Bill also the State Governments
are proposcd to be empowered to compound the offences committed under Clause 18.

31.2 In view of the past experience, the Committee feels that adequate provisions have to be
incorporated in the proposed enactment to curb the tendency to compound offences without restriction.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should review the Clause 19 in the
light of the Supreme Court judgment.

Clause 20 (Power to make rules)

32. Clause 20 reads - (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act,

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:

{a) the form and manner of making an application for grant or renewal of a certificate of registration
and the fee which shall accompany such application under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of
section 4;


24

(b) the other conditions which are required to be fulfilled by an applicant under Clause (c) of sub-
section (4) of section 4:

(¢) the form in which and the conditions subject to which certificate of registration or renewal may
be granted under sub-section (5) of section 4:

(d) the form. and manner of maintaining a register under Clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 4;

(c) the information and return which may be fumished to the registering authority and the transport
rescarch wing under Clause (c) of sub-section (7) of section 4;

(f) the form and manner in which a goods forwarding note shall be executed by the consignor under
sub-section (1) of section 8;

(g) the form and manner in which a common carrier shall issue goods receipts under sub-section (1)
of section 9;

(h) the procedure and safeguards to be complied with for carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous
nature to human life under sub-section (1) of section 13;

(i) the specification of the goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life and the tabel or
class of labels to be carried or displayed in or on the motor vehicle or on such goods in the course of
their transportation under sub-section (2) of section 13;

(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this section and every notification issued under section 14 shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a. total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses 88706 in making any modification in the rule or the notification, or both
Houses agrce that the rule or the notification should not be made or issued, the rule or the notification
shall thereafter have effect ‘only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case: may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or notification

32.1 There is a typographical error in Sub-Clause (2) (b) of Clause 20, In line 20 of page 8 of the
Bill, the words “Clause (d)” should be read as “Clause (c)". Subject to this observation, Clause 20
was adopted by the Committee without suggesting any changes.

33

Clause 21 (Power to remove difficulties)

Clause 21 reads - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
hot inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty;

Provided that no such order shall be made under this section afler the expiry of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, afler it is made, before
cach House of Parliament.

33.1 The Committce notes that this Clause empowers the Central Government to issue orders for
removing difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. Such orders can
be issued only within two years from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation, Every


25

order made under this Clause is required to be laid before Parliament. Clause 21 was considered and
adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change.

Clause 22 (Repeal and saving)
34. Clause 22 reads - (1) The Carriers Act, 1865, is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Carriers Act, 1865, anything done or any action taken under
the said Act shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act and shall continue in forec
accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act

(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeals.

34.1 Clause 22 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change,
Clause 1 (1) & (2) (Short title, extent)
35. Clause 1 reads - (1) This Act may be called the Carriage by Road Act, 2005,
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

35.1 This Clause provides for the short title and extent of the proposed legislation. The proposed legislation
will not be applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

35.2 The Committee adopts the Title and Enacting Formula with slight changes, which are of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, in the Title, the figure “2005” to be changed to “2006”, so
is the case in Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 1 and in the Enacting Formula the words “Fifty-sixth” to be
substituted by “Fifty- seventh”, respectively.

36. The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating necessary official
amendments of formal nature and taking into account its recommendations in respect of Clauses 1
(1), 13), 2(c), 2(d), 3(3), 4(2), 4G), 4(4), 405), 4(7)(b), 4(7)(०), 4(7(), 5(1)6), 501)60), 5(3), 6(1), 7,
8(1), 9, 10, 11, 12(3), 13, 15, 18(1), 19 and 20(2)(b) above.


OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS —AT A GLANCE
CLAUSE 1 (3)

The Committee notes that the Department has not detailed the probable impediments in
bringing the legislation into force in some of the States, while it is enforced in the rest of the
country. Morcoyer, the Department has categorically stated that the enforcement machinery for
the proposed cnxtment, which is same as that for the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, is already in place
in all the States/L Ts. The Committee, therefore, feels that the commencement date of the proposed
legislation should be same throughout the country, otherwise the basic purpose of the enactment to
bring uniformity in matters connected to common carriers will be defeated. The Committee
recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 1 may be modified accordingly. (Para 13.3)

CLAUSE2

The Committee feels that the above explanation furnished by the Department is satisfactory.
The Sub-Clause (a) of Clause 2 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any change, (Para 14.1.3)

The Committee considered the suggestion and feels that the proposed definition of “consigace”
as contained in Sub-Clause (b) of Clause 2 is sufficient. The Sub-Clause (h) of Clause 2 was considered
and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change. (Para 14.2.2)

The Committee finds that definition of ‘consignment’ is incomplete as it does not reflect
properly all the goods to be carried/transported by the common carrier which has been included in
Sub-Clause (a) of Clause 2 relating to the definition of “common carrier”. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the definition of ‘consignment’ may be modified as under:

“consignment” means documents, goods or articles entrusted by the consignor to the common
carrier for carriage, the description or details of which are given in the goods forwarding
note. (Para 14 4,2)

The Committee further recommends that in Sub-Clause (d) of Clause 2 also, for the words
“goods covered by such forwarding note” the words “documents, goods or articles covered by such
forwarding note” may be substituted. (Para 14.4.3)

The Committce feels that the above Clauses are self-explanatory. The Sub-Clauses (९) to (i)
of Clause 2 were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any changes,
(Para 14.9.1)

The Committee feels that in view of the countrywide network of common carriers, the setting
up of a central regulatory authority would give rise to practical difficulties in the working of the
proposed legislation, Further, it would be casier to enforce the provisions of the new enactment:
through the enforcement machinery already in place under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, The
Committee, therefore, considers that the proposed Clause needs no modification.

The Sub-Clause (j) of Clause 2 was accordingly considered and adopted by the Committee
without suggesting any change. (Para 14,10.2 and 14.10.3)

26


27

The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory, The Sub-Clause (k) of Clause
2 was considered and adopted by the Committee without Suggesting any change. (Para 14,11.1)

CLAUSE3

The Committee observes that this Clause provides that after the commencement of the proposed
legislation, no person will engage, whether wholly or partly, in the business of common carrier
without obtaining a registration under the proposed legislation, (Para 15.1)

The Sub-Clauses (1), (2)(a) and (2)(b) of Clause 3 were considered and adopted by the Committee
without suggesting any change. (Para 15.1.1)

The Committee notes that as per the proviso to Sub-Clause (5) of Clause 4 of the Bill, no
application for the grant or renewal of a certificate of registration shall be refused by the registering
authority unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard and reasons for such
refusal are given in writing by the registering authority within sixty days from the date of receipt of
such application, It is quite clear that the procedure for dealing with an application for registration
provided in the proposed enactment makes it incumbent on the registering authority to take a
decision to refuse an application for grant or renewal of registration much before the period of sixty
days from the receipt of the application, The registering authority has to take such decision to
refuse the granUrenewal of registration and thereafter give the applicant an opportunity of being
heard and give reasons for refusal in writing within sixty days from the date of receipt of the
application. Therefore, if sixty days have elapsed from the date of receipt of an application without
any speaking orders regarding refusal of registration, the only course of action left for the registering
authority is to grant the certificate of registration to the applicant,

The Committce further notes that the basic objective of Clause 3 as indicated in notes on
Clauses is that after the commencement of the Proposed legislation no person will engage, whether
wholly or partly, in the business of common carrier without obtaining 4 registration under the
proposed legislation. It is the Clause 4, which sets out the procedure for application for grant or
renewal of registration by issuance of appropriate certificate for carrying on the business of common
carrier, The Committee, therefore, recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 3 should be omitted,
However, Sub-Clause (5) of Clause 4 should be modified to make it mandatory for the registering
authority to grant a certificate of registration or renew it within ninety days of receipt of such
application. (Para 15.2.2 and 15.2.3)
CLAUSE 4

The Committee feels that such matters, as per the normal practice, is best left to subordinate
legislation. The Committee, however, expects that while making rules, a reasonable amount of fees
will be fixed for the purpose of registration, The Committee also desires that keeping in yiew the
increasing use of Internet in today’s trade and commerce, the electronic submission of application
for registration may also be encouraged by making provisions therefor in the rules.

The Sub-Clause (2) of Clause 4 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any change subject to the above observations. (Para 16.2.2 and 16.2.3)

The Committee apprehends that the provision for multiple registrations would make the
procedure unnecessarily lengthy and cumbersome, which can be easily avoided. Moreover, as provided
in the proviso to Sub-Clause. (6) of Clause 4, the validity of the registration in respect of branch
offices is restricted to the validity of the registration granted in respect of the main office. The


28

Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be only one registration, i.c., for the principal
place of business and the details of the branch offices, if any, should be endorsed on the Registration
Certificate itself and such endorsement should be made by the registering authority which issued
the Registration Certificate.

The Committee recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 4 and the explanation thereunder
may be modified in the light of the above observations. (Para 16.3.2 and 16.3.3)

The Committee agrees that the terms used in Sub-Clause (4) of Clause 4, namely, offence
inyolving moral turpitude; intimate knowledge of goods or freight business; adequate space and
facilitics ior warchousing and sufficient financial resources are vague and allows unbridled powers
and unrestricted discretion to the registering authority. The conditions are also susceptible to varied
legal interpretations and thereby inciting avoidable litigation. The Committee also notes that no
rule making power has been given to the Central Government to cover these aspects and Clause 20
empowers the Central Government only to frame rules prescribing the “other conditions” as
mentioned at Sub-Clause (4)(c) of Clause 4. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Sub-
Clause (4) of Clause 4 should be modified by omitting Sub-Clauses (4)(a) to (4)(d) of Clause 4 as
under: —

4(4) A registering authority shall, before granting or renewing a certificate of registration,
satisfy itself that the applicant fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed.

The Committee expects that while making the rules under this Clause, unambiguous conditions
will be prescribed in future. (Para 16.4.3 and 16.4.4)

As regards the suggestion for a new Clause for easy initial registration for the existing common
carriers, the Committee feels that the purpose of the Bill to provide for regulation of common
carriers will be defeated if the process of registration of persons already engaged in the business of
common carrier is allowed without ensuring the compliance of the rules Proposed to be framed
under the enactment. (Para 16.4.5)

As already recommended by the Committee at para 15.2.3 aboye, Sub-Clause (5) of
Clause 4 should be modified to make it mandatory for the registering authority to grant the
certificate of registration or renew it within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of
the application. * (Para 16.5.1)

The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clause (6) of Clause
4 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change. (Para 16.6.1)

The Sub-Clause (7) (a) of Clause 4 was considered and adopted by the Committee without
Suggesting any change. (Para 16.7.1)

With reference to Sub-Clause (7)(b) of Clause 4, the Committee feels that it will be prudent
to specify a time frame within which the registering authority has to give its approval for the shifting
of the main office. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Sub-Clause (7)(b) of Clause 4 should
be modified on the lines indicated below:

(b) submit an application for shifting the main office mentioned in the certificate of registration
to the registering authority which granted the registration and such registering authority
shall grant or refuse permission for the same within thirty days from the date of receipt
of such application:


29

Provided that no application for shifting the main office shall be refused unless the applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard and reasons for such refusal are given in
writing by the registering authority. (Para 16.7.2)

The Sub-Clause 4 (7)(c) was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any
change subject to the observation that the rules to be framed thereunder should encourage electronic
submission of the information/returns. (Para 16.7.3)

With reference to Sub-Clause (7)(d) of Clause 4, the Committee is of the view that the
Certification of Registration should be displayed in the main office and in each branch office, if any.
The requirement of the certified copy to be attested by the concerned registering authority can be
waived and instead it may be provided that the copy of the Certification of Registration should be
attested by the concerned registering authority or by a notary or by a gazetted officer of the
Government, The Committee, therefore, recommends that at Sub-Clause (7)(d) of Clause 4 may be
modified on the lines indicated below: —

(d) display at a prominent place in his or its main office and cach branch office, if any, the
certificate of registration in original or certified copy thereof attested by the concerned
registering authority or a notary or a gazetted officer of the Government, (Para 16.7.4)

CLAUSES

With reference to Sub-Clause (1)(i) of Clause 5, the Committee is of the opinion that the
common carriers should also be penalized for contravention of the provisions pertaining to axle load
and gross vehicle weight, as contained in Section 113 and 114 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The
Committee desires that the Department should not let go off the opportunity presented through the
Proposed legislation to tackle the menace of overloading. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Department towards the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the matter of
persistent overloading by trucks and the undesirable compounding of offences by the various State
Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Sub-Clause (1)0) of Clause 5 should
be modified to include the failure of the common carrier to comply with the provisions of Sections
113 and 124 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 as a ground for the suspension or revocation of
registration, (Para 17.1)

In this context, the Committee feels that despite improvement in the quality and network of
roads and technical upgradation of vehicles, the load bearing capacity of the trucks has not been
revised since independence, which is restricting the ton per K.M. capacity. Further, if the Registered
Laden Weight (RLW) is increased by amending the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, there would be an
inerease in Government revenue. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should consider enhancing the axle weight/RLW for goods carriers. (Para 17,2)

The Committee is of the view that the proposed procedure of having five valid complaints in
succession may defeat the spirit of the legislation which stipulates the regulations of common carrier
and even may encourage erring operators, The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words
“in succession” appearing in Sub-Clause (1) (ii) of Clause 5 may be deleted. The Committee also
desires that the Department may also review the proviso under said Sub-Clause and consider whether
in a time frame should be included for the surrender of the registration certificate after the
registration is suspended or revoked. (Para 17.4)

The Committee feels that Clause 5, Sub-Clause (2) is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clause (2) of
Clause 5 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change.(Para 17.5)


30

The Committee finds that the situation, wherein a common carrier prosecuted in one State
being allowed to carry on the business in other State, to be anomalous as an offender can use the
shield of multiple registrations to carry on the business. As recommended by the Committee, this
situation can also be tackled if there is only one registration, i.c., in respect of the principal place of
business and the branch offices are endorsed in the certificate of registration. In this manner, if a
common carrier is found to have contravened any of the proyisions of the enactment or if five or
more complaints against it are found to be established, the common carrier can be made to stop his
business altogether as his registration certificate will be surrendered to the concerned registering
authority. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable provisions should be inserted in
the proposed legislation to ensure that offenders are dealt with strictly and put out of business
altogether.

The Committee also expects that while framing rules, the disclosure of revocation and the
reasons therefor would be obtained from the applicant in the application form, (Para 17.8 and 17.9)

With reference to Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 5, the Committee has already recommended at
para 16.3.2 above that registration in respect of branch office/offices should be endorsed in the
certificate of registration for the main office itself, The Committce recommends that a proviso
should be added to Sub-Clause 5(3) to provide for the deletion of an endorsement in respect of a
branch office also, (Para 17.10)

CLAUSE6

With reference to Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 6, the Committee fecls that the business of common
carrier, the nature of disputes likely to arise ete, would be alien to tribunals set-up under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, Therefore, the Committee has reasonable doubts about the expertise available
in the tribunals to deal with the cases under the proposed enactment. The Committee desires that
the Department should duly consider this aspect and recommends that the Department should take
adequate steps to equip the tribunals with necessary competence to handle all the issues of common
carriers likely to be brought before it under the proposed enactment. (Para 18.1)

As regards Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 6, the Committee feels that the same are self
explanatory. The Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 5 were considered and adopted by the Committee
without suggesting any changes. (Para 18.2)

CLAUSE7

The Committee notes that a provision for submission of annual returns to the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government dealing with road transport and highways already exists in
the proposed enactment [Sub-Clause (7) (c) of Clause 4]. Further, Clause 7 also neither provide for
prescription of any format for submission of annual returns nor stipulates any time frame therefor,
as mentioned at Sub-Clause (7) (c) of Clause 4. The Committee feels that the information / returns
envisaged under Sub-Clause (7) (९) of Clause 4 would be voluminous and the additional annual
returns sought under Clause 7 would be repetitive in nature. This situation can be avoided by
prescribing suitable formats under Sub-Clause (7)(c) of Clause 4 itself and omitting Clause 7
altogether. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 7 may be omitted and the information
Proposed to be collected under that Clause may be obtained by prescribing suitable formats under
Sub-Clause (7)(c) of Clause 4. The Committee also recommends that the succeeding Clauses namely,
Clauses 8 to 22 may be renumbered as Clauses 7 to 21. (Para 19.1)


3

CLAUSE 8

In respect of Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 8, the Committee notes that the goods forwarding note,
to be prescribed by the rules, executed by the consignor will give details of the consignment. The
Committee recommends that the goods forwarding note should also contain a declaration whether
the goods are of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. The consignor, who deals with the
goods, would be in 8 better position to declare the nature of the goods and it would not be appropriate
to shift the burden of verifying the nature of goods to the common carriers. The Committce, therefore,
recommends that Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 8 may be modified on the lines indicated below:—

8. (1) Every consignor shall execute a goods forwarding note, in such form and manner as may
be prescribed, which shall include declarations about the yalue of the consignment and
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. (Para 20.1)

The Committee feels that Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 8 are self explanatory. The Sub-
Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 8 were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting
any changes. (Para 20.2)

CLAUSE 9

The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. The Sub-Clauses (1)(a), (1)(b),
(2) and (3) of Clause 9 were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any
changes. (Para 21.1)

The Committee feels that in order to ensure formal agreements between the parties in the
matter of liability of the common carrier for the loss of or damage of any consignment or delay in
delivery thereof, suitable provision needs to be added in Clause 9. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a new Sub-Clause may be added under Clause 9 on the following lines:

(4) The goods receipt shall include an undertaking by the common carrier about the
amount of its liability for the loss of or damage of any consignment or delay in delivery
thereof. (Para 21,3)

The Committee expects that the Department will take suitable measures to stop all formal
and informal arrangements existing in the transport industry at present and will strictly implement
the provisions of the proposed enactment uniformly throughout the country. (Para 21.5)

CLAUSE 10 and 11

The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department and feels that the amount
and extent of liability of the common carrier for the loss of or damage of any consignment or delay
in delivery thereof can be regulated by an agreement/undertaking to be reflected in the goods
receipt as already recommended by the Committee. It is, therefore, recommended that Sub-Clauses
(1) and (2) of Clause 10 and proviso thereunder should be substituted by 8 modified Clause 10 on the
following lines:

10. The liabi of the common carrier for the loss of, or damage of any consignment or delay
in delivery thercof shall be limited to the amount mutually agreed upon by and between
the consignor or any person duly authorised in that behalf and the common carrier or any
person duly authorised in that behalf and expressly undertaken by the common carrier,
as specifically mentioned in the goods reccipt:

Proyided that the common carrier shall not be liable if such carrier proves that such loss


32

of, or damage to the consignment or delay indclivery thercof, had not taken place duc to
his fault or neglect or that of his servants or agents thereof. (Para 23.3)

The Committee also recommends that Clause 11 may be omitted in view of the observations!
recommendations of the Committee regarding the provision for mutual agreement between the
consignor and the common carrier on the amount and extent of liability for the loss of, or damage of
any consignment or delay in delivery thereof. The Committee further recommends that the subsequent
Clauses may be renumbered accordingly, (Para 23.4)

CLAUSE 12

The Committee feels that in Clause 12, Sub-Clauses (1) and (2) are self-explanatory. The Sub-
Clauses (1) and (2) of Clause 12 were considered and adopted by the Committee without Suggesting
any changes, (Para 24.1)

The Committee agrees that a common carrier should not be penalized for the fault of a consignor
and therefore recommends that Sub-Clause (3) of Clause 12 may be modified on the following lines:

(3) Where any consignment has been detained for examination or scrutiny by a competent
authority and upon such examination or scrutiny it is found that certain prohibited goods
or goods on which due tax was not paid or insufficiently paid have been entrusted to the
common carrier by the consignor which have not been described in the goods forwarding
note, the cost of such examination or scrutiny shall be borne by the consignor and the
common carrier shall not be liable for any loss, damage or deterioration caused by such
detention of the consignment for examination or scrutiny:

Provided that the onus of proying that such incorrect description of goods in the goods
forwarding note was received from the consignor shall be on the common carrier.

Explanation- For the purposes of this section, “competent authority” means any person
or authority who is empowered to examine or scrutinize goods by or under any law for the
time being in force to secure compliance of provisions of that law. (Para 24.3)

CLAUSE 13

The Committee agrees with the suggestions mentioned in the above paras about the need to
tread more cautiously in respect of the carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to
human life. The Committee is also of the opinion that suitable linkages with the provisions relating
to carriage of such goods in the existing Acts need to be made in the proposed enactment. The new
enactment should in fact aim to strengthen the existing legal machinery to crase the threat to
human lives by the handling and carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Clause 13 may be redrafted and made comprehensive taking into account
the existing Acts which contain provisions for regulating to handling, carriage and insurance of
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. (Para 25,4)

The Committee has already recommended that the consignor should give an undertaking
about the goods of dangerous/hazardous nature to human life in the Goods Forwarding Note. It is
further recommended that while redrafting Clause 13, the Department should also include a provision
that where a consignor has declared about the presence of dangerous/hazardous goods in the
consignment, he should also inform in writing, in vernacular language, the precautions required to
be taken while handling/transporting the goods. (Para 25.5)


CLAUSE 14

The Committee feels that the above Clause is self explanatory. Clause 14 was considered and
adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change. (Para 26.1)
CLAUSE 15

The Committee recommends that suitable additions should be made in the Bill to specifically
provide for lien on goods in favour of the common carrier on the goods that are entrusted by the
consignor to it for carriage. (Para 27.3)

The Committee considered and adopted Sub-Clauses (1), (2)(a), (2)(b) and (3) of Clause 15
without suggesting any change subject to the observations and recommendations made above.

(Para 27.4)
CLAUSE 16
The Committee feels that the above Clause is self-explanatory. Clause 16 was considered and
adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change. (Para 28.1)
CLAUSE 17

The Committee notes that this Clause seeks to list out the force-majeur conditions under
which the common carrier would be exonerated from liabilities. These conditions include acts of
God, acts of war or public enemy, fire, explosion, riots or civil commotion and orders of restriction or
prohibition by Government. The Clause 17 was considered and adopted by the Committee without
Suggesting any change. (Para 29,1)

CLAUSE 18

The Committee is of the opinion that the fines contemplated in the proposed enactment should
haye real deterrent value, which should override any other consideration albeit, legal convenience.
The Committee desires that the Department should reconsider the need to prescribe higher amount
of fine for the contravention of the provisions of Clause 13 and notification issued under Clause 14
as compared to the fine for contravention of Clause 3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 18 may be modified accordingly. Sub-Clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 18 and
the Explanation thereunder were considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any
changes. (Para 30.3)

CLAUSE 19

In view of the past experience, the Committee feels that adequate provisions have to be
incorporated in the proposed enactment to curb the tendency to compound offences without restriction.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should review the Clause 19 in the
light of the Supreme Court judgment. (Para 31.2)

CLAUSE 20

There is a typographical error in Sub-Clause (2) (b) of Clause 20. In line 20 of page 8 of the
Bill, the words “Clause (d)” should be read as “Clause (e)”. Subject to this observation, Clause 20
was adopted by the Committee without suggesting any changes. (Para 32.1)

CLAUSE 21

The Committee notes that this Clause empowers the Central Government to issue orders for


34

removing difficultics in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. Such orders can
be issued only within two years from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation. Every
order made under this Clause is required to be laid before Parliament, Clause 21 was considered and
adopted by the Committce without suggesting any change. (Para 33.1)

CLAUSE 22

Clause 22 was considered and adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change.
(Para 34,1)

CLAUSES (1) & 1(2)

The Committee adopts the Title and Enacting Formula with slight changes, which are of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, in the Title, the figure “2005” to be changed to “2006”, so
is the case in Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 1 and in the Enacting Formula the words “Fifty-sixth” to be
substituted by “Fifty- seventh”, respectively. (Para 35.2)

The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating necessary official
amendments of formal nature and taking into account its recommendations in respect of Clauses 1
(1), 13), 2(०), 2(d), 3(3), 4(2), 4(3), 404), 45), 4(7)), 4(7)(०, 4(7)(4), 501)6), SG), 5(3), 661), 7,
8(1), 9, 10, 11, 12(3), 13, 15, 18(1), 19 and 20(2)(b) above. (Para 36)


ANNEXURE

—MKMKFtsSsSsSsSSSsSSO“OMNSSSSS



Annexure

(Vide Para 1)

As Introduced in the Rajya Sabha
मात्र Dicemper 2005

Bill No. CXXIV of 2005

THE CARRIAGE BY ROAD BILL, 2005
A
BILL

To provide for the regulation af common carriers, limiting their liability and declaration
af value of goods delivered to them to determine their liability for loss of, or
damage to, such goods occasioned by the negligence or criminal acts of themselves,
their servants or agents and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fifly-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1, (1) This Act may be called the Carriage by Road Act, 2005, Short title,

(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government

5 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates

may be appointed for different States and any reference in this Act to the

commencement of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a
reference to the coming into force of this Act in that State

37


Definitions.

Persons not to
engage in
business of
common
carrier without
registraton.

38

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “common carrier” means a person engaged in the business of
collecting, storing, forwarding or distributing goods to be carried by
goods carriages under a goods receipt or transporting for hire of goods
from place to place by motorised transport on road, for all persons
undiscriminatingly and includes a goods booking company, contractor,
agent, broker and couricr agency engaged in the door-to-door
transportation of documents, goods or articles utilising the services of
a person, cither directly or indirectly, to carry or accompany such
documents, goods or articles, but docs not include the Government;

(4) “consignee” means the person named as consignee in the goods
forwarding note;

(c) “consignment” means goods entrusted by the consignor to the
common carrier for carriage, the description or details of which are
given in the goods forwarding note;

(4) “consignor” means a person, named as consignor in the goods
forwarding note, by whom or on whose behalf the goods covered by
such forwarding note arc entrusted to the common carrier for carriage
thereof;

(e) “goods” includes —

(0) containers, pallets or similar articles of transport used to
consolidate goods; and

(ii) animals or livestock;

(A “goods forwarding note” means the document executed under
section है;

(8) “goods receipt” means the receipt issued under section 9,

(h) “person” includes any association or body of persons, whether
incorporated or not, a road transport booking company, contractor
and an agent or a broker carrying on the business of a common carrier;

(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(0) “registering authority” means a State Transport Authority or a
Regional Transport Authority constituted under section 68 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988;

(4) “registration” means the registration granted or renewed under
sub-section (5) of section 4,

3. (1) No person shall engage in the business of a common carrier,
after the commencement of this Act, unless he has been granted a certificate
of registration.

(2) Any person who is engaged, whether wholly or partly, in the business
of a common carrier, immediately before the commencement of this Act,
shall,

10

20

25

30

59 of 1988

40


10

20

25

30

35

40

39

(a) apply for a registration within ninety days from the date of
such commencement;

(6) cease to engage in such business on the expiry of one hundred
and cighty days from the date of such commencement unless he has
applied for registration and the Certificate of registration has been granted
by the registering authority.

(3) The registering authority shall take decision on the application for
registration within ninety days from the date of receipt of the application,

4. (/) Any person, who is engaged or intends to engage in the business
of a common carrier, shall apply for the grant or renewal of a certificate of
registration for Carrying on the business of, common carrier to the registering
authority.

by such fees payable to the fegistering authority as may be prescribed

(3) An application for grant or renewal of registration for carrying on
the business of a common carrier from a branch office which is outside
the jurisdiction of the registering authority referred to in sub-section (2)
shall be made to such registering authority in whose jurisdiction the branch

Explanation.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
where an applicant intends to have two or more branch offices or main
office and branch office or offices within the jurisdiction of a single State
or Union Territory he shall be required to make only one application for
registration of such offices,

(4) A registering authority shall, before granting or renewing a certificate
of registration, satisfy itself that-

(a) where the applicant is an individual, he has not been convicted
of any offence involving moral turpitude;

(8) the applicant has intimate knowledge of goods or freight
business;

(०) the office of the applicant is cither owned by the applicant or is
taken on lease by him or it or is hired in his or its name and the premises
has adequate space and facilities for warehousing of goods and to
handle the loading, unloading, storage and transhipment of goods;

(4) the financial resources of the applicant are sufficient to meet
the liability for any loss of or damage to, consignment and for the
efficient management of business of the common carrier;

(e) the applicant fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed

Application for
Brant or
renewal of
registration


Suspension or
vancellation of
tegistration

40

(5) The registering authority may, on receipt of an application under
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and after satisfying itself that the applicant
fulfils the requirements of sub-section (4), grant the certificate of
registration or renew it, as the case may be, for carrying on the business of
@ common carrier, in such form and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.

Provided that no application for the grant or renewal of a certificate of
registration shall be refused by the registering authority unless the applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard and the reasons for such
refusal are given in writing by the registering authority within sixty days
from the date of receipt of such application.

(6) A certificate of registration granted or renewed under sub-section
(5) shall be valid for a period of ten years from the date of such grant or
renewal, as the case may be:

Provided that in the case of registration in respect of branch offices
referred to in sub-section (3), the validity of such registration shall be
restricted to the validity of the registration granted in respect of the main
office.

(7) The holder of a certificate of registration shall —

(व) maintain a register in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:

(4) not shift the main office mentioned in the certificate of
registration without the prior approval in writing of the registering
authority which granted the registration;

(०) submit to the registering authority under whose jurisdiction the
main office is located and the Transport Research Wing of the Ministry
or Department of the Central Government dealing with road transport
and highways such information and return as may be prescribed within
one hundred and twenty days after the thirty-first day of March every
year;

() display at a prominent place in his or its main office or branch
offices the certificate of registration in original or certified copy thereof
attested by the concerned registering authority.

5. (/) If the registering authority is satisfied that the holder of a certificate
of registration has failed to comply with any of the provisions of sub-
section (7) of section 4 or a complain is made against such holder by any
consignee or consignor, it may give a notice by registered post or through
electronic media or by any other verifiable means to the holder of the
registration 10 rectify the same within a period of thirty days and in case
such holder fails to do so, it may —

(i) suspend the registration for a specified period pending an
inquiry; or

15

20

25

30

35

40


10

20

25

30

35

40

4y

(i) revoke the registration of the main office or of a particular
branch office in case there are five or more complaints in succession
which are proved to be true after an inquiry;

Provided that when the registration is suspended or revoked, the holder
of the registration shall surrender the certificate of registration to the
registering authority,

(2) No registration shall be suspended or revoked under sub-section
(/) unless the holder of the registration is given an Opportunity of being
heard in the inquiry and the reasons for such suspension or revocation, as
the case may be, are given in writing by the registering authority,

(3) The holder of a registration may, at any time, surrender the
registration to the registering authority which granted the registration, and
on such surrender the registering authority shall, after obtaining declaration
from the holder of the registration that no liability is out standing against
him and, he would discharge such liability if he is held liable, revoke the
registration.

6. (/) Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering authority
refusing to grant or renew a certificate of registration or suspending or
revoking a registration under this Act, may within sixty days from the date
of such order, appeal to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal constituted
under sub-section (2) of section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.

(2) An appeal under sub-section (/) shall be preferred in duplicate in
the form of a memorandum setting forth the grounds of objection to the
order of the registering authority and shall be accompanied by such fee as
may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official
Gazette

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (/) and (2), the
provisions of sub-sections (/) and (2) of section 89 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988, as in force immediately before the commencement of this Act,
with rogard to appeal, shall, as far as may, apply to very appeal as if the
provisions aforesaid were cnacted by this Act subject to the modification
that any reference therein to the “permit” shall be construed as a reference
to the “registration”.

7. The State Transport Authority in respect of each State or Union
Territory shall submit annually to the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government dealing with road transport and highways a consolidated annual
return giving the details of the goods carried by the common carriers in
that State or the Union Territory, as the case may be, on the basis of the
returns received from the holders of the registration as specified under
clause (०) of sub-section (7) of section 4,

8. (/) Every consignor shall execute a goods forwarding note, in such
form and manner as may be prescribed, which shall include a declaration
about the value of the consignment.

Appeal,

59 of 1988

59 of 1988

Submission of
snnual return.

Goods
forwarding
note


Goods receipt

Liability of
common
carrier.

Rates of charge
to he fixed by
common carrier
for carriage of
consignment at
a higher risk
rate

42

(2) The consignor shall be responsible for the correctness of the
particulars furnished by him in the goods forwarding note.

(3) The consignor shall indemnify the common carrier against any
damage suffered by him by reason of incorrectness or incompleteness of
the particulars on the goods forwarding note.

9. (/) A common carrier shall, —

(a) in case where the goods are to be loaded by the consignor, on
the completion of such loading; or

(b) in any other case, on the acceptance of the goods by him,
Issue a goods receipt in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The goods receipt shall be issued in triplicate and the original shall
be given to the consignor.

(3) The goods receipt shall be prima facie evidence of the weight or
measure and other particulars of the goods and the number of packages
stated therein,

10, (/) The liability of the common carrier for loss of, or damage to
any consignment, shall be limited to ten thousand rupecs or the value of
consignment declared in the goods forwarding note, whichever is less,
unless the consignor or any person duly authorised in that behalf have
expressly undertaken to pay higher risk rate fixed by the common carrier
under section 11

(2) The liability of the common carrier in case of any delay up to such
period as may be mutually agreed upon by and between the Consignor and
the common carrier and specifically provided in the goods forwarding
note including the consequential loss or damage to such consignment shall
be limited to the amount of freight charges where such loss, damage or
delay took place while the consignment was under the charge of such
carrier:

Provided that beyond the period so agreed upon in the goods forwarding
note, compensation shall be payable in accordance with sub-section (/) or
section 11;

Provided further that the common carrier shall not be liable if such
carrier proves that such loss of, or damage to, the consignment or delay in
delivery thereof, had not taken place due to his fault or neglect or that of
his servants or agents thereof.

11. Every common carrier may require payment for the higher risk
undertaken by him in carrying a particular consignment at such rate of
charge as he may fix and correspondingly, his liability would be in
accordance with the terms as may be agreed upon with the consignor:

Provided that to entitle such carrier to claim payment at a rate higher
than his ordinary rate of charge, he should have exhibited a printed or
written notice, in the vernacular language of the State, of the higher rate of
charge in the place or premises where he carries on the business of common
carrier.

10

15

* 20

25

30

35

40


10

15

20

25

30

35

40

43

12. (/) Every common carrier shall be liable to the consignor for the
loss or damage to any consignment in accordance with the goods
forwarding note, where such loss or damage has arisen on account of any
criminal act of the common carrier, or any of his servants or agents,

(2) In any suit brought against the common carrier for the loss, damage
or non-delivery of consignment, it shall not be necessary for the plaintiff to
prove that such loss, damage or non-delivery was owing to the negligence
or criminal act of the common carrier, or any of his servants or agents,

(3) Where any consignment has been detained for examination or
scrutiny by a competent authority and upon such examination or scrutiny
itis found that certain prohibited goods have been entrusted to the common
carrier by the consignor which have not been described in the goods
forwarding note, the cost of such examination or scrutiny shall be borne
by the consignor and the common carrier shall not be liable for any loss,
damage or deterioration caused by such detention of the consignment for
examination or scrutiny:

Provided that the onus of proving that such incorrect description of
goods in the goods forwarding note was received from the consignor shall
be on the common carrier.

Explanation- For the purposes of this section, “competent authority”
mecans any person or authority who is empowered to examine or scrutinize
80005 by or under any law for the time being in force to secure compliance
of provisions of that law.

13. (1) No goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life shall
be carried by a common carrier except in accordance with such procedure
and after complying with such safeguards as may be prescribed.

(2) The Central Government may, by rules made in this behalf, specify
the goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life and the label or
class of labels to be carried in, or displayed on, the motor vehicle or such
goods in the course of transportation,

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, every common carrier shall scrutinise and ensure before
Slarting transportation of any consignment containing goods of dangerous
or hazardous nature to human life that the consignment is covered by, one
or more insurance policies under a contract of insurance in respect of
such goods providing relief in case of death or injury to a person or damage
to any property or the consignment, if an accident takes place,

14, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

specify, in public interest, the goods or class or classes of goods which
shall not be carried by a common carrier,

Conditions
limiting
exonerating
the liability of
the common
carrier

Provision for
carriage of
goods of
dangerous or
hazardous
nature to
human life.

Power of
Central
Government to
prohibit
carriage of
certain class of
goods.


Right of
common
carrier in case
of consignee's
default

Notice for
institution of a
suit.

General
responsibility
of common
carrier

44

15, (/) If the consignee fails to take delivery of any consignment of
goods within a period of thirty days from the date of notice given by the
common carrier, such consignment may be deemed as unclaimed:

Provided that in case of perishable consignment, the period of thirty
days shall not apply and the consignment shall be deemed unclaimed after
a period of twenty-four hours of service of notice or any lesser period as
may be mutually agreed to by and between the common carrier and the
consignor.

(2) In the case of an unclaimed consignment under sub-section (/),
the common carrier may, —

(a) if such consignment is perishable in nature, have the right to
sell the consignment; or

(6) if such consignment is not perishable in nature, cause a notice
to be served upon the consignee or upon the consignor if the consignee
is not available, requiring him to remove the goods within a period of
fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice and in case of failure
to comply with the notice, the common carrier shall have the right to
sell such consignment without any further notice to the consignee or
the consignor, as the case may be.

(3) The common carrier shall, out of the sale proceeds received under
sub-section (2), retain a sum equal to the freight, storage and other charges
due including expenses incurred for the sale, and the surplus, if any, from
such sale proceeds shall be returned to the consignee or the consignor, as
the case may be.

16. No suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against a common
carrier for any loss of, or damage to, the consignment, unless notice in
writing of the loss or damage to the consignment has been served on the
common carrier before the institution of the suit or other legal proceeding,
and within one hundred and, eighty days from the date of booking of the
consignment by the consignor.

17. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a common carrier shall be
responsible for the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration in transit or
non-delivery of any consignment entrusted to him for carriage, arising
from any cause except the following, namely:-

fa) act of God;

() act of war or public enemy;

(c) riots and civil commotion;

(d) arrest, restraint or seizure under legal process;

(e) order or restriction or prohibition imposed by the Central

Government or a State Government or by an officer or authority

subordinate to the Central Government or a State Government authorised
by it in this behalf;

10

20

25

30

35

40


10

20

25

30

35

40

45

(/ fire, explosion or any unforescen risk:

Provided that the common carrier shall not be relieved of its
responsibility for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery
of the consignment if the common carrier could have avoided such loss,
destruction, damage or deterioration or non-delivery had the common
carrier exercised due deligence and care in the carriage of the consignment.

18. (7) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3, section 13 or
a notification issued under section 14 shall be punishable for the first offence
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and for the second or
subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,

(2) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge
of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business
of the company as well as the company, shall be decmed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where any
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or
is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall be proceeded against and punished accordingly,

Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and

(8) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm,

19. (/) Any offence committed under section 18, may cither before or
after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or
authorities and for such amount as the State Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify.

(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (/),
the offender shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken
against him in respect of such offence.

20. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely; —

(a) the form and manner of making an application for grant or
renewal of a certificate of registration and the fee which shall

Punishnsent for
contravention
in relation to
non-
registration,
carrying goods
of dangerous oF
hazardous
nature, or
prohibited
goods:

Composition
of offences.

Power to make
rules,


Power to
approve
difficulties,

46

accompany such application under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3),
of section 4

(6) the other conditions which are required to be fulfilled by an
applicant under clause (व) of sub-section (4) of section 4;

(०) the form in which and the conditions subject to which certificate
of registration or renewal may be granted under sub-section (5) of
section 4;

(d) the form and manner of maintaining a register under clause (a)
of sub-section (7) of section 4:

(९) the information and return which may be furnished to the
registering authority and the transport research wing under clause (c)
of sub-section (7) of section 4;

(0 the form and manner in which a goods forwarding note shall be
executed by the consignor under sub-section (/) of section 8;

(g) the form and manner in which a common carrier shall issuc
goods receipts under sub-section (/) of section 9;

(h) the procedure and safeguards to be complied with for carrying
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life under sub-section
(7) of section 13;

(0) the specification of the goods of dangerous or hazardous nature
to human life and the label or class of labels to be carried or displayed
in or on the motor vehicle or on such goods in the course of their
transportation under subsection (2) of section 13;

(/) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this section, and every notification issued
under section 14 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued.
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or the notification, or both
Houses agree that the rule or the notification should not be made or issucd,
the rule or the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or notification

21. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act the Central Government may, by general or special order published in
the Official Gazete make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty;

Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this Act,

wn

15

20

25

30

40


3 OF 1865.
3 of 1865
3
10
10 of 1897.

47

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be, after it is made, before cach House of Parliament,

22. (/) The Carriers Act, 1865, is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Carriers Act, 1865, anything
done or any action taken under the said Act shall, in so far as such thing or
action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to
have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act and shall continue
in force accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken
under this Act.

(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses
Act, 1897 with regard to the cffect of repeals,

Repeal and
saving


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Movement of goods or property is an important and integral part of the economic development of the
country, The role of various players in the entire chain of activities enabiling movement of goods, therefore,
assumes importance. At present the law relating to the rights and liabilities of the common carrier is contained
in the Carriers Act, 1865. The main objective of the Act was to make common carriers liable for the loss or
damage to goods carried by them and also to limit the liability for such loss or damage to the goods/property
delivered by them to be carried, Many changes have taken place since the enactment of the said Act. These
include the following:-

(a) Various modes of transport now have separate enactments, for example, transport by the railways
is being regulated by the Railways Act, 1989. It has, therefore, become necessary to re-define the
scope and applicability of the Act to road transport industry.

(b) The transport industry also has undergone a sea change since 1865. A number of players and
middlemen like brokers and agents have come into existence and play an increasing role in the
movement of goods by road

(c) The liability specified in the existing Act at one hundred rupees has also become grossly inadequate
and irrelevant

2 A mumber of deficiencies have been noticed in the course of the enforcement of the provisions of the
Carriers Act, 1865. The Act has no provision for registration of Common Carriers. The Act also had not
foreseen the sophistication and complexity of the transport trade, as it exists today. The Transporters”
Associations have time and again demanded that the existing Act be repealed and new Act be cnacted to cater
to the present day requirements of transport, trade and commerce.

3, The Commission on Review of Administrative Laws constituted by the Central Government under the
Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain in its Report submitted to the Government in September, 1998 has also
recommended review of the Act.

4 Keeping in view the fact that other modes of transport are already covered under separate enactments
and the need for redefining the common carrier, regulation of the common carriers by the State and provision
of a transparent framework of rights and liabilities to govern the transactions between the common carriers
and the customers has been felt, the Government set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri
M.Koteeswaran, the then Executive Director, Association of State Road Transport Undertakings (ASTRU)
comprising members from Central Institute of Road Transport (CIRT), erstwhile Ministry of Surface
Transport. representative of All India Motor Transport Congress (AIMTC). The Committee had recommended
for repeal of the Carriers Act,1865 and its re-enactment incorporating the above requirements.

BY The Bill, inter alia, seeks to achieve the following objectives:
(i) To regulate and limit the liability of the common carriers,
(u) To provide for a registration of common carriers.

(iit) To ensure proper statistical reporting in the transport sector by persons involved in transportation
business.

48


49

(iv) To regulate carriage of hazardous and dangerous goods.

(v) To provide for rule making powers to deal with emerging and changing scenario from time to
lume,

{vi) To repeal the Carriers Act, 1865
6. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill,

7 The Bill secks to achieve the above objects.

T.R. BAALU,
New Deu;
The 30% November, 2005.


Notes ON CLAUSES

Clause 1, - This clause provides for the short. title, extent and commencement of the proposed legislation.
The proposed legislation will not be applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, As certain preparatory
Steps are required to be taken before the proposed icgislation is brought into force, it is proposed to empower
the Central Government to bring it into force from a date to be notified by it.

Clause 2. -This clause secks to define certain terms and expressions used in the Bill These definitions
include “common carrier™”, “consignment”, “goods”, “goods forwarding note” and “person”. The State
‘Transport Authorities and Regional Transport Authoritics constituted Under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
shall be the registering authorities for the purposes of the proposed legislation.

Clause 3. - This clause provides that after the commencement of the proposed legislation no person
will engage, whether wholly or partly, in the business of common carrier without obtaining a registration
under the proposed legislation.

Clause 4. - This clause seeks to set out the procedure for application for grant or renewal of registration
by issuance of appropriate certificate for carrying on the business of common earrier. The explanation to
sub-clause (3) secks to clarify that one registration in one State for a common carrier would suffice, Sub-
clause (6) provides that the period of validity of a registration or renewal of registration shall be ten years.
Sub-clause (7) stipulates the conditions which a holder of registration shall have necessarily to comply with
in terms of the requirements of the proposed Icgislation.

Clause 5. - This clause secks to bestow on the registering authority of the State the power to suspend
or revoke the certificate of registration under certain circumstances after giving the holder of the registration
an opportunity of being heard.

Clause 6. - This clause seeks to provide the procedure for preferring an appeal by any person who is
aggrieved by an order of the registering authority in respect of refusal to grant or renew a registration or
suspension or revocation of a registration, The State Transport Appellate Tribunal constituted under sub-
section (2) of section 87 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 shall be the appellate authority for the purposes of
the proposed legislation.

Clause 7, - This clause provides that the State Transport Authority in cach State or Union Territory
shall be required to submit an annual return giving details of the goods carried by the common carriers on the
basis of returns furnished by such carriers. This is a new provision for statistical purposes

Clause 8. -This clause lays down the procedure to be followed by the consignor. It includes execution
of goods forwarding note in the form to be laid down by rules, responsibility of the consignor for the
sorrcetnuss of the particulars and the declaration of the value of consignment as also indemnification of the
common carrier against any damage suffered by him on grounds of incorrectness or incompleteness of the
particulars mentioned in the goods forwarding note.

Clause 9. -This clause provides that a common carrier shall issue a goods receipt in the form specified
by mules and that the goods receipt would be the prima facie evidence of the weight and other particulars of
the goods

Clause 10, - This clause corresponds to section 3 of the Carriers Act, 1865. It secks to limit the liability
of the common carrier for loss of, or damage to, consignment up to ten thousand rupecs or value of

50


51

consignment declared, whichever is less, unless the consignor has undertaken to pay higher risk rate fixed
by the common carrier under the proposed section 11. This clause also defines the liability of the common
carrier in ०३४० of delay in delivery up to a period agreed to in the goods forwarding note and beyond the
period so agreed. It has been provided that up to the period agreed to, the liability would be limited to the
freight on the consignment and beyond the agreed period, the liability shall be as stipulated in this clause or
clause II, as the case may be. This clause further provides that the common carrier shall not be liable if such
loss or damage or delay in delivery had not taken place due to his fault or neglect or on the part of his servants
or agents,

Clause 11, - This clause corresponds to section 4 of the Carriers Act., 1865. It lays down the procedure
to be followed by the common carrier for payment of higher risk rate for undertaking higher risk and liability
as laid down in clause 10.

Clause 12. -This clause stipulates the conditions under which the common carricr would be liable to
the consignor for the loss or damage on account of his criminal act, He would be liable to compensate the
consignor and that the onus of proving the negligence or criminal act on the part of the common carrier
would not be on the plaintiff, Sub-clause (3) provides that if any consignment has been detained. for
examination by the competent authority and prohibited goods have been detected, the common carrier shall
not liable if he can prove that such description of goods in the forwarding note was received from the
consignor. The explanation to this clause clarifies that any person or authority who is empowered to examine
or scrutinize goods by or under any law for the time being in force to secure compliance of the provisions of
that law would be a competent authority for the purpose of clause 12.

Clause 13. - This clause provides that it is the duty of a common carrier to ensure that dangerous and
hazardous goods are insured before they are accepted for movement,

Clause 14. - This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to notify in the Oficial Gazette, in
public interest, as to the goods or class of goods which are not to be carried by a common carrier.

Clause 15, - This clause seeks to empower the common carrier to dispose of unclaimed consignments
(consignments which the consignee fails to take delivery after a period of thirty days from the date of notice
given by the common carricr). In case of perishable consignments, the period would be twenty-four hours
from service of notice or any lesser period as may be agreed upon, The common carrier will haye the power
to dispose of the consignments and after recovering a sum equal to the freight, storage and other charges due
including expenses incurred for the sale, remit the surplus to the consignee.

Clause 16. - This clause provides a period of limitation for institution of suits against common carriers
for the loss of or damage to any consignment. The complainant has to serve notice within 180 days from the
date of booking of the consignments for institution of any suit or other legal proceedings.

Clause 17. - This clause secks to list out the force-majeur conditions under which the common carrier
would be exonerated from liabilitics. These conditions include act of God, act of war or public enemy, fire,
explosion, riots or civil commotion and orders of restriction or prohibition by Government.

Clause 18. - This clause relates to the punishments for contravention in relation to non-registration and
carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous nature or prohibited goods, It is provided that whoever contravenes
the provisions of scction 3, scction 13 or a notification issued under the proposed section 14 shall be
punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and in case of the second or any subsequent
offence with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

Clause 19, - This clause secks to empower such officers or authority of the State Government as may
be specified by it by notification in the Official Gazette to compound the offences under clause 18 at any time


52

before or after the institution of the prosecution. The amount of compounding shall be laid down by the State
Government, by notification

Clause 20. - This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules, by notification in the
Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the Proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the
matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include the procedure for
application for grant or renewal of registration for carrying on the business of common carrier, the form of
register to be maintained by the common carrier, the form in which returns are to be furnished by common
carricr, the form in which a goods forwarding note is to be executed, the form in which goods receipt is to
be issued, the procedure and safeguards to be complied with in carrying dangerous or hazardous nature of
goods and the specifications required to be exhibited while carrying dangerous or hazardous nature of goods.
Sub-clause (3) lays down that the rules are required to be laid before Parliament.

Clause 21. - This clause empowers the Central Government to issue orders for removing difficulties in
giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. Such orders can be issued only within two years
from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation. Every order made under this clause is required
to be laid before Parliament.

Clause 22. -This clause seeks to repeal the Carriers Act, 1865 and also to save anything done or action
taken under the repealed Act in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1 ) of clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, by notification
in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made under the proposed legislation
These matters, 1afer-alia, relate to the form and manner of making an application for grant or renewal of a
certificate of registration of persons to cngage in the business of a common carrier and the fee which shall
accompany such application under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 4, the other conditions
which are required to be fulfilled by an applicant under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 4, the form
in which and the conditions subject to which a certificate of registration or renewal may be granted under
sub-section (5) of section 4, the form and manner of maintaining a register under clause (a) of sub-section
(7) of section 4, the information and return which may be furnished to the registering authority and the
transport research wing of the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Road Transport and Highways
under clause (c) of sub-section (7) of section 4, the form and manner in which a goods forwarding” note
shall be executed by the consignor under sub-section (1) of section 8, the form and manner in which a
common carrier shall issue goods receipts under sub-section (1) of section 9, the procedure and safeguards
to be complied with for carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life under sub-section
(1) of section 13 and the specification of the goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life and the
label or class of labels to be carried or displayed in or on the motor vehicle or on such goods in the course of
their transportation undcr sub-section (2) of section 13.

2. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause 20 of the Bill requires that the rules made by the Central Government
under the proposed legislation shall have to be laid before Parliament,

3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or administrative detail
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.

53


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the regulation of common carriers, limiting their liability and declaration
of value of goods delivered to them to determine their liability for loss of, or
damage to, such goods occasioned by the negligence or criminal acts of themselves,
their servants or agents and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri TR. Baalu, Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways )

54


eee ge
MINUTES
same ee



>, 4
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.00 p.M. on Tuesday, the 27th December, 2005 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi,

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy

LOK SABHA

Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Dr. K. Dhanaraju

Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Samik Lahiri

Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Umakant Yadav

we ton

ba

SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

2 At the outset, the Committee held preliminary discussion on (i) the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005 and
(ii) the Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005, which had been referred to the Committee for consideration
and report. After some discussion the Committee decided to hear the Scerctarics of the Departments of Road
Transport & Highways and Shipping, respectively, on the said Bills in its next meeting to be held on
12% January 2006, The Committee also decided to invite comments/suggestions from interested individuals/
organisations on the above Bills and directed the Scerctariat to issue Press Communiques accordingly.

3. The Committee also decided to consider the draft Report on the Admiralty Bill 2005 in its future
mecling,

4. The Committee then considered its future programmes and decided to meet on 12th January,
23rd January and 151 February 2006.

5. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 2.30 p.m.

57


XI
ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 12.30 pm. on Thursday, the 12th January, 2006 in Committce Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Shri $.S. Chandran

Shri Janardhana Poojary

Shri Shatrughan Sinha

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shrimati Ambika Soni

LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ramdas Athawale
9, Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10, Shr Adhir Chowdhury
11. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
i y Kumar Khandelwal
13. Shri Samik Lahiri
14. Shri Alok Kumar Mchta
15. Shri Manabendra Shah

MOUS

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director

Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Scerctary

Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi. Committee Officer

WITNESSES

I. (i) Representatives of the Department of Shipping
Shri A.K. Mohapatra, Secretary
Shri C. Balakrishanan, Additional Secy. & FA,
Shri Sushil Kumar, 1.5. (S&IWT)
Shri S.C. Srivastava, Member (Cargo)

(ii) Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri P.B, Singh, Joint Secretary & Legal Counsel

(iii) Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri R. Ragupathi, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor

Il. (i) Representatives of the Department of Road, Transport and Highways
Shri L.K. Joshi, Secretary
Shri 5.86: Das, Joint Secretary (T&A)
Shri S.K. Mishra, Director (RT)



59

(ii) Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legal Counsel

(iii) Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri R.L, Koli, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor

2. # . *
3 * * *
4 The Commitice again assembicd at 1.50 p.st, for consideration of the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005, The
officials of the Department of Road Transport and Highways made a Power Point presentation on the said

Bill. A hard copy of the presentation was kept. The Chairman and the Members raised several queries and the
Secretary, Department of Road. Transport and Highways responded thercto.

3. The Chairman of the Committee also directed the Secretariat to prepare a Questionnaire on cach of the
above two bills and send it to the respective Departments for obtaining replies thereto.

6. A yerbatim record of the proceedings was kept

7. The meeting of the Committee then finally adjourned at 3.00 p.m. to mect again on the 2300 January, 2006,

५५५ Relates to other mulier


XI
TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Monday, the 23rd January, 2006 in Committee Room 'A',

Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi,

Bun

Cans

10,
. Shri Alok Kumar Mchta

2

13

il.

MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Shatrughan Sinha

LOK SABHA

Shri Anil Basu

Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Dr. K. Dhanaraju

Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
Shri Samik Lahiri

Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Chengara Surendran

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director

Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary

Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

WITNESSES

. REPRESENTATIVE FROM CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT, NEW DELHI

Shrimati Sunita Narain, Director,

. REPRESENTATIVES FROM ALLINDIA TRANSPORTERS WELFAREASSOCIATION

Shri O.P. Agarwal, Chairman

Shri R.D. Bansal, President

Shri Ramesh Agarwal, Sr. Vice President
Shn Pradeep Singal, General Seerctary
Shri $.M. Jalan, Vice President (NC)

Shri Mahendra Arya, Vice President (WZ)
Shri R.K. Gulati, Joint General Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM ALLINDIA CONFEDERATION OF GOODS VEHICLES
OWNERS ASSOCIATION

Shri B. Channa Reddy, President

Shri Chittranjan Dass, Vice President

Shri S.P. Singh


61

IV. REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALLINDIA MOTOR TRANSPORT CONGRESS

Sardar Gurinder Pal Singh, President

Shri O.P. Agarwal, Chairman

Shri J.M. Saksena, Advisor

Shri M.P. Sarawagi, President, Calcutta Goods Transporter’s Association & Member, Managing
Committee of AIMTC

Shri २.५5, Chadha, Member, Managing Committee

Shri Inder Bir Singh, Member, Managing Committee

2 The Committee heard the views of the above-mentioned representatives and various stakeholders on
the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005, The fepresentatives have submitted written Memoranda on the said Bill for
consideration of the Committee, The Members raised queries on various provisions of the Bill and the
stakeholders explained their Position thereon.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept,
4 The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m. to meet again on the I* February, 2006.


XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 ७.४. on Friday, the 17th March, 2006 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi

MEMBERS PRESENT
1, Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Prof, Ram Deo Bhandary

Shri Janardhana Poojary

Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy

LOK SABHA

Shri Raj Babbar

Shri N_S.V. Chitthan

Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Shri ७ Wangyuh Konyak

10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma

11. Shri Umakant Yadav

ee क

sexs

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director

Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary

Shrimati Subhashrec Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2. 4 * .

3. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Admiralty Bill, 2005: the Inland
Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005; and the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005. The Committee also considered the
draft Report on the said Bills and adopted the same with minor modifications

4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of all the four
reports to the Parliament on 21st March, 2006,

x w@ .

6 The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 10.30 AM.

$*5 Relate toother moet

62