PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 75 |



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
TOURISM & CULTURE

SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON

ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN ITS SEVENTIETH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004) OF
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3.2.2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3.2.2004)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

JANUARY, 2004/PAUSA, 1925 (SAKA)


Composrrtax: 01

INTRODUCTION
Report 06 ry

Minutes

CONTENTS

nits (0$0॥1114

Comerrries

Packs
(1) = (it)
(iin)
1-9

11 - 13


COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2004)

Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
Shri $.S. Chandran

Shri K. Rahman Khan
Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Kalraj Mishra

9. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10. Shri Satish Pradhan

11. Dr Alladi P. Rajkumar

12. Shri K, Kalavenkata Rao
13, Shri Vayalar Ravi

14. Shrimati Maya Singh

1S. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi

LOK SABHA
16. Shri Raj Babbar
17. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
18. Shri Anil Basu
19. Shrimati Reena Choudhary
20. Shri 11.५ Dhinakaran
21. Shri PS. Gadhavi
22. Shri ५ Dhananjaya Kumar
23. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
24, Dr Ramkrishna Kusmaria
25. Shri S.P. Lepcha
26. Shri Shivaji Mane
27... Shri KH. Muniyappa
28. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
29, Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
30, Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
31. Shri Chandresh Patel
32. Shri Sunder Lal Patwa
33. Shri Braj Mohan Ram
34. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
35. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
36. Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
37 Capt. Satish Sharma
38, Shr Th. Chaoba Singh

० जय 9४ ७ +# (० 1०

(0


40,
41
42
43
44

45.

(ii)

Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
Shn Kalava Srinivasulu
Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
Shri Ram Naresh Tripathee
Shr 0. Venugopal

Shri $.D.N.R. Wadiyar

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Scerctary

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Scerctary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Scerctary

Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this
Seventy-fifth Report of the Committce on “Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in its Seventicth Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of Ministry of
Shipping"

2 The Seventicth Report of the Department-rclated Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 25% April 2003.

3 Action Taken Replics on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Seventicth Report
were received from the Ministry of Shipping on 25% July, 2003.

4. The Committee considered the subject and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 9" January
2004

NILOTPAL BASU
New Detar: Chairman,
January 9, 2004 Department-related Parliamentary Standing

Pausa 19, 1925 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.


REPORT

The Report of the Committce deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations as contained in its Seventicth Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 83) of the Ministry of Shipping, which was presented to the Parliament on 25" April 2003
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 25% July 2003 in respect of all
the observations/rccommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:-

(1) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 14 and 41 Total - 2

(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the

Government replies:
Para Nos. 9 and 80 Total - 2

(ii) Recommendations/obscrvations in respect of which replics of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:

Para Nos. 23 and 50 Total - 2
(1४) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still

awaited:

Para Nos. 19, 29, 40, 55, 59, 70 and 76 Total - 7

3. The Committce desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have
been categorized us interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the carliest.

4. On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replics, the Committee has made observations on cach item
of the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Seventicth Report, action taken thercon by the Government and recommendations/
observations of the Committee on cach item of action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.

ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2003-04
(Recommendation at Para 9)

5. The Committee observes that the Budget Estimates of Ministry of Shipping include allocation of
Rs.10.06 crores for execution of civil works through CPWD for DG (Shipping). The amount earmarked
is also reflected in the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Urban Development and is spent by CPWD
on the projects of the Ministry of Shipping The Committee is of the view that the practice of showing
the same amount in Demands for Grants of two Ministries creates confusion and therefore recommends
that this practice should be reviewed and the amount for the civil works should be reflected in Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Shipping only and placed at the disposal of Ministry of Shipping instead
of Ministry of Urban Development in order to ensure better implementation, control and monitoring of
projects

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

6. The plan funds in respect of civil works undertaken by CPWD are reflected only in one place 1.९.
in the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation. However, in the
information prepared for Department-rclated Parliamentary Standing Committec, the figures of these plan
funds were reflected just to indicate the total Annual Plan allocation of DG (Shipping), The matter was,
however, taken up with Ministry of Urban Development for their views. The comments offered by them
are as under:-

~The plan provisions of not only Ministry of Shipping but also various other Ministries are also
provided in the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Urban Development for execution of civil works


2

through CPWD, As the procedure for execution of civil works is very lengthy, some times projects
carmarked by a Ministry for a particular year can not be started in that particular year due to delay in
receipt of Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction by CPWD, Funds earmarked for such
Projects cannot be utilized during that year and are required to be cither diverted or surrendered. The
advantage of having the funds for all the Ministries under the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Urban
Development, instead of Demands for Grants of cach concerned Ministry is that, in case, duc to some
reason the some of the projects of one Ministry are delayed, it can be utilized for another Ministry's
Projects, which may be at an advanced stage, In this way better utilization of the overall plan provisions
for civil construction of the Government as a whole is achieved.

Sometimes delay in execution of works by CPWD is caused by lack of interaction between the
Project sanctioning authority, 16, the administrative Ministry and CPWD. A system of periodic review of
the works at the level of the Scerctary (Urban Development) has been introduced to improve physical
and financial progress of various projects. Ministries have been requested to nominate a Nodal Officer
for the department, who could coordinate with CPWD to ensure timely completion of projects. CPWD
has been asked to make available to all Ministrics a monthly Progress report in respect of works being
done for various Ministrics. It is expected that the newly introduced system will go a long way in ensuring
better implementation, control, and monitoring of projects as observed by the Standing Committee of
Ministry of Shipping”

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

7 The Committce agrees to the view of the Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty
Alleviation that it is advantageous to have plan funds in respect of Civil works undertaken by
CPWD for all the Ministries under the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Urban Development
and Poverty Alleviation, instead of Demands for Grants of each concerned Ministries as for any
reason, if some of the projects of one Ministry are delayed then the funds can be utilized for
another Ministry's projects. Further, to improve physical and financial progress of various projects
a# system of periodic review of the works at the level of the Secretary, Urban Development and
tem of sending monthly progress report in respect of works being done for various Ministry
ave been introduced. Ministries have also been requested to nominate a nodal officer who could
coordinate with CPWD to ensure timely completion of projects. The Committee hopes that the
newly introduced system by the Ministries would ensure better implementation, control and
monitoring of projects.

PORT SECTOR

(Recommendation at Para 14)

8 The Committee notes with concern that there has been a heavy shortfall in utilization of fund as
compared 10 the approved outlay, During 2002-03 an outlay of Rs.1162.00 crores was provided to the
Ministry of Shipping for Port Sector and the Ministry could utilize only Rs.439.81 crores (upto February,
2003), The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons put forth by the Ministry of Shipping and is of
the view that funds could have been utilised if timely action to address the problem was initiated by the
Ministry. The Comuittce fecls that on the one hand the Ministry is demanding for more allocation and
on the other hand it has failed to utilize the available approved outlay, The Committee strongly recommends
that the Ministry should evolve some institutional mechanism to ensure better implementation control and
monitoring of projects so that the plan outlay is utilized in higher Proportions and the accountability be
fixed for such lapses, if any, in this regard

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

9. The observations/recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted and brought to the
notice of Chairmen of the major ports and Heads of other organizations under Ministry of Shipping. The


3

actual plan expenditure (provisional) incurred during 2002-03 is Rs.528.04 crores. The need for critically
reviewing, the plan schemes and monitoring the pace of plan expenditure in order to ensure financial
discipline and bettcr expenditure management has been impressed upon the Chairmen of the major ports
and the Heads of other organizations. Implementations of the schemes included in Annual Plan 2003-04
are being regularly reviewed and monitored closely with a view to ensuring optimum utilization of the
funds

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

10, The Committee notes that the Ministry have issucd instruction to all the chairman of the
Major Ports and Heads of other organizations under their administrative control for critically
reviewing the plan schemes and monitoring the pace of plan expenditure in order to ensure
financial discipline and better expenditure management.

PORT SECTOR

(Recommendation at Para 19)

11. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry of Shipping in improving the efficiency
and capacity of Indian Ports. The Committee notes that during 10% Plan the Ministry of Shipping will
be able to add a capacity of 127.10 million tonnes bringing the total capacity to 470.6 million tonnes as
against the traffic of 415 million tonnes by the Working Group on Port Sector. The Committee hopes
that with the modernisation of Ports and enhancement of service quality, the Ports will be able to utilise
the additional capacity. vis-a-viy traffic comfortably.

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

12. Observations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted. The present trend wherein the capacity
available in the major ports exceeds the traffic in these ports is expected to be maintained.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

13. The Committce notes that presently the capacity available in the major ports exceed the

traffic und hopes that with the modernisation of Ports and enhancement of service quality, the
Ports will be able to uti the additonal capacity vis-a-vis traffic comfortably.

DEVELOPMENT OF INTERMEDIATE AND MINOR PORTS
(Recommendation at para 23)

14 The Committee notes that the minor ports serve not only as trans-shipment points for trade but also
as catalysts for cconomic activities in their respective regions, The role of minor ports is becoming
increasingly important owing to the development of coastal shipping and they should be viewed as an
alternative to congested major ports. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping should
impress upon the concerned States to provide adequate funds for the development of minor ports so that
they could effectively cater to coastal vessels and assist in development of the hinterland. The Committee
also recommends that keeping in view the contribution and importance of minor ports in cargo handling,
Government of India may also consider to provide central grants to the Maritime States for development
of Minor Ports

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

15. The recommendations of the Hon"ble Committee to provide adequate funds for the development of
munor ports so that they could effectively cater to coastal vessels and assist in development of the
hinterland haye been brought to the notice of all the maritime States and Union Territories with the request
to take necessary action on the recommendations.

16. The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee for providing central grant to the maritime States
for development of minor ports was taken up with the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission


has, in response, stated that the services provided by the ports i.e. cargo handling services, berthing and
ship repair services and harbour services can be provided by the private sector more efficiently. According
to the Planning Commission, the focus of services and efficiency required in order to reform the Port
Sector could only be achicved by the private providers who are subject to competitive pressure and thus,
there is little need for additional public investment in port infrastructure. In view of this, the Planning
Commission has not agreed to the proposal to introduce a scheme relating to central grant to the maritime
States for development of minor ports. However, an amount of Rs.! crore has been allocated in the
Central Budget to the Ministry of Shipping during 2003-04 as part of Central Plan Schemes for grants
in aid to State Government for conducting feasibility/hydrographical/environmental studics for development
of minor ports.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

17 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of Ministry of Shipping for development of
minor ports in the country. The Committce recommends that the Ministry of Shipping should
keep pursuing Planning Commission for providing grants in aid to State Governments for
development of minor ports as minor ports are becoming increasingly important owing to the
development of coastal shipping and to serve as an alternative to congested major ports.

CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 29)

18 The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that CDLB has not implemented revision of
pension and liberalisation of post retirement benefits in terms of wage settlement and the pensioners/
retired employecs have not been paid pension and other post retirement benefits including gratuity, PF
settlement ९०. for the past so many months. The Committee fecls that pensioners after their retirement
fully depend on their retirement benefits and if the same are not disbursed to them in time, it will lead
to harassment and it is also against the law, The Committee does not approve the lackadaisical approach
of the Ministry of Shipping in sharing the responsibility of pensioners of CDLB. The Committee recommends
that Ministry of Shippmg should take responsibility in the matter and ensure that payment of pensionary
benefits to the cmployee of CDLB who retired prior to 1.1.98 and revision on pension and payment of
arrears etc. be implemented at the carlicst.

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

19 Ministry of Shipping has taken note of the recommendations of the Hon"ble Committee. A proposal
for one time grant to the CDLB for the purpose of payment of outstanding ducs of pensioners of the
Board is under consideration in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Pensions
and Pensioners’ Welfare

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

20. The Committee is happy to note that a proposal for one time grant to the CDLB for the
purpose of payment of outstanding dues of pensioners of the Board is under consideration in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Pensions and Pensioners’
Welfare and recommends the Ministry of Shipping to kecp pursuing the matter with Ministry of
Finance for payment of pensionary benefits to the employee of CDLB who retired prior to 1.1.98
and revision on pension and payment of arrears etc. be implemented at an carly date.

INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
(Recommendation at Para 40)

21. The Committce notes with concern that in India, IWT sector has not been developed with desired
pace and thus it cannot compete with the devcloped modes like road and rail. The Commitice observes
that though, measures have been put in place during the 9" Plan to move towards giving a push for


5

accelerated and all-around development of IWT sector in the 10” Plan period, However, the Committee
७ constrained to note that only an amount of २5,152 crores was utilized against the approved outlays
of Rs. 308 crores during 9" Plan period. The Committee recommends the Ministry should gear up its
machinery to ensure that 10" Plan outlay is fully utilized to exploit the potential of this important mode
of transport and approach the Government of India for higher budgetary allocation at RE stage so that
the work on declaration and development of four Waterways as National Waterways could be taken up
on priority,

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT.

22. The Government takes note of the observation of the committee. All possible efforts are being made
10 utilize the 10" Plan outlay. The Government had taken up the matter regarding increase in Plan outlay
wih the Planning Commission immediately after the 10" Plan outlay was finalized, The Planning Commission
Suggested that it could be taken up ॥ the time of mid term appraisal of the 10% Plan. Accordingly, the
Ministry will approach the Planning Commission at the time of mid term appraisal of the 10" Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

23. The Committee notes that efforts are being made by Ministry of Shipping to utilize the 10%
Plan outlay for IWT sector. However, the Committee recommends that Ministry should approach
the Planning Commission for higher budgetary allocation so that declaration and development of
four waterways as National Waterways could be taken up on priority.

INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
(Recommendation at Para 41)

24. The Committee is unhappy 10 note that inspite of substantial investment for development of [WT
Sector. cargo transportation by IWT mode has not shown significant improvement on the three National
Waterways, The Committee also docs not approve the strategy of the Ministry to make investment for
development and regulation of Inland Waterways without fixing the physical targets to be achieved
ws-a-vis financial parameter. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry while coming up
with target of investment must have a realistic physical target for Cargo transportation, year-wise for the
entire Tenth Plan period and beyond

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

25. The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is the infrastructure provider and is responsible
for development and regulation of Inland Waterways, particularly the National Waterways, Various
infrastructural facilities namely navigational channels, navigational aids, terminals etc. are being provided/
maintained by IWAI on the three National Waterways, Cargo movement through [WT mode is the
responsibility of service providers such as Central Inland Water Transport Corporation (CIWTC) and
private operators. As such, a correlation between investment for development/regulation of infrastructure
and volume/value of cargo transported may be difficult to establish. However, as suggested by the
Committee. appointment of a consultant for working out a realistic target for cargo transportation vis-
@-vis targeted investment for the Tenth Plan and beyond is being examined by IWAI,

FURTHER RECOM MENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

26. The Committee is of the view that the entire Ministry has failed in their endeavour to
establish correlation between investment for development/regulation of infrastructure and volume/
value of cargo transported through these three National Waterways. However, the Committee
notes with satisfaction that Ministry of Shipping is considering appointment of a consultant for
working out a realistic target for cargo transportation vis-a-vis targeted investment for the 10%
Plan and beyond and recommends that it should be expedited at an early date,



6

CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 50)

27. The Committce is happy to note that revival package has been introduced and funds are being
released to CIWTC as per schedule. The Committee is however constrained to note that there is an
clement of ambiguity in the policy of the Government towards CIWTC On one hand, the Government
have proposal for revival of CIWTC and on the other, the Government have also initiated the process of
disinvestment of CIWTC. The Committee is of the view that the future of IWT operations including that
of CIWTC holds immense possibilities for establishing a well-defined multimodal transportation network
in the country and therefore, recommends that Government should push further the revival of CIWTC

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

28, The Government is committed to the revival of the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation
(CIWTC) as per the approved revival plan. The disinvestment of the corporation is as per the Government
policy to disinvest “non-strategic” Public Sector Undertakings. The revival plan under implementation has
been kept in view while the process of disinvestment of CIWTC is being put in place.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

29. The Committee fails to understand that on one hand the Ministry has proposal for revival
of CIWTC and on the other it has been fisted for disinvestments as “non-strategic” Public Sector
Undertakings. The Committee does not agree with the reply of the Ministry and strongly
recommends for revival of CIWTC.

INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES (IIMS), MUMBAI
(Recommendation at Para 55)

31. The Committee appreciates the Ministry for taking a decision to include in the objective of the
society a clause for establishment of Indian Maritime University. The Committee, however, recommends
that the Ministry should go for establishing the University by an Act of Parliament so as to provide
considerable operational freedom and a qualitative boost to the Maritime {raining in the country. The
Committee, however, notes with concern that the terms and conditions of services are being changed
against the interest of the employees. The Committce recommends that before taking any action with
regard to the terms and conditions of the service of employees of erstwhile Maritime Institutes, the unions
of the employees be consulicd and it should be ensured that the terms and conditions of service of
employees who have been transferred on deemed deputation to IIMS remain unchanged. Also, the
interests of employees particularly relating to pension, CGHS facilitics and retention of Government
accommodation should be safeguarded.

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
31. A clause relating 10 conversion of IIMS into Indian Maritime University as carly as possible has

already been included in the objectives of the Socicty. The exact mechanism of establishing the University
will, however, be decide by IIMS,

32. Regarding terms and conditions of service of the employees who are on deemed deputation to IIMS,
the IIMS has been asked to take immediate steps to settle the same.

33. As regards the interests of employees regarding pension, CGHS facilities and retention of Government
accommodation, action is being taken accordingly in consultation with concerned Ministries/Departments
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

34. The Committce is unhappy to note that Ministry have not yet taken any decision regarding
mechanism of establishment of Indian Maritime University and settlement of terms and conditions



7

of service of the employees who are on deemed deputation to IIMS including pension, CGHS
ties and retention of Government accommodation. The Committce strongly recommends the
Ministry to expedite the matter ut the earliest.

MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND

(Recommendation at Para 59)

35. The Commitice expresses ils anguish over the monetary failure on the part of the Ministry, which
led to misappropriation of an amount of Rs. 92.78 crore from the Seamen’s Provident Fund, The
Committee is of the view that whatever be the outcome of the matter which is sub-judice now at no cost
the interest of Scamen’s should be allowed to suffer and the Committee recommends that the funds to
the extent of Rs. 92.78 crore should be provided as outright grant to recoup shortage in the fund. The
Committee also recommends: the Ministry to take initiative to prevent such incident in the future.

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

36, The proposal for providing funds to the extent of Rs. 92,78 crore as outright grant to recoup the
shortage in Scamen’s Provident Fund is already under active consideration in the Ministry.

37 Further. after these irregularitics came to notice, the Ministry has already taken the following steps
to prevent such incidence in future —

(1) Resolution of 28.11.1996, authorizing the Commissioner as a sole authority to do the investment
has been rescined.

(11) A reputed company (Chartered Accountants) has been appointed as Internal Auditors who shall
submit quarterly report which will be placed before the Board in its subsequent mectings. The
first two reports have already been placed before the Board

(in) All physical securities required to be converted into demat form have been converted. State
Bank of Indore has been appointed as Depository Participants for the purpose.

(iv) Ministry of Finance has been requested to get a special audit of the Seamen's Provident Fund
done by CAG

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

3% The Committee notey that the proposal for providing funds to the extent of Rs. 92.78 crores
us outright grant (0 recoup the shortage in Scamen’s Provident Fund is under active consideration
he Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Shipping have taken initiative to prevent such
irregularities in the future. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to keep pursuing
the Ministry of Finance for recouping the shortage of funds in Seamen's Provident Fund to the
extent of Rs. 92.78 crores.

REVIVAL OF HOOGHLY DOCK PORT ENGINEERS LIMITED (HDPEL), KOLKATA
(Recommendation at Para 70)

39 The Commutice notes that the Ministry has issued guideline for ports authorities and shipping
companies permutting them to place orders on public sector shipyards on nomination and tender basis,
The Committee hopes that change in Government policy would certainly help the various loss making
PSUs 10 make them viable. The Committee feels that HDPEL with its infrastructure and a expertise can
be a integral part for development and promotion of Inland Water Transportation through NW-| and NW-
2 and act as a catalyst to contribute to the national economy. The Committee recommends that Ministry
should take action for revival of the HDPEL with the existing capacity and infrastructure including
manpower

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

40) tas true that Ministry of Shipping has issued guidelines to the Port Authoritics and Shipping,
Companies to place orders on Public Scctor Shipyards under this Ministry including HDPEL on nomination


8

basis/non-tender basis. However, it has also been left to these authorities to go in for open competitive
bidding or place orders on nomination/non-tender basis subject to commercial consideration. In addition
shipbuilding subsidy scheme has been extended for a further period of 5 years up to 2007. HDPEL has
already constructed one survey launch, two hydraulic surface dredgers, seven nos. dumib barges and four
705. pontoons fitted with cranes for NW-I and NW-II, Some of these works were given to HDPEL on
nomination basis. In addition to these since last several years repair works of cutter suction dredgers of
the Authorities, tug and other vessels were awarded to HDPEL on limited tender as well as on nomination
basis, IWAL also proposes to award the work of construction of two nos, 300 tonne cargo vesscls to
HDPEL on nomination basis. [WAI has placed orders for construction of 4 Nos. Crane Mounted Pontoons
on HDPEL on nomination basis.

41. Keeping in view the recurring loss making position of the Company since its nationalization in 1984,
the Company was referred to the Disinvestment Commission for its disinvestment or otherwise.
Disinvestment Commission after in-depth consideration of the matter has recommended that the Government
should disinvest its entire stake in HDPEL at the catlicst to a strategic buyer, together with financial
restructuring, details of which have to be finalized in consultation with the prospective buyers. If
disinvestment does not succeed, owing to lack of interest of suitable bidders or for any other reason,
closure/winding up of HDPEL is recommended. The Government is yet to take a decision on the
recommendations of the Disinvestment Commission. Government is seized of the matter. Till a final
docision is taken on the recommendations of the Disinvestment Commission, no proposal for revival of
HDPEL wath its existing capacity and infrastructure including manpower scems to be feasible.

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

42. The Committee notes that decision on disinvestments, closure/winding up of HDPEL is
pending with the Government. The Committee, however, recommends the Ministry of Shipping
to press further for revival of HDPEL with its existing capacity and infrastructure including
manpower as the change in Government policy would help the various loss muking PSUs to make
them viable.

TONNAGE ACQUISITION PROGRAMME
(Recommendation at Para 76)

43 The Committee appreciates the Ministry for taking several proactive steps viz; simplification of
guidelines for import of ships. doing away: with age norms etc. The Commitice notes that the proposal
to introduce Tonnage Tax on the basis of recommendations of the Rakesh Mohan Committee for the
Shipping Industry in licu of the corporate tax is under consideration of the Government in consultation
wath the Ministry of Finance and a working group has been set up to finalise the fiscal regime and try
to structure the required legislation for Introduction of Tonnage Tax. The Commitice, however, recommends
that the Government should take steps for removal of custom duty of 5 per cent on tugs and barges and
provide tax relief in income tax payments so as to bring Indian Seafarers at par with Indian working in
forcign ships.

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

44. The issue of providing tax relicf in Income Tax payment to bring Indian Seafarers at par with Indian
working in foreign ships has been taken up with Ministry of Finance. Minister of Shipping has also
discussed thts with the Finance Minister during the pre-budget consultations on 16% January 2001 and
21९ January 2002

45. So far as custom duty of 5% on tugs and barges is concered, the Ministry is of the view that to
protect the Indian Shipbuilding. Industry, which is competent to build tugs cte,, is reasonable. However,
the Committee may like to give directions, if it thinks otherwise.


9

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

46. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Shipping and recommends that Tonnage
Tax be introduced in licu of corporate tax at the earliest.

CONSTRUCTION OF SINGLE BUOY MOORING (SBM)

(Recommendation at Para 80)

47. The Commuttce appreciates that the Ministry of Shipping and Petroleum and Natural Gas haye been
able to reach an amicable solution for the setting up of the SBM and there has been an agreement for
sctting up the SBM within the Cochin Port Limits,

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

48. The observations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted. A Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) for the establishment, operation and maintenance of the SBM within port waters has been signed
by the Cochin Port Trust with Kochi Refinery Limited on 11.6.2003

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

49. The Committee notes the reply and does not desire to pursue the matter further.


MINUTES



I
FIRST MEETING

The Committce met at 2.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9% January, 2004 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi

MEMBERS PRESENT
1, Shri Nilotpal Basu — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri 5.5. Chandran

Shri Sukhdey Singh Libra
Shri Kalraj Mishra

Shri Satish Pradhan

» Dr, Alladi P. Rajkumar
Shri K. Kalayenkata Rao
Shri Vayalar Ravi

Shri 5, Viduthalai Virumbi

LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri G.M. Banatwaila
13. Shn Anil Basu
14. Shrimati Reena Choudhary
15. Shr V. Dhananjaya Kumar
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
17. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
18. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
19. Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
20. Shri D. Venugopal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary

Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Sceretary

Shamati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2 « , *
3% * *

Seen awe sin

4 The Committee then considered the Draft teports on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/obscrvations of the Committee contained in the 67th Report on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and 70th Report on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of Ministry of Shipping and after some discussion, adopted the reports with slight modifications.
The Committee also decided to present the reports to the Parliament during its next Session.

5 bd * *

6, A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

7. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.20 9.७.

***Relates ७ matters not inehided in this Repo Report