 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
312
_ 
THREE HUNDRED TWELFTH REPORT  
Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
Works  
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 


 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWELFTH REPORT  
 
Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Works  
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-15 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   
6.  
    7. ANNEXURES         
 
    
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16-20
MINUTES
29-48
21-28

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twelfth Report on  ‘Review of Central Road  and 
Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Works’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on the subject on 16th December, 2021.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its  thanks to the officers of Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways  for placing before the Committee , the material and information 
desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and ad opted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
 
 
 
BOS Bank of Sanction 
CALA Competent Authority for Land Acquisition 
CRF Central Road Fund 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund  
DG Director General 
EI Economic Importance 
FS Financial Sanction 
IEBR Internal and Extra-Budgetary Resources 
ISC Inter-State Connectivity 
LA Land Acquisition 
MORTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  
PWD Public Works Department  
RD Road Development  
RO Regional Officer 
ROB Road Over Bridges 
RT Road Transport 
RUB Road Under Bridges 
SS Special Secretary 
TA Technical Approval 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UT Union Territory 

 
1 
REPORT 
 
Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Works 
 
 India has one of the largest road networks in the world. Having a well -maintained, robust 
road network spanning across the country is a crucial prerequisite for fast -paced economic 
growth of any country. The development and maintenance of National Highways in India is in -
part funded by the collection of cess, a duty of excise customs on petrol and high speed diesel 
oil. The Central Road Fund Act, 2000 was enacted to give statutory st atus to the existing Central 
Road Fund governed by the Resolution of Parliament passed in 1988, for development and 
maintenance of national highways and improvement of safety at railway crossings, and for these 
purposes to levy and collect by way of cess, a duty of excise and duty of customs on motor spirit 
commonly known as petrol, high speed diesel oil and for other matters connected therewith. The 
CRF Act, 2000 has been replaced by the Central Road and Infrastructure Fund, 2000 through 
Finance Act, 2018.  Given the large number of road highway works taken up across the country 
under the Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF), the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Revie w 
of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) works’ for detailed examination and Report 
thereon. 
2. In this connection, the Committee heard the views of the Director -General (Road 
Development) and Special Secretary (DG (RD) & SS), Ministry of Road Tran sport and 
Highways in its meeting held on 16 th December, 2021. The Committee held discussions with the 
officials of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, State Government of Tamil Nadu and 
State Government of Kerala on this subject during its Study Visi t to Chennai and Kochi from 

 
2 
12th - 16th July, 2021. The Committee also heard the officials of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and State Government of Rajasthan on the subject during its Study Visit to Jaisalmer 
on 15th November, 2021. 
 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
3. The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Committee that CRF 
was available for Road Sector (National Highways, Rural roads under PMGSY and State Roads) 
and only for ROBs/ RUBs and safety works at u nmanned Railway Level Crossings as per the 
initial Central Road Fund (CRF) Act of 2000. Vide amendment through Finance Act, 2016, 
Railway capital works (Gauge conversion, electrification, etc.) were also included under the Act. 
4. The Central Road Fund Act, 2000 has been replaced by “Central Road and Infrastructure 
Fund” (CRIF) through Finance Act, 2018.  More sectors were included through amendment of 
2018, viz. Ports, Shipyards, Inland Waterways, Airports, Railway track & Commercial 
Infrastructure/ Stations, Urban Public Transport, etc., in Transport Sector besides other Sectors 
(Energy, Water and Sanitation, Communication, Social and Commercial Infrastructure). 
5. The CRIF Act, 2000 was further amended vide Finance Act, 2019. Now the fund is 
earmarked as p er Section 7A of the amended Act by a Committee headed by the Hon’ble 
Finance Minister and there is no fixed share of apportionment now, for this a committee is 
constituted as per Gazette Notification No. S.O.3226(E) dated 02.07.2018. The Act is 
administered by the Department of Economic Affairs as per the amendments to the Government 
of India (Allocation and Business) Rules, 1961 dated 26.07.2018.  
6. The Ministry furnished the below comparison of cess distribution before 01.06.2016, 
after 01.06.2016 and b efore 31.03.2018 and as per CRF Act, 2000 amended to CRIF Act, 2000 
by the Finance Act, 2018: 

 
3 
Ministry/ 
Organization 
 Earlier formula as per 
CRF Act, 2000 till 31 st 
May, 2016 
Revised formula as per 
amendments made in the 
CRF Act, 2000 by Finance 
Act 2016 e ffective from 1 st 
June, 2016 upto 31 st March, 
2018 
Distributions as 
per CRIF 
amended by the 
Finance Act, 2018 
w.e.f. 01.04.2018 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Ministry of Rural 
Development for 
development of 
Rural Roads 
(PMGSY) 
50% of  diesel cess 
(excluding  Rs.0.50/litre) 
33.50% of Cess of both Diesel 
and Petrol 
To be decided by 
Committee headed 
by Hon’ble 
Finance Minister 
as per Section 7A 
of the CRIF Act, 
2000 (erstwhile 
CRF Act, 2000) 
National 
Highways  
(MORT&H) 
Rs.0.50 / litre of both 
Petrol and Diesel Cess + 
57.50 % of  X 
41.50% of Cess of both Diesel 
and Petrol 
Railways  12.50% of X 14% of Cess of both Diesel 
and Petrol 
State Roads 
under CRF and 
EI and ISC 
30% of X 10% of Cess of both Diesel 
and Petrol 

 
4 
(MORTH) 
Border Roads 
Organization 
Nil 1% of Cess of both Diesel and 
Petrol 
X= 50% Diesel Cess (excluding Rs.0.50/litre) + 100% of Petrol Cess 
(excluding  Rs.0.50/litre).  
 
 
7. The funds under CRIF are allocated for development and maintenance of National 
Highway works including Bharatmala projects, Road Transport projects, works on State roads 
including EI&ISC works, etc. Total budget of Ministry, IEBR and Pvt. Sector Investment since 
2014-15 is at Annexure -I. The details of CRIF share used for NHs, Road Transport and State 
roads including EI&ISC since 2014 -15 is at Annexure -II. The scheme -wise Outstanding 
liabilities of sanctioned projects/ Bank of Sanction (BOS) of various works of the Ministry as on 
01.04.2021 is at Annexure-III. 
8. The Committee notes that through the amendment made by F inance Act, 2018, 
more sectors viz., Ports, Shipyards, Inland Waterways, Airports, Railway track and 
Commercial Infrastructure/ Stations, Urban Public Transport, etc., in Transport Sector 
besides other Sectors (Energy, Water and Sanitation, Communication, Social and 
Commercial Infrastructure), have been included under the CRIF. The Committee feels 
that the budgetary support that CRIF now provides to all these crucial sectors will help in 
achieving all round growth of the Indian economy. The Committee furthe r notes that the 
distribution under CRIF has been made more transparent as it is to now be decided by a 

 
5 
Committee headed by Hon’ble Finance Minister as per Section 7A of the CRIF Act, 2000 
depending on the priorities of the project. 
 
CRIF State Roads 
9. The Ministry informed the Committee that it allocates funds for State Roads under the 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Scheme and Economic Importance and Inter State 
Connectivity (EI&ISC) Schemes as per the provisions of the CRIF Act, 2000 amended  by the 
Finance Act from time to time. As per the CRIF Act, 2000 and its amendment vide the Finance 
Act, 2019. 
■ Central Government is no longer responsible for:- 
● Sanctioning of schemes; State to sanction works 
● Monitoring of State road projects and expenditu re incurred thereon; for release 
of funds to States 
● Formulation of rules for State roads. 
■ Central Govt. to formulate criteria for allocation of funds for such roads. 
10. The Committee notes that as per the CRIF Act, 2000 and its amendment vide the 
Finance Act, 2019, the Central Government is no longer responsible for formulation of 
rules for State roads. The Committee feels that the Ministry should specify the guidelines 
and technical specifications that must be followed by States to construct State roads f unded 
by CRIF. The Committee recommends that a mechanism should be put in place by the 
Ministry to carry out random checks regarding the quality of such State roads. This would 
go a long way in improving the quality of State roads being constructed by using CRIF. 

 
6 
11. The Ministry further informed the Committee that the criteria for CRF State Roads was 
proposed by the MoRT&H with the approval of Hon’ble Minister (RT&H); these have been 
finalized by M/o Finance with approval of Hon’ble Finance Minister; issued on 31.01.2020 
(Annexure-IV). 
12. The Ministry apprised the Committee about the following major aspects of the criteria for 
State roads under CRIF Act, 2000:- 
○ Criteria for allocation of funds is based on 30% weightage to fuel consumption and 70% 
weightage to geographical area of the State/ UT. 10% of such allocation to be 
earmarked for road safety works.  
○ Considering the limited available budgetary resources, aspirations of the Government, 
financing of State road projects in the second phase after com pletion of the Phase -I of 
Bharatmala under CRIF shall be duly considered.     
○ Fund shall be available for clearing outstanding liability of works sanctioned by the 
MoRT&H under CRIF (including Economic Importance & Inter -State Connectivity 
(EI&ISC) Schemes). 
○ Construction of roads connecting 'economic corridors', 'connecting roads under 
Bharatmala', 'roads connecting ports' and 'roads connecting commercial hubs' shall be 
funded under CRIF. 
○ The sanction of EI&ISC works would be similar as CRIF works.  
○ Total c ost of the schemes to be approved to be limited to the bank of sanctions of 
generally three times  of the annual allocation, except for hill States and North -East 
States (where working season is limited) for which this is to be generally be four times 
of the annual allocation for the year for the State/ UT. 

 
7 
○ Land acquisition (LA) was not being permitted earlier for State road projects except for 
pre-construction activities for ring -roads or bypasses or service roads along NHs. LA is 
now also to be allow ed for development of NHs as States’/ UTs’ contributions to share 
of Land Costs. This would facilitate participation/ contribution of States in LA cost as 
envisaged under “Grand Challenge” mechanism. 
○ Projects on de-notified/ reverted back to States/ UTs on  account of construction of NH 
bypasses, potential roads for declaration as new NHs, economically important roads, 
roads connecting NHs with particular focus on safety aspects.  
○ Road safety works, construction of ROBs/ RUBs, bridges, etc. 
○ State Governments/ UTs shall forward list of projects along with the relevant details to 
this Ministry for consideration of finalizing the same.  
○ State Govts./ UTs shall accord Administrative Approval for the projects after 
finalization of list by the Ministry. 
○ State/ UT PWDs, Road Construction Department/ Corporation, etc., to accord Technical 
Approval and Financial Sanction (TA&FS).   
○ Upto 10% of excess cost over administratively approved cost allowed. 
○ MoRT&H to release funds to State Govts./ UTs in Quarterly instalments linked to 
submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs).  
○ One third of accrual for the State/ UT for the year shall be maintained as a revolving 
balance with State/ UT while releasing funds.      
○ State Governments/ UTs to further release funds to concerned executive agencies (e.g. 
PWDs, Road Construction Department/ Corporation, etc.) within 7 days of release of 
funds by Ministry. 
○ Fund provided under CRIF shall not lapse at the end of the financial year. 

 
8 
13. The Ministry furnished details about the State / U T – wise accrual and release made for 
CRIF State roads since 2014-15 including Outstanding liabilities of sanctioned projects/ Bank of 
Sanction (BOS) as on 01.04.2021 (attached at Annexure -V). The State / UT – wise allocation 
and expenditure made for EI&IS C works since 2014 -15 including BOS as on 01.04.2021 is 
attached at Annexure-VI.  
14. During the meeting of the Committee held on 16 th  December, 2021, DG(RD)&SS 
informed that the total cost of scheme which can be sanctioned under a particular State, is limited 
to Bank of Sanctions which is limited to three times of the annual accrual/allocations in plain 
areas and four times in hilly and North -Eastern Areas. He stated that the sanction process has 
been further modified and as per the amended Act, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
only approves the projects which are identified and submitted by the State Governments. After 
the approval, it is the responsibility of the State Government to accord administrative approvals 
and financial sanctions and to mo nitor the progress of projects. He apprised the Committee that 
based on the progress of work, State Governments submit a utilization certificate duly audited by 
the audit committee, based on which, the Ministry releases the funds to the State Governments. 
He stated that there was no lack of clarity between the States and the Centre and that delays in 
the progress of works used to be present in many States a few years back but that now most 
States are completing projects in 3 -4 years, except some North -Eastern States where projects 
take more time because of rains and other issues. He pointed out the issue of delay in submission 
of utilization certificates by the State Governments. Another problem he highlighted upon was 
that the bank of sanctions is already h igh and the Ministry does not have any funds for further 
release as the unspent balance and current accruals of State Governments have been completely 
released. 

 
9 
15. Chief Engineer, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, during his presentation 
before the Committee on 16th December, 2021, furnished the following details regarding projects 
sanctioned under CRF/CRIF since 2016-17: 
Year No. Length (in km) Cost (in Rs. Crore) 
2016-17 1,329 12,237 16,594 
2017-18 1,086 12,440 20,450 
2018-19 808 9,393 18,998 
2019-20 - - - 
2020-21 128 2,021 3,716 
2021-22* 379 3,751 4,419 
TOTAL 3,730 39,842 64,177 
*Till November, 2021 
16. The following details were furnished by the Ministry regarding the status of ongoing 
CRF/CRIF projects and projects completed during last three years and current year: 
Works in Progress Works completed during last three years and 
current year 
No. Cost 
Rs. in Cr. 
No. Cost 
Rs. in Cr. 
1,627 38,141 1,616 19,666 

 
10 
17. The Committee notes the State / UT – wise accrual and release made for CRIF State 
roads since 2014-15 and the State / UT – wise allocation and expenditure made for EI&ISC 
works since 2014-15 including BOS as on 01.04.2021. The Committee feels that most of the 
States are making efficient use of the CRIF funds. Since the CRIF fund i s non-lapsable in 
nature, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must take up the issue of  inordinate 
delays in submitting the utilization certificates with the State Government, at the top -most 
level. The Ministry must impress upon the State Governme nts that sincere efforts have to 
be made to ensure that the projects sanctioned under CRIF are completed on time and the 
available funds are timely utilized.  
18. The Committee takes note of the issue highlighted by the Ministry regarding Bank 
of Sanctions already being high and the Ministry not having any funds for further release 
as the unspent balance and current accruals of State Governments have been completely 
released. Considering the backlog of funds to be released under CRIF which has been 
caused by Bank of Sanctions being high, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
make efforts to keep the Bank of Sanctions within the prescribed limits so that the funds 
for the sanctioned projects can be released to the State Governments on time.  
19. The Committee observes a major negative impact that the Coronavirus pandemic 
has had on the number of projects sanctioned under CRIF during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. 
The Committee hopes that the subsequent waves, if any, of the pandemic do not have a 
significant impact on the road projects across the country and that the Ministry would be 
able to sanction a greater number of works under CRIF in the coming years.  
20. On the issue of Bank of Sanctions (BOS), the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation made in para 376 of its 296 th Report on ‘Role of Highways in Nation 
Building’, which states the following:  

 
11 
 “The Committee is of the view that the existing mechanism of bank of sanctions is 
causing a visible lack of clarity between the State Government Departments concerned and the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, regarding the amount that the State is yet to be 
awarded. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue and come up 
with suitable guidelines to ensure that there is no confusion among t he State Government 
Departments and the Ministry, regarding the share of funds to be received by the State, in any 
particular year, after factoring in the Bank of Sanctions.”  
21. The Committee observes that 10% of the allocation made to States under CRIF is to 
be earmarked for road safety works. Keeping in mind that India has the highest number of 
deaths in the world on account of road accidents and the immeasurable impact that the 
same has on countless families as well as on the overall Indian economy, th e Committee 
feels that the efforts being made by the Ministry in this regard would give a big boost if a 
higher share of CRIF funds allocated to the State Governments are earmarked for 
carrying out road safety works. The Committee, therefore, recommends th at the Ministry 
may consider increasing the percentage of funds that are earmarked for road safety works 
under CRIF, from the existing 10 percent. Further, the Ministry may evolve an effective 
mechanism to oversee and monitor optimal utilization of the fun ds earmarked for road 
safety works under CRIF.  
22. During the meeting of the Committee held on the subject in Chennai on 12 th July, 2021, 
Member (Projects), NHAI apprised the Committee of various issues faced in the land acquisition 
viz., diversion of CAL A by the State Governments during general elections, pandemic, natural 
calamities, etc., absence of suitable provision in NH Act 1956 in connection with the deposit 
money before the competent court in such cases of unwilling/absentee/ untraceable land owne rs, 
land owners approaching arbitration for more compensation, enhancement of compensation by 

 
12 
the Arbitrator , protests by land owners for higher rates, alignment mismatch  leading to shift in 
actual alignment, pendency of arbitration cases for longer period of time. He suggested that State 
Governments should have dedicated Land Acquisition Department for speedy execution of road 
projects and informed that NHAI has given all powers to Regional Officers (ROs) to execute the 
projects. It was informed that for  Tamil nadu, the annual accrual of funds is Rs. 350 crores for 
the year 2021-22 and 1/3rd of the project value had been released as advance, till that time.  
23. During the meeting of the Committee held in Kumarakom on 16 th July, 2021, Secretary, 
Public Wo rks Department, State Government of Kerala opined that the State receives low 
allocation of CRIF funds because of its small area, despite having a high density road network 
because the CRIF guidelines give 70% weightage to area of the State and only 30% we ightage to 
fuel consumption in the State. He briefed the Committee about the delayed NH projects in Kerala 
and stated that the State however is receiving good support from NHAI. Representatives of the 
State Government of Kerala, informed the Committee that  about Rs. 700 crores of funds under 
CRF/CRIF are yet to be received whereas the representatives of Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways stated that about Rs. 126 crores are yet to be disbursed to the Government of Kerala 
and that utilization certificates for the same are yet to be received.  
24. The Committee takes note of the issue highlighted by the representatives of State 
Government of Kerala regarding the criteria for allocation of CRIF funds based on 70% 
weightage to area of the State and 30% weight age to fuel consumption in the State, and 
recommends that the criteria may be reassessed to ensure that there is a logical, equitable 
distribution of CRIF funds and smaller States are not at a disadvantage in terms of the 
CRIF allocation that they receive.  The Committee feels that the existing criteria might be 
resulting into very low allocation of CRIF funds to the North -Eastern States since they are 
smaller in area and the traffic plying in those States is also on the lower side. The 

 
13 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider making some special changes to 
the existing criteria to permit higher allocation under CRIF to the North -Eastern States 
given their sensitive location and difficult terrain. 
25.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry and  State Governments should 
coordinate to address the issues being faced regarding the disbursal of CRIF funds to the 
State. A high -level meeting of officials of the Ministry and the State Governments should 
take place every month to resolve issues pertainin g to land acquisition, forest clearances, 
CRIF disbursal, and other problems being faced in the development of NHs in the State. 
The Committee further recommends that a comprehensive Master Plan should be 
formulated for improving road connectivity to impor tant tourism places, cultural places, 
ports etc. across the country and that CRIF funds may be utilized for implementing the 
same. The Committee recommends that the criteria for sanction of road projects under 
CRIF may be modified so as to give higher prio rity for sanctions to roads that provide 
connectivity to places of tourism and cultural significance and last -mile connectivity to 
ports. 
26. With regard to delays faced by projects under CRIF, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should have a syste m to identify the pending issues with State and 
Central Governments and the same should be followed up with the Chief Secretary of the 
States. CRIF funds should also be recommended for linkage of inner state roads, small 
towns to nearby NH roads and when l inkage between two states is being worked out, it 
should be ensured that both States cooperate for executing the works on time. The 
Committee further recommends that all concerned Ministries/State Departments viz., 
tourism, culture, airport, shipping, rail ways, etc. should formulate a master plan and plan 

 
14 
of action for their respective sector and convene periodical meetings to carry out the same 
in a time-bound manner. 
27.         During the meeting of the Committee held on 16 th December, 2021, a Member of the 
Committee raised the issue of poor quality of roads constructed by the State Governments under 
CRIF. He queried about the quality monitoring mechanism for the same and highlighted a road 
accident in his constituency wherein three people got killed beca use of a road that was left dug 
up. The Chairman desired that complaint should be lodged against officers and contractors 
involved and action must be taken by the Ministry after due investigation. DG (RD)&SS 
informed the Committee that the State Government s are responsible for quality monitoring of 
CRIF works and that they have to follow the specifications for road construction issued by the 
Ministry and the Indian Roads Congress. As for quality of roads of National Highways are 
concerned, Ministry of Road transport and Highways is responsible. Some Members of the 
Committee opined that the inputs of public representatives should also be sought in the 
implementation of road projects.  
28.         Some Members of the Committee raised the issue of road contracts  under CRIF being 
awarded to bids about 32 -33% lesser than the approved estimated cost for the same and 
questioned about how the quality of roads constructed by such bidders can be expected to be 
good. A Member of the Committee suggested that a benchmark c ost of road projects should be 
calculated by the Ministry and that in case of  projects being awarded to  bids lower than the 
benchmark costs, such projects must be flagged and frequent inspection visits must be made to 
check the quality of construction of s uch flagged road projects.  
29. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 10 of this Report and 
states that the Ministry should urgently work upon devising a monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that the roads constructed using the CRIF fund are of  high quality.  

 
15 
30. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may review the existing 
guidelines for awarding of tenders for road projects under CRIF or otherwise, since it is 
often found that the projects get awarded at substantially lower bids t han the amount 
projected by the Ministry/NHAI. In such cases, the concessionaire is more likely to not 
actually complete the work at all, or do it with sub -par quality. In light of this, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may either come out with upper and lower limits 
for bidding for road projects or establish a mechanism to strictly monitor the quality and 
progress of road projects awarded to substantially low bids. In cases where poor 
performance and sub -par quality of road projects is noticed, t he contractor must be 
suitably penalized and their past project record must be duly considered before awarding 
any road projects in the future. 

 
16 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
 The Committee notes that through the amendment made by Finance Act, 2018, 
more sectors viz., Ports, Shipyards, Inland Waterways, Airports, Railway track and 
Commercial Infrastructure/ Stations, Urban Public Transport, etc., in Transport Sector 
besides other Sectors (Energy, Water and Sanitation, Communication, Social and 
Commercial Infrastructure), have been included under the CRIF. The Committee feels 
that the budgetary support that CRIF now provides to all these crucial sectors will help in 
achieving all round growth of the Indian economy. The Committee further notes that the 
distribution under CRIF has been made more transparent as it is to now be decided by  a 
Committee headed by Hon’ble Finance Minister as per Section 7A of the CRIF Act, 2000 
depending on the priorities of the project. 
(Para 8) 
CRIF State Roads 
 The Committee notes that as per the CRIF Act, 2000 and its amendment vide the 
Finance Act, 2019, the Central Government is no longer responsible for formulation of 
rules for State roads. The Committee feels that the Ministry should specify the guidelines 
and technical specifications that must be followed by States to construct State roads funded 
by CR IF. The Committee recommends that a mechanism should be put in place by the 
Ministry to carry out random checks regarding the quality of such State roads. This would 
go a long way in improving the quality of State roads being constructed by using CRIF. 
(Para 10) 
 The Committee notes the State / UT – wise accrual and release made for CRIF State 
roads since 2014-15 and the State / UT – wise allocation and expenditure made for EI&ISC 
works since 2014-15 including BOS as on 01.04.2021. The Committee feels that most of the 
States are making efficient use of the CRIF funds. Since the CRIF fund is non -lapsable in 
nature, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must take up the issue of  inordinate 
delays in submitting the utilization certificates with the State Government, at the top -most 

 
17 
 
level. The Ministry must impress upon the State Governments that sincere efforts have to 
be made to ensure that the projects sanctioned under CRIF are completed on time and the 
available funds are timely utilized. 
(Para 17) 
 The Committee takes note of the issue highlighted by the Ministry regarding Bank 
of Sanctions already being high and the Ministry not having any funds for further release 
as the unspent balance and current accruals of State Governments have been completely 
released. Considering the backlog of funds to be released under CRIF which has been 
caused by Bank of Sanctions being high, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
make efforts to keep the Bank of Sanctions within the prescribed limits so that the fun ds 
for the sanctioned projects can be released to the State Governments on time.  
(Para 18) 
The Committee observes a major negative impact that the Coronavirus pandemic 
has had on the number of projects sanctioned under CRIF during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. 
The Committee hopes that the subsequent waves, if any, of the pandemic do not have a 
significant impact on the road projects across the country and that the Ministry would be 
able to sanction a greater number of works under CRIF in the coming years.  
(Para 19) 
On the issue of Bank of Sanctions (BOS), the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation made in para 376 of its 296 th Report on ‘Role of Highways in Nation 
Building’, which states the following:  
 “The Committee is of the view that the existing mechanism of  bank of sanctions is 
causing a visible lack of clarity between the State Government Departments concerned and the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, regarding the amount that the State is yet to be 
awarded. The Committee recommends that the Ministry m ay look into the issue and come up 
with suitable guidelines to ensure that there is no confusion among the State Government 
Departments and the Ministry, regarding the share of funds to be received by the State, in any 
particular year, after factoring in the Bank of Sanctions.”  
(Para 20) 

 
18 
 
The Committee observes that 10% of the allocation made to States under CRIF is to 
be earmarked for road safety works. Keeping in mind that India has the highest number of 
deaths in the world on account of road accidents an d the immeasurable impact that the 
same has on countless families as well as on the overall Indian economy, the Committee 
feels that the efforts being made by the Ministry in this regard would give a big boost if a 
higher share of CRIF funds allocated to t he State Governments are earmarked for 
carrying out road safety works. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may consider increasing the percentage of funds that are earmarked for road safety works 
under CRIF, from the existing 10 percent.  Further, the Ministry may evolve an effective 
mechanism to oversee and monitor optimal utilization of the funds earmarked for road 
safety works under CRIF.  
(Para 21) 
The Committee takes note of the issue highlighted by the representatives of State 
Government of Kerala regarding the criteria for allocation of CRIF funds based on 70% 
weightage to area of the State and 30% weightage to fuel consumption in the State, and 
recommends that the criteria may be reassessed to ensure that there is a logical, equitab le 
distribution of CRIF funds and smaller States are not at a disadvantage in terms of the 
CRIF allocation that they receive. The Committee feels that the existing criteria might be 
resulting into very low allocation of CRIF funds to the North -Eastern States since they are 
smaller in area and the traffic plying in those States is also on the lower side. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider making some special changes to 
the existing criteria to permit higher allocation under CRIF to the N orth-Eastern States 
given their sensitive location and difficult terrain. 
(Para 24) 
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry and State Governments should 
coordinate to address the issues being faced regarding the disbursal of CRIF funds to the 
State. A high -level meeting of officials of the Ministry and the State Governments should 
take place every month to resolve issues pertaining to land acquisition, forest clearances, 
CRIF disbursal, and other problems being faced in the development of NHs in the State. 

 
19 
 
The Committee further recommends that a comprehensive Master Plan should be 
formulated for improving road connectivity to important tourism places, cultural places, 
ports etc. across the country and that CRIF funds may be utilized for implementing the 
same. The Committee recommends that the criteria for sanction of road projects under 
CRIF may be modified so as to give higher priority for sanctions to roads that provide 
connectivity to places of tourism and cultural significance and last -mile connectivity to 
ports. 
(Para 25) 
 With regard to delays faced by projects under CRIF, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should have a system to identify the pending issues with State and 
Central Governments and the same should be followed up with the Chief Secretary of the 
States. CRIF funds should also be recommended for linkage of inner state roads, small 
towns to nearby NH roads and when linkage between two states is being worked out, it 
should be ensured that both States cooperate for executing the works on time. The 
Committee further recommends that all concerned Ministries/State Departments viz., 
tourism, culture, airport, shipping, railways, etc. should formulate a master plan and plan 
of action for their respective sector and convene periodical meetings to carry out the same  
in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 26) 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 10 of this Report and 
states that the Ministry should urgently work upon devising a monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that the roads constructed using the CRIF fund are of high quality.  
(Para 29) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may review the existing 
guidelines for awarding of tenders for road projects under CRIF or otherwise, since it is 
often found that the projects get awarded at substantially l ower bids than the amount 
projected by the Ministry/NHAI. In such cases, the concessionaire is more likely to not 
actually complete the work at all, or do it with sub -par quality. In light of this, the 

 
20 
 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may either come out with upper and lower limits 
for bidding for road projects or establish a mechanism to strictly monitor the quality and 
progress of road projects awarded to substantially low bids. In cases where poor 
performance and sub -par quality of road projects is  noticed, the contractor must be 
suitably penalized and their past project record must be duly considered before awarding 
any road projects in the future. 
(Para 30) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
 
X 
TENTH MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16 th  December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   -                                              Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
5. Sh. Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
6. Sh. Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA  
7. Shri Margani Bharat 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
11. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Dushyant Singh 
15. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
16. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
17. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT  
      
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
 
  
21

 
Witnesses: - 
  
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
1. Shri Indresh Kumar Pandey Director General (Road  Development) & Special Secretary 
2. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Additional Secretary 
3. Shri S. K. Nirmal Additional Director General 
4. Shri P.V.V.S. Ravi Prasad Additional Director Ge neral 
5. Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Sudip Choudhary Chief Engineer 
7. Shri V. K. Rajawat Chief Engineer 
8. Shri O. P. Shrivastava Chief Engineer 
9. Shri L. Behera Superintending Engineer 
  
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)  
10. Shri R. K. Pandey Member 
  
National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL)  
11. Shri Atul Kumar Director (T) 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee and the Director 
General (Road Development) & Special Secretary, Min istry of Road Transport and Highways 
and other senior representatives of the Ministry to  the meeting, apprising them of the agenda of 
the meeting i.e.  to deliberate on ‘Review of Central Road and Infra structure Fund (CRIF) 
Works’. 
2.         In his opening remarks, the Chairman sta ted that the amendment of the Central Road 
Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Act, 2000 through the Fi nance Act, 2018 and replacing the earlier 
Act with the CRIF Act, 2000 has been done to use th e proceeds of the road cess under CRIF to 
finance other infrastructure projects including por ts, shipyards, waterways, some portion of the 
railway infrastructure and even social infrastructu re including educational institutions, medical 
22

 
colleges etc. He asked the Director General (Road D evelopment) & Special Secretary to 
highlight the impact of the recent amendments of the CRIF Act, 2000. He queried about the bank 
of sanctions issued and amount of funds released to  the State Governments under CRIF during 
the last three years. He enquired about the rationa lity of the existing criteria for allocation of 
funds under CRIF Act, 2000, which is based on 30% w eightage to fuel consumption and 70% 
weightage to geographical area of the State/UT. He further sought information regarding the 
present mechanism with regard to allocation, accrua l and release of CRIF funds to the State/UT 
Governments and any delays that State/UT Government s might be facing in release of funds by 
the Government of India, under CRIF. 
3.         The DG (RD)&SS, Ministry of Road Transpo rt and Highways began his deposition by 
informing the Committee that the earlier CRF Act, 2 000 came into effect in the year 2000 and 
was amended through the Finance Act, 2018 and renam ed as Central Road Infrastructure Fund. 
He further stated that as per the Finance Act, 2018, CRIF is to be administered by the Ministry of 
Finance through the Department of Economic Affairs.  He further elaborated that earlier, 41.5 
percent of the cess was given for the National High ways, 10 percent for the State Roads and the 
rest for other infrastructure, however, after 1 st  April, 2018, a Committee headed by the Finance 
Minister and aided by a Committee of Secretaries, d ecided upon the distribution of the CRIF 
among the various Ministries/Organizations. He appr ised the Committee that the total cost of 
scheme which can be sanctioned under a particular S tate, is limited to Bank of Sanctions which 
is limited to three times of the annual accrual/all ocations in plain areas and four times in hilly 
and North-Eastern Areas. He stated that the sanctio n process has been further modified and as 
per the amended Act, Ministry of Road Transport and  Highways only approves the projects 
which are identified and submitted by the State Gov ernments. After the approval, it is the 
responsibility of the State Government to accord administrative approvals and financial sanctions 
and to monitor the progress of projects. He apprise d the Committee that based on the progress of 
work, State Governments submit a utilization certif icate duly audited by the audit committee, 
23

 
based on which, the Ministry releases the funds to the State Governments. He stated that there 
was no lack of clarity between the States and the C entre and that delays in the progress of works 
used to be present in many States a few years back but that now most States are completing 
projects in 3-4 years, except some North-Eastern St ates where projects take more time because 
of rains and other issues. He pointed out the issue  of delay in submission of utilization 
certificates by the State Governments. Another problem he highlighted upon was that the bank of 
sanctions is already high and the Ministry does not  have any funds for further release as the 
unspent balance and current accruals of State Governments has been completely released. 
4.         Chief Engineer, MoRTH thereafter made a power point presentation on the subject and 
briefed the Committee about the major aspects of th e CRIF Act, 2000. He apprised the 
Committee about the details of CRIF share used for NHs, Road Transport and State roads 
including Economic Importance and Inter State Conne ctivity Scheme (EI & ISC) since 2014-15 
and the scheme-wise outstanding liabilities of sanc tioned projects/ Bank of Sanction (BOS) of 
various works of Ministry as on 1 st  April, 2021. He briefed the Committee about the ma jor 
aspects of the criteria for State roads under CRIF Act, 2000. He stated that 1,627 projects under 
CRIF worth Rs. 38,141 crores are currently under pr ogress and that 1,616 projects worth Rs. 
19,666 crores have been completed during the last t hree years and current year. He informed the 
Committee that CRIF is non-lapsable and there is no  provision to withhold and earmark the fund 
to a different State. 
5.         The Chairman recommended that the Minist ry should give priority to road projects that 
provide connectivity to places of tourism, culture,  railways, civil aviation and shipping, and that 
a certain percentage of funds should be allocated towards such road projects only. 
6.         A Member of the Committee raised the iss ue of poor quality of roads constructed by the 
State Governments under CRIF. He queried about the quality monitoring mechanism for the 
same and highlighted a road accident in his constit uency wherein three people got killed because 
24

 
of a road that was left dug up. The Chairman desire d that complaint should be lodged against 
officers and contractors involved and action must b e taken by the Ministry after due 
investigation. DG (RD)&SS informed the Committee th at the State Governments are responsible 
for quality monitoring of CRIF works and that they have to follow the specifications for road 
construction issued by the Ministry and the Indian Roads Congress. As for quality of roads of 
National Highways are concerned, Ministry of Road t ransport and Highways is responsible. 
Some Members of the Committee opined that the input s of public representatives should also be 
sought in the implementation of road projects. 
7.         Some Members of the Committee raised the  issue of road contracts under CRIF being 
awarded to bids about 32-33% lesser than the approv ed estimated cost for the same and 
questioned about how the quality of roads construct ed by such bidders can be expected to be 
good. A Member of the Committee suggested that a be nchmark cost of road projects should be 
calculated by the Ministry and that in case of proj ects being awarded to bids lower than the 
benchmark costs, such projects must be flagged and frequent inspection visits must be made to 
check the quality of construction of such flagged road projects. 
8.         Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
DG (RD)&SS and other representatives of the Ministr y. The Chairman then directed that written 
replies to the queries which remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9. The Chairman, thereafter drew the attention of t he Committee to the fact that it is 
presently, inter-alia , examining the subject ‘Issues related to land acq uisition at Bagdogra 
Airport’. The Chairman stated that during its Study Visit to Kolkata on 18 th  November, 2021, the 
Committee had discussed the issues relating to the functioning of Airports in West Bengal 
wherein the issue of land transfer by the Ministry of Defence to Airports Authority of India to 
expand the Bagdogra Airport was raised. Though the State Government and Airports Authority 
of India were keen to develop/expand the said airpo rt, the key hindrance for it is the non-transfer 
25

 
of 3.5 acres of land which is currently under the p ossession of Ministry of Defence. The 
Committee directed the authorities to solve the iss ue between themselves so that the airport can 
be expanded/developed. Both the State Government of  West Bengal and Airports Authority of 
India are willing to fully compensate the Ministry of Defence for acquiring this piece of land. 
However, inter-Ministerial differences still persis t. On earlier occasions, when such disputes 
existed in the State of Goa relating to National Hi ghway projects, the Committee acted as a 
catalyst and helped to resolve the issue. With a vi ew to thrash out this issue once and for all, the 
Committee decided to call for written views/suggest ions of State Governments and hear their 
officials on the subject. Accordingly, the Committe e authorized the Chairman to obtain 
necessary orders from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard. 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the mee ting was kept.  
11.         The meeting adjourned at 4:35 PM. 
  
 
26

 
  
XIV  
FOURTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st  January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA  
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm w elcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the  meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
27

 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
(i) * * * 
(ii) * * * 
 (iii) * * * 
 (iv) * * * 
 (v) * * * 
 (vi) * * * 
B.        Draft subject Report on – 
 
 (i)         * * * 
  (ii)        * * * 
 (iii)       Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Works; and 
(iv)       * * * 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered th e aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
* Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
28

 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

ANNEXURE-VII  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
  
DATED: 16.12.2021  
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
1. Shri Indresh Kumar Pandey Director General (Road  Development) & Special Secretary 
2. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Additional Secretary 
3. Shri S. K. Nirmal Additional Director General 
4. Shri P.V.V.S. Ravi Prasad Additional Director Ge neral 
5. Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Sudip Choudhary Chief Engineer 
7. Shri V. K. Rajawat Chief Engineer 
8. Shri O. P. Shrivastava Chief Engineer 
9. Shri L. Behera Superintending Engineer 
  
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
 
10. Shri R. K. Pandey Member 
  
National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL)  
11. Shri Atul Kumar Director (T) 
 
 
 48