PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM

THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH DEC. 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH DEC. 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER, 1998/AGRAHAYANA 1920 (SAKA)


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT

ON
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH DEC. 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH DEC. 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER, 1998/AGRAHAYANA, 1920 (SAKA)


Aw की YP LP

CONTENTS

Composition OF THE COMMITTEE

Report OF THE COMMITTEE

BILL AS REPORTED BY THE COMMITTEE .

Nore oF DISSENT . .... ........



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM
(1998-99)

1. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Janardhana Poojary
Smt. Basanti Sarma
Miss Saroj Khaparde
Shri Akhilesh Das

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
Shri Govindram Miri
Shri Bratin Sengupta

Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
10. Shri Munayvar Hasan

11. Shri Ram Deo Bhandary
12. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
13. Dr. D. Venkateshwar Rao
14. Shri Abani Roy

15. Shri Korambayil Ahmmed Haji

per awawnr

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
17. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta

18. Shri Vijay Sankeshwar

19. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Manabendra Shah

22. Shri Raghvendra Singh

23. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria
24. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri

25. Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
26. Shri PC. Chacko

27. Shri A.C. Jose

28. Shri P.R. Kyndiah

29. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta

30. Shri P.M, Sayeed 1
31. Shri Kotla Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy
32. Shri Nripen Goswami

33. Shri Anil Basu

34. Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth
35, Shri Jang Bahadur Singh Patel
36. Shri Ramraajan

37. Shri Bijoy Kumar Bijoy

0)
4871 /1.5/1-2-&


38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
45.

Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
Shri Prasanna Acharya
Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal
Shri D. Venugopal

Shri Ramdas Athawala

Shri Omar Abdullah

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint secretary.

Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary

Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer

Gi)

4871/ LS/F—2-B


REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism,
having, been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty Fourth
Report.

2. The Hon'ble Chairman, has referred the Merchant Shipping (second amendment) Bill, 1998 as
introduced in the Rajya Sabha and pending therein, to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport and Tourism for examination and report*

3.The Committee discussed provisions of the Bill at its meeting held on the 11th, 24th August and 7th,
17th September and Sth, 28th Oct., 1998.

4. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary Ministry of Surface Transport and representatives
of the M/o Law, Justice and Company Affairs.

5. The’ Committee decided that the evidence recorded by the Committee should be laid on the table of
both the Houses of Parliament.

6. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at its meetings heid on 28th
Oct., 1998.

7. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on 2nd December, 1998.

8. The Ministry of Surface Transport in their note submitted to the Committee explained the need for
introduction of the Bill. In their note the Ministry of Surface Transport stated that keeping in view of
various important developments on the shipping sector, it was decided to appoint a Committee during the
year 1991 to review the provisions of the Act and identify the necessary amendments needed to bring it in
line with important changes in international shipping. The Committee submitted its report in 1992
suggesting about 180 amendments to the Act. Some of the sections were amended during the year 1994,
While action to amend the Act in accordance with the comprehensive recommendations of the Review
Committee is likely to take sometime, in view of certain developments in the shipping section it is felt
that two sections namely sections 76 and 95 of the Act need to be amended expeditiously.

9. OBJECTS AND REASONS FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO SECTIONS 76 AND 95

A. The main objective of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 is to ensure development and efficient
maintenance of the Indian Mercantile Marine in a befitting manner in the interest of the nation. The Act
has been amended from time to time in the light of experience gained in its implementation and also to
give effect to various provisions of international conventions or portocols ratified by India.

B. Section 76 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 provides for certificates of competency to be held
by officers on board on ships and the number of officers to be provided on ships. It does not distinguish
between different kinds of vessels or even between coastal and foreign-going vessels so far as manning
scales are concerned. Even small ships operating in coastal waters are required to have certificated officers
on the scale specified for foreign-going vessels. This not only casts additional financiaf‘burden on coastal
ship owners but sometimes causes difficulty in complying with the existing provisions. Coastal vessels
do not require the same level of manning as is required for foreign-going vessels. The Bill proposes to
amend section 76 so that, instead of specifying the manning scales for different kinds of ships in the Act
itself, these may be notified by the Central Government, from time to time, keeping in view operational
and other requirements. if

C. Section 95 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 provides for seamen’s employment office which
regulates supply of different categories of seamen for various classes of ships on the basis of roster
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Par dated the Th August, 1998, August, 1998.

1



system. This system has discouraged employment of young-trained manpower by Indian and foreign ship
owners, In order to facilitate increased employment of Indian seafarers particularly on board foreign flag
vessels so as to realise vast potential of the country in this regard and to augment valuable foreign
exchange earings, the Government seeks to encourage private sector participation in training and placement
of merchant navy seamen. It is, therefore, necessary to minimise Government controls, which have been
perceived by foreign ship owners as a major obstacle in employment of Indian seafarers on their ships.
Accordingly, the Bill proposes to amend section 95 relating to seamen’s employment office so as to allow
both Indian and foreign ship owners to employ merchant navy crew members without going to the
seamen’s employment office.

10. The Committee at its meeting held on 17th September, 1998 discussed the Merchant Shipping
(Second Amendment) Bill, 1998 in the light of the evidence tendered by the Secretary, Ministry of
Surface Transport on the 7th September, 1998.

11. The Representatives of the M/o Law, Justice and Company Affairs informed the Committee at its
meeting held on Sth October, 1998 that in case the existing Amendments to Section 76, as proposed in
this bill, is carried out then consequential amendments may be required to be carried out in sections 436
and 458 of the Parent Act i.e. the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.

12. The Committee at its meeting held on 28th October, 1998 heard the representatives of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs and Surface Transport in the light of the written notes furnished by
both the Ministries regarding consequential amendments in Section 436 and 458 of the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958, in case the existing amendments to section 76 as provided in the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendmnet) Bill, 1998 are carried out. The representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs opined that since section 436 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 provides punishment for
contravention of any provisions of the Act and in case the Section 76, as proposed in the Bill is amended,
then consequential amendment in Sr. No. 17 of Section 436 (2) is also required to be carried out.

13. The Committee, having heard the representaitves of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs and Ministry of Surface Transport and having consider the documents on the subject is of the
opinion that there is a need to amend section 76 and section 95 of the Merchant Shipping Act of 1958 with
a view to achieving the objectives set out in the statement of objects and reasons of the amending Bill.
The Committee is in agreement with the provisions of the Bill and recommends that the Bill in its present
form, be passed taking care of certain consequential changes in Sections 436 and 458 of the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958.

14. The Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs vide their O.M. dated the 13th November, 1998
sent the draft of the consequential amendments to the sections 436 and 458 of the Merchant Shipping Act,
1958 to the Ministry of Surface Transport.

15. The Ministry of Surface Transport vide their O.M. dated 16th November, 1998 informed the
Committee that the amendments proposed by the Ministy of Law, Justice and Company Affairs are
acceptable to that Ministry and confirm the same (Extracts of the Sections 436 and 458 of the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958 are at Appendices)

16. The Ministry of Surface Transport during hte deliberations of the meetings of the Committee
desired that rules making powers under amended section 76 of the Merchant Shipping Bill 1998 may be
given to the executive i.e. Ministry of Surface Transport as they have to give effect to various agreements/
treaties ratified by India from time to time and also to keep pace with the fast changes taking place in the
shipping industry and that the rule making takes a lot of time as they have to formulate rules in consultation
with the Law Ministry. The Ministry of Surface Transport therefore requested the Committee to give
some flexibility to the Director General of Shipping in issuing the notification in this regard. However the
representatives of the Ministry of Law opined that in case the mannings scales have already been prescribed
by Rules, the Merchant Shippifg Act should provide that the violation of the rule will be punishable. That
has been given in section 458 of the Merchant Shipping Act. But there is no provision in the Merchant

2


Shipping Act that violation of a notification is punishable. In case the manning scales are to be provided
by way of a notification, then, a separate provision should be made in the Merchant Shipping Act and that
rules and regulations are to be laid on the Tables of the Houses of Parliament. Keeping in view the advise
tendered by the representatives of the Ministry of Law, the Committee expressed its strong reservations
in this regard and did not agree to the views of the Ministry of Surface Transport. The Committee was of
the opinion that there would be no problem in framing rules and the Law Ministry has to be consulted
in the matter of rule making process so as to ensure legality of the subject. The Committee therefore
directed that all the rules/order that would be made under the amended section 76 of the Act would have
to be notified and the notification should be laid on the table of both the houses of Parliament.

17. The Committee further directed that a comprehensive bill considering rest of the amendments of
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 as suggested by the Review Committee under the Chairmanship of the
Director General Shipping in 1991, so as to bring it in line with the important changes in international
shipping may be brought before the Parliament instead of introducing piecemeal amendments from time
to time.

18. The Committee took note of the views expressed by S/Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth, Anil Basu and
Abani Roy opposing the Bill. The Committee decided to append their views on a note of dissent to its
report.

New Dewut; PROF. VAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
December 2, 1998 Chairman,
Agrahayana 11, 1920 (Saka) Committee on Transport and Tourism.

4871/ LS/F3-A __ 3


Bill No. XVI of 1998

THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
(AS REPORTED BY THE COMMITTEE)

A
BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

‘Short title and 1, (/) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 1998.
commence-
ment, (2) it shall come into force on such date is the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
‘Substitution of 2. For section 76 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 44 Of 1958.
pew section for the following section shall be substituted namely:—
section 76.
Certificate of

76. (J) Every Indian ship when going to sea from any port or place shall be provided with officers

Fenopy {© 009 certificated under this Act according so such manning scale as may be prescribed:

officers of Provided that the Central Government may prescribe different manning scales for different types
ships. of ships keeping in view the operational and other requirements.

(2) Every ship, whether at sea or in any port or place, shall engage such number of persons and
with such qualifications as may be prescribed for maintaining watches.

3. In section 95 of the principal Act.— Amendment
of section 95.
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(@) clause (a) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) to maintain registers of seamen in respect of such categories, of sea men as may be
prescribed from time to time;";

(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted,

4 4871 / LS/F—3B


NOTE OF DISSENT
By
1, Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth
2. Shri Anil Basu
3. Shri Abani Roy

We oppose the amendment of Section 76 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958, because the legislative
authority in the matter of specifying the manning scales for different kinds of ship as provided in the Act
itself shall be diminished. Executive Authority will enjoy full liberty in the matter of specifying the
manning scales.

Therefore, we suggest that Rules in respect of manning scales for different kinds of ships according to
tonnage, capacity and the size be framed and passed by Parliament.

We oppose vehemently amendment of Section 95 of the Merchant Shipping Act. This section ensures
employment of Seamen on the basis of roster system. Existing Seamen's Employment office is a result of
long drawn struggle of Seamen.

The First Asian Maritime Conference held in Cylon in October, 1958 under the auspices of the
International Labour Organisation called up on the Government of all countries of world to establish
Seamen's Employment Office in order to regulate employment of Seamen. Dismantling of Seamen's
Employment Office will lead complete chaos in Shipping Industries. Seamen will be thrown as prey to
the brokers and Agents in the matter of employment, bribery, corruption, anarchism will loom large in
this shpere.

Therefore, we record our opposition to this bill strongly and rather we propose to bring the
comprehensive bill with a view to strengthening the Seamen’s Employment Office and ameliorating the
service condition of Seamen.


APPENDICES

4871 / LS/F—+-A


APPENDIX-I

PART XVI

Penalties and Procedure

Penalties

436. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or falls to comply with any provision
there of which it was his duty to comply with, shall be guilty of an offence; and if in respect of
any such offence no penalty is specially provided in sub-section (2), he shall be punishable

with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.

(2) The offence mentioned in the second column of the following table shall be punishable to the
extent mentioned in the fourth column of the same with reference to such offences respectively.

offence has
reference

any person causes a ship or fishing
vessel to proceed to sea without the
required certificated personnel

(b) any person having been engaged as 76
one of the officers referred to in
section 76 goes to 5८७ 85 such officer}
without being duly certificated,

(c) any master fails to submit the 84 (i) (c)
required crew list or fails to report
the changes made in the list before
commencing the relevant voyage.

Section of this|
No. a, © Act to which

Penalties

Imprisonment which may extend to
six months or five which may extend
to ten thousand rupees, or both.

Imprisonment which may extend to
six months or fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or both,

Fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees and in addition, a
fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees for every day
thousand rupees for every day during
which the offence continues after
conviction.



458. (1)
(2)

(3)

APPENDIX-II
All rules and regulations made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.

In making a rule or regulation under this Act the Central Government may direct that a breach
thereof shall be punishable —

(a) in the case of a rule made under section 331 or section 3441, with imprisonment which
may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
both;

(b) in the case of any other rule of regulation made under any other provision of this Act, with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees;

and in either case if the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to fifty
rupees for every day after the first during which the breach continues.

Every rules or regulations made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or the regulation, or both houses
agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall, thereafter,
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.



MINUTES



*VIIT
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 11th August, 1998, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhorta — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Janardhana Poojary
Smt. Basanti Sarma

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
Shri Govidram Miri

Shri Bratin Sengupta

Shri Abani Roy

Shri Korambayil Ahmed Haji

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
10, Shri Chaman Lal Gupta

11. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
12. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
13, Shri Manabendra Shah

14, Shri Raghvendra Singh

15. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria
16, Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
17. Shn P.C. Chacko

18. Shri A.C, Jos

19. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta

20. Shn Nripend Goswami

21. Shri Anil Basu

22. Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth
23. Shri Jang Bahadur Singh Patel
24. Shri Ramraajan

25, Shri Prasanna Acharya

26. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal

27. Shri Ramdas Athawal

28. Shri G.M. Banatwalla

SA RWELWN

“Minutes of Ist to VIlth meetings related to matters not included inthis Repo Vilth meetings related to matters not included in this Report.


SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer
The Chairman also apprised the Committee about the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill,
1998 which has been referred to the Committee by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for examination

and report thereon. The Committee has decided to discuss the issues involved in the aforesaid bill during
its next meeting to be held on Monday, the 24th August, 1998.

The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12,30 p.m.

14


*X
TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 24th August 1998, in Room No. 63 First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Janardhana Poojary
Mrs. Basanti Sarma
Miss Saroj Khaparde
Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
Shri Govindram Miri
Shri Bratin Sengupta

8. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
9. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari
10. Shri Abani Roy

LOK SABHA

11. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
12. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta

13. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
14. Shri Raghvendra Singh

15. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria
16. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri

17. Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
18. Shri P.C. Chacko

19. Shri A.C. Jos

20. Shri PR. Kyndiah

21. Shir P.M. Sayeed

22. Shri Nripen Goswami

23 Shri Anil Basu

24. Shri Jang Bahadur Singh Patel
25. Shri Bijoy Kumar 'Bijoy'

26. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh

27. Shri Prasanna Acharya

28. Shri Ramdas Athawale

29. Shri G.M. Banatwalla

30. Shri Omar Abdullah

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
"Minutes of IXth meeting related to matters not included inthis Report. SSS meeting related to matters not included in this Report.

NAWwse wy

15


The Committee took up for the consideration the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 1998,
which has been referred to it by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. A General Discussion on the
background note regarding the introduction of the bill seeking to amend sections 76 and 95 of Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958, was held. The Committee was of the view that the background note submitted by the
Ministry of Surface Transport was not comprehensive. It noted that the Committee which was constituted
in 1991 to review the provisions of the Act had suggested about 180 amendments to the Act. However the
background note only indicated the few sections of the Act which were considered urgent and for which
a separate bill was introduced in the Parliament in 1993 and the sections were amended w.e,f. 17.1.94. It
did not mention about the rest of the amendments suggested by the review Committee.

2. The Committee also desired to know as to what were the recommendations of the review Committee
with regard to the manning scale. The Committee decided that before consideration of the amendment to
sections 76 and 95 the members of the Committee may go through the full recommendations of the
review Committee. The Committee therefore directed the Secretariat to obtain the comments of the Ministry
with regard to the rest of amendments as also the other recommendations of the review Committee.

3. The Committee further decided to hear the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport,
at its next meeting on 7th of September, 1998. It also directed that the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs may be asked to be present in future meetings of the Committee to
assist it.

4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.15 p.m.

16


XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Monday, the 7th September, 1998 in Room No. 62 First Floor,

Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBER PRESENT

1. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Smt. Basanti Sarma
. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
. Shri Govindram Miri
. Shri Bratin Sengupta
. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
. Shri Ram Deo Bhandary
. Shri Abani Roy
LOK SABHA

9. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta
10. Shri Manabendra Shah
11. Shri Raghvendra Singh
12. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri
13. Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
14. Shri A.C. Jos
15, Shri Kotla Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy
16. Shri Nripen Goswami
17. Shri Jang Bahadur Singh Patel
18. Shri Bijoy Kumar ‘Bijoy*
19. Shri Ramdas Athawale
20. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
21. Shri Omar Abdullah
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT
Shri R. Vasudevan, Secretary
Shri M. Ramachandran, Joint Secretary (Shipping)
Shri Praveen Aggarwal, Sr. Deputy Director General of Shipping, Mumbai
Shri R.D. Meena, Director (MM)
Capt. Vinay Asthana, Shipping Corporation of India

9० 53 ७६ (० #+ ० ९3

Poe [1

17


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICEAND COMPANY AFFAIRS
1, Dr, K.N. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel

2. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport, in connection with the Merchant
Shipping (Second Amendment), Bill, 1998 and sought some clarifications based on the background note
furnished by the Ministry of Surface Transport and also regarding the introduction of the bill seeking to
amend sections 76 and 95 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

4. * * *
5. * * .
6. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.

18


Xi
TWELTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 17th September, 1998 in Committee Room *B’ First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Smt. Basanti Sarma

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
. Shri Bratin Sengupta

. Shri Munavvar Hasan

. Shri Ram Deo Bhandary
. Shri Abani Roy

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta

10. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil

11. Shri Manabendra Shah

12. Shri Raghvendra Singh

13. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri

14. Shri P.C. Chacko

15. Shri A.C. Jos

16. Shri Kotla Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy

17. Shri Nripen Goswami

18. Shri Anil Basu

19. Shri Ramraajan

20, Shri Bijoy Kumar ‘Bijoy’

21. Shri Ramdas Athawale
SECRETARIAT

Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S, Walia, Under Secretary
Smt, Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer

eSrIAwawn

2. At the outset the Committee discussed the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill, 1998 in
the light of the evidence tendered by the Secretary, Ministry of of Surface Transport on the 7th September,
1998 and decided that the Committee may give its concurrence to amend the two Sections of the above
mentioned bill and simultaneously’ask the Ministry to prepare a comprehensive bill regarding the rest of
the amendments suggested by the review Committee under the Chairmanship of Director-General of
Shipping and introduce the same bill at the earliest. The Chairman also sought the confidence of the
Committee that he may hear the views of the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs in connection with the amendments of Sections 76 and 95 of the said bill.

3. * * *
* * *

4.

5. + * *

6. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.00 p.m.

***Relates 10 the matter not included in this Report.


*XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday the Sth October, 1998 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Smt. Basanti Sarma
. Miss Saroj Khaparde
. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
Shri Govindram Miri
. Shri Bratin Sengupta

. Shri Munavvar Hasan
. Shri Ram Deo Bhandary
. Dr. 0. Venkateshwar Rao
. Shri Abani Roy
11. Shri Korambayil Ahmed Haji
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary *
13. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta
14. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
15. Shri Manabendra Shah
16. Shri Raghvendra Singh
17. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria
18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri
19, Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
20. Shri A.C. Jos
21. Shri Kotla Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy
22. Shri Nripen Goswami
23. Shri Jang Bahadur Singh Patel
24. Shri Bijoy Kumar ‘Bijoy’
25. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
26. Shri D. Venugopal ४
27. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer
*Minutes of XIIIth mecting related to matters not included in this Report.

20

Sen 9 ४४७ + २

ड़


REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS
1, Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel

2. The Committee took up clause by clause consideration of the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1998.

3. The Committee was informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs that in case the existing Amendments to Section 76, as proposed in this bill, is recommended

then consequential amendments may be required to be carried out in Sections 436 and 458 of the Parent
Act i.e. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.

4. The Committee then discussed the Bill in the light of the information furnished by the representatives
of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company affairs and decided to hear the representatives of the
Ministry of Surface Transport to elicit their views on suggestions made by the Ministry of Law.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4,00 p.m, to meet on 6th Oct. 1998 at 11.00 a.m.

21


*XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11,00 a.m. on Wednesday the 28th October, 1998 in Committee Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Smt. Basanti Sarma
3. Shri Govindram Miri
4. Shri Bratin Sengupta
5. Shri Munavvar Hasan
6. Dr. 0. Venkateshwar Rao
7. Shri Abani Roy
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta
9. Shri Raghvendra Singh
10. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri
11. Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
12. Shri P.C. Chacko
13. Shri P.R. Kyndiah
14, Shri P.M. Kyndiah
15. Shri Kotla Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy
16. Shri Nripen Goswami
17, Shri Anil Basu
18. Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth
19. Shri Bijoy Kumar ‘Bijoy”
20, Shri D. Venugopal
21. Shri Ramdas Athawale
22. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT
. Shri R. Vasudevan, Secretary
. Cap. S.S. Naphade, Navtical Adviser, DG Shipping
. Shri M. Ramachandran, JS (S)
. Shri R.D. Meena, Director (MM)
. Shri Sanjay Vikram Singh, Under Secretary (MA)

प्म मे ० ७ 5

*Minutes of XVth, XVIth, XVIIth_ meetings related to matters not included in this Report.

22


REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS

1. Shri K.N. Chaturvedi, Joint’Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel

2. The Committee heard the Representatives of the Ministries of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
and Surace Transport in the light of the written notes furnished by both the Ministries regarding
consequential amendments in sections 436 and 458 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 in case the
existing amendments to section 76 as provided in the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Bill 1998
are carried out. The represenatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs opined that since
section 436 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 provides punishment for contraventions of any provisions
of the Act and in case the section 76, as proposed in the bill is amended, the consequential amendment in
Sr. No. 17 of Section 436 (2) is also required to be carried out so as to bring in the penalty clause which
will be in the following manner:

I 2 3 4

UF If any master fails 84(1)(c) Fine which may extend
to submit the required to five thousand
crew list or fails to rupees and in addition
report the changes a fine which may
made in the list before extend to one thousand
commencing the relevant rupees for every day,
voyage. during which the

offence continues
after conviction.”

3. Similarly Section 458 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958 also requires consequential Amendment
for providing punishment regarding breach of rules and regulations made under Section 76 of the Act in
the following manner:

In Section 458 of the principal Act in sub-section (2), after clause (a), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:- “(aa) in the case of a rule made under section 76, with imprisonment which may
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;”

4. The Ministry of Surface Transport after some discussion agreed to the consequential amendment to
Sections 436 und 458 as proposed by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.

5, The Comittee thereafter took up clause by clause consideration of Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1998 and adopted the same without any change. However the Committee agreed to the
Suggestions given by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs for incorporating consequential
Amendment in Sections 436 and 458 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, which were also agreed to by
the Ministry of Surface Transport.

6. The Committee was also of the view that a comprehensive bill containing rest of the amendments to
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, as suggested by the review committee under the Chairmanship of the
Director General Shipping in 1991, so as to bring it in line with the important changes in international
Shipping may be brought before the Parliament instead of introducing piecemeal amendments from
time to time.

7. Averbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

23


XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday the 2nd December, 1998 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Smt. Basanti Sarma
. Shri Akhilesh Das
. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
. Shri Bratin Sengupta
Dr. Alladi ९. Rajkumar
. Shri Abani Roy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
8. Shri Chaman Lal Gupta
9. Shri Manabendra Shah
10. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria
11. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri
12. Shri Jagat Vir Singh Drona
13. Shri P.C. Chacko
14. Shri P.R. Kyndiah
15. Shri P.M. Sayeed
16, Shri Anil Basu
17. Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth
18. Shri Jang Bahadur Singh Patel
19. Shri Ramraajan
20. Shri Bijoy Kumar ‘Bijoy’
21. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
22. Shri Ramdas Athawale
23. Shri Omar Abdullah

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Smt. Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary

Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer

9” ४७ + ४० ७९5

24


2. The Committee took up for consideration its draft Thirty Fourth Report on the Merchant Shipping
(Second Amendment) Bill, 1998 and adopted the same with some modifications, The Committee also
authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Ved Prakash Goyal to present the Report to the Rajya
Sabha and Shri P.C. Chacko and in his absence Shri PM. Sayeed to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok
Sabha.

3. The Committee took note of the views expressed by Shri Lakshman Chandra Seth, Shri Abani Roy,
and Shri Anil Basu opposing the Bill . The Committee decided to append their views as a note of dissent
to its Report.

4, * + *

5. * * *

6. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.00 p.m.

***Relates to the matter not included in this Repo. included in this Report.

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4871RS—20,03. 1999.