r 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
0:'\ 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, 1996-97 
(DEMAND NO. 7) 
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL AVIATION 
(Presented to the Rajya Snbha on 4th Sept., 1996) 
(Laid on the Table of the l ok Sabha on 6th Sept., 1996) 
RAJYA SABIIA SECR!!:TARIA T 
NEW DELHI 
August, 1996/Bhildra, lYIB (Sakil) 
I 

CONTENTS 
I CoMI'Osnlo"~ Of 1 HI ' C'-nMMI n ~~ 
2. IN (l{ ()l)\ "CI lOI'o . . . . . . • 
3. Rr.voR 1 o~ ;H~ CoMMnTtE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ' . . 
(i)·(ii) 
(iii) 
1-11 
13-2 1 

-
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
(1996-97) 
l. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Citairma11 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri G. Prathapa Reddy 
3. Shri Sushi! Barongpa 
*4. Shri S.S. Surjewala 
5. Shri Virendra Kataria 
6. Shri Janardhana Poo jary 
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
8. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
9. Shri Raghavji 
10. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
11. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
12. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
13. Shr i V.P. Duraisamy 
14. Shr i Yerra Narayanaswamy 
15. Dr. D . Vcnkateshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shn Pramod Mahajan 
17. Dr. A .K. Patel 
18. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
19. Shri De vi Bux Singh 
20. Shri Ganga Charan Rajput 
21. Shri P.S. Gadhva i 
22. Shri Chamanl ;tl Gupta 
23. Shri Uuam Singh Pawar 
24. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh R;Hhollr 
25. Shri K. Vijay Bhaskara Reddy 
2.6. Shri P.M . Sayeed 
27. Shri Manorilnjan Bhakt a 
28. Shri P.C . Chacko 
29. Dr. Y.S. Rajsekhar Reddy 
30. Shri Sa t Mabajan 
31. Shri K .D. Sult<tnpuri 
32. Shri Pradeep Kumar Dev 
33. Shri Parsa Ram Meghwal 
34. Shri A. Siddaraju 
35. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
36. Shri Ratna Bahadur Rai 
37. Shri Balay Rai 
(i) 

38. Shri A.M. Velu 
39. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
40. Shri Lgandula Ramana 
41. Shri Anant Mahadev_gudc 
42. Shri Bishambar Prasad Nishad 
43. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
44. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
45. Shri G.M . Banatwalla 
SECRETARIAT " 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Tomar. Director 
(ii) 
Slui Surinder Kumar. Under Secremry 
Shrimati Sunita Sc~aran, Committee Officer 
• 

-
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Commiuee on Transport ~nd Tourism, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present on thei r behalf, present this 24th Report on the 
Demands for Grants 1996-97 of the Department of Civil Aviation. 
2. The Comm iuee at its meetings held on 7th and 19th August. 1996 considered the 
Grants 1996-97 of the Department of Civil Aviation (Demand No. 7) and heard the 
Secretary, Department of Civil Aviation on the subject. 
3. The Commillee expresse s its thanks to lhe Officers of the Department for placing 
before the Committee the material and inform ation desired in connection with the 
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Dep<~rtment, and for giving evidence before 
the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered and ~doptcd the report at its meeting held on the 
29th August, 1996. 
NEW DELHI; 
August 29. 1991i 
Bhadra 7. I 918 (Saka) 
(iii) 
SUNDER SINGH BHANDARI 
Chairman, 
Commiuee on Transport and Tourism. 

I 
I 
REPORT 
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL AVIATION 
The Department of Civil Aviation is respon~ible for the formulation and implementation of 
national policies and programm es in the aviation sector . Apart from the development and 
regulation of civil aviation in the country, the Department oversees the establishment of new 
airports, maintenance and upgradation of existing ones, regulation of carriage of traffic by air 
and ensuring civil aviation security. Railway safety, including inquiries into serious railway 
accidents, also constitutes one of the allied functions of the Department. 
2. The Civil Aviation sector is monitored and regulated by two separate organisations 
under the Department of Civil Aviation i.e. Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Bureau 
of Civil Aviation Security . The functions pertaining to railway safety are entrusted to a 
Commission viz. Commission of Railway Safety . 
3. The following public sector undertakings/companies/autonomous bodies also function 
under the administrative control of the Department of Civil Aviation: 
(a) Air India Limited and its wholly owned subsidiaries viz., Hotel Corporation of India 
Ltd. and Air India Charters Ltd . 
(b) Indian Airlines Limited and its wholly owned subsidiary viz. Airlines Allied Services 
Ltd. 
(c) Airports Authority of lndia . 
(d) Pawan Hans Limited. 
4. Demand No . 7 pertains to the Department of Civil Aviation . Provisions in this demand 
mainly include allocations for the Secretariat of the Department, the establishment expenditure 
of the DGCA and procurement of equipment and accessories; Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
release of budgetary support to Airpon~ Authority of India for various Plan projects at different 
airports in the country; reimbur~ement to AAl towards its share of Foreign Travel Tax and for 
expenditure incurred on security arrangements at airports; and Grants-in-Aid to Indira Gandhi 
Rnshtriya Uran Academy (IGRUA). 
5. The other Public Sector Undertaki ng' under the Department meet their plan 
expenditure out of their own internal and extra-budgetary resources. The annual plan of Hotel 
Corpora tion of India Ltd. is financed by Air lndi;; Ltd. and that of IGRUA, equa lly by Air 
India Limited and lndian Airlines Limited. 
6. The Committee in its 15th Report pertnining to Demands for Grunts (1995-96) of the 
Department of Civil Aviation had observed that the wide gap between the Bud ~e t Estimates 
and the Revised Estimates for the Department presented an unhealthy picture, and had 
impressed upon it to find ways and mean~ to prepare its Budget Estimates giving due weightage 
tO actuals. The Comminee is astonished to note that the Budget Estimate of the Department for 
the current year again shows a huge gap as compared to the Revised Estimates for the year 
1995-96 and is likely to be increased substantially again at the RE I996-97 stage. The gap is 
again due to the token allocation~ made by the Department under the Head:. of 'payments to 
AA I for Expenditure on security measure;, at airports' and ·payments to State Governments for 
compensating them for the levy foregone by them by exempting international atrlines, including 
Air India, from payments of sales tax on ATI· lifted by them at the airport locuted in the States 
concerned' . The annua l expenditure on both thc~c items in RE of 1995-% was Rs. 48.33 crores. 
L 

2 
SECURITY ARRANGEI\fENTS AT THE AIRPORTS 
7. A token provision of Rs. 1.00 crore has been made in the current year's Budget 
Estimates for making payments to Airports Authority of India to enable jt to reimburse 
State Governments/Union Territories for security arrangements made by them at various 
airports. The actual expenditure incurred under this head, as indicated in the R.E. for 1994-
95 and 1995-96, were Rs. 15.00 crores and Rs. 20.00 crores, re~pcctively. lltc represen­
tatives of the Department, during their deposition before the Committee, stated that it is the 
practice in other Departments too to make such token provisions, specially when bills for 
expenditure incurred are received later in the year. A token provision is made only to keep 
the budgetary provision alive. When the Budget is revised every year in October-November, 
all such requirements are taken into account. 
8. The Committee was informed that the recommendation~ of the Internal Committee 
of the Department, that this expenditure on :;ecurity arra~cmenb could be met by the 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) if an en hanced share of Foreign Travel Tax dues could be 
paid by the Government to the Authority were turned down by the Minhtry of Finance on 
the grounds that tax revenues formed a pan of the resources for expenditure of the 
Government, both Plan and non-Plan , and the receipts from any tax could not be pre­
empted for financing any particular item. The Ministry of Finance advised the Department 
to make it~ projections on investments needed in the civil aviation sector with regard to 
security, to the Planning Comm1!>~ion •s part of the Five Ycmi'Annual Plnn exercise . The 
Committee was told that the Department or Civil Aviation has been considering a proposal 
for the creation of a civil aviation security force . 
9. The Committee is constraint«~ to note that the entire process of decision making is 
taking far too long and we are still in the same position as 11 year ago. With the expansion of 
the civil aviation sector, the entry of private sector and opening up of new routes. the question 
or civil aviation security needs to be looked at in right earnest. The Committee agrees with the 
Department that there should be a separate provision for civil aviation security force charged 
with the security of airports and civil aviation establishments. The State Governments and 
Union Territories cannot be expected to continue to provide their necessary services in this 
regard. The Committee recommends to the Go•ernment to take a fmal decision urgently, and 
set up a civil aviation security force. Meanwhile, the Committee regrets to note that the 
Department of Civil Aviation has continued with its practice of making only a token 
contribution under the head 'Security' on the plea that the exact annual expenditure thnt will 
be eventually incurred is not yet known. The Committee was astonished at this stand taken b~ 
the Department. The D~partment could easily have based its present year's requirements on 
the RE of the preceding year. In such a situati on there would not have been such a significant 
gap between the BE and eventual RE for 1996-97. 
PRICE OF AVIATI0:-1 TURBINE FUEL (ATFl 
10. A provision of Rs. 28.33 erores was made dl the BE and RE stages of the Budget 
(or 1995-96 for making payments to State Governments in lieu of sales tax for A TF sold to 
international airlines. This provision is meant for ~ompensa ti ng the State Governments for 
the revenue from ATF while exempting interniltional atrline~. including Air India, from 
payment of sales tax for ATF lifted by them at the airport' located in the State; concerned. 
In the Budget Estimates for 1996-97. only a token provision of Rs. 1.00 crore has been made 
under thi; Head . 
... 
11. The Committee was informed that the prQblem of high pnce or ATF in India vtS-a· I " · · 
J 

3 
vis the world market cont inues. T he price in India of the ATF is almos t four times that in 
the international markets. This price was again increased during the recent hike in the price 
of petroleum products. The Committee was told that whenever the prices of petroleum 
products are increased in the country, the cost of A TF also goes up, since that becomes the 
most convenient mode of meeting the burden of subsidy on petroleum and kerosene. 
12. The Department of Civil Aviation had received representations from interna tional 
air carriers against the imposit ion of sales uix on ATF. Since the levy of sales tax on ATF is 
not consistem with the provisions in the Bilateral Air Services Agreements signed with 
various countries, as also with the existing ICAOL Resolutions, the Ministry had examined 
the possibility of reviving the earlier scheme of paymem of compensation to the State 
Governments for revenue foregone by them by not charg ing sales tax. However, it was then 
felt by the Government tha t it would not be desirab le to revive thi~ scheme as it was against 
the Governme nt policy to provide subsidy in the civil aviation sector and as liability on this 
account was likely to increase substantially with the growth of international air trafric to and 
from India. The Government has now decided that the Ministry of Finance would examine 
the case for amending the CentrJl Sales Tax Act 1956 by inserting an explanation to Section 
5 of the Act, so that the sale of A TF to mternational carriers could be deemed to be a sale 
in the course of export. Furthe r, actio n in the matter i> required to be taken by the Ministry. 
13, The Committee is of the view that tbe matter has been pending for quite ~me time 
and there Is need for an early decision in the matter to relieve the extra burden or high price 
on ATF on domestic airli nes, meet India's international civil aviat ion obligations and also 
compensate lbe loss which would be suffered by th e Sta te Governments from the wilhdnlwal 
of sales tax o n the sale of A TF. 
RECYCLING OF INLAND Affi TRAVE L TAX AND FOREIGN TRAVEL TAX IN 
AVIAT ION SECTOR 
14. An allocation of R~. 13 crores has been made in the BE for 1996-97 for payment to 
the AAJ for its share of the revenue collected by Government as Foreign Travel Tax (1:-Tf) 
from passe ngers embarking on i nternational flights ut airports managed by the Authori ty. 
The BE and RE for 1995-96 under this sub-head were Rs. 10.50 crores and Rs. 12.50 crores 
respectively. Prior to levy of the FIT. 11 Passenger Service Fee (PSF) used to be collected by 
the Authority from passengers. When the FTT wa~ tmposed, the PSF was merged with 11 on 
the understanding that the share on account of PSF would be reimbursed by Government to 
the Airports Authority of India. 
15. The Commillee in its 15th Repo rt had observed that if a substantial percentage of 
FIT and Inland Air Travel Tax (!A TT) were to be recycled back to the civil aviation sector 
for development and creation of necessary inf rastructure and facalities. it would generate 
additional busine~~. whtch in turn would result m htgher tax for the national exchequer. The 
representatives of the Department, during the course of thetr deposition before the 
Committee, stated tha t the Departmen t does not get much by way of Government reve nue. 
The ent ire amount of R~. 400 crores colle<'led on llccount of Inland Air Truvel Tax goes to 
the national exchequer and only 10 per cent from the Foreign Travel Tax is reimbursed to 
the Department of Civil Aviation. In their written replies, the Department aiso informed the 
Commillee that a proposal for enhanccmem of the share payable to the AAJ to 30% of the 
net revenue collection by Government on account of lA IT/FIT was taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance. It was felt that with the accepta nce of ibis suggestion, the Author ity 
would be in a position to make investments towards development of infmstructural facilities 
at certain airports in priority areas thus meeting the objective of recycling a part of revenue 

I 
4 
collections on account of IATDfTT in the civil avtat1on sector itselr. However, Ministry 
of Finance did not accept the proposal on the grounds that tax revenues formed a part 
of resources for expenditure of the Government, both Plan and Non-Plan, and the 
rece ipts (rom lA TDfTT could not be pre-empted for financing any particular item. 
Accordingly, Ministry of Finance advised the Department of Civil Aviation that proposals 
for investment in the Civil Aviation Sector would have to be projected to the Planning 
Commission for financing the developmental works as a part of the Five Year/ Annual 
Plan exerC-ise. 
16. The Commltl te has noted the views of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee is, 
however , of the view that t.he overall level of allocations for the Department of Civil 
Aviation continues to be very small and is totally inadequate for the needs of the civil 
aviation sector. It needs to be rem embued that air transpo rt is one of the fastest growing 
sectors of the economy, with record growth rate s or 14-20% in recent years. While at one 
point this mode of travel was considered a luxury, meant for the more affluent sections of 
society, now with the growing demand s of the tourism industry, rapid indu striali sation in 
all parts of the country and the need for movement of goods rapidly to their desired 
destinations, there is an urgen t need for the development, upgradation and modernisation 
of Ute civil aviation sector . As of now, the Bllldget of the Department of Rs. 128.37 crores 
for 1996-97 is one of the smallest budgets in the Government. T he total Plan outlay for 
the Ministry in this Budget is only Rs. 53.46 crores and that on the Non-Plan side 
Rs. 74.91 crores. The amounts allocated this year are less than the RE for 1994-95 and 
1995-96. The allocati on on the Plan side for upgradalio n of various airports in dllrerent 
parts of the country is only Rs. 48.55 crores . Expa n ~io n of the air transport petwork in 
the country must necessarily involve state·of-tbe-art equipment and fully trained personnel, 
as air safety is a prime consideration. 
17. The growth of tourism sector i.~ presently severely constrained by inadequat~ air 
links, specially in remote, hilly and border areas which, nevertheless, have tremendous 
touri st potential. Similarly, the grow th of India's foreign trade is a lso hamper ed by the 
lack of proper infrastructure in the civil aviation sector . The importance of tourism and 
foreign trade sectors in the growth of the Indian economy cannot be overemp hasised. 
These two sectors would more than compensate the economy and the national exchequer 
for proper investments made in the civil aviation sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Governme nt that if revenues from IATIIFTT cannot be ploughed back 
into the civil aviation sector, the allocations for this sector should be otherwise augmented 
to meet its rapidly growing needs. 
COMMlSSION OF RATLWAY SAFETY 
18. A provision of R~. 1.29 crores has llccn made on the Budget Estimates fo1 
1996-97 to meet the establishment expenditure of the Commi>:.ion of Railway Safety 
which is responsible for conducting Statutory inquiries into rail accident> and other allied 
functions. The Committee in its 91h ond 15th Report> had recommended that smcc the 
Commission discharges its functions entirely for rail travel. the expenditure being incurred 
on it should be rcimbur..ed by the Ministry of Railway~. The Department of Civil 
Aviation should not be made to incur any expendi ture on nny 1tem not connected with 
it. The Department. in their written replies , had informed the Committee that they had 
taken up the matter with the Ministry of Railways requesting them to convey their 
~oncurrence tO reimbursing the entire expcn<.liture incurred. 8> :llso to bear the future 
expenditure of Commission of Railway Security llte litHer did not agree to tht.: proposal 
on the ground that in order to ret:•in it~ independence in investig<~tions. the Commission 

5 
should not be dependent on Railway finances. The Department has not accepted the view of 
the Ministry of Railway' and the matter is being further pursued. 
19. Tbe Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations and desires that the Depart­
ment should continue to actively pursue this issue with the Ministry or Rai lways. 
AIR INDIA 
20. The approved Plan outl<ty for Air India for 1995-96 was Rs. 2952.44 crores. Against 
this, the est imated expenditure on Plan sch.;mes was only Rs. 146.88 crores. The major area 
where shortfall in expend iture took place, WHS ''a ircraft acquisition". Here, as against an 
approved Plan outlay of R!>. 2830.28 crores, the airli nes only spent 866.37 crores. According 
to the airlines, this was due to deferral of certain aircrafts projects to future years. 'There 
were some shortfalls in non-aircraft projects too. Here, as against an approved oullay of Rs. 
102 crores, only Rs. 79.73 crores were spent. The main heads which showed substantially 
low expenditure as compared to approved outlays were "Workshop Equipment". "Ground 
Services Department" and "ComputerisatiowCommunication Facilities". 
2L. For 1996-97. the approved annual outlay of the airlines is lower than in 1995-96, and 
total~ R>. 2907.75 crores. However. m view of the financial crisis being faced by the airlines, 
it has formulated a Capital Budget of Rs. 1060.62 crores. The scheme-wise detail;. of the 
outlay arc as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl. Name of the 1996-97 
No. scheme Proposed Pian outlay 
A. Aircraft Projects 887.62 
(2 8747-400 aircraft) 
B. Non-Aircraft Proje<:ts 
(a) Continuing Projects ll8.87J (b) New Projects 36.13 173.00 
(c) Block Provision 18.00 
Total Capital ExJ}eoditure (A+B) 1060.62 
22. Air India incurred losses of Rs. 244 crores in 1995-% According to the estimates 
given by the airlines, it will ~uffer ltlmost equivalent losses of Rs. 230 crores in 1996-97 The 
muin reasons for its losses are said tO be. expenditure on account of interest and 
depreciation on new aircrafts, reduction of yield due to increased competition, increased 
Iundin& and navigational charges, ugitution by engineers, and exchange rate fluctuations. etc. 
The Secretary, Department of Civil Avi<ttion, who deposed before the Committee, said that 
some years ago when the airlines wu; making profits, it did not invc>r in new nircrafts and 
merely put its earnings.in a bank. Over time, its fleet has been reduced to 26 aircraft which 
hy now :~re very olrl. Thi< h:" limited rht• nrwr:ttion"l :~bility of the airline> ond h:" pl:tced it 
10 a disadvantaged position vis-a-d.r other tnternational airlines in the region who ~tarted on 
a much >maller scale but who now have many more aircrafts . The airline\ ha> now decided 
to purchase new aircrahs. Two new Boeing 747s arc expected in 1'\ovcmber-Deccrnbcr 1996. 
TI1c Comminee was also told of the complicated decision making involved in proce;sing of 

6 
purchase proposals of aircraf!s by Air lndia. The~e proposals, whtch have to go through a 
number of Boards and Ministries, often take tw<> years to fructify . And this in a sitmttion 
where the airlines takes market loan~ to purcha~e aircraft~ for __.hich the Government doe~ 
not ~tand any guarantee. 
23. According to the Secretary. another reason for Air India making IO!>Ses, was the fact 
that a number of routes on which It had again started operating. were not profit makmg 
routes. 
24. The Committee has noted the above stated reasons for the present sorry state or Air 
India. The Committee notes with concern the complete Jack of any long-term perspective 
planning on the part of Air India and the Govemmmt in the sector of civil aviation. By the 
Government's own admission, the airlines did not go in for purchase of new aircrafls at a 
time when it bad the resources and was making p rofits. It merely kept the money in a bank 
and allowed its fleet and operations to shrink to the present level. The Government has 
accepted the need for an international Oag carrier, but the latter has to compete with other 
top-class international airlines, and has to be self-sustaining. A long-term perspective is, 
therefore, a must. Due to the earlier short.~ighted .approach, we are now in a situation -..here 
massive investments will have to be made not only to replace our ageing Oeet but to also catch 
up with other airlines. 
25. Other reasons for losses, as stated by Air India, VIZ. increased competition, increased 
landing and navigational charges, agitation by engineers and exchonae rate Ouctuations. etc. 
are acceptable only upto a point, a!. a large numl~r of other airlines would also be facing such 
problems throughout the world. In the view of the Commiltee, apart from the shrunken and 
ageing Oeet of the airlines, the other main causes for Air India's unsatisfactory performon'-e 
are its poor Image, Jack of punctuality, and Jon quality of servites offered by it. Examples of 
the •bo•e are too numerous to mention. The Committee was told that the punctuality level of 
the airlines bas Improved mar~:inally during the last year. It has to ~ borne in mind that the 
intage and reputation of an) organisations does not changt with small improvements in one 
year. These have 10 be carefully built and nurtured over u long period of lime. The airlines 
has itself admitted in one of its replies that the productivity of' it!. per-Sonnel is lo" compared 
to international standards. The Committee recommends that the airlines needs to toke a •cr~ 
serious look at the problems "ithin, to tone up discipline, motivate its personnel and then•b) 
improve the quality of its services. Wet len~in~ of aircraft!. b) Air India b anotbtr cause for 
the heavy losses incurred b} the airlines. According to the figures mad~ available to the 
Committee, the airlines has incurr<d expenditur. of Rs. 541.84 crores <•n wet ll·nsing. Th~ 
Committee recommends that the airlines should do a co51 benefit anal}5b of \Itt leasinl! of 
aircr~fts to ~ if it should continue to incur such ma$;h·e e'P"nditurc. 
26. The Committte is of the view that matter:- of purchase etc. of aircraft arc dechions 
for Air India to make and as Air India's own resources are invohed In such case.\. th~ 
Government needs to give greater autonomy to it to ensure that these decisions are tnken 
within the shortest possible time and nnt two ye:.r<, as at present. 
PAWAN BANS LIMITED 
27 Pawan Han~ Limitt:d is entrusted with the ta_,J.. of p1·ovtding hchcopt• r suppurt 
-.ervice\ to the oil sector in off shore exploration, operaun~ m htlly ;md inaccc"thle a1c.1S 
and muking avuiiHble charter ilights for promoti<>n of tmvcl ;~nu tourism 
28 The CommJHce ha\ noted a ma"tvt: shortfall in the actual expenditure of Pa\\an 

7 
Hans Limited as compared to the approved Plan outlays during !he last two years. In 1994-95, 
against a total approved outlay of R~. 14.90 crores, only a sum or Rs. 8.26 crorcs was spent. 
whereas in 1995-96 the actual expenditure was Rs. 4.10 crores against an approved outlay of 
Rs. 29.80 crores. The main areas of shortfall are in "aquisition of ne)Y fleet" and "building 
projects". 
28A. According to the Department of Civil Aviation, against a provision of Rs. 20 
crores in 1995·96 for four light, and one medium helicopter, !hey were only able to acquire 
two light helicopters in 1995-96 costing 3.6 crores. Purchase of two more helicopters is 
expected to be comp leted by Novumber, I 996. The approved Plan outlay for Pawan Hans 
for 1996-97 contains a provision for Rs. 97.25 crores for purchase of eight helicopters two 
each in the light and medium categories and 4 heavy ones. 
29. Under "building projects", the shortfall in outlay has been becau~e of non­
commencement of construction activity of !he Juhu residential complex in Mumbai since 
1994·95 due to non-finalisation of terms with Atrport Authority of lndi:vCPWD and othcr 
legal formalities. 
30. Although the above alloc:nions are mternally generated source~ of Pawan Hans. and 
do not mvolve any budgetary support b) the Government. there ~eenl'> to be a conttnutng 
delay in execution of variou> plan prOJect" of the organisation. Proposals for purchase of 
helicopter$ in anyone finanic;tl year ,tlw;ty' -,pill over to the 'uccceding year and the 
requirements seem to be accumul<lling. Du nng the Eighth five Ye:tr Plan period, against a 
wrgct of seven light and ten medium helicopters, only five light and one medium helicopters 
were purchased, and advance payment for purchase of two heavy duty helicopters was made. 
This is not a satisfactory stali! of affairs. If the organisation need' helicopters for operational 
purposes and has allocated money for the same after gelling the necessary Bpprovab, then 
there is no reason why delays should occur. The Committee recommends that Powan Hans 
Ltd. should l!nsure that it achie>es its f'lan targets within the stipulated lime, utilises its funds 
proper!) and does not accumulate Its demands for helicopters and equipment. 
31 As regards the Juhu residential complex. the Commiltel! is conurained to note that 
non-finalisation of terms and legal formalities ha•e held up construction of !he re~ideolial 
compte~ for almost two years. This must sure!) be causing barmhip to employee:. and 
persounel of the organisation speciall) in a city like Mumbai where accommodation is not easy 
to obtain. The Committee recommends that Pawan Hans Ltd. expedite all pending approvals 
and formalities and commence construction of the complex at the eorliest. 
32. Pawan llans Ltd. presently h(ls 19 Westland helicopters which h;tve been grounded 
since February 1991 for t·easons uf upcrutil'll' safety and economic non-viability. A decision 
has been t<•ken to dispose off this entire Oect. Meanwhile, Pawan Ham. Ltd. is maintaining 
these hcliC<>pters. The representative-, of the Department of Civil AviahOn, who deposed 
before the Committee. stated thut some offers were received for purchase of the helicopters. 
An Inter-Ministerial Steering Commmce ha\ been set up to examine these offers. 
33. The Committee is of the view that the Government should dispo~ ofT these grounded 
helicopters at tbe earliest. It is clear that none of these helicopters is going to be used by 
Pawan Hans. Yet, infructuous upenditure is being incurred on their maintenance. In spite of 
a request by the Committee, it ha~ not yet been provided the expenditure being incurred on 
maintenance of tbese helicopters. The Commillee is also of the view that any further delay in 
their disposal is futile, as the sale price can only be expected to decline in future. 

I 
I 
-
8 
INDIAN AIRLINES 
34. The approved annual !'lao outlay for lndiao Airlines for 1995-96 was Rs. 411.41 
crores. However, in view of 1ts financi al position , the Airlines had budgeted its annual 
outlay at Rs. 409.43 crores only A~ against this outlay. the actual expe nditur e incurred wa~ 
Rs. 358.43 crores, whe reas the Airline~ exceeded its outlay on "Aircraft Projects" by 
Rs 16.57 crores due to changes m the exchange rate. Under "Other Supporting Facilities" it 
only spent Rs. 1.08 crores against a projected Rs. 54.43 cro res on Real Time Computer 
SyMem and Commumcation,, According to the Airlines, this project will now be financed 
through external borrowings to the extent of 90% of the cost 
35. For 1996-97, the Airlines has an approved Plan outlay of R\. 445 crores, con~istmg 
of Rs. 408.65 crores unde r "Aircraft ProJeCts' and Rs. 3.35 crores under "O the r Supporting 
Facilities." The major portion of Plan outlay under "Aircraft Projects", i.e., Rs. 363.65 
crores, is for repayment of loans in respect of 31 Airbus A320 aircrafts acquired by it earlie r 
An amount of Rs. 45 crores has been projected toward' advance payment for purchase of six 
50-seater aucraft by Indian A1rlines. The fin:mcmg of these aircraft\ will be done through 
commercial borrowings for the: enure cost ot R~ 300 crores. 
36. The entire expenditure is to be incurred out of the internal and extra-budgetary 
resources of Indian Airlines. 
37. Indian A1rline~ continued to incur losses 1 n it~ open uions in 1995-96. The losses in 
1995-96 arc e~timated to ge Rs. 134 75 crorcs, which are lower than those incurred in 1994-95, 
1.c., Rs. 188.73 ~:rores. The A1rlincs cslunates 1ts losses in 1996-97 to be Rs. 44.50 crores 
Ac.:ording to the Airlines. the main re.a~ons for it" incurring these los;,es are: grounding of 
14 A320s for nine months in 199() resulting in a loss of around R~ 200 crores, unequal 
competition from private airlines who are con~:entr:ttmg only on profll makm~t trunk routes 
unlike Indian Airlines, 60'¥, of whose s<:rv1cn hotve always been lo's making; merger ot 
Vayudoot with its accumulated lms of R~. 207 cron.:s and an an nu ~l loss of Rs. 15 cro res and 
an ucfdition~l 1000 employees with Indian Aulines, exodus of as man~ as 161 p1lol\ ani! 9:1 
engmecr~ who left for other pnvotc airlines Since rnuny who lcfl were also Check Pilots, 
instructor~ and cxammers. lnd1a Airlines abli1ty to tram and produce addition<tl Cornman· 
den. also greatly suffered. The present ~hortagc of as manY as 7~ Commanders re\ulted in 
under-utilisation ,,f aircraft\ and hence mcffiClcnt operations. 
38. Accordm-c to the Indian Airlines, they have formulated a tum-around strategy wh1cr 
con>lsts of t.:fforts to impn>vc morale :md discirlinc withio the orgamsation: increa":d 
utih,ation of aircrafts; inr.reasc m the numhcr ni overall hours flown pa month by pth>'-: 
incn:ased international operations: Internal restrm:turing uf orcmmauon tn gh g. •ter 
au1nnomy to some of its wings and; attempt to 1mprove publi~ relations. 
39. The Con11nittee wa" aho mformed that in order to get around the sho1 t:tgt• of 
Commam.lers and the difficulty u(' lateral inc.luctlon" on account o! commitments giver \C• 
pik>ts' unions. the Airlines ha' rc-uclivated a wholly owned subsid 1ary known lts Alliance 
Air Th 1s subsidiary ha~ st:trtcd operations SJncc 15th April 1996 and h~~ been given fou 
Boe1ng 737 atrcrafl~ by the lndran Airlines since then. The prese nt \tre ngth of the Allinnce 
Air is 39 pilots. 17 of whom are Commanders, and 22 co-pilot\ ·The Comn11ttc~ wa> 
informed th<ll as the Alliance Air did not have to operate under obligation' imposed on 
Indian Airlines through ih commitments to pilots· unions. it w:ts laterally inclucung pilots 
from outside. Tht: Committee inquired about the financial pl.'rformance of Alliance Air The 
rcpr.:sentiltive~ of Department of Civil A\lation. however. expressed their intlbilitl' tu 

9 
provide figures on financial performance of Alliance Air on the ground that the period from 
April onwards was too shon for any financial performance figures to be available. The 
Committee was also informed that mo~t of the employees of Alliance Air were on 
deputation from Indian Airlines and no extra staff was being recruited from the open market 
for this new organistion. 
40. Since the Committee was not provide d with figures on nnancial performance of 
Alliance Air nor did it have any information about tbe number of personnel of Alliance AJr 
taken from the open market and those from Indian Airlines, it is not in a position to give its 
views on the organisation and would, therefore, reserve its comments at Ibis stage. The 
Committee recommends to the Go•ernment that these ngures may be provided to the 
Committee when Action Taken Replies are provided by the Department of Civil Avialion to 
the Committee. 
41 The Committee has noted the reasons advanced by Indian Airlines for losse<; incurred 
by it. While the Committee accepts these reasons as being partly respOnsible for the present 
condition of Indian Airlines, it is also of the view that other causes, which unfortunately are 
common to both Air India and Indian Airlines, viz. poor image, lack of punctuality and low 
quality of services offered by it, are equally to blame for its present state. Here ton, like Air 
India, the examples are ton numerous to mention. These are indicative of a de-motlvated and 
indisciplined approach ln the organisation -.hicb need.\ to be looked ~t 'er) serious!) b) its 
management. The recommendations made by the Committee in the ca'>c of Air India apply in 
equal meuure to Indian Airlines. 
42. I he Secretary, Dcp;1rtment of Civil Aviation informed I. he Committee that there 
arc no legal provision' restricting fare\ that may be charged by Airlines in lndw on the 
routes where Indian Airlin~s is operating ''' flights. The fare charged by it doc' to 'orne 
ex lent. control the !arc' hat private airhnes char~c from their \u,tomers. 
43. The Committee i~ of the view that pri~ratt' air operators have heen known to charge 
exorbiwnt and arbitury far~. ~pecially on routes "here Indian Airline' is not operatinl(. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be ~orne yardstick~ for fixine fare~. The 
Government should coruider puUing in place regulator) frameworlo. to this effect. 
11-fAJOR PROJECTS 
44. ModernisatiOn of Air Traffic Services at Mumbai and Delhi Airports is one of the 
maJor project~ presently being handled by Airporh Authority of lndiu This prOJect itlltially 
CO>ting R, . 209.71\ crnre' with ~ roretgn ext:hangL component of R~ . lo2.78 crorcs was 
:tpprovcd b)' the Government in June. 1990. The cost estimate wa• sub,equently revised to 
Rs. 3Sl.X7 aores (including foreign exchange compuncnt of Rs 2~7 25 crores) in March 
1993. Due to certain new requirement- of ICAO and general price incrca'e Ill the 
con\tructiC)Il there is upwurd re,'ision 111 the e~umutcd cost of the prnJCCt from R' J5l.i'i7 
cror~> to (.b. -123.8') crorcs (~ncluding Rs. 31.70 LuHcs fur parallel Taxi Track <Jnu lltllCI 
allied works to be done bv International Atrport~ Division of Airporh Authomy ul India) 
includtng the Foreign Exchange content •>f Rs. 266 .48 crorcs. The Rcvt~d Cost r;,umate~ 
has been put up for ·•pprov•l of the Government Th<: proJeCt is likely to be completed by 
Dt!cembcr, I 996. 
45 The Committee ts not happy with the tardy progre~s of the project The Committee 
ts >urpri,ed to note thut th~ project whkh wa~ appmvc:d by Government '"June. 1990 wuh 
an mtti~l co .. t of R~. 2rJJ.76 crore., h~' not been completed. Due to the'e delay' the co'l 
escalatton has been more than double . It i~ 'tatcd that the pr<"ject is likely to be 

• 
!() 
completed by December, 1996. The Committee is doubtful that it will be completed by then . 
The Committee recommends that special efforts should be made to see that such projects 
especially where there Is a substantial foreign exchange compone nt should be completed within 
the projected time frame to avoid any cost escalation and waste of foreign exchange. 
46. A feasibility repon for the New Domestic Terminal Complex (Phase -H) Mumbai 
with an estimated cost of Rs. 124.00 crores has been submitted to Government for approvul. 
In anticipation of the approval for the project Rs. 0.50 crores bas been provided dunng 
1996-97. 
47. Another feasibility report for the New International Tem1inal Complex (Phase- 11) 
Delhi with an estimated cost of Rs. 715.00 crores b proposed to be ~ubmiued shortly to the 
Government for approval. 
48. The Model Airports Project is also one of the major projects undertaken by Airport' 
Authority of India_ Airports Authority nf India (AAl) has selected 12 airports for 
development as model 3irports at an estimaled cost of Rs. 4.10 crores. ProJects at Lucknow. 
Jaipur, Nagpur, Vadodara. Calicut, Coimbatore and Indore have been completed at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 2.70 crore~. The works at Hyderabad, Patna, Guwahnti and 
Dhubaneswar will be completed by December, 1997. Improvement> at lmphal airport wtll 
take some more time. During deliberation>. the Secreta I)', Department of Civil Aviation, 
informed the Committee the main cmpha~•~ in these 12 model :1 irporb projects was to 
strengt hen the runways and expand terminal build ings both for national and international 
flights, tf need be. Out of these 12 atrports, 7 have already been inaugur;ttcd and 5 are in 
;~dvance stages of completion. The Committee recommends that th e Department should take 
more airports for development under the model uirports projects. 
PURCHASE OF SW A Tl AIRCRAFT 
49. A provision of Rs. 26.70 crores h;ts been made 111 the lith Five Year Plan fm 
procurement of Swatis, ~imulators, and gliders. During 1996-97. <tn amount of Rs. 1.20 
crores has been provided for the scheme. 
50. DGCA intend~ replacing about 70 to 100 old trainer atrcn•fls 111 different flying club> 
in the country with these Swati aircrafL\. 
51. The Committee bas been mformed by the Department of Civil Aviatton tlwt 
DGCA has designed "SWAII" and it IS now bcmg manufactured by J3HEL. 1 htridv,ur 
During the penod 1992-95. an amount of Rs 5 crore' ha> been mcurrcd on the purchase ol 
Swati atrcrafts. Six of these aircrdfts have so far been delivered by Bl tEL and five more ate 
expected tO be delivered during the current financial yea•· 
52. The Committee does not agree ,.ilh the deci,ion of the Govunment to entrust the 
manufac ture of Swati Bircrafts to BREL. It w:as clearly brought out during the hearinJ::S of the 
Comntitlr<> th~t BHEL did not hove any expertise or meaw. tu manuracture aircraft\ and that 
they put together the machinery required for the purpose after the order for the ;~ircrafts 
were placed with them. The inexperience of UTIEL in this field also resulted in their putting 
out an aircraft with manufacturing defects. "hich led to an aircrash and tbe death of a test 
pilot. The Committee was also told that utter the crash, the Inquiry Committee recommended 
some modifications which were carried out in the manufacturing proce>s. During the course of 
the Committee's hearings on Demands for GrunL~, some ambiguit) still remained a.~ to "hich 
department was actually responsible for the unfortunate accident and whether the de>ign, and 
the manufacturing process bad been fully checked. It is clear that the design of the aircraft 

11 
was prepared by DGCA who then gave the task of manufacturing II to BHEL, who lacked 
experience in this field and produced a defective machine. The Committee recommends thai 
the Government inquire into the enllre sequence of events and ru: responsibility. 

MJNUTES 
-

I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M . on T uesday, the 6th August, 1996 in Com mittee Room 
'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari- Citairman 
RAJYA SABRA • 
2. Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi 
3. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
4. Shri Raghavj i 
5. Maula na Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
6. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
7. Shrl Bra tin Sengupta 
8. Shri V. P. Duraisamy 
9. Dr. D . Venkateshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
11. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
12. Shri Devi Bux Singh 
13. Sbri Ganga Charan Rajput 
14. Shri P. S. Gadhvai 
15. Sbri Chamanlal Gup<a 
16. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
17. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
18. Shri P.M. Sayeed 
19. Sbri Y.S . Rajsekhar Reddy 
20. Shri Basangouda R. Pati l 
21. Sbri A. M. Velu 
22. Shri Anant Milhadevgude 
23. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
24. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Tomar. Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar . Under Secremrv 
Shrimati Sun ita Sekaran. Commitlee Officer . 
2 .• 
' ' ,). 
• 
• 
4. ~ • 
5. The Committee dec ided to meet again at 10.00 1\.M. on Wednesday , the 7th August , 
1996 to take up Demands for Grants. {!996·97) of the Department of Civil Aviation and to 
hear the Secretary of that Department on the subject. 
6. The Comm ittee adjourned at 6.00 Y.M • 
.. • Relate to matter~ no1 ~ !\eluded in !hi~ RcporL 
15 

_, 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at lO.OO A.M. on Wednesday, the 7th August, 1996 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground floor , Parliamem House Annexe , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chainnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sushi! Barongpa 
3. Shri Janardhana Poojary 
4. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
5. Shri Raghavji 
6. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
7. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
8. Shri V. P. Duraisamy 
9. Dr. D. Venkateshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
11. Shri Devi Bux Singh 
12. Sbri P.S. Gadbvai 
13. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
14. Shri Unam Singh Pawar 
15. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
16. Shri P. M. Sayeed 
17. Sbri P. ·C. Chacko 
18. Shri K. D . Sultanpuri 
19. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
20. Shri A.M . Velu 
21. Shri Anant Mahadevgude 
22. Sbri Mahendra Battha 
23. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
Representatives or the Department or Ci•il Aviation 
1. Shri Yogesh Chandra , Secretary 
2. Shri P. K. Brahma, Joint Secy. & Financial Advi~or 
3. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee, Joint Sccrewry 
4. Shri S.C. Tripathi, Commissioner (Securit)') 
5. Sbri P.J. Vincent. Financial Controller 
6. Shri Brijesh Kumar , M.D., Air India 
7. Sbri H.S. Khola , D.G.C.A. 
8. Capt. J.R.D . Rao, M.D ., Indian Airlines 
9. Air Marshal H.M . Shahul, Chairman . AAJ 
16 

L 
I 
17 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar. Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer 
2. The Com mittee too k up for consideration Demands for Grants (1996·97) of the 
Depar tment of Civil Aviation and heard the Secretary of that Department on the above 
mentioned subject. 
3. A verbatim record of the p roceed ings of the meeting was kept. 
4. • • 
5. The Comm ittee adjourned at 1.00 P.M. 
• 
• ··Relate' 10 m~. u~r n01 mcludcd 111 thll- Rcpon . 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Comm inee met at 11.00 A.M. o n Monday, the 19th August, 1996 an Main 
Committee Room. Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sunder Singh Dhandar i-Citairmon 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Janardhana Poojary 
3. Shri Mahcshwar Singh 
4. Shri Raghavji 
5. Maulana Obaidullah Kha n Amli 
6. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
7. Shri Bra tin Sengupta 
8. Shri V. P. Duraisamy 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. A. K. Patel 
lO. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
ll. Shri Devi Bux Singh 
12. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
13. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
14. Shri Man oranjan Bhakta 
15. Shri P. C. Chacko 
16. Shri Sat Mahajan 
17. Shri K. D. Sultanpur i 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Dev 
19. Shri A. Siddaraju 
20. Shri A. M Velu 
21. Shri S. S. Palanilmmic kam 
22. Shri Anant Mahad cvgude 
23. Shri Bbhambar Pra>ad l"ishad 
24. Shri Mahendra Baitha 
25. Shri G. M. Banatw:dla 
Representative s of the Department of Ci> il ''' ialion 
I. Shri Yogc~h Chandr<o, Secretary 
2. Shri Brijcsh Kumar , M.D .. Air lndi;t 
3 Shri P. C. Sen, MD., Indian Airline' 
4 Shri P.K. Brahma. Joint Secretary & 1- A. 
5. Shri S.C. Tripathi, Commi~>ioner (Security) 
6. Shri H.S. Khola, D G.C.A. 
7. Shri Ranj an Chatterjee. Jotnt Secretary & CMD. J'aw:•n Han' Linuted 
8. Air Marshal H.M Shahul, Chatrman. Atrporh Authority ot India 
18 

• 
SECRETARIA T 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Tomar. Director 
19 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran. Committee Officer. 
2. • • 
3. The Committee also further conside red the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the 
Depart ment of Civil Aviat ion and heard the Secretary of that Department on t11e subject. 
again. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. 
6 . 
• 
The Committee adjourned at 5.45 P.M. 
• 

I 
VI 
SIXT R MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thuoday, lhe 29th August, 1996 in Room No. 63. 
Fiot Floor, Parliament House, New De lhi. 
MEM BERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chairman 
RAJY A SABHA 
2. Shri Sushi! Barongpa 
3. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
4. Shri Raghavji 
5. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
6. Shri V. P. Duraisumy 
7. Shri Yerra Narayanaswamy 
LOK SABRA 
8. Dr. A . K. Patel 
9. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
10. Shri Devi Bux Singh 
11. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
12. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rt1thour 
13. Shri P. M. Sayeed 
14. Shri P. C. Chacko 
15. Shri Sat Mahajan 
16. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
17. Shri A. Siddaraju 
18. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
19. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
20. Shri G . M. Banatwalla 
SEC RETARIAT 
Shri A>hok Tomar. Director 
Shri Sunnder Kumar, Under Sc<:retary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up for .:onsideration the draft Twenty-fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants, (1996·97) of the Dep>~r l men• of Civil Aviulion . The Committee held 
discussions on the suggestions put forth by McmbeTh and adopted the Report with slight 
modifications to present/lay the same on the Table of both the Houses . The Committee 
autho rised the Chairman. and in hi~ absence Shri Mahe>hwar S1ngh and in hi~ absence Shri 
Sushi! Barongpa, tO present the Report to the Rajy:t Sabha . and Shn P.C. Chacko and in hi' 
ab~nce Dr. A.K. Patel to Jay lhe same in Lok Sabha. 
3. • • 
4. TI1e Comminee adjourned at 4.30 I'.M 
---------
'"Re lates to manor no1 lnclu~cd m lhiS Rcpon. 
20 

Yll 
SEVENT H MEETING 
The Committe e met <~I 3.00 t•.M. on Wedn esday, the 4tb September, 1996 in Comm ittee 
Room 'A· . Grou nd Floor. Parliam en t House Annexe, New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Raghavji-/n the Chair 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri G . Prathapa Reddy 
3. Shn Sushi! Barongpa 
4. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
5. Maul ana Obaidullah Khan Azmt 
6. Shri Oratin Sengupta 
7. Shri Ycrra Narayanaswamy 
LOK SABIIA 
/!. Shri Ram Tabal Chaudhary 
9. Shri Ganga Ch<1ran Rajput 
10. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
II Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Dcv 
13. Shri Parsa Ram Meghwal 
14 Shri Oasamtouda R Patil 
15. Shu G. M~ Banatwalla 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Toma r, Dire ctor 
Shri Surind e r Kuma r, Under Secreta!')' 
Shrirnat i Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer 
2. • 
3. • 
4. The Commillee took note or the fact th;tt its 24th Report on the Oem;ands Cor Grants 
(1996-97) or the Department or Civil Aviauon could not be laid on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha on the 3rd September, 1996 and dectded that Shri Pradeep Kumar Ocv and in his 
absence Shri U11am Singh Pawar may lay the same on the Table or Lok Sabha on Friday. 
the lith September, 1996. 
5. The Com mitte e adjo urned at 4.30 P.M. 
"'Rc laJc 10 mailers not included ln this Rcpon. 
21 