       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
299
_ 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Eighty Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) 
of Ministry of Culture 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Eighty Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
Ministry of Culture 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS                (iii)-(v) 
 4. REPORT                                 1-54 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   55-61 
    6. MINUTES         62-63 
7.  ANNEXURES        64-114 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(i) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri Derek O’Brien 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
9. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat   
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
 Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

(ii) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred  Ninety Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations /observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Eighty Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Culture.  
2. The Two Hundred and Eighty Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 15th March, 
2021 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 22nd 
July, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on t he 3rd 
August, 2021.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
August 3, 2021                                                          Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Sravana 12, 1943 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) 
 
ACRONYMS 
ACP Annual Conservation Plan 
AMASR Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATN Action Taken Note 
BCE Before the Common Era 
BE Budget Estimates 
BHS Built Heritage and Sites 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General 
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CE Common Era 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 
CPM Centrally Protected Monument 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
DFMD Door Frame Metal Detector 
DG Director General 
DO Demi-Official 
DoNER Development of North Eastern Region 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DRC Documentation Resource Center 
EAT Expenditure, Advance and Transfer 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GPS Global Positioning System 

(iv) 
 
GPRS General Packet Radio Service 
HCM Hon’ble Minister of Culture 
HHEC Handicrafts & Handlooms Exports Corporation 
HHMD Hand-Held Metal Detector 
HQ Headquarters 
IIH Indian Institute of Heritage 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
MTS Multi- Tasking Staff 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MOC Ministry of Culture 
MOF Ministry of Finance 
NBCC National Building Construction Company 
NCF National Culture Fund 
NCSM National Council of Science Museums 
NER North Eastern Region 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NICSI National Informatics Centre Services Inc. 
NM National Museum 
NMI National Museum Institute 
NMMI National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
NPC National Productivity Council 
NRLC 
National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural 
Property 
NZCC North Zone Cultural Centre 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PM Prime Minister 

(v) 
 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PS Private Secretary 
RE Revised Estimates 
RFID Radio-Frequency Identification 
RR Recruitment Rules 
RRRLF Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Foundation 
RSC Rashtriya Sanskriti Mahotsav 
SIIH Society of Indian Institute of Heritage 
SJM Salar Jung Museum 
SLC State Library Committee 
SLCC State Level Co-ordination Committee 
SLPC State Library Planning Committee 
SPoCS Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
SZCC South Zone Cultural Centre 
TRIFED Tribal Co-operative Marketing Federation of India 
UGC University Grant Commission 
UNESCO 
 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UT Union Territory 
VMH Victoria Memorial Hall 
X-BIS X-Ray Baggage Inspection System 
ZCC Zonal Cultural Centre 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (202 1-22) of Ministry of Culture’ which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 15th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 2 2nd July, 202 1 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the 2 89th Report. The replies 
have been categorized as follows:— 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:  10, 12, 20, 22, 27, 30, 53, 89, 121                                                                                                  
Total:   9 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:   9, 13, 19, 33, 41, 45, 47, 49, 54, 66, 69, 72, 77, 82, 84, 90, 92, 
95, 98, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 120, 125, 126                                                                                                
Total:   27 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:   8, 29, 31, 36, 38, 42, 55, 60, 61, 63,  70, 75, 91, 93, 97, 101, 
107, 109, 118, 124  
Total:   20 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:   102  
Total:   1 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
 
 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR 2021 -22 AND ANNUAL PLAN 
2020-21 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee simultaneously recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
conservation works that may have been postponed in FY 2020 -21 may be completed this 
year, so as to avoid permanent damages to our precious cultural heritage. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry may request for higher allocation at the R.E. stage in 
FY 2021-22 as per its requirements, so as to keep all the ongoing projects/ activities of the 
Ministry on track. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The Science Branch of ASI has already proposed all pending and incomplete work in 
the F.Y. 2021 -22 which were postponed in F.Y. 2020 -21. For higher allocation at RE stage 
2021-22, the issue has been noted and ASI will be projecting realistic higher allocation under 
relevant Heads of Appropriat ion (HsoA) including HoA 2205.00.106 14.01.27 Minor Works 
(Conservation). 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is constrained to note the consistent trend of decreasing Government 
expenditure on culture as a proportion to GDP. For 2020 -21, Government spending on 
Culture is only 0.0087 percent of the GDP as per 1 st Advance Estimates for 2020 -21. This 
trend of decreasing Government expenditure on Culture is quite clear, even if the 
Coronavirus impacted FY 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 are not taken into  consideration. Since 
cultural activities provide livelihood to significant sections of the population, the size of 

3 
 
financial outlay for the Ministry should be assessed in terms of this sector's potential for 
growth and employment generation so that the Mi nistry could harness this sector's huge 
potential and accommodate aspirations of people. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government should chalk out a solid financial roadmap for higher funding for the 
Ministry so that it is provided with a m uch larger resource envelope and the share of the 
Ministry in the total Central Plan allocation is raised substantially. 
(Para 12) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 The Ministry has been making the projections for the funds keeping in view the 
activities/programmes envisaged by various organizations and autonomous bodies of the 
Ministry every year. For 2021 -22, the Ministry made a projection of Rs. 3843.68 crore 
whereas against this projection, a budgetary allocation of Rs. 2687.99 has only been made by 
the Ministry of Finance. Committee's recommendation for higher funding is noted for future 
compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should exercise due diligence in its 
budget formulation so that realistic proposals are  made and allocated sums are utilized 
productively. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 Due to constant monitoring of the progress of implementation of the schemes as well 
as the budgeted expenditure at the highest level on a monthly/fortnightly/weekly basis, 
proportion of overall expenditure has significantly improved in FY 2020 -21. This approach 
has been continued in the current financial year with special instructions to 
Attached/Subordinate Offices, Autonomous Organizations to phase out the expenditure in 
such a manner so that the quantum of expenditure incurred under these 
organizations/schemes is propelled and also sustained in an even manner during the financial 
year. The concerned officers are also advised to make endeavor to incur optimum 

4 
 
expenditure of the budgeted provision so that savings/surrender under each sub -head/object 
head are avoided or are kept at the minimum. Committee’s recommendations are duly noted 
for further compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee appreciates the initiat ives taken by the Ministry on account of the 
Corona virus pandemic restrictions. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will incorporate 
the digital conferences as a part of its work culture and utilize the same for closer monitoring 
of activities across the country, while saving expenditure that would otherwise be incurred on 
travel and lodging. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 All offices at Ministry proper along with all other attached/subordinate offices and 
Autonomous organizations have already incorporated digital mode for organizing workshops, 
conferences, meetings, seminars etc. In case of ASI, dedicated NICSI provided Vid eo 
Conferencing facility as well as open domain facilities like Google Meet are being used for 
conferences between Circles and Offices and ASI HQ.  
Further, several science communication activities which were related to COVID -19 
awareness were undertaken b y the museum division. Recently a webinar on “Equip Yourself 
for the COVID -19 Era” was conducted to help boost immunity, strengthen the respiratory 
system as well as overall well being of all officers and other staffs under ministry of Culture. 
Thus digital conferencing has become a part of the work culture and is also utilized for close 
monitoring of activities and also for resolution of certain operational/administrative issues of 
various offices/institutions of the Ministry across the country. Moreover a ll the major 
committee meetings are also conducted through video conferencing. The Ministry of Culture 
has been following all possible precautionary measures to contain the spread of the 
pandemic. The recommendation of the committee has been noted for futu re compliance. All 
the divisions and other institutions of the ministry have been apprised of the same. 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 

5 
 
5. The Committee is concerned to note that the budgetary allocation of ASI has 
decreased from B.E. 2020-21 allocation of ₹1246.75 crores to ₹1042.63 crores in B.E. for 
2021-22. The Committee observes that India is a resource -constrained country and in order 
to obtain the best possible outcomes, it is imperative that allocation of resources is 
prioritized across competing ends and the available funds are deployed in a more efficient 
and productive manner. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry should take 
tangible measures to economise on expenditure and improve efficiency so that conse rvation, 
development and maintenance of the protected monuments of ASI are not adversely impacted. 
The Committee also recommends that ASI should explore to attract investment through CSR 
funds. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 It is an earnest endeavor by ASI to economically utilize the budget allocation under 
different Heads of Appropriation (HsoA) for conservation, development and maintenance of 
all Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) of ASI. Committee’s recommendations are d uly 
noted for further compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee observes that the Archaeological Survey of India does not have a 
Smartphone application to permit users to learn more about the monuments under its control. 
The Committee recommends ASI to develop a mobile application that provides informative 
content about the monuments and site museums under the control of ASI, besides permitting 
users to report violation of rules and regulations, incidents of vandalism, encroachment etc.  
The said application may also include the option to book   online tickets for all ASI 
monuments and museums. 
(Para 30) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 It is submitted that ASI is in the process of developing “Indian Heritage Atlas” 
Smartphone mobile app and is expected to be launched shortly. 

6 
 
SUPPORT TO LIBRARIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that the budgetary allocation for 
‘Support to Libraries’ in B.E. 2021 -22 is less than even the actual amount utilized by the 
Ministry under this Head during FY 2019 -20. Since there is an imperative need to improve 
library and information service sector of the country, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to ensure proper utilization of the allocated funds in the initial qua rters by way of 
expenditure monitoring and financial discipline so that this Head does not receive any 
further cuts at the R.E. 2021-22 stage. 
(Para 53) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 The allocation for ‘Support to Libraries’ for 2021 -22 has been kept in the light of the 
actual expenditure during 2020 -21 and the overall reduction of the budget allocation to the 
Ministry for 2021 -22. However, the Committee’s recommendation for proper utilization of 
the allocated funds is noted for compliance. 
 
 
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that there is a large gap of about 30% between the projected 
requirement of the Ministry and the budgetary allocation made to it under B.E. 2021 -22. In 
light of this, the National Culture Fund becomes critical for the realization of the 
projects/activities/schemes planned by the Ministry for the FY 2021 -22. The Committee is 
deeply concerned to note the consistent decrease in the CSR funds since 2016 -17, especially 
during FY 2019 -20. The Committee recomm ends that the Ministry should set quantifiable 
targets for attracting CSR funds for FY 2021-22 and make sincere efforts to achieve the same 
by approaching different corporations with proposals to utilize their CSR funds for the 
development and upkeep of cultural heritage across the country. 

7 
 
(Para 89) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 The Ministry is in the process of revitalizing and reinventing NCF to make it more 
appealing and transparent which is expected to attract more CSR funds, Furthermore, DO 
letters from Hon'ble Minister of Culture have been sent to different states requesting them to 
encourage Companies in their states to make CSR contributions. 
  
MISCELLAENOUS 
Added focus on Social Media and Internet for promotion of Cultural Heritage 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee further desires the Ministry to do a thorough analysis of the websites 
and apps of the Ministry and its various organizations and carry out improvements and 
updates, where needed, since the websites and apps often become outdated. 
(Para 121) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 The directions/recommendations of the Committee have been noted and 
communicated to the organizations for due compliance. 
  

8 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR 2021 -22 AND ANNUAL PLAN 
2020-21 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that the Ministry should have a core set of priorities so that 
the budgeted allocations are not divided in numerous areas and become less impactful. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to review its priorities and concentrate on 
schemes/programmes which are absolutely essential so that scarce resources can be 
optimally utilized for achieving the desired results in focused areas. 
(Para 9) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The priorities of the program and activities are finalized after due consultations with 
the organizations / institutions by the Programme Divisions handling various schemes of the 
Ministry. The autonomous B odies of the Ministry also sign  MOU for activities to be 
undertaken during a year. Generally in all large scale events, Ministry ensures that there is 
participation from all Autonomous Bodies to have a meaningful impact on society. Further  in 
order to utilize the allotted budget optimally, each organization keeps reviewing their 
priorities and accordingly concentrates on the scheme / programmes / activities.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee, simultaneously, recommends that the Government may lay greater 
focus on preservation of our tangible and intangible cultural heritage in the coming years 
and that the same should reflect in the budgetary allocation made to the Ministry of Culture 
for this purpose. 

9 
 
(Para 13) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 The Ministry of Culture has several ongoing projects for preservation of our tangible 
and intangible cultural heritage. It has also launched an e -platform named Indian Cultural 
Portal for bringing all the tangible and intangible cultural heritage of t he country under a 
single umbrella. ASI undertakes conservation and environmental development works at 
nearly 700 -750 monuments and remains, and all monuments are preserved and well 
maintained. All these works are undertaken as per the requirements at the site. To effectively 
achieve this objective , all the divisions under this ministry have also been apprised of the 
recommendation of the Committee for efficacious compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes significant variations between Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual Expenditure under various heads during the financial year 2020 -21. 
For example, ₹160.35 crore, ₹209.79 crore and ₹20.60 crore allocated at the BE stage under 
the heads - "Centenaries and Anniversaries, Celebrat ions and Schemes", "Kala Sanskriti 
Vikas Yojana" and "Global Engagement and International Cooperation" were scaled down 
to ₹104.43 crore, ₹139.77 crore and ₹4.17 crore respectively at the RE 2020 -21 stage in the 
wake of expenditure ceilings stipulated by M inistry of Finance purportedly due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The actual expenditure incurred till 8 th February, 2021 is only ₹37.47 
crore, ₹107.14 crore and ₹4.22 crore respectively. Similarly, the BE 2020 -21 allocation of 
the Ministry was ₹3149.86 crore w hich was revised to ₹2211.86 crore at the RE stage and 
the Ministry has spent only ₹1700.11 crore till 8 th February, 2021. Given the fact that the 
Ministry has now to spend ₹511.75 crore in less than two months, the Committee apprehends 
under utilization o f budgeted funds and occurrence of savings. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the magnitude of savings under the capital account and revenue account 
separately and also the date on which the same was surrendered. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The details of savings under capital and revenue account in FY 2020-21 are as below:  

10 
 
                                                        (Rs. in thousands) 
    Budget Head  RE Savings/Surrender % w.r.t RE 
Revenue 21834521 9276941 4.24% 
Capital 283979 691440 2.43% 
Total 22118500 9968381 4.5% 
3.2 The execution of general programs and activities undertaken by various divisions of 
the Ministry were widely affected due to the restrictions imposed during COVID -19. It is 
significant to note that several outdoor fair & festivals (both at national and international 
level), cultural programs, outreach activities, exhibitions, workshops, children programs etc., 
which constituted a major portion of the expenditure under central sector schemes , could not 
be held due to implementation of Lockdown measures and other restrictions on expenditure 
issued by the Ministry of Finance. Moreover, undertaking capital works met with innumerous 
challenges due to the imposed lockdowns, unavailability of building materials and workers as 
a result of the prevailing COVID situation. However , departments were constantly reviewing 
the expenditure at the highest level and re -prioritized its activities in the light of the changed 
scenario. Sincere efforts were made for the financial resources to be utilized optimally for the 
activities of the Ministry. As a result , overall budget expenditure has seen a significant 
increase in FY 2020-21. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Impact of Corona virus Pandemic on footfall received and revenue generated at ASI 
Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that the footfall received at ASI monuments and sites during FY 
2020-21 till December, 2020 is approximately 0.45 crores, as compared to 3.67 crores 
during the same period  in FY 2019 -20, on account of the Coronavirus pandemic and 
lockdown restrictions imposed in FY 2020 -21. Similarly, the revenue generated from the ASI 
monuments and sites dropped to about ₹13.52 crores as compared to ₹249.20 crores during 
the same period in  FY 2019 -20. The Committee expects ASI to take necessary precautions 
and safety measures for prevention of further spread of the pandemic, so that it is able to 
restore the footfall and revenue generated from ASI monuments and sites in FY 2021 -22, to 

11 
 
pre-Coronavirus levels. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 It is intimated that in the subject connection for increasing the footfalls at CPMs that 
the field offices i.e. Circles have been delegated powers to permit visitors at ticketed CPMs in 
coordination and consultation with respective district administration. Further, all field offices 
have been directed to strictly comply with instructions being issued by State and Central 
Government and local authorities pertaining to Covid -19 pandemic related safety and 
precautionary measures. 
 
Safety and Security of Centrally Protected Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee would like to know the details of instances where eviction notices/orders 
were issued by the Superintending Archaeologists for removal of encroachments from the 
Centrally Protected Monuments and the course of action taken by ASI in such cases. 
(Para 41) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1  Under Section 19(1) of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 1958 Act, no person including the owner/occupier is allowed to construct any 
building/ constructional activities within the protected area without the permission from 
Central government. Any such activity without requisite permission in this area is violation 
of the act. 
As soon as any such violation is noticed within the protected area of any monument/site, the 
local sub-circle in-charge lodges an official complaint with the concerned police station. A 
show-cause notice is issued by the Superintending Archaeologist of the Cir cle to the offender 
with clear instructions indicating to remove the encroachment within specified period. Copy 
of the show -cause notice is also endorsed to the local police authorities, District Magistrate, 
Municipal Corporation/ local bodies etc. with the request to stop such activity and remove the 
same. 
5.2  In the event of non -compliance or unsatisfactory reply to this notice, a report is 

12 
 
submitted by the Superintending Archaeologist to the Director General, ASI who directs the 
offender to remove the e ncroachment within a specified period and in case of non -
compliance of this notice, DG, ASI issues an order under Section 19 (2) of AMASR Act 
1958 directing the District Magistrate to remove the structure / encroachment erected by the 
owner / occupier whic h has been made in contravention of the Act, to be removed within a 
period of fifteen days with the owner bearing its cost. 
5.3 The list of monuments where eviction notices/orders were issued by the ASI for 
removal of encroachments from the Centrally Prote cted Monuments and the course of action 
taken in such cases is enclosed as Annexure-I. 
DEVELOPMENT OF MUSEUMS 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that under the Scheme - "Development of Museums", the 
Ministry targets to address the existing gaps in availability of museums and proposes to 
develop 5 iconic museums of international standard in the country. Since the BE which was 
pegged at ₹180.90 crore for the year 2020 -21, has been pruned down to ₹128.18 crore for 
FY 2021-22 due to resource cru nch in the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, the Committee 
would like the Ministry to work out a financing model which could enable the museums to 
cover their operational costs through their own revenue generating efforts and other means 
of finance. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 The ‘Development of Museum’ falls under the Centre Sector Scheme head and it is an 
umbrella for the Museum Grant Scheme, Scheme for Promotion of Culture of  Science 
(SPoCS) and Museum of PMs of India. Under ‘ Museum Grant Scheme’ , the financial 
assistance is being  given for the establishment of new museums, development of existing 
museums, digitization of art objects in the museums and training of museum’s p rofessionals 
managed by State Governments, Societies, Autonomous bodies, local bodies, Academic 
Institutions and Trusts registered under the societies Act.   
6.2 Further the Ministry is providing the financial assistance to the Autonomous Bodies like 

13 
 
NCSM, Indian Museum, Victoria Memorial Hall, Allahabad Museum etc. through their 
regular grant  to meet their operational and establishment expenses.   
Safety and Security at Museums 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made so far by the Ministry in 
tagging the museum artefacts across the country through the use of RFID technology. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to ensure periodic checking of museum artefacts against 
the catalog records with a view to identify incidents of thefts of artefacts at the earliest. 
(Para 47) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 The various institutions under Ministry are undertaking tagging work of artifacts and 
also carrying out periodic check to curb the incidents of thefts as detailed below:  

14 
 
i. Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH),  Kolkata has completed the first phase of the 
RFID tagging of its objects, in the process tagging 6,029 objects. Subsequently, 
however, the work was stopped in consultation with the Ministry, due to the 
technical deficiencies of the equipment supplied by the nationally -selected 
agency. The rectification of these deficiencies is still ongoing, after which RFID 
tagging will be resumed and completed expeditiously. 
ii. Periodical checking of artefacts with catalogue records are being d one in Indian 
Museum. In respect of paintings and decorative art objects, last verification with 
catalogue was done in 2017. For Archaeological objects, this verification process 
was completed in 2020 and for Anthropological objects, the process is now in 
progress.In respect of RFID tagging, the vendor engaged by the Indian Museum, 
Kolkata has completed part RFID tagging but several issues have remained 
unresolved since February 2020 including tagging of very small objects, sensing 
and detection of RFID tag s already installed with the handheld RFID reader 
provided by the vendor etc. The vendor is yet to come out with a solution and due 
to subsequent Covid -19 pandemic, these works are yet to be completed and 
resolved till date by the vendor. 
iii. The National Museum conducts periodic physical verifications of objects. There is 
no incidence of thefts at the National Museum. CISF has been deployed to ensure 
Safety and Security of the National Museum. 
SUPPORT TO AKADEMIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that in case of "Support to Akademies", the BE for 2021 -22 is 
₹341.57 crore which is less than the BE 2020-21 allocation of ₹434.58 crore but greater than 
the RE 2020 -21 allocation of ₹275.17 crore. The Committee observes that since with their 
specific mandate, the Akademies strive to promote, propagate and showcase Indian art and 
culture through literature, dance, theatre and other art forms, the Ministry should make 
concerted efforts to utilize the limited funds allocated and avoid divergence betwee n 
allocations and utilization under the head - Support to Akademies. The Committee desires to 
be kept apprised of the actual expenditure incurred under this head during 2019 -20 and 
2020-21 against budgeted allocation. 

15 
 
(Para 49) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 The actual expenditure incurred under ‘Support to Akademi’ during the  FY 2019 -20 
and 2020-21 are as follows:- 
(Rs in crore) 
Year 
Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2019-20 382.84 342.63 339.25 
2020-21  434.58 277.17 276.82 
SUPPORT TO LIBRARIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee observes that over the years, the economic and technological progress 
of the country has brought about a paradigm shift of preferences of readers which has led to 
neglect of our libraries. Library is a State subject and since the State Governments are 
resource-constrained, they attach low priority to the development and modernisation of 
libraries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should encourage the 
States/UTs to ameliorate the det eriorating condition of libraries and digitize them. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in this direction. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the amount disbursed to various State / UT library 
authorities by the Ministry under the various RRRLF schemes during the last three years. 
(Para 54) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 State Library Committee (SLC)/ State Library Planning Committee (SLPC) has been 
constituted in each State/UT. This committee determines the Annual Action Plan and budget 
allocation under various matching schemes of RRRLF for a year. The recommendation of t he 
Parliament Standing Committee regarding modernization of libraries is noted and State/UT 
Library Authorities are being apprised accordingly. The details of financial assistance granted 
to State Libraries may be seen at Annexure-II & Annexure-III. 
 

16 
 
VACANCIES EXISTING IN DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS UNDER THE 
MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee is deeply anguished to note that important organizations like the 
National Gallery of Modern Art, Delhi, Mumbai & Bengaluru; National Research 
Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property (NRLC), Centre for Cultural Resources 
and Training (CCRT); Sangeet Natak Akademi; Lalit Kala Akademi; National Mission for 
Manuscripts; Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata; Indian Museum etc., are operating with  less 
than 50% of their sanctioned strength. The Committee fails to understand how these 
organization can manage to do justice to their respective mandates while operating with 
more than 50% vacancies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry  should 
look into the reasons for the understaffing in its various organizations and take immediate 
remedial measures to fill the vacancies existing in the various organizations under it. 
 
(Para 66) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
10.1 The attached, subordinate offices  and Autonomous Bodies under the Ministry are 
taking remedial measures for filling up of vacancies which is i a regular and continuous 
process and necessary steps are being taken as below : 
i. In case of Autonomous Bodies under the museum division of Ministry  , the  
initiatives like sending indents to fill up Group -B (Non Gaz) posts and issuing open 
advertisements to fill up Group-A posts on deputation basis are undertaken whereas in 
case of Library division RRs are amended wherever necessary to quicken the pr ocess 
of filling up vacancies. 
ii. All necessary steps are being initiated by Archives and Anthropological division to 
fill up the vacant posts as per the RRs of the posts and extant GoI 
guidelines/instructions. 
iii. Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH), Kolkata is in the process of amending the 
recruitment rules which is expected to be finalized soon. Authentication and 

17 
 
ratification of RRs was duly completed by the VMH Board of Trustees, and has been  
forwarded to M/o Law and Justice for final concurrence 
iv. Due to a court ca se, all recruitments in Indian Museum were put on hold till 
December 2018 in respect of advertisements for filling of vacant posts released in 
2012-13. During this intervening period, since 2012 -13, a large number of employees 
superannuated and such vacant posts could not be filled-up. As per the directive of the 
Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta, Indian Museum is required to comply with the 
provisions of the Govt.’s reservation policy and comply with the approved reservation 
roster for all future recruitments. Due to the absence of an approved reservation roster 
and discrepancies in the available roster, effort for preparing a fresh reservation roster 
have been initiated and a proposal for grouping of posts has been sent to DoPT by the 
Ministry. Final approval  is awaited. Revised Recruitment Rules are also under 
process. Since a large number of posts are lying vacant for more than 5 years, these 
posts shall also require revival as per prevailing norms 
v. In case of NRLC, Lucknow, Proposals for recruitment to many vacant posts have 
been submitted to UPSC 
vi. Process of filling up of vacant posts is already in progress for CCRT with RRs being 
approved by the Ministry and also by the Society by March 2021 and two posts of 
Deputy Directors being recruited thereafter. Rest of the post will be filled at the 
earliest. 
vii. For filling up the vacant posts in Sangeet Natak Akademi, Akademi has already 
submitted a proposal to MoC for hiring the services of EdCIL for filling up the vacant 
positions in various categories. 
viii. In case of Kal akshetra Foundation, it is informed that the recruitment against 
the vacant posts is actively under consideration. 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee is concerned to note that around 35% of the sanctioned strength of 
Archaeological Survey of India is lying vacant at present. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to thrash out the lingering issues and make dedicated efforts to fill the vacancies 
existing in ASI since ASI staff is critical for the development and maintenance of 
archaeological monuments and sites across the country. 

18 
 
(Para 69) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 The sanctioned strength of ASI across all cadres is 8271. Of which 5367 Nos of posts 
are filled up. Total vacancy as on date is 2904 which works out to be around 35% of the total 
strength. Vacant posts of MTS [2392] accounts for the major chunk of total vacancy. These 
are being reported to SSC. Vacancies in other cadres viz.  129 Nos. have already been   
reported to UPSC/SSC. 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes the progress made so far with regard to the establishment of the 
upcoming Indian Institute of Heritage and Conservation and expects the Ministry to ensure 
that the Institute gets operational within the shortest possible time, so as to tackle the lack of 
human resources in the organizations of the Ministry. 
(Para 72) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 The Indian Institute of Heritage (IIH) is being envisioned as a Deemed University of 
the Ministry of Culture to conduct academic programmes currently being conducted by 
various cultural institutions of the Ministry.  The Ministry has decided to expand the nature 
and scope of the existing Deemed University, National Museum Institute, and make IIH an 
Umbrella institution for the Ministry. The following works /activities in regard to setting  up 
IIH are being undertaken : 
(i) The Society of the National Museum Institute of History of Art, Conservation and 
Museology (NMI) has approved the change of name from NMI to the Society of 
Indian Institute of Heritage (SIIH) in the special meetings of the NM I society held 
on 17th December, 2020 and 18th March, 2021.  
(ii) As per requirement under Societies Registration Act, revised Memorandum of 
Association (MoA) and request for name change is being submitted to the 
Registrar of Societies.  
(iii) After approval of revis ed MoA and name change, approval of University Grant 
Commission (UGC) and Ministry of Education shall be obtained for starting of 

19 
 
new schools and courses.  
(iv) A committee has been constituted to frame the structure of the IIH i.e. Schools 
and Departments, Aca demic Courses, Faculty & Staff, Infrastructure 
requirements, preparation of University Ordinance, Rules & Regulations and other 
guidelines, composition of Academic Council, Finance Committee and Board of 
Studies etc 
(v) The work related to the Constitution of Society of IIH and Board of Management 
of IIH has been initiated. 
(vi) The work related to the creation of a Website for IIH has been started and the 
domain name www.iih,gov.in has been reserved. Creation of Logo etc is also 
being taken up 
(vii) Convergence of all the institutions working under the Ministry, conducting 
various courses is being worked out. 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee takes note of the activities targeted by ASI in North-Eastern Areas and 
feels that ASI should take up more work in the North -Eastern Areas. In light of the extremely 
slow pace of expenditure in North -Eastern Areas, the Committee calls upon the Ministry to 
devise a detailed action plan for carrying out development and conservation of cultural 
heritage i n the North -Eastern areas to ensure optimum utilization of the funds allocated 
during the FY 2021- 22. 
(Para 77) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 In compliance with the observation raised by the committee regarding slow pace of 
expenditure for the Conservation works in North -Eastern Areas, the inadvertent delays and 
slow-pace of works happened on account   of COVID 19 Pandemic. All field offices of ASI 
in the North-Eastern region have been asked to execute conservation and development works 
as per the Approved Annual Conservation Plan (ACP).  The funds are allocated for the 
scientific conservation and preservation work which is to be carried out at G hanashyam’s 

20 
 
house at Joysagar, District Sibsagar, Assam. 
 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee feels that the pace of the same needs to be increased in order to cover 
the thousands of Centrally Protected Monuments across the country. The Committee would 
like to know the steps taken by NMA and the Ministry to tackle the roadblocks being faced in 
the speedy preparation of Heritage Bye-Laws for CPMs. 
(Para 82) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1  The five Regional Directors of ASI  are the Competent Authority for preparation of 
Heritage Bye -Laws, which can only be prepared once the site plan is prepared for each 
Centrally Protected Monument. The Site Plans are prepared by ASI. It may be mentioned that 
NMA as well as the Regional Dir ectors/Competent Authorities are functioning with 
contractual staff for some time. The Ministry of Culture has moved the file for creation of 
regular posts in consultation with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. The 
appointment of sanction ed regular staff is expected to speed up the preparation of Heritage 
Bye-Laws for CPMs. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON CULTURAL MAPPING 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee notes that the National Mission on Cultural Mapping would act as a 
central database of artists from across the country, reflecting its rich and varied intangible 
cultural heritage. The Committee recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the concerned 
State/UT departments to ensure that the information pertaining to all the States is corr ectly 
collected and updated on the portal being developed for this purpose. Training programmes, 
where necessary, may be organized for the concerned officials of the Ministry as well as the 
State Governments. The Committee desires to be updated on the prog ress made under the 
National Mission on Cultural Mapping. 

21 
 
(Para 84) 
Reply of Ministry 
15.1 The mission has been in regular touch with the states/UTs to ensure that the 
information pertaining to all the States is correctly collected and updated on the portal being 
developed for this purpose. Secretary, Culture has written to all the States and provision has 
been made in the portal workflow to add/upload and edit the artist database of their State/UT. 
As per latest status , around 14.50 lakh artist/artisans are added to the portal through 
secondary sources. 
 
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.  The Committee desires the Ministry to come up with proposals wherein a part of the 
project of the Ministry is funded by MPs from their MPLAD Scheme funds, if and when the 
Scheme gets operationalized, and the rest of the part is funded from the budgetary allocation 
available with the Ministry. This could help encourage more MPs to take up development and 
conservation work at archaeological sites and monuments, thus helping preserve our 
valuable cultural heritage and generating employment opportunities for local people. 
(Para 90) 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1  Committee's recommendations are duly noted for compliance. 
 
GENERATION OF REVENUE FROM MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
SITES 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into the possible avenues for 
generation of revenue through development of cafeterias, souvenir shops, interpretation 
centre, light and sound show etc. at the Centrally Protected Monuments and Museums across 
the country. 

22 
 
(Para 92) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 The recommendation of the committee duly noted. The status of such revenue 
generation avenues like cafeteria shops, souvenir shop etc. at different museums and 
monuments is as below:  
i. The National Museum has a cafeteria and a souvenir shop. 
ii. The National Gallery of Modern Art has an operational Souvenir Shop. The cafeteria 
of NGMA, New Delhi to be opened very soon at its prescribed location. Whereas 
revenue generated from cafeteria and souvenir shops at NM and NGMA are not 
substantial. 
iii. VMH Ko lkata has a Souvenir Shop which sells arts -themed merchandise and 
publications based on its collection. On 23 January 2021, it also launched a new 3D 
Projection Mapping show on the magnificent eastern façade of the building, which 
was inaugurated by the Ho n’ble Prime Minister. However, the project of introducing 
a cafeteria with excellent facilities could not be pursued proactively, because it needs 
to be outsourced to a specialist agency or installed on a PPP model, and that could not 
be immediately done b ecause of a standing High Court order prohibiting the use of 
any part of the VMH premises / campus for ‘commercial’ purposes. At present the 
VMH is trying through its legal counsel to vacate this order. 
iv. The Salar Jung Museum outsourced the Cafeteria to Tel angana State Tourism 
Development Corporation and getting yearly income of Rs.4,63,056/ -  Similarly a 
souvenir shop outsourced to HHEC (The Handicrafts & Handlooms Exports 
Corporation) and getting yearly income of Rs.7,20,000/ 
v. In the case of museums under A utonomous Bodies  the revenue from the souvenir 
counter as well as cafeteria running in the Museum are also a source of the internal 
income 
vi. NCSM, IM & VMH also generate internal revenue from various user charges 
including license fee for cafeteria, souveni r shops etc. User charges are also collected 
from various ticketed shows. Further , NCSM, Kolkata also provides consultancy 
services to various departments/ministries/Govt. organizations etc. and extends 
technical help in setting up galleries/ exhibition/V EMs/ science centres etc. against 

23 
 
consultancy fees to generate revenue for the Council. 
vii. As far as revenue from Sound and Light Show is concerned, provision has been made 
under Memorandum of Agreement signed between ASI and the implementing agency 
i.e. “40% of the revenue from the show shall be shared to ASI”. However, for Sound 
and Light Show at selected monuments, revenue sharing provision is specified as per 
implementation mechanism of the project. Further, revenue through the interpretation 
centre, cafeteria, Souvenir shop is concerned, there is no specific provision and the 
same is decided as per suitability. 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee is surprised to note that there is no specific Head of Account for 
budgetary allocation for R&D activities presently in the Ministry. The Ministry should ensure 
that sufficient budgetary allocation is made to fund scientific research into proper 
maintenance and preservation of the cultural heritage of our country, with special refe rence 
to the major risks faced by the historical monuments and sites on account of air pollution in 
the country. The Committee desires the Ministry to allocate funds for using state of the art 
satellite remote sensing and/or Light Detection and Ranging (Li DAR) technology to discover 
unearthed ancient archaeological sites in the country. 
(Para 95) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 In case of ASI, all R&D works are executed by various Branches related to the 
Excavation, Epigraphy and Science Branch of the Archaeological  Survey of India. Adequate 
funds are provided to them under the relevant budget head of MW -Conservation and OC 
(EE). It is also informed that ASI has initiated the process of documentation of its world 
heritage monuments by using high precision laser scanning. 
18.2 The Science Branch of ASI is mainly responsible for conservation and preservation of 
Culture Heritage of the country. The funds allocated for conservation are generally utilized 
for conservation and preservation of monuments, antiquities and obje cts after studying the 
major risk factor faced by various historic monuments etc. 

24 
 
18.3 In addition to this, Branch also has three laboratories at Agra, Aurangabad and 
Dehradun. 
i.    APL at Agra monitors various pollutants on monuments. 
ii.  CRL Laboratory at Aurangabad to carry out  scientific research. 
iii Laboratory at Dehradun to study the products used in Scientific conservation and 
preservation. 
18.4 Further, NRLC, Lucknow, the premiere institution in the field of conservation and 
research, established in the year 1975 is an institution engaged in R&D activities in the field 
of conservation of cultural heritage under MOC and is being presently provided the funds 
from Establishment Head.  
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee observes that the six-month conservation course conducted by NRLC 
received a lukewarm response in the year 2020. The Committee desires that NRLC may 
publicize the six-month conservation course that it conducts every year so as to improve the 
number of participants in the co urse and contribute towards addressing the shortage of 
human resources in the field of conservation of artefacts and sites. 
(Para 98) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 NRLC conducts a Six Months Conservation Course every year along with some 
tailor-made programmes/workshops to train conservators and conservation professionals. In 
the year 2019, NRLC trained 25 conservators. However, in the year 2020, lukewarm response 
was received mainly due to COVID -19 pandemic. NRLC will continue the training 
programmes in this critical period and hope to get overwhelming response once the COVID -
19 pandemic is over. NRLC also plans to increase the specialized courses in the field of 
conservation and related fields like Mud Plaster Technology, Preservation of Monuments an d 
Conservation of Paintings, if sufficient funds are provided. This will help to produce more 
and more human resources in the field and will contribute towards addressing the shortage of 
conservators. 
 

25 
 
CULTURAL FUNCTION & PRODUCTION GRANT (CFPG) AND REPERTORY 
GRANT 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure quick disposal of grants 
under the Repertory Grant scheme, since the same supports the livelihood of artistes 
showcasing classical, tribal, music and dance  art forms. The Committee strongly 
recommends that any delays in the settlement of payments, under the Scheme, should be 
carefully looked into and resolved promptly. The Committee desires that assistance and 
information may be provided by the Ministry, to the beneficiaries of this Scheme, in case 
some documentation is needed to clear their pending payments. The Committee further 
desires that the amounts given out under this Scheme may be reviewed and revised from time 
to time, keeping in view the effect of inflation. 
(Para 111) 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 In this regard, it is informed that the Ministry has been releasing the financial 
assistance to those organizations that are timely fulfilling the requisite conditions viz. 
compliance of Expenditure Advance Transfer (EAT) Module of Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS), non -pendency of Utilization Certificate, availability of unique 
id obtained from NGO Darpan portal, etc.  Even if some organizations are unable to meet any 
of the said criteria they have been informed over phone/email/ and their status is uploaded on 
the website. Even representatives by some of the organizations have also visited personally to 
clear their confusion regarding financial matters etc. The suggestion of the committee 
regarding m ore prompt disbursal of grant as well as revision of grant in the context of 
inflation has been noted for further compliance. 
 
AUDIT PARAS IN CAG REPORT 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee takes serious note of the observations made in Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2018 - Union 

26 
 
Government (Civil) Compliance Audit Observations No. 6 of 2020. The Committee desires to 
be apprised o f the reasons behind the delayed execution of the projects carried out for 
modernization of Indian Museum, Kolkata. Point - wise comments may be furnished on the 
different observations made in the CAG Report regarding the modernisation of Indian 
Museum, Kolkata. The Committee recommends the Ministry to review the existing mechanism 
to ensure that proper conservation practices are being followed while carrying out 
renovation/modernization works at the monuments and museums. 
(Para 113) 
Reply of Ministry 
21.1 The pointwise comments along with background notes, comments of implementing 
agency i.e. NBCC and ATN submitted to CAG are attached at Annexure IV (A to F).  
MISCELLAENOUS 
Co-ordination with different Ministries and State Governments 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.        The Committee recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of 
Railways; Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, and the concerned State Departments 
to ensure road and rail connectivity at the archaeological monuments/sites and museums 
across the country. This would significantly help in increasing the footfall received at the 
Centrally Protected Monuments and museums, thus giving a boost to the tourism prospects of 
the country. Coordination is also required with the Ministry of Tourism to ensure efficient 
last-mile connectivity to archaeological monuments and museums, from the nearest railway/ 
metro/ bus stations. 
(Para 114) 
Reply of Ministry 
22.1 A meeting was held between Hon’ble Minister Tourism &  Culture and Hon’ble 
Minister of Road Transport Highways. Hon’ble Minister of Road Transport Highways while 
suggesting various tourist amenities has also desired that while designing the list of 
monuments in Heritage Portal, the ASI may also indicate the n earby National Highways 

27 
 
passing through or existing near the monuments or tourist centers. 
22.2 In response to the note received from PS to HCM (MoC), DG, ASI vide letter dated 
24.12.2020 has requested the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  to share 
the digital data on National Highways to incorporate the same in the Indian Heritage Atlas 
Application. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23.           It is equally important to coordinate with intelligence agencies in order to prevent 
incidents of damage to historical monuments and sites, especially those which are religious 
in nature, since such incidents often spark communal tensions, besides causing irreparable 
damage to our cultural heritage. Steps may be taken by the Ministry to enhance the sec urity 
at sensitive monuments, in coordination with the local law enforcement agencies, if needed. 
The Committee observes that the installation of CCTV surveillance systems should be 
prioritized at sensitive monuments and sites across the country so as to d iscourage potential 
miscreants. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of Ministry 
23.1 Whenever any law and order issue arises in Centrally protected monuments, the SAs 
of Circles concerned immediately informs the local police stations and District administration 
requesting appropriate action. 
23.2 Security Equipment/Electronic gadgets like CCTVs, X -BIS (X -Ray Baggage 
Inspection System), DFMD (Door Frame Metal Detector) and HHMD (Hand Held Metal 
Detector) have been provided in selected Centrally Protected Monuments and site Museums. 
Recommendation/Observation 
24.        The Committee feels that many of the State Governments often do not look after their 
protected monuments. The apathy of the State Governments towards the cultural heritage 
falling under their jurisdiction, sometimes causes irreparable damage to the same. T he 
Committee desires the Ministry to look into cases of neglect of historical monuments and 

28 
 
sites by the State Governments, take it up with the concerned State Department, provide 
technical assistance to them and if needed, consider taking over the respons ibility of 
development and upkeep of select State-protected monuments in cases of extreme neglect. 
 (Para 116) 
Reply of Ministry 
24.1 The constitution has divided the jurisdiction over these monuments – Cultural 
heritage and Archaeological sites as under:- 
Union- Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Site and Remains 
declared by Parliament, by law to be of national importance. 
State:- Ancient and Historical Monuments other than those declared by Parliament to 
be of national importance. 
Concurrent: Besides the above, both the Union and States have concurrent jurisdiction 
over archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by Law and 
Parliament to be of national importance. 
24.2 ASI has the mandate to maintain and protect Centrally Protected Monuments declared 
as of National Importance under the AMASR Act, 1958 and Rules 1959. ASI is ready to 
provide all technical support, if State Governments request for the same. 
24.3 In this regard , it is stated that ASI provides technical assistance to various state 
governments from time to time regarding conservation of monuments under the jurisdiction 
of the governments. Technical assistance is also provided by way of undertaking 
conservation works on Civil Deposit basis. 
 
Added focus on Social Media and Internet for promotion of Cultural Heritage 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee takes note of the increase in the followers of the various social media 
accounts of the Ministry. Social media is an influential communication tool in the modern 
age, especially to reach out to the young generation of the country. It is there fore a high time 
that the Ministry makes sincere efforts to publish engaging content regularly through its 

29 
 
various social media accounts, so as to generate the interest of the people in the rich cultural 
heritage of our country. This will not only help in increasing the footfall at the various 
monuments and museums across the country, but also instill a sense of responsibility and 
pride in people who visit these places which will help with the maintenance and upkeep of the 
monuments. 
(Para 120) 
Reply of Ministry 
25.1 Committee's recommendation on proactive presence in social media has been 
circulated among all the offices/organizations for further initiatives and necessary 
compliance. All the offices/institutions under M/o Culture are actively participati ng through 
various social media platforms. The dedicated Media Team has been created in the 
institutions to publish contents and engage the public through social media accounts.  All 
institutions are maintaining  and regularly updating social media profile s at Facebook, 
Instagram, Twitter and YouTube etc.  Salar Jung Museum (SJM) is interacting with the 
public via posts on social media platforms about artefacts and events on Facebook and 
Twitter. It is also a partner with Google Arts and Culture wherein stories about the objects are 
uploaded along with interesting narratives. 
Conservation of Regional Cultures and Traditions 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take steps to protect and 
preserve culture of regional communities and tribes such as the Dogras inhabiting the 
Jammu region, the Malayaraya tribal group residing in the hilly areas of Kerala, and other 
similar local communities and tribes in other parts of the country, so that the unique richness 
of these cul tures can be passed on to the future generations. Efforts may also be made to 
preserve their historical sites and structures and maintain the memorials which symbolize the 
history of these regional communities, with the cooperation of the concerned communi ty and 
the State Department. The Ministry may allocate funds to organize events and festivals to 
celebrate such regional cultures. 
(Para 125) 

30 
 
Reply of Ministry 
26.1 UT of Jammu & Kashmir falls under the jurisdiction of North Zone Cultural Centre 
(NZCC), Patiala. NZCC has taken steps to protect & preserve culture of regional 
communities and tribes such as the Dogras inhabiting the Jammu region of U.T. of Jammu & 
Kashmir by organizing cultural events and festivals and inviting Dogra artists in its member 
States. Further, the regional communities & tribes including Dogras are provided regular 
opportunities to participate in various programmes of folk, tribal, music & dance activities, 
training workshops, as well as exhibitions/craft melas of folk arts and cra fts under number of 
Centrally sponsored Schemes like National Cultural Exchange Programme; Shilpgram 
Activities; Theatre Rejuvenation Scheme; Guru Shishya Parampara (Master to Pupil 
Traditions) Scheme; Documentation/Publication Scheme etc. NZCC also provid es financial 
assistance to Dogra artistes in the process of promotion of Dogra art forms under Guru 
Shishya Parampara Scheme; organized Multi Lingual Poetic Meet (Mushiara); Dogri Kavi 
Sammelan; Dogri Sangeet Musical evening; Theatre workshops etc. 
26.2 The State of Kerala falls under the jurisdiction of South Zone Cultural Centre 
(SZCC), Thanjavur. SZCC is taking all out best efforts to upkeep the unique richness of 
Tribals local communities especially in the Hilly areas of Kerala, and other similar local 
communities and tribes in other parts of the country. Every effort is being made to preserve 
the historical importance of the respective regional communities of the area. 
26.3 As per the requirements of the member states special tribal festivals and Aadi 
Mahotsav are conducted through all the ZCCs in which performing arts, craft exhibitions are 
conducted in association with TRIFED. All the ZCCs also organize a number of Regional 
festivals belonging to various member States to showcase the rich heritage and culture of 
respective States. Further, Rashtriya Sanskriti Mahotsav (RSM) conceptualized by the 
Ministry of Culture, Government of India is being organized to Preserve, Promote & 
Popularize the heritage of Indian Spirit, to reconnect the new generation wit h our culture and 
to showcase to the country and the world our soft power of unity in diversity. 
 
Archaeological Research 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee desires that the Ministry may carry out extensive marine 

31 
 
archaeological research in the lost city of Dwarka, Gujarat. Likewise, there may be several 
undiscovered archaeological sites in the country, wherein use of the latest available 
technologies can be made to carry out archaeological research and excavation, since the 
same might possibly l ead to major discoveries of artefacts of archaeological and historical 
significance. 
(Para 126) 
Reply of Ministry 
27.1 The archaeological site at Dwarka, Gujarat was subjected to archaeological 
investigations on various occasions in the past and present that Dwarka is at least 2,000 years 
old. The total cultural deposition found at Dwarka was assigned a time bracket from 15th 
century BCE to 16th century CE divided into eight stages. A semi -spherical single-hole stone 
which might be the base for flag -post; L-shaped edges of stones for proper grip and arresting 
wave action on bastions; seals, inscriptions, which have been dated to 1500 BCE; pottery 
dated to 3528 BCE; stone sculptures, terracotta beads, bronze, copper and iron objects, etc. 
are some significant findings from the site. 
27.2 Further, it is to inform that Archaeological survey is a continuous process. ASI carries 
it out through conventional methods as well as latest scientific instruments and technologies 
such as GPS, GPR, GIS, Satellite Imagery, Remote Sensing, etc. wherever necessary.  

32 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR 2021 -22 AND ANNUAL PLAN 
2020-21 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is concerned to note that allocation of ₹2687.99 crore in BE 2021 - 22 
is 14.66% lower than the allocation of ₹3149.85 crore made in BE 2020 -21 which witnessed 
a severe cut of 29.77% at the RE 2020 -21 stage. What is equally disturbing is that there is a 
substantial shortfall in budgetary provisions for FY 2021 -22 vis-à-vis the projected demand 
of ₹3843.68 crore by the Ministry. The Committee observes that Culture is not a marginal 
sector but integral to all development because it not only promotes economic growth 
providing employment to a large section of population and spurs other economic sector s like 
tourism thereby contributing to the GDP of the country, but it also creates an environment 
for sustenance of our rich and diverse cultural heritage. Since the Ministry of Culture has the 
onerous responsibility of the preservation, development and pr omotion of the country's 
tangible and intangible heritage as well as knowledge heritage, the Committee is convinced 
that the BE allocation of ₹2687.99 crore for 2021 -22 is not commensurate with the fund 
requirements of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
be provided with a bigger financial outlay at the RE 2021 -22 stage so that the Ministry can 
achieve remarkable improvement in preservation and conservation of our cultural heritage 
and promotion of art and culture. 
(Para 8) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry of Culture had projected a demand of Rs. 3843.68 crore for 2021 -22. 
However, it has been allocated an amount of Rs. 2687.99 crore only. This comprises Rs. 
2609.23 crore under Revenue Head and Rs. 78.76 crore under Capital Head. The overall 

33 
 
budgetary allocation for FY 2021 -22 has been provisioned among various 
organizations/umbrella schemes after carefully factoring in the requirements/priorities of 
various constituent units. However, reduced allocation will impact the activities under the 
umbrella schemes of the Ministry such as Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana and Development of 
Museum etc. and organizations such as Archaeological Survey of India, National Archives of 
India, National Museum, NGMA and other Autonomous Bodies being provided support 
under Library, Museum and Akademies. The far ranging activities of these 
schemes/organizations not only create a material impact on the economy but are completely 
inevitable for the preservation, conservation and promotion of the rich cultural heritage of th e 
country. At this juncture, recommendation of the committee is completely agreed upon and 
this ministry would pursue for further enhancement of budgetary provisions at RE stage in 
accordance with its requirement.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
1.2 The Committee desires that the Ministry of Culture should take up with the 
Ministry of Finance about increased budgetary provisions for the Ministry of Culture at 
RE 2021 -22 stage, especially in light of the drastic cuts faced by the Ministry during 
2020-21 and the adverse impact of the same on the cultural heritage of the country. The 
Committee feels that enhanced budgetary allocation would permit the Ministry to bring 
back on track its projects and schemes which are of crucial importance to our tangible 
as well as intangible cultural heritage. 
 
 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee appreciates the progress made by ASI in the introduction of an online 
e-ticketing system at 143 Centrally Protected Monuments and 30 Site Museums of ASI. The 
Committee desires ASI to ensure that offline ticket counters are kept operational at ASI 
monuments and museums so that people not having access to smart phones or unable to use 
the same are able to enter the monuments. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of Ministry 

34 
 
2.1 The observation /recommendation of the Committee have been noted for the 
necessary compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
2.2 The Committee may be apprised of the  specific action taken by the Ministry to 
ensure that offline ticket counters are kept operational at ASI monuments and 
museums. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may include the option to book 
online tickets for visiting Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) in the “Indian Culture” 
Smartphone application of the Ministry. The Committee desires the Ministry to coordinate 
with the Ministry of Tourism and integrate ticket booking of CPMs in its “Incredible India” 
website and Smartphone application. 
(Para 31) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted and being incorporated in the ‘Indian 
Heritage Atlas App’ by ASI.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
3.2 The Committee notes that while the ‘Indian Culture’ smartphone application of 
the Ministry does provide information about various historical sites, monuments and 
museums in the country, it neither provides any information regarding how to visit the 
place, nor has any option for the user to book ticket(s) for the same. The Committee 
feels that the Ministry should take an integrated approach while developing its online 
presence in order to ensure that the people interested in our cultural heritage do not 
face any difficulties in obtaining commonly sought information regarding the same. 
 
Safety and Security of Centrally Protected Monuments 

35 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is anguished to note the reckless acts of security breach and 
vandalism that have taken place at ASI monuments in the past few years. The Committee 
would like the ASI to ensure strict security checks both at entry and exit points of 
monuments/sites for curbing incidents of theft, vandalism and waiving of flags. Security 
personnel m ay be instructed to carry arms for self defense as well as to defend the 
monuments from violent elements. The Committee desires ASI to install CCTV cameras at 
required locations of the Centrally Protected Monuments and regularly monitor the footage 
thereof, to ensure that undesirable acts of vandalism can be spotted and prevented at the 
earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the penal provisions that are presently in force 
for defacing/vandalizing of CPMs. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 The ASI has engaged private security guards at selected monuments where footfall is 
high. Sensitive monuments like Taj Mahal at Agra and Red Fort, Delhi are guarded by CISF. 
Security Equipment/Electronic gadgets like CCTVs, X -BIS (X -Ray Baggage Inspection 
System), DFMD (Door Frame Metal Detector) and HHMD (Hand Held Metal Detector) have 
been provided in selected Centrally Protected Monuments and Site Museums. 
4.2 As per the section 30 of the AMASR Act, 1958, “whoever destroys, removes, injures, 
alters, defaces, imperil s or misuses a protected monument shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend up to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both”.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
4.3 The Committee is not happy to note that private/CISF security, as well as 
security equipments have been provided at only selected Centrally  Protected 
Monuments (CPMs) and Site Museums. CPMs are amongst the most important 
historical monuments in the country. Therefore, the Committee is of the str ong view 
that ASI should ensure that at least a certain minimum level of security standards is 
enforced at all the Centrally protected monuments in India. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that ASI may work out such security measures that should be 

36 
 
ensured across all the Centrally protected monuments and  desires that  the Ministry 
should allocate the budgetary provisions required for the same.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee underlines the need for erection of boundary walls as a basic 
requirement for the physical protection of our valuable tangible cultural heritage. The 
Committee desires that ASI may carry out a survey to assess the requirement of construction 
of boundary walls at all the Centrally Protected Monuments, analyze the budg etary 
allocation required therefore and seek allocation for the same from the Ministry of Finance 
at the R.E. 2021-22 stage. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 ASI has provided boundary walls, wherever necessary, in consultation with its field 
offices, and with a view to prevent encroachments within the protected limits of monuments. 
Funds for the construction are sufficiently provided under the budget head allocated for the 
conservation and maintenance of monuments. As desired by the committee, further Surv ey 
will be carried out as per the feasibility & requirement of the monuments/sites.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
5.2 The Committee feels that having boundary walls erected at Centrally protected 
monuments is of utmost importance since doing so is much needed to tackle the menace 
of encroachment, while clearly demarcating the boundaries of the respective 
monument. The Com mittee, therefore, recommends that ASI may strive to construct 
boundary walls at all the Centrally protected monuments in a phased, time -bound 
manner. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee desires that the Ministry may examine the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 from a holistic perspective to assess whether the 

37 
 
Superintending Archaeologists in -charge of the Circles needed legal powers to tackle 
encroachments at Centrally Protected Monuments, and if need be, amend the AMASR Act, 
1958, giving them more powers. 
(Para 42) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 On the receipt of report regarding any encroachment at Centrally Protected 
Monuments, the police complaints are being filed by ASI. Further, for removal of 
encroachments ASI issues notices under the provisions of AMASR Act, 1958 and Rules, 
1959 directing the defaulters to remove the constructions/encroachments at their own cost 
failing which demolition orders are issued requesting District Collector to demolish the same 
and the owner or occupier shall be liable to pay the cost of such removal. All the 
Superintending Archaeologists of the Circles are also vested with the powers of Estate 
Officer. Action is also in itiated under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised occupants) 
Act, 1971, wherever applicable. In specific cases ASI also files litigations against the 
encroachers before the court of Law. 
6.2 To monitor the action taken by State Governments for removal of encroachments 
from CPM/Sites, State Level coordination Committee (SLCC) have already been constituted 
in the state of Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Rajasthan, Odisha, Puducherry, Assam, Punjab, 
Meghalaya, Jammu & Kashmir  and Sikkim, and had held  meeting to address the issues 
flagged by ASI. The states which have not set up a State Level coordination Committee yet, 
have been requested to form a SLCC. In this regard ASI is making correspondence regularly 
with these states to constitute State Level coordination Committee.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
6.3 The Committee notes the existing provisions under the AMASR Act, 1958 to 
tackle the issue of encroachment. However, the reply furnished by the Ministry is 
devoid of any mention regarding the recommendation made by the Committee to 
examine the Act to assess whether the officials have sufficient legal powers to effectively 
tackle encroachment at Centrally protected monuments across the country. The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. In 
case such an examination  of the Act  points to the need for amendments to the Act, the 
same may be taken up by the Ministry at the earliest. 

38 
 
 
SUPPORT TO LIBRARIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee recommends the Ministry to initiate book exchange programmes 
between the Central Libraries and State/UT Libraries during 2020 -21. The Committee feels 
that this will help in periodically freshening up the book collection at public libraries across 
the country, giving readers a reason to utilize the library facilities more often. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 It may be reiterated that, Library is a State subject and Public Libraries function under 
the administrative control of the respective State /U.T. Initiation of book exchange 
programme between the libraries functioning under the control of the State/U.T. L ibrary 
Authorities on a periodic basis come under the purview of the respective State/U.T. However 
the recommendation of the Committee is being forwarded to the State/U.T Library 
Authorities for taking necessary initiative.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
7.2 The Committee is surprised to note the reply of the Ministry since it does not 
make any mention of the various Central libraries functioning as autonomous bodies 
under its administrative control, viz., Delhi Public Library, Delhi; Khuda Baksh 
Oriental Public Library, Patna; Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi; 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Foundation, Kolkata; and  Rampur Raza Library, 
Rampur. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons due to  which the above 
Central libraries have not been considered in the reply furnished by the Ministry. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should initiate book 
exchange programmes between the Central Libraries and State/UT libraries in order to 
freshen up the book collection available at public libraries across the country. 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 

39 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee is deeply concerned to note a major decline in the number of 
beneficiaries under ‘Artistes Pension Scheme’, both during FY 2019-20 and FY 2020-21. The 
Committee failed to comprehend the reasons behind the decrease in the number of 
beneficiaries during the FY 2019-20 as compared to that in FY 2018-19. 
(Para 60) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 The numbers of beneficiaries are continuously increased since 2018-19 to 2020-21 by 
conducting Expert Committee Meeting every year. As per existing guidelines of the Scheme, 
release of pension to the recommended artists is subject to fulfilling certain conditions like 
submission of requisite documents, i.e. Life and Income Certificates. These pre -requisite 
conditions are not submitted many times by artists in time. This often results in non -release 
of pensions in spite of best efforts of the Ministry. As soon as the left out pensioner (who 
have  not received their pension) fulfils all the conditions of the Scheme, such as submission 
of Latest Income and Life Certificates, etc., their due pension from back date is being 
released. 
8.2 It is a fact that increase of beneficiaries as well as release of artists pension are not 
interrelated, as release of pension is dependent on submission of requisite documents 
whereas, increase of number of beneficiaries depends on the expert committee meetings.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
8.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry with 
respect to the Committee’s recommendation. Most of the beneficiaries receiving the 
pension from the Ministry are of old age and might not be having the ability to submit 
the requisite documents to the Ministry, especially in view of the difficulty faced on 
account of the Coronavirus pandemic. In view of the fact that the p ension is the sole 
source of livelihood for most beneficiaries under the Artistes Pension Scheme of the 
Ministry, the Committee strongly feels that the Ministry could have anticipated this 
issue and made necessary provisions to ensure that pensioners who h ad produced the 
requisite documents in the recent past, are temporarily exempted from submitting the 
documents in light of the pandemic restrictions. Alternatively, suitable help should be 

40 
 
extended to the beneficiaries to enable them to submit the required  documentation in 
time.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee was not convinced by the justification adduced by the Ministry for low 
expenditure under the Artistes Pension Scheme during FY 2020 -21 on account of difficulties 
faced in receiving the requisite documents from pensioners with the information technology 
resources currently available, it should not be an insurmountable task for the Ministry to 
prepare a robust and reliable system to digitally receive the documents required from the 
Artistes. The eligibility criteria for the Scheme establishes that all the beneficiaries are over 
60 years of age, except in case of spouse, and the combined income of the artist and their 
spouse is less than ₹4,000 per month. The pension amount received under th is Scheme is thus 
critical to their subsistence, more so amidst the pandemic restrictions. The Committee is of 
the view that the Ministry should have relaxed the condition of documentations from the 
existing beneficiaries of the Scheme. Provisions should h ave been made to allow the receipt 
of necessary documents from the applicants under this Scheme, in digital form given the 
restrictions imposed on account of the Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee expects the 
Ministry to take an early decision to thrash o ut this lingering issue once and for all so as to 
enable the artists to avail the benefits under the Scheme. The Committee seeks to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the Ministry to help the artistes in the submission of the required 
documentation amidst the Coronavirus pandemic restrictions. 
(Para 61) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 As per the extant guidelines for release of Artistes pension, submission of Annual 
Income Certificate and Life certificate issued by the authorized issuing authority is 
mandatory. The Artistes pensions are released to those beneficiaries whose requisite 
certificates as above are received. The guidelines of the Scheme are reviewed periodically 
and its existing guidelines were reviewed and modified on 28 -09-2017. It is true that the 
information technology is available for receiving required documents from the Pensioner and 
for such communication several email ids have been created in the section. In spite of such 

41 
 
attempts the pensioners are not able to submit their documents because of the ir ignorance of 
the technology. Even when contacted over phone some beneficiaries are not able to 
understand the language of staff of the section in Hindi/English. However, the suggestion of 
the committee regarding relaxation of documentation has been note d and will be taken up 
while reviewing the guidelines in future.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
9.2 The Committee notes the difficulties faced by the Ministry in communicating 
with the beneficiaries due to their lack of knowledge of technology and in some cases, 
their inability to understand Hindi and English. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may seek the assistance of its regional Zonal Cultural Cent ers to bridge the 
communication gap that sometimes arises between the Ministry officials and the 
beneficiaries, since the dissemination of right information is crucial for the beneficiaries 
to continue availing the benefits of the Pension Scheme of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee is pained to note that the Ministry has not felt the need for increasing 
the pension amount under the Artistes Pension Scheme for 10 years. The Committee 
underlines the need of linking the pension amount under the Artistes Pension Scheme with 
inflation is necessary so that the beneficiaries under the Scheme can take care of themselves 
in their old age. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take  necessary action in this 
regard. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 The suggestion for increasing the pension amount is noted and will be taken up while 
reviewing the guidelines in future.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
10.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the scheduled timeline for the review of 
the guidelines of the Scheme. The Committee feels that given the ever rising inflation, 
especially under the difficult circumstances faced across the country since the past ye ar, 

42 
 
the review of the pension amount should be looked into urgently and a provision for 
binding such amount with inflation may be given serious consideration. 
 
VACANCIES EXISTING IN DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS UNDER THE 
MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the response received from the 
Department of Expenditure to the detailed proposal submitted by ASI for revival and creation 
of posts in ASI. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 Department of Expenditure vide its I. D. Note No.11(3)/Culture/2020/E.Coord.I dated 
17.02.2021 and 28.04.2021 have conveyed approval for revival of 41 posts and creation of 
758 posts respectively across various cadres of ASI. 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
11.2 The Committee desires to be  apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI to 
fill these posts , now that the approval for the same has been conveyed by the 
Department of Expenditure. The Committee strongly recommends that these vacancies 
should be filled at the earliest in order to  permit ASI to fulfill its important mandate of 
protection and preservation of archaeological sites and monuments. 
 
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee is distressed to note that till 15 th January, 2021, the Ministry has been 
able to spend a mere 19.3 percent of the ₹39.28 crore R.E. 2020 -21 allocation for ‘North -
Eastern Areas’. This utilization is far low compared to the Ministry's average 76.86% 

43 
 
utilization of its total outlay earmarked i n R.E. for 2020-21. This cannot but be suggestive of 
laxity in the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry and the extent of indifference towards the 
schemes of North Eastern Areas. The Committee desires the Ministry to devise a foolproof 
mechanism to utilize the allotted sums. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 The Ministry is regularly monitoring the expenditure under the NER Head and keeps 
apprising the DoNER on expenditure progress. All grants under scheme being released in the 
North Eastern Area are met from NER Head. During FY 2020 -21 due to COVID -19 
pandemic situation and restrictions being imposed by MOF, the Ministry has incurred lesser 
expenditure under the NER Head. The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for 
appropriate action.   
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
12.2 The Committee does not accept the reply of the Ministry. The repercussions of 
the Coronavirus pandemic were felt across the country and not just in the North -
Eastern region. The Committee fails to see how the Ministry managed to spend a 
respectable amount of funds allocated to i t as a whole, at the R.E. 2020 -21 stage, while 
its utilization of funds for the North -Eastern Areas was less than even one -third of the 
average utilization. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a thorough 
look into the real reasons causing the significantly low utilization of funds for the North-
Eastern Areas. 
 
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes that as per the National Culture Fund website, no projects have 
been completed through the use of NCF since 2017. The ongoing projects list on the website 
provides no information on the date of initiation/estimated date of completion of  the projects. 
The latest NCF Annual Report available on the website is for the year 2017 -18. The 
Committee feels that the NCF website is the gateway of information regarding the utilization 

44 
 
of NCF Funds for prospective donors. The Committee calls upon the  Ministry to ensure the 
regular updation of NCF Annual Reports and details of ongoing projects, on the NCF 
website. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 Observations of the committee have been noted for future compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
13. 2 The Committee is anguished to note that the Ministry has merely noted the 
recommendation of the Committee for future compliance, even when a similar 
recommendation had been made in the 277 th Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2020 -21) of M inistry of Culture, as well. The Ministry may take immediate 
measures to ensure that the NCF website is regularly updated with information 
regarding the ongoing projects funded by NCF, as well as the timely publication of the 
NCF Annual Reports. 
 
GENERATION OF REVENUE FROM MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
SITES 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 38 of its 277 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of Ministry of Culture urging the Ministry of Finance to 
allocate the revenue generated by ASI and National Museums through sale of entry tickets 
and other sources, to the Ministry so as to augment the scarce budgetary allocation available 
with the Ministry for the FY 2021-22. 
(Para 93) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 A proposal in this regard was submitted to the Ministry of Finance but same was not 
agreed.  

45 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
14.2 The Committee may be apprised of the reasons furnished by the Ministry of 
Finance for not agreeing with the proposal submitted by the Ministry of Culture for 
allocation of the revenue generated by ASI and National Museums, to the Ministry 
itself, in order to augment the scarce budgetary allocation available with the Ministry. 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take steps to improve the output of the 
research work conducted by NRLC. Further, the NRLC should collaborate with reputed 
international research institutions working in the field of scientific research in conservation 
of cultural artefacts and sites. For this to happen, the Laboratory should have adequate funds 
for conducting its research work and other activities. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of Ministry 
15.1 NRLC, Lucknow has the mandate to carry out research in the field of conservation of 
cultural property, training of conservators and field conservation projects. NRLC has a state 
of the art conservation laboratory with scientists and conservators working to gether and 
providing scientific inputs for field projects besides training the buddy conservators. NRLC 
has developed several conservation procedures for cultural heritage and published around 250 
research papers, it has to its credits 4 patents and carrie d out several conservation projects in 
India and abroad with its limited resources. NRLC has already collaborated with IITs & other 
research institutions to carry out research in the field of conservation and have published 
research papers in International  journals. The NRLC is being provided funds under the 
establishment head and in current year a provision of Rs. 8.60 Cr has been made for salary 
and other expenses of the institute.   
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
15.2 The Committee notes that the National Research Laboratory for Conservation of 
Cultural Property (NRLC) is the premier organization for researches in conservation of 

46 
 
the cultural property including monuments and sites, as well as museums, library and 
archive collections. In view of this, the Committee feels that the annual budget allocated 
to NRLC, including salary expenses, might be reviewed, with due consideration to how 
allocating additional funds to the institute could fund useful research projects in th e 
field of conservation. 
 
 
INCLUSION OF MONUMENTS IN LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED 
MONUMENTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee takes note of the inclusion of 17 monuments across the country in the 
list of Centrally Protected Monuments, during the period 2015 -2020. The Committee 
however observes that while many archaeological sites and monuments come under the 
protection of State Governments/ Central Government/ private bodies, there are a large 
number of historical sites in the country which are no t looked after by any organization and 
face the prospect of getting damaged beyond repair. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry/ASI may conduct an extensive survey across the country to create a 
database of such monuments which date back hundreds of years but are not looked after any 
organization. Once such a database is created, the Ministry may come up with possible 
solutions to look after these monuments with participation of the local population and carry 
out urgent repair works, where needed. 
(Para 101) 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) has documented 
approximately 1.84 lakh templates on Built Heritage and Sites (BHS) - collected from 
secondary sources - till 28th February 2021. This database is mainly about unprotected BHS 
from differe nt states of the country. The NMMA has also documented a total of 16 lakh 
antiquities – in collaboration with various State Archaeology Departments, Educational and 
Heritage organizations. Templates of 12.59 lakh antiquities (approx.) and 11406 BHS have 
been uploaded on the NMMA   website www.nmma.nic.in  

47 
 
Activities of NMMA 
● Creates and maintains two national databases on Monuments and Antiquities. 
● It works in collaboration with designated Documentation Resource Cente rs (DRCs) 
i.e. State Archaeology Departments, Educational and Heritage Organizations, in -house (ASI) 
staff and out sourcing through tendering process. 
● It trains heritage professionals of the country on documentation methods, strategies 
for creating a uniform database. 
● NMMA publishes books etc. and creates public awareness programmes. 
 
16.2 NMMA was initially approved for 5 years from 2007 -2012 (XIth Five year Plan) to 
prepare two National databases on BHS and Antiquities from secondary sources. Its tenure 
was extended till 2017 initially and then it was merged with the ASI Headquarters, New 
Delhi in 2017 
 
16.3 As per the Ministry of Finance’s guidelines, a 3rd party evaluation of the NMMA was 
carried out by the National Productivity Council (NPC) in 2017. The NPC had observed that 
owing to various constraints, such as paucity of staff including regular Mission Director, non-
availability of adequate fund, etc, much progress could not be made during the XIth & XIIth 
Five Years Plan. The merger of the NMMA wit h the ASI is a result of NPC’s 
recommendation  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
16.4 The Committee notes that NMMA has documented approximately 1.84 lakh 
templates on Built Heritage and Sites (BHS) and uploaded 11406 BHS on its website. 
The Committee hopes that NMMA will continue to document more BHS so as to have a 
clear picture of the varied tangible heritage in the country. In this regard, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 5.7.57 of its 294 th Report on 
‘Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites: Challenges and 
Opportunities’ and recommends that the participation of local municipal bodies, local 
communities, history and archaeology students and the likes, may be sought fo r 
carrying out the documentation exercise. 
 
SCHEME FOR THE AWARD OF SENIOR/JUNIOR FELLOWSHIPS TO 

48 
 
OUTSTANDING PERSONS IN THE FIELDS OF CULTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.       The Committee is not satisfied by the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the delays 
in payment to 1135 Junior/Senior Fellows. Such delays are unfair to the Junior/Senior 
Fellows who have submitted their final reports and would discourage people from taking up 
projects in areas related to Culture. The Committee notes that 615 Ju nior/Senior Fellows out 
of the total 1135, have not received their payments since February, 2019, which is more than 
a year before the Coronavirus pandemic restrictions came into force. The Committee desires 
to know the reasons for not holding the meeting of the Expert Committee during the FY 2019-
20 and why options for holding a virtual meeting of the Expert Committee were not explored 
by the Expert Committee during FY 2020 -21. The Committee desires that the Ministry may 
ensure that the Expert Committee me etings are held as per schedule so that Junior/Senior 
Fellows do not face delays in receiving their payments. 
(Para 107) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 Owing to Covid -19 Pandemic, the meetings of the Expert Committees under the 
scheme of Scholarship and Fellowship for Promotion of Art and Culture could not be held in 
the year 2020. However, the meeting of the Expert Committee for making selections in r/o 
senior fellows and for consideration of mid -term/ six monthly reports in r/o senior/ junior 
fellows selected in the previous batch years has now been held in March, 2021. Further, the 
meeting of the Expert Committee for making selections in r/o Junior Follows was also 
scheduled to be held from the last week of April, 2021. However, the meeting of the Expert 
Committee for making selections of Junior Fellows for the Batch Year 2019 -20 could not be 
held in view of lockdown in the country due to the prevailing COVID pandemic. These 
selections are now likely to be held in the 2nd quarter of 2021.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
17.2 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide 
any reasons for which virtual meetings of the Expert Committee could not be held 
amidst the Coronavirus pandemic restrictions. The Committee desires to know whether 
the payments have now been cleared for the 615 Junior/Senior Fellows, now that a 

49 
 
meeting of the Expert Committee has been held in March, 2021. The Committee may be 
apprised of any delays caused in the release of payments on account of lack of sufficient 
funds available with the Ministry and whether sufficient budgetary provisions have 
been made for the timely release of the fellowships in the ongoing Financial Year. 
 
CULTURAL FUNCTION & PRODUCTION GRANT (CFPG) AND REPERTORY 
GRANT 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to ensure that the applications and Utilization 
Certificates submitted by ‘not -for-profit’ organizations, NGOs, Societies, Trusts and 
Universities for receiving grants under the Cultural Function and Production Grant Scheme, 
are dealt with at the earliest. The Committee recommends that the concerned NGO/ Society/ 
Trust/ University should be duly intimated in case the Ministry needs more documents from 
them for the release of their Production Grant. 
(Para 109) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 The Ministry is taking all possible actions to ensure that the grant is released to the 
organizations who have submitted the requisite documents at the earliest. Further, a dedicated 
helpline has already been made operational to extend all possible help to the concerned 
organizations so as to enable them to submit the requisite documents so that the sanction 
grant can be released to them on priority.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
18.2 The Committee desires to know from the Ministry whether the concerned NGO/ 
Society/ Trust/ University is duly intimated in case there is any requirement for 
submission of further documentation, in order to avoid undue delays in the release of 
grant to them. 
 
MISCELLAENOUS 

50 
 
Damages caused in National Library, Kolkata by Cyclone Amphan 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee hopes that the administration of National Library, Kolkata has been 
able to repair and restore the damages caused at the Library building due to the Cyclone 
Amphan. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that necessary safeguards are in 
place at archaeological sites/monuments and museums that exist in areas prone to natural 
disasters, so as to minimize the damages as much as possible. 
(Para 118) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 The damage caused due to the Amphan Cyclone to the Skyline roof of the Bhasha 
Bhawan of National Library, Kolkata has been immediately repaired and restored by the 
CPWD, Kolkata. 
19.2 ASI ensures that in case of damage to any monument due to any natural disaster, 
immediate repair works are carried out at the affected portions of the monument. ASI is also 
in the process of developing Disaster Management Plans for its world heritage monuments. 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
19.3 The Committee recommends that ASI should be proactive in ensuring that 
suitable preventive measures are in place to minimize the damages caused to important 
artefacts and sites at times of disaster, especially those in disaster prone areas, since it is 
not always possible to repair the damage once it has been caused. The Committee 
desires that the Disaster Management Plans for its UNESCO World Heritage 
Monuments may be finalized and implemented in a time-bound manner.  
 
Lowering the fees charged for filming at Centrally Protected Monuments and Museums 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee feels that the prices charged by the Ministry for filming at 
archaeological sites/monuments and museums, outside the period notified in the ASI 
notification mentioned above, are very high. Films and videos featuring the archaeological 

51 
 
monuments and museums showcase the richness of our cultural heritage to both domestic 
and foreign viewers alike and act as a free tool for publicity of the monuments and museums, 
thus propelling their tourism prospects. In light of this, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to opt for a pay -as-you-wish payment model, wherein the filming company seeking 
the permission can pay the amount that it can afford to pay. The Ministry may also ensure 
that there are no delays in grant of permission for filming at the monume nts while putting in 
place enough safeguards to ensure that the filming activities do not cause any harm to the 
monuments and/or the archaeological artefacts. 
(Para 124) 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 Under Rule 44 of the AMASR Rules 1959, fee for filming a Centrally Protected 
Monuments / Sites is Rs.1,00,000/ - for World Heritage Monuments / Sites and Rs.50,000/ - 
for other monuments / sites. ASI has revised the prices for film shooting vide Gazette 
Notification No.GSR-391 (E), dated 31st March, 2016 considering the 
 
 Observations of the CAG Report, 
 considerable increase in the per- capita income of the country and 
 need for increase in the revenue generation 
20.2 The ASI exempts the payment of fees/charges for filming of centrally protected 
monuments and sites except the World Heritage monuments and Iconic Sites from 25th 
December, 2020 to 15th August, 2021 to commemorate the celebration of the 75th year of 
Indian Independence. 
20.3 When any application is received to grant permission for filming at the centrall y 
protected monuments, ASI processes and issue permissions timely. While according 
permissions for holding such cultural events, the ASI imposes appropriate conditions on 
various aspects to ensure the event would not cause any damage to the monument or its  
cultural integrity. 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
20.4 The Committee notes that ASI has revised the prices for film shooting in 2016 
considering the observations of the CAG Report, considerable increase in the per-capita 

52 
 
income of the country and the need for increase in revenue generation. An important 
factor missing in the considerations made by ASI while revising the prices for film 
shooting, is the detrimental effect of levying high fees on the free social outreach 
obtained by a monument/site w hen it is featured in a movie or other such media 
content, propelling their tourism prospects. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that ASI may review the fees it levies for grant of shooting permission at its monuments 
and sites. 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
 
INCLUSION OF MONUMENTS IN LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED 
MONUMENTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee further recommends that important historical monuments and sites 
such as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalam village, Adoni Taluka; Kethavaram Rock Arts and 
Belum Caves in Kurnool etc., be included in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments, given 
their historical significance. 
(Para 102) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The Rama Temple, Peddathumblam, Kurnool District, Andhra Pradesh is presently 
under   the protection of Government of Andhra Pradesh. The ASI has sought the views of 
the State Govt. for central protection of the monument which is awaited. 
1.2 The Kethavaram rock paintings and Belum Caves in Kurnool District (Andhra 
Pradesh) are State protected monuments under the control of the Department of Archaeology 
and Museum, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh. No such proposal has been received from the State 
Govt. concerned to include these mo numents in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments. 
However, ASI has sought the consent of the State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh by a letter dated 
12.02.2021 for their views for the central protection of Kethavaram rock paintings which is 
awaited. 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
1.3 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the response received by ASI from 
the State Government of Andhra Pradesh with regard to the consent/views sought for 

54 
 
the Central protection of Rama Temple, Peddathumblam, Kurnool and Kethavaram 
rock paintings. 
***** 
  

55 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR 2021 -22 AND ANNUAL PLAN 
2020-21 
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Culture should take up with the Ministry of 
Finance about increased budgetary provisions for the Ministry of Culture at RE 2021 -
22 stage, especially in light of the drastic cuts faced by t he Ministry during 2020-21 and 
the adverse impact of the same on the cultural heritage of the country. The Committee 
feels that enhanced budgetary allocation would permit the Ministry to bring back on 
track its projects and schemes which are of crucial importance to our tangible as well as 
intangible cultural heritage. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
The Committee may be apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry to ensure 
that offline ticket counters are kept operational at ASI monuments and museums.  
(Para 2.2) 
The Committee notes that while the ‘Indian Culture’ smartphone application of the 
Ministry does provide information about various historical sites, monuments and 
museums in the country, it neither provides any information  regarding how to visit the 
place, nor has any option for the user to book ticket(s) for the same. The Committee 
feels that the Ministry should take an integrated approach while developing its online 
presence in order to ensure that the people interested i n our cultural heritage do not 
face any difficulties in obtaining commonly sought information regarding the same.  
(Para 3.2) 
 
Safety and Security of Centrally Protected Monuments 

56 
 
The Committee is not happy to note that private/CISF security, as well as security 
equipments have been provided at only selected Centrally Protected Monuments 
(CPMs) and Site Museums. CPMs are amongst the most important historical 
monuments in the country . Therefore, the Committee is of the strong view that ASI 
should ensure that at least a certain minimum level of security standards is enforced at 
all the Centrally protected monuments in India. In this regard, the Committee 
recommends that ASI may work ou t such security measures that should be ensured 
across all the Centrally protected monuments and desires that the Ministry should 
allocate the budgetary provisions required for the same.  
(Para 4.3) 
The Committee feels that having boundary walls erected at  Centrally protected 
monuments is of utmost importance since doing so is much needed to tackle the menace 
of encroachment, while clearly demarcating the boundaries of the respective 
monument. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may strive to cons truct 
boundary walls at all the Centrally protected monuments in a phased, time -bound 
manner.  
(Para 5.2) 
The Committee notes the existing provisions under the AMASR Act, 1958 to tackle the 
issue of encroachment. However, the reply furnished by the Ministr y is devoid of any 
mention regarding the recommendation made by the Committee to examine the Act to 
assess whether the officials have sufficient legal powers to effectively tackle 
encroachment at Centrally protected monuments across the country. The Commit tee 
desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. In case such an 
examination of the Act points to the need for amendments to the Act, the same may be 
taken up by the Ministry at the earliest.  
(Para 6.3) 
SUPPORT TO LIBRARIES 
The Committee is surprised to note the reply of the Ministry since it does not make any 
mention of the various Central libraries functioning as autonomous bodies under its 
administrative control, viz., Delhi Public Library, Delhi; Khuda Baksh Oriental Public 
Library, Patna; Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi; Raja Ram Mohan 
Roy Library Foundation, Kolkata; and  Rampur Raza Library, Rampur. The 

57 
 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons due to w hich the above Central libraries 
have not been considered in the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should initiate book exchange 
programmes between the Central Libraries and State/UT libraries in  order to freshen 
up the book collection available at public libraries across the country.  
(Para 7.2) 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry with respect to 
the Committee’s recommendation. Most of the beneficiaries receiving the pension from 
the Ministry are of old age and might not be having the ability to submit the requi site 
documents to the Ministry, especially in view of the difficulty faced on account of the 
Coronavirus pandemic. In view of the fact that the pension is the sole source of 
livelihood for most beneficiaries under the Artistes Pension Scheme of the Ministr y, the 
Committee strongly feels that the Ministry could have anticipated this issue and made 
necessary provisions to ensure that pensioners who had produced the requisite 
documents in the recent past, are temporarily exempted from submitting the documents 
in light of the pandemic restrictions. Alternatively, suitable help should be extended to 
the beneficiaries to enable them to submit the required documentation in time.  
(Para 8.3) 
The Committee notes the difficulties faced by the Ministry in communicating  with the 
beneficiaries due to their lack of knowledge of technology and in some cases, their 
inability to understand Hindi and English. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may seek the assistance of its regional Zonal Cultural Centers to bridge the  
communication gap that sometimes arises between the Ministry officials and the 
beneficiaries, since the dissemination of right information is crucial for the beneficiaries 
to continue availing the benefits of the Pension Scheme of the Ministry.  
(Para 9.2) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the scheduled timeline for the review of the 
guidelines of the Scheme. The Committee feels that given the ever rising inflation, 
especially under the difficult circumstances faced across the country since the past ye ar, 

58 
 
the review of the pension amount should be looked into urgently and a provision for 
binding such amount with inflation may be given serious consideration.  
(Para 10.2) 
VACANCIES EXISTING IN DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS UNDER THE 
MINISTRY 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI to fill these 
posts, now that the approval for the same has been conveyed by the Department of 
Expenditure. The Committee strongly recommends that these vacancies should be filled 
at the earliest in order to permit ASI to fulfill its important mandate of protection and 
preservation of archaeological sites and monuments.  
(Para 11.2) 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
The Committee does not accept the reply of the Ministry. The repercussions of the 
Coronavirus pandemic were felt across the country and not just in the North -Eastern 
region. The Committee fails to see how the Ministry managed to spend a respectable 
amount of funds allocated to it as a whole, at the R.E. 2020 -21 stage, while its utilization 
of funds for the North -Eastern Areas was less than even one -third of the average 
utilization. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a thorough look 
into the real reasons causing the significantly low utilization of funds for the North -
Eastern Areas.  
(Para 12.2) 
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND 
The Committee is anguished to note that the Ministry has merely noted the 
recommendation of the Committee for future compliance, even when a similar 
recommendation had been made in the 277 th Report of the Committee on Dema nds for 
Grants (2020 -21) of Ministry of Culture, as well. The Ministry may take immediate 
measures to ensure that the NCF website is regularly updated with information 
regarding the ongoing projects funded by NCF, as well as the timely publication of the 
NCF Annual Reports.  
(Para 13.2) 

59 
 
GENERATION OF REVENUE FROM MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
SITES 
The Committee may be apprised of the reasons furnished by the Ministry of Finance for 
not agreeing with the proposal submitted by the Ministry of Culture for allocation of 
the revenue generated by ASI and National Museums, to the Ministry itself, in order to 
augment the scarce budgetary allocation available with the Ministry.  
(Para 14.2) 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
The Committee notes that the National Research Laboratory for Conservation of 
Cultural Property (NRLC) is the premier organization for researches in conservation of 
the cultural property including monuments and sites, as well as museums, library and 
archive collections. In view of this, the Committee feels that the annual budget allocated 
to NRLC, including salary expenses, might be reviewed, with due consideration to how 
allocating additional funds to the institute could fund useful research projects in th e 
field of conservation.  
(Para 15.2) 
INCLUSION OF MONUMENTS IN LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED 
MONUMENTS 
The Committee notes that NMMA has documented approximately 1.84 lakh templates 
on Built Heritage and Sites (BHS) and uploaded 11406 BHS on its website. The 
Committee hopes that NMMA will continue to document more BHS so as to have a 
clear picture of the varied tangible heritage in the country. In this regard, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 5.7.57 of its 294 th Report on 
‘Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites: Challenges and 
Opportunities’ and recommends that the participation of local municipal bodies, local 
communities, history and archaeology students and the likes, may be sought for 
carrying out the documentation exercise.  
(Para 16.4) 
SCHEME FOR THE AWARD OF SENIOR/JUNIOR FELLOWSHIPS TO 
OUTSTANDING PERSONS IN THE FIELDS OF CULTURE 

60 
 
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 
reasons for which virtual meetings of the  Expert Committee could not be held amidst 
the Coronavirus pandemic restrictions. The Committee desires to know whether the 
payments have now been cleared for the 615 Junior/Senior Fellows, now that a meeting 
of the Expert Committee has been held in March,  2021. The Committee may be 
apprised of any delays caused in the release of payments on account of lack of sufficient 
funds available with the Ministry and whether sufficient budgetary provisions have 
been made for the timely release of the fellowships in the ongoing Financial Year.  
(Para 17.2) 
CULTURAL FUNCTION & PRODUCTION GRANT (CFPG) AND REPERTORY 
GRANT 
The Committee desires to know from the Ministry whether the concerned NGO/ 
Society/ Trust/ University is duly intimated in case there is any requiremen t for 
submission of further documentation, in order to avoid undue delays in the release of 
grant to them.  
(Para 18.2) 
MISCELLAENOUS 
Damages caused in National Library, Kolkata by Cyclone Amphan 
The Committee recommends that ASI should be proactive in ensuring that suitable 
preventive measures are in place to minimize the damages caused to important artefacts 
and sites at times of disaster, especially those in disaster prone areas, since it is not  
always possible to repair the damage once it has been caused. The Committee desires 
that the Disaster Management Plans for its UNESCO World Heritage Monuments may 
be finalized and implemented in a time-bound manner.  
(Para 19.3) 
Lowering the fees charged for filming at Centrally Protected Monuments and Museums 
The Committee notes that ASI has revised the prices for film shooting in 2016 
considering the observations of the CAG Report, considerable increase in the per-capita 
income of the country and the nee d for increase in revenue generation. An important 
factor missing in the considerations made by ASI while revising the prices for film 

61 
 
shooting, is the detrimental effect of levying high fees on the free social outreach 
obtained by a monument/site when it is featured in a movie or other such media 
content, propelling their tourism prospects. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that ASI may review the fees it levies for grant of shooting permission at its monuments 
and sites.  
(Para 20.4) 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
1RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
 
INCLUSION OF MONUMENTS IN LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED 
MONUMENTS 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the response received by ASI from the 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh with regard to the consent/views sought for the 
Central protection of Rama Temple, Peddathumblam, Kurnool and Kethavaram rock 
paintings.  
(Para 1.3) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

62 
 
XXVI 
TWENTY SIXTH  MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3 rd August, 2021 in Committee 
Room - D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Margani Bharat 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12. Shri Prince Raj 
13. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Shri Dushyant Singh 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  

63 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to adopt and 
consider the draft Reports of the Committee on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Eighty Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Culture’ and *   
* *1 and sought their views on these draft Reports. 
3.      The Committee, thereafter, considered t he draft Reports and after a brief 
deliberation, adopted the same with some changes. 
4.       The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports of the Committee on 
‘Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report on the Demands for 
Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Culture’ and *    *  
  * to both the Houses of Parliament on 4 th August, 2021. The Committee, 
accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his absence, Shri Derek 
O’Brien, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha.  Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his 
absence, Shri Margani Bharat, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports 
on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.         The meeting adjourned at 3:45 P.M. 
  
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  

64 
 
Annexure-I 
Details of Action Taken by issuing Notices Issued under Section 19 (1) & (2) 
on Encroachments in & around Centrally Protected Monuments 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Circle 
Name of Monument 
Encroached 
Nature & Number of 
Encroachments* 
Action Taken on Encroachments in Protected Area 
Show Cause  
Notice 
Police 
Report 
Notices Issued 
under Section 
19 (1) 
Order Issued under 
Section 19 (2) 
 North Region       
1. Delhi Circle Tughluqabad Fort South East 
District Tughluqabad Sub circle 
Residential house (The extent of 
encroachment is being 
demarcated through Total Station 
Method) 
865 Yes Yes No encroachments 
removed in last 3 
years. 
2.  Begumpuri Masjid, Begumpur 
South District 
Hauz Khas I sub Circle 
Religious use (Except mosque the 
area is fully encroached) 
86 Yes Yes No encroachments 
removed in last 3 
years. 
3.  Atgah Khan’s Tomb, Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, South East District 
Humayun’ Tomb Sub Circle 
Residential house 
(Basement/Crypt encroached) 
20 Yes Yes No encroachments 
removed in last 3 
years. 
4.  Rajpur (Mutiny) Cemetery Old 
Rajpur Cantonment, North District 
Residential house (Fully 
encroached) 
205 205 205  
5.  D’Eremao Cemetery Kisanganj Residential house (Fully 
encroached) 
52 Yes Yes  
6. Shimla Hidimba Devi temple, Manali, 
District Kullu 
Govt. Primary School, Dungri 
Shops and Khokhas 
Yes Yes Yes --- 
 South Region       
7. Chennai Circle Kings's Barracks Fort St.George, 
Chennai 
Office/ shops (Partially 
encroached) 
Yes No Yes No 
8.  Sri. Apathasahayeswara Temple, 
Thennery 
House/Hut by Private Yes No Yes No 
9.  Pallava Rock -cut shrine, 
Kilmavilangai 
Agricultural lands & House by 
Public 
No No Yes No 
10.  Rock Sculptures and caves at 
Vilapakkam, ArcotTaluk, Ranipet 
district, Tamil Nadu 
Public/State govt agency Yes Yes Yes No 
11.  Remains of the Fort with the 
building thereon at Attur, Salem, 
Tamil Nadu 
House/Hut, Public/State govt. 
agency 
Yes Yes Yes No 

65 
 
12.  Hill Fort at  Namakkal, 
Namakkaldist, Tamil Nadu 
House/Hut, Public/State govt. 
agency 
Yes Yes Yes No 
13.  Fort and temples on the hill at 
Chinakavandanur Salem, Tamil 
Nadu 
House/Hut Yes No Yes No 
 Hampi Circle       
14. Gulbarga Fort 
and Great 
Mosque in the 
fort at Kalburgi. 
Residential and 282 No’s Issued 282 No’s. Copies endorsed 
to the all district 
authorities 
Issued 282 Issued 282 NIL 
15. Trichy Circle Fort on Rock, Pallapatti House/ shop / hut & 107 Yes Yes Yes Nil 
16.  Sikkanathasamy temple, 
Kudumiyanmalai 
House & hut & 11 Yes Yes Yes Nil  
17.  Rock cut siva cave temple, 
Kunnandarkoil 
House/ shop / hut & 18 Yes Yes Yes  Nil 
18.  Natural Cavern called 
Andarmadam, Sembuthi 
Hut/ shop/3 Yes Yes Yes Nil 
19.  Siva temple, Tiruverumbur House/ shop / hut & 200 Yes Yes Yes Nil 
20.  Rock cut Jain bas -relief and beds 
and a mutilated Jain stone image, 
Karadipatti 
House/ hut& 28 Yes Yes Yes Nil 
21.  Airavatesvara temple, Darasuram House/ hut & 2 - Yes Yes Nil 
22. Dharwad Circle Temple on the knoll under bastion 
of the northern fort At: Badami 
New construction/ repair - 01 Yes. No Yes. No 
23. Goa Chapel of St. Cajetan 1. Saw Mill existing since before 
1992 (No records available with 
this office) 
Not Available Not 
Available 
Not Available Not Available 
   2. Construction of new residential 
bungalow by Smt. S. S. Lotlikar 
Yes. 
2 Notices were 
issued by the Sr. 
Conservation 
Assistant Old 
Goa Sub -circle 
vide 
14/2/ACT/2019-
20- 
827 dated 
12.03.2020 and 
14/2/ACT/2019-
20- 
832 dated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No 
Yes. 
As per 
directions 
received from 
DG, ASI vide 
letter dated 
Letter No. F. 
No. T- 
19034/46/2018-
M dated 
01.04.2021 a 
Show 
cause notice 
was issued to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No 

66 
 
16.03.2020. 
However, these 
notices w ere set 
aside by the 
Hon’ble High 
Court of 
Bombay at Goa 
vide Judgement 
LD- VC-CW-
132-2020 
dated 
22/09/2020. 
Smt. Suvarna 
Suraj Lotlikar 
vide F. 
No.4/50/2021-
22-09 
dated 
08/04/2021. 
However, the 
encroacher 
approached 
Hon’ble High 
Court of 
Bombay at Goa 
and the Show 
Cause notice 
was set aside by 
the Hon’ble 
High Court vide 
combined 
Judgement 
WP/1153/2021, 
WP/1160/2021 
and CP/ 
1162/2021 
dated 
03/05/2021. 
The same has 
been forwarded 
vide this 
office’s letter 
4/73/2021-22-
81 dated 
06/05/2021. 
 Central Region       
24. Jabalpur (1) Shahburz Satkhanda, Mandla 4 Nil Nil 4 Nil 
25.  (2)Tripuri Sundri, Tewar 1 Nil Nil 1 Nil 
26. Jhansi (1) Jhansi Fort (Jhar nagate ) 
Jhansi. 
01 Number 
Residential house 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
27. Lucknow (1) Bara Imambara (Asaf-
ud-Daula’s Imambara), Lucknow 
(19) 
Commercial use by the trust 
people and few families living in 
Yes  Yes Yes 

67 
 
the cells belonging to the Trust. 
28.  (2)Asifi Masjid, Lucknow (06) Yes  Yes Yes 
   Few families are living in the cells 
belonging to the Trust. 
   
 
29.  (3)Rumi Darwaza, Lucknow (01) Residential use. Yes  Yes Yes 
30.  (4)Neil’s Gate/Sher Darwaza, 
Lucknow 
(07) Residential use. Yes  Yes Yes 
31.  (5)Kaisarbagh Gate, Lucknow (06) Residential & Commercial Yes  Yes Yes 
32.  (6)Cemetery Kaiser Pasand near 
Kaiserbagh Bus Stand, Lucknow 
(05) Residential houses 
constructed in the surrounding of 
the pillar. 
Yes  Yes  
33.  (10)Tomb of Janab-e-Aliya, 
Lucknow 
(10) Family members of trustees 
are residing in the cells and new 
additions have been made. 
Yes  Yes - 
34.  (35)Tomb of Nawab Sadar Jahan 
at Pihani, Hardoi 
(16) Residential and Commercial. Yes Yes Yes  
35.  (39) Memorial Well Garden, 
Kanpur city 
(01) Covered and being utilized 
by State Govt. 
Yes    
36. Raipur (1) Rajiv Lochan Temple, Rajim, 
Tahsil-Rajim, District Gariaband 
Fixing of inauguration stone & 
board 
Show Cause 
Notice issued on 
27.12.2017. 
Information 
sent to OIC 
Rajim on 
12.12.2017. 
Notice for 
removal issued 
on 16-02-2018. 
-- 
37.  (3)Chaiturgarh Fort, Near Bagdara 
Tahsil-Pali District Korba 
Re-construction of old kitchen 
shed. 
Show Cause 
Notice issued on 
22.10.2018 
Information 
sent to PS 
Pali on 
27.09.2018. 
Notice for 
removal issued 
on 15.01.2019. 
In pursuance of ASI 
Directorate letter F. 
No.37/33/2018-M 
dated 15.03.2019, the 
matter has been taken 
up with the ASGI,  
Chhattisgarh High 
Court and the 
Collector District 
Bilaspur on 
22.03.2019. 
38.  (4)Rajiv Lochan Temple, Rajim, 
Tahsil-Rajim, District Gariaband 
Construction of Tin Shed Show Cause 
Notice issued on 
02-08-2019. 
Information 
sent to 
Rajim PS 
on 16-06- 
2019. 
Notice for 
removal issued 
on 17-09-2019. 
-- 
39. Sarnath (1) Cemetery of Kydganj 01 Nil 01   
40.  (6)Vijay Garh Fort 02 02 02   
 Eastern Region       

68 
 
41. Bhubaneswar Sisupalgarh, Bhubaneswar Residential/large scale 
constructions within the protected 
area. 
Issued Nil Issued - 
42.  Sighanath Temple, Gopinathpur construction of a tourist facilities 
by the State govt. 
Issued Nil Issued - 
 Western Region       
43. 
 
Jodhpur 
 
The Adhaidin -ka-Jhonpra, Ajmer, 
District Ajmer 
Permanent Residential 
construction/ Construction of 
shop/ Iron Cabin. 
08 - 08 
 
01  
 
44.  Gateway of Taragarh hill, Ajmer, 
District Ajmer 
Permanent Residential/ 
Commercial (Construction of 
shop/ Iron Cabin). 
02 - 02 Nil 
45.  Ancient Mounds (2), Binjor, 
District Ganganagar 
Permanent Residential Re - 
construction in house / Boundary 
wall of field. 
01 - 01 Nil 
46.  Magazine building in the Ajmer 
fort, including Museum, Ajmer, 
District Ajmer 
Demolition of existing structures 
and digging by use of JCB and 
lying of floor through Road 
Roller. 
01 - 01 Nil 
47.  Ancient Mounds (2), Mathula, 
District Ganganagar 
Permanent unauthorized 
construction of Boundary wall 
and water tank. 
01 - 01 01 
48.  Tripolia Gate, Ajmer City, District 
Ajmer 
Permanent residential re - 
construction of wall. 
01 - 01 01 
49.  Ancient Mounds, Badopol, 
District Hanumangarh 
Re- construction work in house. 01 - 01 Nil 
50.  Ancient Mounds, Dhokal, District 
Hanumangarh 
Unauthorized construction of new 
house. 
02 - 02 01 
51.  Fort of Chittor as a whole, Chittor, 
District Chittorgarh 
Temporary/ Permanent 
Residential/ Commercial 
Construction/ Re - construction / 
Repair and Renovation Activity. 
81 - 79 08 
52.  Fort of Kumbhalgarh as a whole, 
Kumbhalgarh, District Rajsamand 
Temporary/ Permanent 
Residential/ Commercial  
Construction/ Re - construction / 
Repair and Renovation Activity. 
31 - 30 01 
53.  Ghat with inscriptions, Pavilions 
and Toranas, together with 
adjacent area comprise in survey 
Re- construction work in the 
house. 
01 - 01 Nil 

69 
 
plot no. 344, Navchowki, District 
Rajsamand 
54.  Fort including ancient temples, 
Jaisalmer, District Jaislmer 
Temporary/ Permanent 
Residential/ Commercial 
Construction/ Re - construction / 
Repair and Renovation Activity. 
37 - 37 Nil 
55  Ancient Site, Lodruva, District 
Jaisalmer 
Temporary/ Permanent 
Residential/ Commercial 
Construction/ Re - construction / 
Repair and Renovation Activity.  
29 - 29 01 
56.  Menal (Mahanal) Temple & Math, 
Menal, District Chittorgarh 
Construction/ Re - construction 
Activity. 
02 - 02 Nil 
57. Mumbai Circle Cave Temples and Inscriptions, 
Karla, Pune 
Encroached by Ekvira Devasthan 
Trust by making M.S. Bridge and 
Q lines for temple. 
Yes Yes Yes (Under 
Rule 38) 
No 
 
 
 
 
  

70 
 
Annexure-II 
State wise & Scheme wise financial assistance rendered by RRRLF during 2019-20 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT Central Selection Voluntary Scheme Children Scheme Centenary Celebration Children's Corner 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 18 3787036.39 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 21 4418209.12 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ASSAM 26 5470163.67 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
BIHAR 10 2103909.10 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 30 6311727.31 0 0.00 1 12500.00 1 28500.00 0 0.00 
GOA 2 420781.82 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HARYANA 8 1683127.28 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 13 2735081.84 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 7 1472736.37 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KARNATAKA 24 5049381.85 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KERALA 14 2945472.75 4 85458.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 42 8836418.24 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 34 7153290.96 6 849206.00 20 1575000.00 0 0.00 11 949850.00 
MANIPUR 7 1472736.37 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 

71 
 
MEGHALAYA 8 1683127.28 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 7 1472736.37 0 0.00 7 212460.00 0 0.00 2 100000.00 
NAGALAND 8 1683127.28 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ODISHA 8 1683127.28 8 720609.00 3 154750.00 0 0.00 3 128500.00 
PUNJAB 5 1051954.55 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 25 5259772.76 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
SIKKIM 4 841563.64 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TAMIL NADU 34 7153290.96 0 0.00 9 936022.00 0 0.00 2 200000.00 
TRIPURA 6 1262345.46 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 25 5259772.76 1 12500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 18 3787036.39 5 553625.00 4 109795.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 2 420781.82 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 1 210390.91 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 3 631172.73 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 18 3787036.39 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 

72 
 
JHARKHAND 3 631172.73 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 4 841563.64 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
34 7153290.96 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 469 98673336.98 24 2221398.00 44 3000527.00 1 28500.00 18 1378350.00 

73 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Divyangjan Corner Seminar Non-Matching CSP Digitization Total Non- 
Matching 
Book Assistance 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3787036.39 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 4418209.12 0 0.00 
ASSAM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5470163.67 0 0.00 
BIHAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2103909.10 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 0 0.00 2 150000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 6502727.31 2341 26515705.00 
GOA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 420781.82 130 3729446.00 
HARYANA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1683127.28 1 110414.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2735081.84 943 18670300.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1472736.37 140 2648948.00 
KARNATAKA 0 0.00 4 425000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5474381.85 300 23553838.00 
KERALA 0 0.00 2 150000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3180930.75 0 0.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 8836418.24 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 10527346.96 1200 14117213.00 
MANIPUR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1472736.37 157 10099732.00 
MEGHALAYA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1683127.28 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 0 0.00 1 112500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1897696.37 510 6558840.00 
NAGALAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1683127.28 64 139155.00 

74 
 
ODISHA 0 0.00 2 75000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2761986.28 0 0.00 
PUNJAB 0 0.00 1 112500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1164454.55 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 1 742875.00 1 112500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 6115147.76 0 0.00 
SIKKIM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 841563.64 12 5861263.00 
TAMIL NADU 1 175000.00 5 400000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 8864312.96 32 17082906.00 
TRIPURA 0 0.00 1 25000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1287345.46 26 4719889.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 0 0.00 4 300000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5572272.76 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 0 0.00 12 815867.00 0 0.00 0 0 5266323.39 0 0.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 420781.82 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 3 4036218.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 7 562500.00 0 0.00 2 360000.00 922500.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 210390.91 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0 0.00 1 150000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 781172.73 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3787036.39 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0 0.00 1 50000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 681172.73 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 841563.64 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 7153290.96 20 5100.00 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 2 917875.00 44 3440867.00 0 0.00 2 360000.00 110020853.98 5879 137848967.00 

75 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Storage material Increasing Accomodation Modernization Seminar Mobile library 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 1 5000000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ASSAM 85 2272162.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 200000.00 0 0.00 
BIHAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 1 138700.00 2 1000000.00 16 3514527.00 1 200000.00 0 0.00 
GOA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HARYANA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KARNATAKA 0 0.00 1 2500000.00 0 0.00 1 300000.00 0 0.00 
KERALA 0 0.00 21 10192000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 0 0.00 19 9493793.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MANIPUR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 500000.00 0 0.00 
MEGHALAYA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 0 0.00 20 6000000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
NAGALAND 0 0.00 8 3600000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ODISHA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 

76 
 
PUNJAB 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 5 2434340.00 4 7490896.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
SIKKIM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TAMIL NADU 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TRIPURA 0 0.00 1 529150.00 0 0.00 1 150000.00 0 0.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 0 0.00 1 314000.00 0 0.00 1 118000.00 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 55 617675.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
0 0.00 2 3450000.00 4 136992.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 146 5462877.00 80 49569839.00 20 3651519.00 6 1468000.00 0 0.00 

77 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT Total Matching 
State Central 
Expenditure Expenditure 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0.00 0.00 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 5000000.00 500000.00 4500000.00 
ASSAM 2472162.00 247216.20 2224945.80 
BIHAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 
GUJARAT 31368932.00 15684466.00 15684466.00 
GOA 3729446.00 1491778.40 2237667.60 
HARYANA 110414.00 44165.60 66248.40 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 18670300.00 7468120.00 11202180.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 2648948.00 1059579.20 1589368.80 
KARNATAKA 26353838.00 13176919.00 13176919.00 
KERALA 10192000.00 5096000.00 5096000.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0.00 0.00 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 23611006.00 11805503.00 11805503.00 
MANIPUR 10599732.00 1059973.20 9539758.80 
MEGHALAYA 0.00 0.00 0.00 
MIZORAM 12558840.00 1255884.00 11302956.00 
NAGALAND 3739155.00 373915.50 3365239.50 
ODISHA 0.00 0.00 0.00 
PUNJAB 0.00 0.00 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 9925236.00 3970094.40 5955141.60 
SIKKIM 5861263.00 586126.30 5275136.70 
TAMIL NADU 17082906.00 8541453.00 8541453.00 
TRIPURA 5399039.00 539903.90 4859135.10 
UTTAR PRADESH 432000.00 172800.00 259200.00 
WEST BENGAL 617675.00 308837.50 308837.50 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 4036218.00 1614487.20 2421730.80 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0.00 0.00 0.00 

78 
 
DELHI 0.00 0.00 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0.00 0.00 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0.00 0.00 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
3592092.00 1796046.00 1796046.00 
0.00 0.00 0.00 
TOTAL 198001202.00 76793268.40 121207933.60 

79 
 
State wise & Scheme wise financial assistance rendered by RRRLF during 2018-19 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Central Selection Voluntary Scheme Children Scheme Centenary Celebration Children's Corner 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 18 5546604.09 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 21 6471038.10 0 0.00 8 600000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ASSAM 26 8011761.46 2 500000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
BIHAR 10 3081446.72 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 112500.00 
GUJARAT 30 9244340.15 0 0.00 4 87500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
GOA 2 616289.34 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 149325.00 
HARYANA 8 2465157.37 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 13 4005880.73 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 7 2157012.70 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KARNATAKA 24 7395472.12 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KERALA 14 4314025.40 15 846512.00 1 37500.00 1 25000.00 0 0.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 42 12942076.21 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 34 10476918.84 24 3510981.00 46 3300000.00 0 0.00 22 2084150.00 
MANIPUR 7 2157012.70 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MEGHALAYA 8 2465157.37 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 7 2157012.70 0 0.00 7 637500.00 0 0.00 5 450000.00 
NAGALAND 8 2465157.37 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 

80 
 
ODISHA 8 2465157.37 12 880741.00 15 1064250.00 0 0.00 13 1184000.00 
PUNJAB 5 1540723.36 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 25 7703616.79 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
SIKKIM 4 1232578.69 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TAMIL NADU 34 10476918.84 1 43125.00 7 256890.00 0 0.00 10 689801.00 
TRIPURA 6 1848868.03 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 25 7703616.79 2 105251.00 1 37500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 18 5546604.09 12 318785.00 6 224950.00 1 25000.00 0 0.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 2 616289.34 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 1 308144.67 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 3 924434.01 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 18 5546604.09 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 3 924434.01 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 4 1232578.69 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
34 10476918.84 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 469 144519850.98 68 6205395.00 95 6246090.00 2 50000.00 52 4669776.00 

81 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Divyangjan Corner Seminar Non-Matching CSP Digitization Total Non- 
Matching 
Book Assistance 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5546604.09 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 7071038.10 20 2499263.00 
ASSAM 5 1017500.00 1 20000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 9549261.46 0 950000.00 
BIHAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3193946.72 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 1 125000.00 4 166809.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 9623649.15 2341 25843713.00 
GOA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 765614.34 128 3528525.00 
HARYANA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2465157.37 23 265903.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 4005880.73 1028 127608.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 0 0.00 1 75000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2232012.70 140 17671696.00 
KARNATAKA 0 0.00 6 542209.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 7937681.12 300 21983313.00 
KERALA 0 0.00 3 125000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5348037.40 100 2452125.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 12942076.21 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 0 0.00 2 45000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 19417049.84 101 1426713.00 
MANIPUR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2157012.70 157 13920680.00 
MEGHALAYA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2465157.37 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3244512.70 500 6124930.00 
NAGALAND 1 374140.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2839297.37 666 17267651.00 
ODISHA 0 0.00 2 225000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5819148.37 900 12789210.00 

82 
 
PUNJAB 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1540723.36 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 1 174928.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 7878544.79 323 9340432.00 
SIKKIM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1232578.69 12 8999974.00 
TAMIL NADU 4 1279967.00 11 455000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 13201701.84 1045 94325389.00 
TRIPURA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1848868.03 26 5224566.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 0 0.00 7 823627.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 8669994.79 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 0 0.00 18 1562500.00 35 696426.00 0 0.00 8374265.09 823 11577986.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 616289.34 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 2 4275751.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 12 1087500.00 0 0.00 1 180000.00 1267500.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 308144.67 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 924434.01 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5546604.09 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0 0.00 1 150000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1074434.01 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1232578.69 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 10476918.84 33 3786317.00 
0 0.00 3 198070.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 198070.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 12 2971535.00 71 5475715.00 35 696426.00 1 180000.00 171014787.98 8668 264381745.00 

83 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Storage material Increasing Accomodation Modernization Seminar Mobile library 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 57 2878773.00 5 4502500.00 1 66700.00 3 300000.00 5 250000.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 10 2991300.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ASSAM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
BIHAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 7 1076662.00 2 1000000.00 29 6538429.00 7 1100000.00 0 0.00 
GOA 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 52250.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HARYANA 2 181826.00 0 0.00 1 40000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 140500.00 0 0.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KARNATAKA 50 18735000.00 4 5855000.00 18 4982400.00 4 800000.00 0 0.00 
KERALA 3 156248.00 20 9714500.00 5 3784637.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 1800 11646000.00 15 7451231.00 0 0.00 1 3500000.00 0 0.00 
MANIPUR 317 5086048.00 2 5000000.00 0 0.00 2 1500000.00 0 0.00 
MEGHALAYA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 0 0.00 16 5000000.00 0 0.00 2 400000.00 0 0.00 
NAGALAND 0 0.00 18 8800000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ODISHA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 

84 
 
PUNJAB 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 19 2093729.00 8 16652000.00 48 6688660.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
SIKKIM 8 2509318.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TAMIL NADU 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TRIPURA 17 2461425.00 1 588020.00 0 0.00 1 100000.00 0 0.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 0 0.00 2 2598821.00 0 0.00 2 196000.00 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 0 0.00 1 224501.00 0 0.00 2 350000.00 0 0.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 3 144429.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
11 748045.00 2 5000000.00 7 674583.00 2 300000.00 0 0.00 
0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 2304 50708803.00 96 72386573.00 110 22827659.00 27 8686500.00 5 250000.00 

85 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT Total Matching 
State Central 
Expenditure Expenditure 
ANDHRA PRADESH 7997973.00 3998986.50 3998986.50 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 5490563.00 549056.30 4941506.70 
ASSAM 950000.00 95000.00 855000.00 
BIHAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 
GUJARAT 35558804.00 17779402.00 17779402.00 
GOA 3580775.00 1432310.00 2148465.00 
HARYANA 487729.00 195091.60 292637.40 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 268108.00 107243.20 160864.80 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 17671696.00 7068678.40 10603017.60 
KARNATAKA 52355713.00 26177856.50 26177856.50 
KERALA 16107510.00 8053755.00 8053755.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0.00 0.00 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 24023944.00 12011972.00 12011972.00 
MANIPUR 25506728.00 2550672.80 22956055.20 
MEGHALAYA 0.00 0.00 0.00 
MIZORAM 11524930.00 1152493.00 10372437.00 
NAGALAND 26067651.00 2606765.10 23460885.90 
ODISHA 12789210.00 5115684.00 7673526.00 
PUNJAB 0.00 0.00 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 34774821.00 13909928.40 20864892.60 
SIKKIM 11509292.00 1150929.20 10358362.80 
TAMIL NADU 94325389.00 47162694.50 47162694.50 
TRIPURA 8374011.00 837401.10 7536609.90 
UTTAR PRADESH 2794821.00 1117928.40 1676892.60 
WEST BENGAL 12152487.00 6076243.50 6076243.50 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 4275751.00 1710300.40 2565450.60 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0.00 0.00 0.00 
DELHI 0.00 0.00 0.00 

86 
 
LAKSHADWEEP 0.00 0.00 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0.00 0.00 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 144429.00 57771.60 86657.40 
TELANGANA 
DAMAN & DIU 
10508945.00 5254472.50 5254472.50 
0.00 0.00 0.00 
TOTAL 419241280.00 166172636.00 253068644.00 

87 
 
State wise & Scheme wise financial assistance rendered by RRRLF during 2017-18 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Central Selection Voluntary Scheme Children Scheme Centenary Celebration Children's Corner 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 15 3744129.92 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 13 3244912.60 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3 150000.00 
ASSAM 17 4243347.24 7 825230.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
BIHAR 8 1996869.29 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 19 4742564.57 0 0.00 16 437372.00 1 85500.00 3 249421.00 
GOA 1 249608.66 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 50000.00 
HARYANA 12 2995303.94 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 13 3244912.60 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 8 1996869.29 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
KARNATAKA 21 5241781.89 3 254134.00 0 0.00 1 35500.00 0 0.00 
KERALA 10 2496086.61 15 914882.00 2 202500.00 3 103341.00 4 300000.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 26 6489825.20 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 36 8985911.81 11 1936081.00 13 1087500.00 1 75000.00 13 1724500.00 
MANIPUR 7 1747260.63 4 660693.00 2 50000.00 0 0.00 2 200000.00 
MEGHALAYA 4 998434.65 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MIZORAM 6 1497651.97 0 0.00 5 412500.00 0 0.00 14 1200000.00 

88 
 
NAGALAND 8 1996869.29 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ODISHA 15 3744129.92 14 1838438.00 8 446250.00 0 0.00 10 1262500.00 
PUNJAB 8 1996869.29 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 27 6739433.86 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
SIKKIM 4 998434.65 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TAMIL NADU 25 6240216.53 3 224813.00 5 187500.00 0 0.00 1 50000.00 
TRIPURA 4 998434.65 0 0.00 1 37500.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 22 5491390.55 7 463647.00 1 112500.00 0 0.00 3 294487.00 
WEST BENGAL 19 4742564.57 31 3543492.00 11 567500.00 5 181873.00 0 0.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 2 499217.32 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 1 249608.66 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 3 748825.98 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 5 1248043.31 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 3 748825.98 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 5 1248043.31 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 11 2745695.28 1 33889.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 378 94352074.02 96 10695299.00 64 3541122.00 11 481214.00 54 5480908.00 

89 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Divyangjan Corner Seminar Non-Matching CSP Total Non- 
Matching 
Book Assistance Storage material 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3744129.92 0 0.00 0 0.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 3 525000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3919912.60 25 3595675.00 3 2997390.00 
ASSAM 19 6825000.00 2 135000.00 0 0.00 12028577.24 264 20564100.00 52 6230362.00 
BIHAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1996869.29 0 0.00 0 0.00 
GUJARAT 1 125000.00 1 75000.00 0 0.00 5714857.57 2400 33236564.00 39 6243483.00 
GOA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 299608.66 131 3758696.00 0 0.00 
HARYANA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2995303.94 0 0.00 8 1179015.00 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 3244912.60 655 4878048.00 0 0.00 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1996869.29 140 52168551.00 19 2218000.00 
KARNATAKA 0 0.00 5 318750.00 0 0.00 5850165.89 506 106429439.00 0 0.00 
KERALA 0 0.00 1 75000.00 0 0.00 4091809.61 0 0.00 3 262255.00 
MADHYA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 6489825.20 0 0.00 0 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 0 0.00 2 135000.00 0 0.00 13943992.81 1505 16134998.00 636 8766633.00 
MANIPUR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2657953.63 154 10628649.00 159 2227150.00 
MEGHALAYA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 998434.65 94 1379027.00 5 341460.00 
MIZORAM 0 0.00 1 50000.00 0 0.00 3160151.97 467 5246120.00 13 332150.00 
NAGALAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1996869.29 607 28762330.00 83 5193445.00 

90 
 
ODISHA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 7291317.92 900 14770718.00 0 0.00 
PUNJAB 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1996869.29 0 0.00 0 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 1 174580.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 6914013.86 316 6570500.00 70 9154914.00 
SIKKIM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 998434.65 13 5820430.00 0 0.00 
TAMIL NADU 11 1924265.00 5 325000.00 0 0.00 8951794.53 4531 79655472.00 46 10447685.00 
TRIPURA 0 0.00 1 75000.00 0 0.00 1110934.65 25 10479072.00 16 1173761.00 
UTTAR PRADESH 0 0.00 5 375000.00 0 0.00 6737024.55 573 25160201.00 0 0.00 
WEST BENGAL 0 0.00 17 1175000.00 35 549044.00 10759473.57 2474 5440603.00 286 3443362.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 499217.32 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 5 6862537.00 0 0.00 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 9 600000.00 0 0.00 600000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 249608.66 0 0.00 0 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 748825.98 0 0.00 0 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1248043.31 0 0.00 0 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 748825.98 0 0.00 0 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 0 0.00 1 25000.00 0 0.00 1273043.31 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TELANGANA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2779584.28 0 0.00 0 0.00 
TOTAL 35 9573845.00 50 3363750.00 35 549044.00 128037256.02 15785 441541730.00 1438 60211065.00 

91 
 
(Amount in Rs) 
Name of the State/ UT 
Increasing Accommodation Modernization Seminar Mobile library 
Total Matching 
Central 
No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount No. Lib. Amount Expenditure 
ANDHRA PRADESH 0 0.00 8 602750.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 602750.00 301375.00 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 3 7500000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 14093065.00 12683758.50 
ASSAM 1 2499500.00 20 10995917.00 2 700000.00 0 0.00 40989879.00 36890891.10 
BIHAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
GUJARAT 6 2910653.00 88 13078162.00 0 0.00 1 50000.00 55518862.00 27759431.00 
GOA 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 200000.00 0 0.00 3958696.00 2375217.60 
HARYANA 0 0.00 5 1062247.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2241262.00 1344757.20 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 2 245878.00 0 0.00 5123926.00 3074355.60 
JAMMU &KASHMIR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 54386551.00 32631930.60 
KARNATAKA 0 0.00 0 0.00 12 2399958.00 0 0.00 108829397.00 54414698.50 
KERALA 11 4873286.00 4 1490328.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 6625869.00 3312934.50 
MADHYA PRADESH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
MAHARASHTRA 14 6957967.00 0 0.00 1 659832.00 0 0.00 32519430.00 16259715.00 
MANIPUR 3 7500000.00 2 476029.00 2 1500000.00 0 0.00 22331828.00 20098645.20 
MEGHALAYA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1720487.00 1548438.30 
MIZORAM 14 4400000.00 0 0.00 1 220000.00 0 0.00 10198270.00 9178443.00 
NAGALAND 23 10900000.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 44855775.00 40370197.50 
ODISHA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 14770718.00 8862430.80 

92 
 
PUNJAB 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
RAJASTHAN 12 17335850.00 51 1029145.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 34090409.00 20454245.40 
SIKKIM 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5820430.00 5238387.00 
TAMIL NADU 0 0.00 32 8473344.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 98576501.00 49288250.50 
TRIPURA 4 3757852.00 1 299598.00 2 214000.00 0 0.00 15924283.00 14331854.70 
UTTAR PRADESH 0 0.00 5 4432433.00 3 300000.00 0 0.00 29892634.00 17935580.40 
WEST BENGAL 0 0.00 909 47535163.00 45 5800000.00 0 0.00 62219128.00 31109564.00 
ANDAMAN & NICCOBAR 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CHANDIGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 6862537.00 4117522.20 
DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
DELHI 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
LAKSHADWEEP 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
PONDICHERRY 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CHHATTISGARH 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
JHARKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
UTTARAKHAND 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
TELANGANA 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00  0.00 
TOTAL 91 68635108.00 1125 89475116.00 71 12239668.00 1 50000.00 672152687.00 413582623.60 
 

93 
 
Annexure-III 
National Mission on Libraries (NML) under its NML Model Library scheme provides financial 
assistance to one (1) State Central Library and one (1) District Library in each state/UT as 
recommended by the respective state/UT Library Authority. Six (6) librari es under the Ministry 
of Culture are also eligible for assistance under this scheme. 
NML Model Library Scheme has four (4) subcomponents as mentioned below: 
Subcomponent 
Maximum admissible amount in lakh 
State Central 
Library District Library MoC Library 
Up gradation of Infrastructure 100 50 500 
Up gradation of Technology 
and Modernization Services 
100 30 200 
Creation of Facilities for 
Specially abled groups 
20 5 20 
Procurement of reading 
resources and Advocacy and 
Outreach programmes 
3 2 4.20 
 
Total 223 87 724.20 
 
Statement of total amount of assistance during 2017 -18, 2018-19 and 2019 -20 on the basis of 
the proposals and claims received from the State/U.T. Library Authorities under NML Model 
Library Scheme: 
Sl. 
No. State Name of the Library Amount Released in Lakh 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1 West Bengal   West Bengal State Central Library,  
West Bengal   40.80 8.66  
2 West Bengal   North Bengal State Library, 
Coochbehar, West Bengal   23.45   
3 Karnataka State Central Library, Bangalore, 
Karnataka 36.49   
4 Karnataka District Central Library, Shimoga, 
Karnataka 45.76 17.00  
5 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
State Central Library, Itanagar, 
Arunachal Pradesh 67.79   
6 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
District Library, Pasighat, 
Arunachal Pradesh 34.02   
7 Tripura Unakoti District Library, Tripura 4.45  7.60 
8 Mizoram State Central Library, Aizawal, 
Mizoram 8.12 16.38  
9 Assam District Library, Jorhat, Assam 21.09 5.70  

94 
 
10 Assam District Library, Guwahati, Assam 34.20   
11 Telangana State Central Library, Hyderabad, 
Telangana     10.92 22.00 6.67 
12 Telangana District Central Library, 
Mahabubnagar, Telangana  16.50 17.00 
13 Rajasthan Dr. Radhakrishnan Rajya Kendriya 
Pustakalaya, Jaipur, Rajasthan 30.98   
14 Rajasthan Rajakiya Sarbajanik Mandal 
Pustakalaya, Kota, Rajasthan 16.50 16.50 18.27 
15 Goa Krishnadas Shama State Central 
Library, Panaji, Goa 1.49  12.14 
16 Goa Dr. Francisco Luis Gomes District 
Library, Navelin, Goa 3.38   
17 Tamil Nadu District Library, Vellore, Tamil 
Nadu 53.51 6.02 14.28 
18 Tamil Nadu District Library, Tiruchirappalli, 
Tamil Nadu 25.97 36.81 0.20 
19 Nagaland State Central Library, Kohima, 
Nagaland 85.58 89.90  
20 Nagaland District Library, Dimapur, 
Nagaland 38.18 31.57  
21 Chhattisgarh District Library, Raigarh 13.64   
22 Pondicherry Romain Rolland Library, State 
Central Library, Puducherry 33.00 25.41 63.88 
23 Pondicherry Dr. S. R. Ranganathan 
Government Public Library, 
District Library, Karaikal 
  28.03 
24 Kerala State Central Library, 
Thiruvananthapuram 11.95 3.44 13.15 
25 Maharashtra District Library, Nandurbar, 
Maharashtra 13.36 2.39  
26 Maharashtra Govt. Divisional Library, 
Aurangabad   26.78 
27 Madhya Pradesh Govt. District Library, Khandwa  33.00  
28 Madhya Pradesh Govt. Ahilya Library, Indore    16.50 
  Total 654.62 331.28 224.50 
Note: 1) Release of payment depends on submission of certified claims and other requisite 
documents from the respective State / UT Library Authority. 
2) Concern library directly controls the implementation and execution of work approved under 
NML Model Library Scheme. 
 
 
 
 

95  
Annexure-IV -A 
 
 
Draft Para-wise Reply to Chapter III. of Report No. 6 of 2020 on Modernization of Indian Museum, Kolkata 
 
Para 
No. CAG Observation Reply of Indian Museum 
3.1 Work awarded on nomination  
basis without any conservation 
plan or preparation of DPR 
As per the provision of GFR 126(2) (GFR 2005) , clarification in OM No 15(1) 2010-EII(A ) dated 3rd April 2013 
of Ministry of Finance and DO letter No O-17034/7/2011-PS dated 25 August 2011 from the Secretary, Ministry 
of Urban Development addressed to the Secretary, Ministry  of Culture introducing the National Buildings 
Construction Corporation Limited,(NBCC) a premier construction Central Public sector Undertaking, under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Urban Development, the maintenance works of Indian Museum  was 
awarded to NBCC as Implementing Agency. It may be noted that the work was awarded on Nomination Basis as 
per the provisions of GRF 2005. Detailed reply has been further elaborated at Para 3.1.4.2 (A) and (B). 
Further, the contention that the work was carried out  without any conservation plan or  preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and proper planning is also not correct since a condition report titled “Preliminary Report 
on Investigations of Indian Museum, Kolkata” was  submitted by NBCC Ltd. Kolkata which was prepared by 
Department of Construction Engineering, Jadavpur University.  It is also appropriate to mention the DPR was 
placed before to Board of Trustees, Indian Museum on 14.06.2012 by NBCC and the same was also presented 
before the SFC by NBCC in June 2013 based on which the proposal for modernization of Indian  Museum was 
approved. 
3.1.1 Background and Overview of 
modernization 
No comments 
3.1.2 Audit Objective Scope and 
Methodology 
No comments 
3.1.3 Production of records The Audit Team from the Director General of Audit, Indian Audit and Accounts Department as  per their letter 
OA-I/ Intimation/2015-16/483 dated 10.03.2016 (Annexure C) started the 
Feasibility study for  Thematic Audit on “Modernization of Indian Museum Kolkata” during the period  
15.03.2016 to 08.04.2016. As per the Audit requisition Indian Museum has furnished all such files (Nine items) to 
Audit Team on 17.03.2016 for verification and the files were duly  received by them. The Audit team examined 
the files and recorded their observations in their  report to their Authority for obtaining approval for final 
Thematic Audit programme on “Modernization of Indian Museum Kolkata”. 
The 2 nd phase of Audit started from April 2018. At that time all such files which were in the  custody of 

96  
Director’s Secretariat, and as per the instruction of the then Director were placed at the disposal of one Deputy 
Keeper who was responsible for submission to the audit party. At  the time of present Director -in-charge such 
files were again returned to Director’s Secretariat.  However, some part files are still found missing. The 
concerned staff of the Director’s Secretariat had brought the matter to the knowledge of Director -in-charge on 
03.10.2019 which was referred to OSD (Administration) for necessary enquiry on this matter. 
The complaint filed by the Security Officer with the New Market Police Station was on 24.07.2018 pertaining to 
loss of majority of the requisitioned documents/files. 
However, it is observed on inspection of the Director’s Secretariat that files related to minutes  of The Board of 
Trustees, Finance Committee, files relating to  Project Implementation and  Monitoring Committee and files 
related to Core Committee meetings are all available with Director’s Secretariat. 
3.1.4.1 Reduction of Scope and its 
Impact 
Para wise comments are as follows: 
(A) Storage Reserve Artifacts In the Pre & Proto history hall for storage of artefacts, for storage of paintings in the Arts section and for 
preservation of artefacts in the Anthropology gallery, NBCC has provided the storage  equipment as per the 
requirement desired by Indian Museum authorities. NBCC vide their  letter NBCC/Engg.(IIM)/Kol/2019/433 
dated 17.05.2019 conveyed that the reserve storage at  the basement was not included in the approved scope of 
work. Further, the Project Management Committee regarding Modernization, Renovation and Restoration of 
Indian Museum, Kolkata in its meeting dated 2nd June 2015 resolved that the in Phase-II modernization work 
following works may be considered (a) Storage, (b) Dehumidification, (c) Air Conditioning, (d) Accessories, (e) 
Periphery Beautification. 
(B) Fire Detection, Fire Fighting and 
Preservation System 
NBCC mentioned that it was discussed in the meeting of the Technical Committee that fire  fighting system with 
water hydrant is not feasible and desired in the Museum. Therefore, fir e extinguishers were provided by the 
museum. NBCC has not executed this work, hence, not  claimed this expenditure in the Project Completion cost. 
NBCC submitted scheme and estimate for the fire detection system. Due to non approval of the scheme NBCC 
could not implemented the item in the project. 
(C) Installation of Lift The representative of NBCC in  the meeting of  the Project Implementation & Monitoring committee informed 
that the proposed site for installation of lift was not suitable for installation. They proposed that new lift may be 
installed in the space available between  Botanical Survey of India buildings facing Sudder street. The feasibility 
for installation of lift on  that site was examined. It was decided that NBCC would submit a proposal to th e 
Director, Indian Museum for installation of the lift at the new site for which requisite approval would be 
conveyed. 
Indian Museum in their letter IM(T)/05/7/213 dated 30.05.2016 and subsequent reminder  IM(T)/PM/36/377 
dated 11.07.2016 requested to submit a Technical report for non feasibility of marble  staircase as a site for the 

97  
lift. But the reply from NBCC has not yet been received. 
(D) Heating Ventilation and Air  
Conditioning (HVAC) System 
The Project Management Committee regarding Modernization, Renovation and Restoration of Indian Museum, 
Kolkata in its meeting dated 2nd June 2015 resolved that the following areas of work identified for Phase-II work : 
(a) Storage, (b) Dehumidification, (c) Air Conditioning, (d) Accessories, (e) Periphery Beautification.- 
3.1.4.2 Planning of work executed  
(A) Adequacy of Policy, Guidelines Before commencement of work in April 2012 “Preliminary Report on Investigations of Indian  Museum, 
Kolkata” was submitted by NBCC Ltd. Kolkata which was prepared by Department of Construction Engineering, 
Jadavpur University. The scope of the report was (i) assessment of  the present condition of the building, (ii) To 
identify the major rehabilitation /restoration work for extending the life of the old structure and (iii) To prepare a 
comprehensive report. Further, the Development Committee in its meeting held on 23.04.2012 formed a Core 
Committee to look into the story/concept and design and display. The Ministry of Culture vide F.No.17 - 3/2008-
M.II dt. 22.1.2014 formed a Technical Committee under the Chairmanship of DG, NCSM Kolkata to assess the 
work being executed in respect of renovation, up gradation and modernization of Indian Museum in order to 
ensure that the work is as per specification and design given by the consultant. The Standing Finance Committee 
of MoC in their meeting dated 26.6.2013 for regular monitoring of the project of up-gradation of Indian Museum 
assigned the work to a Project  Implementation and Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary (Museum), MOC. The above two committees have also reviewed the progress of the work. 
(B) Preparation of Concept Plan No comment 
(C ) Award of work to NBCC The Condition Assessment Survey (CAS) of the Indian Museum building was to be completed by CPWD by 
31.5.2011. The Development Committee in their meeting dt. 1.7.2011 observed  that out of the 9 elements in 
CAS. CPWD has completed two elements only. It was decided that since CPWD has not completed the job within 
the timeframe, the Bengal Engineering Science University (BESU), Shibpur would be requested to complete the 
work by July 2011. Subsequently, BESU could not complete it within the time limit, and the work was 
completed by Jadavpur University. 
A copy of the DO letter No O -17034/7/2011-PS dated 25 August 2011 from the Secretary,  Ministry of Urban 
Development addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Culture (Annexure B)  introducing the National Buildings 
Construction Corporation Limited, as a premier construction Central Public Sector Undertaking, under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Urban  Development was forwarded to Indian Museum vide letter No 
F21-163-/2011/CDN dated 16 TH September 2011. Since NBCC has all the recourses and expertise to execute 
projects of any  value, as an implementing agency and has on its role highly qualified engineers, who have to  
their credit, successful completion of large number of projects in India the organisation was considered  
competent to take up the works of Indian Museum. 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their OM  No 15(1)/2010-EII(a) dated 3.04.2013 (Annexure 
A) has clarified that the Rule 126(4) of Chapter 5 of General Financial Rule 2005 provides that “ the Ministry or 
Department may at its discretion, assign repair works estimated to cost above Rs.30 lakhs and original works of 

98  
any value  to any Public Works  organisation such as Central Public Works Department(CPWD), State Public 
works Divisions , other central Government organizations authorized to carry out civil or electrical works such as 
Military Engineering Service(MES), Border Roads Organization(BRO) etc. public Sector Undertaking set up by 
the Central or State Government to carry out civil and electrical works.  Apart from the above said organizations 
any other Central or State Government organizations/ Public Sector Under taking to be assigned such works are 
required to be notified by the Ministry of Urban Development. It may be mentioned that NBCC being a public 
sector organization under the Govt. of India is authorized to take such work. Repair and renovation work of the 
new Library at FPS building Indian Museum Kolkata was assigned to NBCC, Kolkata. Simultaneously, the other 
maintenance work was being done by CPWD. 
CPWD was not able to maintain their  time schedule, to complete the maintenance work of  Indian Museum 
assigned to them. A proposal regarding complete repair and renovation of  Indian Museum was received from 
NBCC in their letter GGM/RBG (East)/Indian Museum/2011/321 dt. 10.5.2011. The Chairman of the Board of 
Trustees was pleased to accord in-principal approval of the NBCC’s proposal. The Development Committee in 
their meeting dt. 1.7.2011 discussed the NBCC’s proposal and resolved to assign the complete maintenance work of 
Indian Museum to NBCC. 
The BoT meeting held on 22.01.2011 decided to induct NBCC in place of CPWD. Standing  Finance Committee 
of the Ministry of Culture in their meeting held on 26.06.2013 noted that  Board of Trustees of Indian Museum 
had approved detailed Projec t Report given by NBCC and  Agreement with NBCC has been signed by Indian 
Museum to carry out various works after the approval of BOT, Indian Museum and approved the project at a total 
cost of Rs. 99.76 crore. 
(D) MOU with NBCC The MOU to be entered with NBCC was approved by the Ministry of Culture 
(E) Detailed Project Report NBCC in their letter Kol/ZO/IM/2016/164 dated 29.04.2016 has confirmed that the DPR was prepared by NBCC 
and placed before the Board of Trustees, Indian Museum.  One copy of the  DPR is also available with Indian 
Museum. However, the DPR does not have detailed cost estimate incorporated which was subsequently submitted 
by NBCC. The said DPR also does not have detailed architectural, structural and flow chart drawings, detailed 
specifications of work, detailed electrical drawings etc. which were subsequently submitted to Indian Museum at 
the time of commencement of tendering by NBCC for each work. 
3.1.4.3 Execution of Works  
(A) Preparation of estimate 
(i) Deviations 
(ii) Nonscheduled Items 
(i) Deviations: - NBCC’s reply is awaited. Will be sent as soon as NBCC submits the same to Indian Museum. 
 
(ii) Non schedule items:-The statements of “Rate Analysis for Non-Schedule items (Civil) relating to the 
Budgetary Estimates for the works (1) Creation of toilets and replacement of lift and (2)  Repairing and 
Restoration of the External Façade of the Main Building of Indian Museum  Kolkata, submitted by NBCC to the 
Indian Audit and Accounts Department have been examined by them. The Indian Audit and Accounts 
Department in their letter PAGS: IM:2011 - 12:144 dt. 23.2.2012 (Annexure-E) has stated that the norms 

99  
followed by NBCC for fixing the rates of non-scheduled items are in conformity with the norms followed by 
CPWD. 
(B) Payment to Sub Contractors 
(i) Adoption of BoQ rates 
(ii) Application of DSR rates 
Most of the posts in Group A in Indian Museum are vacant for long time. There is no officer  who has the 
expertise to engage contractors for civil and electrical works and to examine the  bills received from them. 
Accordingly civil or electrical woks of the Indian Museum have been  executed through  CPWD or  approved 
public Sector Undertaking like NBCC. 
These agencies having expertise and trained personnel are responsible for examination of all  bills received from 
the contractors engaged by them for the works assigned to them by Indian Museum. 
In the instant case, NBCC was appointed as implementing agency. Work was executed by vendors  
appointed by NBCC. 
(C ) Safeguarding of Artifacts During execution of the work most of the artifacts were removed by the Museum Authority through their own 
arrangement. Huge number of artifacts had to be handled during renovation work, in spite of best effort and due 
care in one case minor damage of detachment of parts could not be avoided. 
3.1.4.4 Renovation of Galleries  
(A) Pedestals The design of the pedestal was approved by the Core Committee based on extensive discussion 
considering the weight of the artefacts, their safety, ease of display and aesthetics 
(B) Showcases NBCC in their letter Kol/ZO/IM/2017 dated 18.12.2017 informed that NBCC was directed to  provide the glass 
cover in such a way that it is not easily open able so as to avoid pilferage/ interference of the visitors, particularly 
to avoid physical contact of the visitors to the artifacts. Maintenance of those showcase required to be done by 
expert team. 
(C ) Lighting of Showcases and 
Galleries 
Lighting of showcases were done based on the generic requirement of proper illumination of 
objects with the intention that objects shall be from time to time be replaced with objects in the reserve. 
(D) Installation of Track Mounted 
LED Projector Light 
Track Mounted LED projector lights were installed as per the requirement intimated by Indian Museum to NBCC. 
These fixtures are mounted on tracks and can be shifted to any location within the track as per requirement. Hence 
there is lot of flexibility in deciding the level of illumination required for an exhibition  and can be used  
suitably. 
(E) Surveillance System and  Power 
Back UP 
445 CCTVs were installed at the initial stage. The system has in place provision to add additional cameras as per 
requirement. 
(F) Artifacts displayed without 
Labels/ description 
No comments. 
3.1.4.5 Monitoring and Co-ordination 
i. Non submission of records 
regarding Core Committee 
The Development committee in its meeting held on 23.04.2012 formed a Core Committee to  look into this 
story/concept and design and display. During the period (2.5.2013 to 22.12.2013) the Core Committee had 31 

100  
ii. PIMC and TC  constituted 
towards the fag  end of the 
project 
meetings. 
The Ministry of Culture F.No.17 -3/2008-M.II dt. 22.1.2014 formed a Technical Committee  under the 
Chairmanship of DG, NCSM Kolkata to assess the work being executed in respect of renovation, upgradation and 
modernization of Indian Museum in order to ensure that the work is as per specification and design given by the 
consultant. 
The Standing Finance Committee of MoC in their meeting dt. 26.6.2013 for regular monitoring of the project of 
upgradation of Indian Museum assigned the work to a Project Implementation and Monitoring Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Museum), MOC.  
The above two committees have also reviewed the progress of the work. Since the PIMC was constituted before 
commencement of major modernization work there was no delay in the constitution of this committee. 
3.1.4.6 Handing over of the project by 
NBCC 
NBCC vide their letter No NBCC/Engg.(IM)/Kol/2019 /433 dated 17.05.2019 stated that all the works for 
renovation and modernization of Indian Museum at Kolkata has been executed  satisfactorily conforming to 
relevant specifications/approved drawings and as per administrative and financial sanction accorded by the 
Ministry of Culture, GOI. All the works under approved and defined scope of works has been completed.” Some 
of the Completion certificates and handing over notes:- 
Subject Reference No and date 
1. Completion Certificate for Renovation of 
External Façade of Indian Museum 
KOL/ZO/TC/2014/270 dated 28.05.2014 
2. Completion Certificate for  creation for 
toilets and replacement of lift of Indian Museum 
KOL/ZO/TC/2014/271 dated 28.05.2014 
certifying completion of the toilet. 
3. Handing over of Renovated Pre History Gallery 
with newly display showcase and keys 
No Nil dated 16.07.2015 
4. Handing over of Renovated South East 
Asian Gallery 
No Nil dated 07.07.2015 
5. Handing over of Renovated Anthropology 
Gallery with newly display showcase and keys 
No- Nil ,dated 16.04.2015 
6. Handing over of Renovated North East 
Indian and Mask Gallery 
No –Nil, dated 04.03.2015 
7.Handing over of Renovated Security 
Control Room 
No –Nil, dated 16.04.2015 
8. Handing over of Renovated Invertebrate 
Fossil Gallery 
No –Nil, dated 30.03.2015 

101  
9. Handing over the key of reserved part in 
paint gallery and souvenir Shop 
URCPL/ZO/IM/14-15/031 DATED 8TH August 
2014 
10. Handing over of Shivalik and Rock and 
Minerals gallery 
No –Nil, dated 10.03.2015 
 
3.1.4.7 Maintenance of assets Post 
Modernization 
Electric and Civil maintenance works of Indian Museum Building have been assigned to the CPWD 
as deposit work. 
3.1.4.8 Unutilized Grants of MoC Unutilized Grants will be returned to MoC after completion of the reconciliation and Final settlement of 
accounts with NBCC 
3.1.4.9 Increase in footfall Post 
Modernization 
No comments 
3.1.5 Conclusions:- Reply is at Para 3.1.3.to 3.1.4 
 Recommendations:- Noted for future guidance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102  
Annexure- IV-B 
 
 
DRAFT BACKGROUND NOTE 
 
In accordance with a decision of the Board of Trustees (BoT) in its meeting held on 16.07.2008,  
the Indian Museum Bicentenary Vision, Concept and Development Committee was set up with  
Professor Barun De as Chairman for the architectural restoration and upgradation of the interior  
and the precincts of the Indian Museum. 
Renowned museum experts from various fields were included in the committee. The first meeting 
of the above committee was held on 7th August, 2008. In the above meeting it was resolved that a 
nodal agency will be selected for preparation of a Concept Plan for Vision 2014 for the Indian  
Museum. An Expression of Interest was thereafter published in some leading dailies in 
September, 2008 inviting architects registered with the Council of Architecture with experience 
of work in similar  large projects and an interest in the development of the Conservation Master 
Plan, condition  assessment, restoration of the historic interior space and exterior and related 
upgradation activities of the Indian Museum. 
There were eleven responses and the Committee made a two -stage short listing. The Committee  
in its meeting held on 01.12.2008 after considerable discussion and deliberation on the visual 
and extual presentation, replies by the agencies to their various queries and the financial 
estimates, agreed that M/s Partha Das & Associates in collaboration with Shri Ashis Acharjee & 
Shri Anindya Basu were the most suitable agency for the development of the concept, 
architectural restoration and upgradation of the main museum and its precinct. 
The matter was placed before the BoT meeting held on 28 January, 2009. The Board felt that in  
the absence of an administrative approval, financial sanction and EFC of the Ministry of Culture, 
Govt of India for the bicentenary celebration of Indian Museum, it was undesirable to issue an  
order for execution of work to the above said agency. Under the circumstances Board of Trustees 
recommended that M/s Partha Das & Associates in collaboration with Shri Ashis Acharjee & Shri 
Anindya Basu should prepare a Detailed Project Report/ Project Estimate to be submitted after due 
approval of the Bicentenary Development Committee and Board of Trustee, to the Ministry of  
Culture and even Planning Commission for the necessary approval, financial sanction and EFC.  
As per the authorization of the Board of Trustees the Finance Committee in its meeting held on  
12.03.2009 decided that M/s DBA Partners (Partha Das, Anindya Basu and Ashi sh Acharjee) be 
awarded the work of preparation of Vision Concept and rough Project cost. 
As per initiative of the Board of Trustees, Planning Commission and Secretary, Culture (Govt of  
India) an allocation of about Rs. 20.50 crore was made available in the Budget estimate for 
2009- 2010. 
In a meeting with the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on 5th March, 2009 it was suggested that BoT 
may consider to appoint an agency, from amongst Govt/ Public Sector organization like CPWD, 
Engineers India Ltd, National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), Civil Construction  
Wing of DRDO, National Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC), National Project 
Construction Corporation (NPCC) etc. as implementing agency for this purpose. 
Comprehensive structural and constructional feasibility of the concept plan submitted by M/s DBA 

103  
Partners was forwarded to the Additional Director General, CPWD, Eastern Region vide letter no. 
520(2009-10)/T-1048 dt. 31.12.2009 with the request to furnish the feasibility of the concept plan. 
In the Development Committee meeting held on 24.05.2010, the DBA Partners made a 
presentation of the proposed concept plan, at an estimated cost of Rs. 91.60 crore which was also 
accepted by the Board of Trustees. 
Indian Museum approached CPWD for 
(a) the structural feasibility which has been given subject to structural strengthening of the 
existing structure wherever required, 
(b) the feasibility of the proposed concept from the angle of development control and 
applicable municipal bye-laws, 
(c) the feasibility of the exhibition concept proposal from the heritage point of view. 
In a meeting held on 04.04.2011 it was resolved that Indian Museum should provide a status report 
including any CPWD report on the building so that next step to be taken by the Development  
committee may be decided. 
In a meeting held in 20.04.2011 it was noted that the status report furnished by the CPWD was not 
very exhaustive. The CPWD had provided the drawings in digital format comprising layout of 
the campus, floor plans, elevations of the museum building along with the topographical map of 
the campus and the sewerage system of the campus. The other provisions such as electrical 
layout, rain water disposal etc., were yet to be completed. The Condition Assessment Survey 
(CAS) of  the India n Museum building was to be completed by CPWD by 31.5.2011. The 
Development Committee in their meeting dated 1.7.2011 observed that out of the 9 elements in 
CAS, CPWD completed only two elements. As CPWD had done the condition assessment report 
partially, it was suggested that the balance work may be completed through  any Govt. 
engineering college. 
Accordingly, it was decided that since CPWD has not completed the job within the timeframe, the 
Bengal Engineering Science University (BESU), Shibpur would be requested to complete the work 
by July 2011. Subsequently, BESU also could not complete it within the time limit and the work  
was finally completed by Jadavpur University. 
DO letter No O-17034/7/2011-PS dated 25th August 2011 from the Secretary, Ministry of Urban  
Development addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Culture introduced the National Buildings  
Construction Corporation Limited, as a premier construction Central Public Sector Undertaking, 
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Urban Development. This letter was forwarded 
to Indian Museum vide letter No F21 -163-/2011/CDN dated 16 th September 2011. Since NBCC  
has all the resources and expertise to execute projects of any value, as an implementing agency 
and has on its role highly qualified engineers, who have to their credit, successful completion of  
large number of projects in India the organization was considered competent to take up the works 
of Indian Museum. 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their OM No. 15(1)/2010-EII(a) dated 
3.04.2013 had clarified that the Rule 126(4) of Chapter 5 of General Financial Rule 2005 provides 
that the Ministry or Department may at its discretion, assign repair works estimated to cost above 
Rs.30 lakhs and original works of any value to any public works organisation such as Central  

104  
Public Works Department(CPWD), State Public  Works Divisions,  other central  government 
organizations authorized to carry out civil or electrical works such a s Military Engineering  
Service(MES), Border Roads Organization(BRO) etc. Public Sector Undertaking set up by the  
Central or State Government to carry out civil and electrical works. Apart from the above said  
organizations any other Central or State Government organizations/ Public Sector Undertaking 
to be assigned such works are required to be notified by the Ministry of Urban Development. 
Under the circumstances NBCC being a public sector organization under the Govt. of India was 
authorized to take-up such work. 
Based on above, repair and renovation work of the new Library at FPS building Indian Museum  
Kolkata was assigned to NBCC, Kolkata. Simultaneously, the other maintenance work was 
being done by CPWD. It was observed that CPWD was not being able  to maintain their time 
schedule, to complete the maintenance work of Indian Museum assigned to them. A proposal 
regarding complete repair and renovation of Indian Museum was received from NBCC in their 
letter GGM/RBG (East)/Indian Museum/2011/321 dt. 10.5.2011. The Chairman of the Board of 
Trustees was pleased to accord in-principal approval of the NBCC’s proposal. The Development  
Committee in their meeting dt. 1.7.2011 discussed the NBCC’s proposal and resolved to assign  
the complete maintenance work of Indian Museum to NBCC. 
Before commencement of work in April 2012 “Preliminary Report on Investigations of Indian  
Museum, Kolkata” was submitted by NBCC Ltd. Kolkata which was prepared by Department of  
Construction Engineering, Jadavpur University. The scope of the report was 
(i) assessment of the present condition of the building, 
 
(ii) To identify the major rehabilitation /restoration work for extending the life of the old 
structure and 
(iii) To prepare a comprehensive report. Further, The Development Committee in its meeting 
held on 23.04.2012 formed a Core  Committee to look  into the story/concept and design and 
display. 
The Development committee in its meeting held on 23.04.2012 formed a Core Committee to look 
into this story/concept and design and display. During the period 2.5.2013 to 22.12.2013 the Core 
Committee had 31 meetings to finalize and give directions for completion of the modernization  
work before the bicentenary celebrations. 
Standing Finance Committee of the Ministry of Culture in their meeting held on 26.06.2013 noted 
that Board of Trustees of Indian Museum had approved detailed Project Report given by NBCC  
and Agreement with NBCC has been signed by Indian Museum to carry out various works after  
the approval of BOT, Indian Museum and accordingly approve d the Modernisation Project at a  
total cost of Rs. 99.76 crore. 
The Standing Finance Committee of MoC also in their meeting on 26.6.2013 constituted a Project 
Implementation and Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Museum), 
MOC for regular monitoring of the project of up-gradation of Indian Museum. 
Further, the Ministry of Culture vide F.No.17 -3/2008-M.II dated 22.1.2014 formed a Technical  
Committee under the Chairmanship of DG, NCSM Kolkata to assess the work being executed in  
respect of renovation, up-gradation and modernization of Indian Museum in order to ensure that  

105  
the work is as per specification and design given by the consultant. 
The above two committees have also reviewed the progress of the work from time to time. 
The Audit Team from the Director General of Audit, Indian Audit and Accounts Department as  
per their letter OA -I/ Intimation/2015-16/483 dated 10.03.2016 started the Feasibility study for  
Thematic Audit on “Modernization of Indian Museum Kolkata” during the per iod 15.03.2016 to 
08.04.2016. As per the Audit requisition Indian Museum has furnished all such files (Nine items) 
to Audit Team on 17.03.2016 for verification and the files were duly received by them (Annexure- 
D) The Audit team examined the files and recorded their observations in their report to their  
Authority for obtaining approval for final Thematic Audit  programme on “ Modernization of  
Indian Museum Kolkata”. 
The 2 nd phase of Audit started from April 2018. At that time all such files which were in  the 
custody of Director’s Secretariat, and as per the instruction of the then Director were placed at the 
disposal of one Deputy Keeper who was responsible for submission to the audit party. At the time 
of present Director -in-charge such files were again returned to Director’s Secretariat.  However, 
some part files are still found missing. The concerned staff of the Director’s Secretariat had brought 
the matter to the knowledge of Director -in-charge on 03.10.2019 which was referred to OSD  
(Administration) for necessary enquiry on this matter. 
The Audit file with all queries was misplaced and this to establish that one complaint was filed by 
the Security Officer with the New Market Police Station was on 24.07.2018 pertaining to loss of  
majority of the requisitioned documents/files. 
Audit files, the Minutes files, files regarding correspondence with the Ministry and Bills from the 
agency were found missing. The Audit file and the vouches regarding payment of advances to  
NBCC and all the bills submitted by NBCC , which  were examined by the Audit and they have  
recorded their comments on it was misplaced which resulted in an adverse audit report. Audit 
file could be reconstituted any time after collecting the Audit queries from the Audit Team. But 
that has not been done. Bills received from NBCC were to be processed for adjustment of 
advance payments made to NBCC. But no effort was made by Indian Museum in this regard. To 
complete the pending work like installation of Lift no positive step was also taken. 
All copies of the missing Bills have recently been collected from NBCC and after proper scrutiny 
the advances pending against NBCC will be adjusted shortly by Indian Museum. 
 
Engineers India Ltd, National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), Civil Construction 
Wing of DRDO, National Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC), National Project 
Construction Corporation (NPCC) etc. as implementing agency for this purpose. 
Comprehensive structural and constructional feasibility of the concept plan submitted by M/s DBA 
Partners was forwarded to the Additional Director General, CPWD, Eastern Region vide letter no. 
520(2009-10)/T-1048 dt. 31.12.2009 with the request to furnish the feasibility of the concept plan. 
In the Development Committee meeting held on 24.05.2010, the DBA Partners made a 
presentation of the proposed concept plan, at an estimated cost of Rs. 91.60 crore which was also 
accepted by the Board of Trustees. 
Indian Museum approached CPWD for 
(d) the structural feasibility which has been given subject to structural strengthening of the 

106  
existing structure wherever required, 
(e) the feasibility of the proposed concept from the angle of development control and 
applicable municipal bye-laws, 
(f) the feasibility of the exhibition concept proposal from the heritage point of view. 
In a meeting held on 04.04.2011 it was resolved that Indian Museum should provide a status report 
including any CPWD report on the building so that next step to be taken by the Development  
committee may be decided. 
In a meeting held in 20.04.2011 it was noted that the status report furnished by the CPWD was not 
very exhaustive. The CPWD had provided the drawings in digital format comprising layout of 
the campus, floor plans, elevations of the museum building along with the topographical map of 
the campus and the sewerage system of the campus. The other provisions such as electrical 
layout, rain water disposal etc., were yet to be completed. The Condition Assessment Survey 
(CAS) of  the Indian Museum building was to be complet ed by CPWD by 31.5.2011. The 
Development Committee in their meeting dated 1.7.2011 observed that out of the 9 elements in 
CAS, CPWD completed only two elements. As CPWD had done the condition assessment report 
partially, it  was suggested that the balance work may be completed through  any Govt. 
engineering college. 
Accordingly, it was decided that since CPWD has not completed the job within the timeframe, the 
Bengal Engineering Science University (BESU), Shibpur would be requested to complete the work 
by July 2011. Subsequently, BESU also could not complete it within the time limit and the work  
was finally completed by Jadavpur University. 
DO letter No O-17034/7/2011-PS dated 25th August 2011 from the Secretary, Ministry of Urban  
Development addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Culture introduced the National Buildings  
Construction Corporation Limited, as a premier construction Central Public Sector Undertaking, 
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Urban Development. This letter was forwarded 
to Indian Museum vide letter No F21 -163-/2011/CDN dated 16 th September 2011. Since NBCC  
has all the resources and expertise to execute projects of any value, as an implementing agency  
and has on its role highly qualified engineers, who have to th eir credit, successful completion of  
large number of projects in India the organization was considered competent to take up the works 
of Indian Museum. 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their OM No. 15(1)/2010-EII(a) dated 
3.04.2013 had clarified that the Rule 126(4) of Chapter 5 of General Financial Rule 2005 provides 
that the Ministry or Department may at its discretion, assign repair works estimated to cost above 
Rs.30 lakhs and original works of any value to any public works organisat ion such as Central  
Public Works Department(CPWD), State Public  Works Divisions,  other central  government 
organizations authorized to carry out civil or electrical works such as Military Engineering  
Service(MES), Border Roads Organization(BRO) etc. Public Sector Undertaking set up by the  
Central or State Government to carry out civil and electrical works. Apart from the above said  
organizations any other Central or State Government organizations/ Public Sector Undertaking 
to be assigned such works are requi red to be notified by the Ministry of Urban Development. 
Under the circumstances NBCC being a public sector organization under the Govt. of India was 
authorized to take-up such work. 

107  
Based on above, repair and renovation work of the new Library at FPS building Indian Museum 
Kolkata was assigned to NBCC, Kolkata. Simultaneously, the other maintenance work was 
being done by CPWD. It was observed that CPWD was not being able to maintain their time 
schedule, to complete the maintenance work of Indian Museum  assigned to them. A proposal 
regarding complete repair and renovation of Indian Museum was received from NBCC in their 
letter GGM/RBG (East)/Indian Museum/2011/321 dt. 10.5.2011. The Chairman of the Board of 
Trustees was pleased to accord in-principal approval of the NBCC’s proposal. The Development  
Committee in their meeting dt. 1.7.2011 discussed the NBCC’s proposal and resolved to assign  
the complete maintenance work of Indian Museum to NBCC. 
Before commencement of work in April 2012 “Preliminary Rep ort on Investigations of Indian  
Museum, Kolkata” was submitted by NBCC Ltd. Kolkata which was prepared by Department of  
Construction Engineering, Jadavpur University. The scope of the report was 
(iv) assessment of the present condition of the building, 
 
(v) To identify the major rehabilitation /restoration work for extending the life of the old 
structure and 
(vi) To prepare a comprehensive report. Further, The Development Committee in its meeting 
held on 23.04.2012 formed a Core  Committee to look  into the story/concept and design and 
display. 
The Development committee in its meeting held on 23.04.2012 formed a Core Committee to look 
into this story/concept and design and display. During the period 2.5.2013 to 22.12.2013 the Core 
Committee had 31 meetings to finalize and give directions for completion of the modernization  
work before the bicentenary celebrations. 
Standing Finance Committee of the Ministry of Culture in their meeting held on 26.06.2013 noted 
that Board of Trustees of Indian Museum had approved detailed Proj ect Report given by NBCC  
and Agreement with NBCC has been signed by Indian Museum to carry out various works after  
the approval of BOT, Indian Museum and accordingly approved the Modernisation Project at a  
total cost of Rs. 99.76 crore. 
The Standing Finance Committee of MoC also in their meeting on 26.6.2013 constituted a Project 
Implementation and Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Museum), 
MOC for regular monitoring of the project of up-gradation of Indian Museum. 
Further, the Ministry of Culture vide F.No.17 -3/2008-M.II dated 22.1.2014 formed a Technical  
Committee under the Chairmanship of DG, NCSM Kolkata to assess the work being executed in  
respect of renovation, up-gradation and modernization of Indian Museum in  order to ensure that 
the work is as per specification and design given by the consultant. 
The above two committees have also reviewed the progress of the work from time to time. 
The Audit Team from the Director General of Audit, Indian Audit and Accounts Department as 
per their letter OA -I/ Intimation/2015-16/483 dated 10.03.2016 started the Feasibility study for  
Thematic Audit on “Modernization of Indian Museum Kolkata” during the period 15.03.2016 to  
08.04.2016. As per the Audit requisition Indian Museum has furnished all such files (Nine items) 
to Audit Team on 17.03.2016 for verification and the files were duly received by them (Annexure- 
D) The Audit team examined the files and recorded their observations in their report to their  

108  
Authority for obtaining approval for final Thematic Audit  programme on “ Modernization of  
Indian Museum Kolkata”. 
The 2 nd phase of Audit started from April 2018. At that time all such files which were in the  
custody of Director’s Secretariat, and as per the instruction of the then Director were placed at the 
disposal of one Deputy Keeper who was responsible for submission to the audit party. At the time 
of present Director -in-charge such files were again returned to Director’s Secretariat.  However, 
some part files are still found missing. The concerned staff of the Director’s Secretariat had brought 
the matter to the knowledge of Director -in-charge on 03.10.2019 which was referred to OSD  
(Administration) for necessary enquiry on this matter. 
The Audit file with all queries was misplaced and this to establish that one complaint was filed by 
the Security Officer with the New Market Police Station was on 24.07.2018 pertaining to loss of  
majority of the requisitioned documents/files. 
Audit files, the Minutes files, files regarding correspondence with the Ministry and Bills from the 
agency were found missing. The Audit file and the vouches regarding payment of advances to  
NBCC and all the bills submitted by NBCC , which  were examined by the Audit and they have  
recorded their comments on it was misplaced which resulted in an adverse audit report. Audit 
file could be reconstituted any time after collecting the Audit queries from the Audit Team. But 
that has not been done. Bills received from NBCC were to be processed for adju stment of 
advance payments made to NBCC. But no effort was made by Indian Museum in this regard. To 
complete the pending work like installation of Lift no  positive step was also taken. All copies of 
the missing Bills have recently been collected from NBCC and after proper scrutiny the advances 
pending against NBCC will be adjusted shortly by Indian Museum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

109  
Annexure- IV-C 
Government  of India  
Ministry  of Culture  
FORMAT  OF ATNS  FOR  THE  USE  OF CONCERNED  
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS  
APPENDIX - III  
(Vide  Para  53)  
Format  of Action  Taken  note  (On paragraphs  of C&AG  Report)  
 
I (a)  Ministry  / Department  Ministry  of Culture  
 (b)  Subject/  title  of the  
paragraph  
Modernization  of Indian  Museum  
Kolkata  
 (c)  Paragraph  No.  3.1  
 (d)  Report  No.  and  year  Report  No 6 of 2020  
II  (a)  Date  of receipt  of the  Draft  
Paragraph/Review  in the  
Ministry  
 
 (b)  Date  of Ministry’s  reply   
III   Gist  of paragraph/Review  Indian Museum, Kolkata awarded the 
modernisation work on nomination basis and 
executed the work without any  conservation 
plan or preparation of Detailed Project Report 
and proper planning. Major works pertaining to  
providing modern storage system, fire-fighting, 
fire- detection and prevention and HVAC were 
not taken up  though sanctioned. It also did not 
ensure financial safeguards and failed in 
monitoring of the quality of work in the initial 
phases. Works sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 
83.66 crore were executed for Rs. 105.70 crore, 
with works estimated to cost Rs. 25.76 crore not 
awarded at all. Proper conservation processes 
were also not followed during   renovation   
resulting   in   damage   to   priceless 
artefacts. 
IV  (a)  Do the Ministry agree with the  
facts  and  figures  included in 
the  paragraph?  
 
 (b)  If not, please indicate the 
areas  of disagreement  and  
also  attach  documents  in 
support  
 
V (A)  Main  Audit  conclusions   
 (1)  Deficiency  in the  existing  
system  including  system  of 
internal  control.  
There is no specific guidelines laid down 
criteria  of the MoC for  preservation and  
conservation of the  artifacts.  
 (2)  Failure  to follow  the  
systems  and  procedure  
Indian  Museum  Kolkata  awarded  the  
modernization  work  on nomination  basis  

110  
and  executed  the  work  without  any  
conservation  plan  or preparation  of 
Detailed  Project  report  and  proper  
planning  
 (3)  Failure  of individuals  Not  mentioned  
 (4)  Amount  of loss/
 short  assessment/  
short  levy  
Works sanctioned at a cost of Rs 83.66 
crore were  executed  for  Rs 105. 70 crore,  
with  work  estimated to cost Rs 25.76 
crore were not awarded  at all.  
 (B)  Do the Ministry agree with the  
Audit  Conclusions?  If not,  
please  indicate  specific areas   
of disagreement,  reasons  for  
disagreement  and  also  attach  
copies of relevant documents,  
where  necessary.  
 
VI   Remedial  Actions  Taken   
 (i)  Improvement  in system  and  
procedures  including  internal  
controls.  
The  maintenance  work  of Indian  Museum  buildings  has  been  assigned  to CPWD.  
 (ii)  Recovery  of overpayment  
pointed  out  by audit  
Not  reported  
 (iii)  Recovery  of under  
assessment  short  levy  or other  
dues  
Not  reported  
 (iv)  Write  off  of  amount  of 
losses/ waste expenditure/  
irrecoverable  amount  
Not  reported  
 (v)  Modifications  in the  scheme,  
including  financing  pattern  
Not  recommended  
 (vi)  Review  of similar  cases/  
complete  scheme/  project in 
the  list  of findings of sample  
check  by Audit.  
No such  similar  case  
 (vii)  Audit  Comments/ No 
Comments  
Audit  recommendation  are  noted for  future  guidance  
Joint  Secretary  to the  Government  of India  
 
 
Date:  
Encl:  As per  list  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

111  
 
Annexure- IV-D 
 
 
 
 
 


112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


113  
Annexure- IV-E 
 
 
 
 
  


114  
Annexure- IV-F 
 
 [Quoted text hidden] 
 
 
 
 
****** 
 