 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED 
Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports 
  (Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, 
(P resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports 
 
resented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th  June, 20 22 
the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
327 
REPORT   
Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports  
22 ) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT  
 
Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports 
 
 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 
th  June, 2022 ) 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available  

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
4. REPORT                                1-21 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE  22-29 
6. MINUTES          30-34 
7. ANNEXURES        35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


i  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. * vacant 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat 
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
*Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 4th May, 2022 


ii  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty Seventh Report on ‘Connectivity and Tourist 
Terminal Facilities at Ports’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Senior Officers of the Ministry of Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways, Chairmen of various Ports and Chairman, Railway Board, on the 
subject on 1 st June, 2022. The Committee also heard the views of the Senior Offic ers of 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and the Ministry  of Tourism, on the subject on 1 st 
June, 2022. 
 
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministries of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways, Tourism and Railway Board for placin g before the Committee, the 
material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points 
raised by the Members. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 8th June, 2022. 
 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
June 8, 2022  Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Jyaistha 18, 1944 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
Rajya Sabha 


iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
ATM Automated Teller Machine 
BOXN Bogie open wagon fitted with air brakes 
BRPL Barpali Railway station, Odisha 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
DBFOT Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer 
DPIIT The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
EoDB Ease of Doing Business 
EXIM Export Import 
F.Y. Financial Year 
HPRCL Haridaspur Paradip Railway Company Limited 
INCLA India Cruise Lines Association 
INR Indian Rupees 
IPGL Indian Ports Global Limited 
IWT Inland Water Transport 
KRCL Krishnapatnam Port Rail Connectivity 
MIV Maritime India Vision 2030 
MbPT Mumbai Port Trust 
MMLP Multi Modal Logistic Parks 
MMT Million Metric Tonnes 
MMTPA Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum 
MoEF Ministry of Environment & Forests (now MoEF&CC) 
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MSDC Maritime Shipping Development Council 
MTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum 
NANR Naranpur Railway Station, Odisha 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHLML National Highways Logistics Management Limited 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSW Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
RoB Road Over Bridge 
R–S–R Rail-Sea-Rail 
RV Raigad–Vizianagram 
SDCL Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
SE South Eastern 
SFC Smart Freight Centre 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 


iv 
 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
TDC Target Date of Completion 
VPA Vishakhapatnam Port Authority 
VPT Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
USD United States Dollar 
 
 


1  
REPORT 
 
 
India has a significant maritime sector with 12 Major and over 200 Non -Major Ports 
situated along its 7500 km long coastline and a vast network of navigable waterways. Maritime 
Trade which is an important component of the maritime sector, influences the pace, structure and 
pattern of development of the country. Ports play a critical role in development of the maritime 
sector of the nation  and the region as well as a huge volume of cargo containing industrial, 
domestic commodities is traded between India and foreign countries through ports. By linking 
maritime trade with inland transportation such as rail -road-air effectively, ports serve as a main 
mode in supply chain transportati on, connectivity of national and international traffic and 
economic growth of the nation. The country ’s maritime sector plays a crucial role in its overall 
trade and growth, with 95% of the country ’s trade volume and 65% of the trade value being 
undertaken through maritime transport. 
 
2. Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPS&W) has been entrusted with the 
responsibility to formulate policies and programmes on aforesaid subjects and their 
implementation. The Ministry looks after shipping and waterways  sectors which include Major 
Ports, National Waterways, Inland Water Transport, Shipbuilding and Ship -repair etc. As ports 
play a vital role in the EXIM trade of the country, the focus of the government continues to be on 
the capacity augmentation of the p orts, so that they are able to meet ever increasing trade 
requirements of the country. The total installed capacity of the Major and Non -Major ports 
during 2020-21 was 2554.61 MTPA (1560.61 MTPA Major Ports & 994.00 MTPA non -Major 
Ports). This has been possible on account of various infrastructure projects undertaken at various 
ports for construction of new berths and terminals, mechanization of existing berths and 
terminals, capital dredging for deepening of drafts for attracting large vessels in port chan nels 
etc. 
 
3. The Ministry also informed the Committee that to be globally competitive, the Indian 
Ports have made progress in mechanization and adoption of technology to improve productivity 
and establish ancillary services within port premises to improve ca rgo evacuation time. With an 
aim to achieve approximately 5% share in world exports, India ’s exports need to grow 
aggressively in next 5 to 10 years. It is also imperative for Indian Ports to strengthen maritime 
capabilities in view of the increase in port  connectivity to handle heavier cargo volumes and 
bigger size of container vessels, in near future. Besides maritime trade, another aspect which has 
enormous potential to develop and is closely  related to port development and connectivity, is 


2  
cruise touris m, which can increase the number of tourists, both in international and domestic 
circuits. Cruise shipping can benefit the economy of the country  and can also generate 
employment. For cruise shipping to develop, tourist terminal facilities and connectivity of ports 
to the places of tourist interest is crucial. To give focus on cruise tourism, a Task Force has been 
constituted in the year 2015 with the coordinated efforts of Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways (MoPS&W) and Tourism. 
 
4. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and  
Culture, in this backdrop, decided to take up the subject “ Connectivity and Tourist Terminal 
Facilities at Ports” for examination and report thereon. The Committee heard the views of the 
Senior Officers of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, Chairmen of various Ports and 
Chairman, Railway Board, in its meeting held on 18 th May, 2022 as well as in visits undertaken 
by the Committee. The Committee also heard the views of the Senior Officers  of Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping & Waterways and the Ministry of Tourism, in its meeting held on the 1 st June, 
2022. 
 
5. The Committee is aware that ports have been centers of commerce for centuries 
and they remain crucial to the economy even today. Every year, hundreds of billions of 
rupees worth of products move through ports. Ports generate substantial business activity 
through their operations. The Committee notes that n ation’s major ports are an important 
part of our  national economy and transportation system. Over 95% of India’s trading by 
volume and 65% by value is done through maritime transport. In addition to their impact 
on the national economy, ports also have an impact on local and regional economies of the 
states on which the ports are situated. The Committee is also of the opinion that a 
substantial portion of business activity in a variety of industries is driven by international 
trade, and the value of foreign  trade has risen substantially over the years. Although trade 
volumes are affected by global economic conditions and have decreased slightly over the 
past few years due to COVID pandemic, trade volumes are expected to rise in the future, 
increasing the imp ortance of ports and waterways in terms of export and import. The 
Committee recommends that at this crucial juncture of expected increase in global 
maritime trade, appropriate policy measures may be taken to increase maritime trade 
through port connectivity to boost the economy of the country. 
 
6. The Committee observes that with the increase in port capacity to handle heavier 
cargo volumes and bigger size of container vessels in near future, there will be a need for 
development of modern terminal development,  which will also challenge the ability of 


3  
terminals to handle increasing cargo volumes. The Committee recommends that 
appropriate guidelines and coordination mechanisms may be formulated to facilitate the 
development of modern terminals to handle increased  cargo volumes and bigger container 
vessels in near future which will decrease the challenges of terminal operators as well. 
 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
 
7. Sagarmala is a National Programme aimed at accelerating economic development in the 
country by harnessing the potential of India ’s 7,500 km long coastline and 14,500 km of 
potentially navigable waterways. Sag armala was announced by the Hon’ ble Prime Minister in 
2014. The concept of Sagarmala was ap proved by the Union Cabinet on 25th March 2015. The 
vision of Sagarmala is to reduce logistics cost for both domestic and EXIM cargo with minimal 
infrastructure investment. Studies under Sagarmala have identified opportunities for reducing 
overall logistics costs, thereby improving the overall efficiency of the economy and increasing 
competitiveness of exports. 
 
8. Currently, there are 802 projects worth investment of ₹ 5.48 lakh crore s for 
implementation under the “Sagarmala Programme”  by 2035. Out of which, 201 projects worth ₹ 
99,281 crores have been completed and 216 projects worth ₹ 2.12 lakh crores are under 
implementation. Further, 384 projects worth ₹ 2.3 Lakh crore are under various stages of 
development. In addition to this, 73 5 projects with estimated investment of ₹ 1 lakh crore have 
been identified for carrying out holistic development of coastal districts. The Table below 
provides a breakup of the projects on the basis of their present status: 
 
 
Project Theme 
Total Projects 
Completed 
Projects 
Projects Under 
Implementation 
# 
TPC 
(₹ Cr) 
# 
TPC 
(₹ Cr) 
# 
TPC 
(₹ Cr) 
Port Modernization & New Port 
Development 
239 2,50,643 84 29,666 54 37,294 
Port Connectivity Enhancement 213 1,39,208 60 21,106 71 84,319 
Port Led Industrialization 33 1,19,845 9 45,865 21 72,706 
Coastal Community Development 77 10,135 19 1,450 18 2,323 
Coastal Shipping & IWT 240 29,139 30 1,192 52 16,115 
Total 802 5,48,970 202 99,281 216 2,12,757 
 
9. Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SDCL) was incorporated on 31st August, 


4  
2016 to raise funds as debt/equity (as long term capital), as per the project requirement, by 
leveraging resources provided by the Government of India and from multi -lateral and bilateral 
funding agencies. SDCL has invested ₹ 125 crore in SPVs for providing rail connectivity to 
Krishnapatnam Port (KRCL), ₹ 337 crore in Haridaspur Paradip Railway Company Limited 
(HPRCL), ₹ 10 crore for developing  and operating Chabahar Port in Iran after taking over 
from India Ports Global Limited (IPGL) in 2018-19, ₹ 50 crore in SPV formed with NHAI for 
development of ROB at Haldia Port and ₹ 20 crore in a road connectivity project providing 
connectivity from Visakhapatnam Port to the National Highway. 
 
10. The Committee notes that SDCL was incorporated on 31st August, 2016 for 
implementation of Sagarmala and currently out of 802 projects, 202 projects have been 
completed, 216 projects are under implementation, while 384 are under various stages of 
development. Hence, only about 25% of the total projects under Sagarmala are complete as 
on date. The Committee expresses serious concern at the slow progress of work and 
recommends that Sagarmala, being a crucial step in the progress of India’s shipping sector, 
which seeks to bring about port connectivity needs to be expedited. The Committee also 
desires to know whether there has been cost escalation and time overrun as compared to 
original cost and timeline of the projects. The Committee while underlining  the speedy 
implementation of the Sagarmala projects, also desires to know the precise reasons for 
delays, port-wise and concrete steps taken to address the delays. 
 
 
MARITIME STATES DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE (MSDC) 
 
11. Maritime States Development Committee (MSDC) is an apex advisory body for the 
development of the maritime sector and aims to ensure integrated development of Major and 
non-Major Ports. The MSDC was constituted in May, 1997 to assess in consultation with State 
Governments, the future developmen t of existing and new Minor Ports by the respective 
Maritime States either directly or through captive users and private participation. Further, MSDC 
also monitors the development of minor ports, captive ports and private ports in the Maritime 
States with a view to ensure their integrated development with Major Ports and to assess the 
requirements of other infrastructure requirements like roads/rail/IWT and make suitable 
recommendations to the concerned Ministers. 
 
12. The MSDC is a platform which gives an oppo rtunity for deliberating upon steps and 


5  
measures for creating a synergy between the Major Ports and Minor Ports. Besides, the Major 
Ports, the Non -Major Ports have an essential role to play  in the maritime trade. 18 th MSDC 
meeting held on 24 th June 2021 wherein agenda points related to rail and road connectivity with 
ports were also discussed. 
 
 
PORT CONNECTIVITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
13. Connectivity is one of the critical enablers for ports as it is the end -to-end effectiveness 
of the logistics  system that drives competitiveness for industry. Port connectivity challenges 
exist in India and even new ports that have world class equipment can see their turnaround times 
hamstrung because of poor connectivity. 
 
14. The Committee was also informed that this poor conne ctivity constrains India’s trade 
competitiveness and increases industrial production costs. India's hinterland connectivity is 
mainly based on road and rail networks. Railways are the mainstay for carrying long lead 
distance and bulk cargo. But the expansi on of rail network has not been able to keep up with the 
growing demand. Hence, the implementation of road and rail connectivity projects attains 
importance for enhancing the country's overall freight efficiency. 
 
15. The “Sagarmala Programme,”  which is the ke y initiative by MoPS&W has identified 
connectivity between ports and domestic production and consumption centers, through rail, road, 
pipeline, MMLP under the pillar of port connectivity. 
 
 
RAIL CONNECTIVITY 
 
16. The Ministry informed the Committee that there are 90 port -rail connectivity projects 
worth Rs. 76,713 Crore have been taken up by MoPSW with Indian Railways, Major Ports, and 
Maritime Boards. Out of which, 35 projects Rs. 9,964 Crore have been completed and 55 
projects are in various stages of develop ment and implementation. These projects will help in 
integrating port rail and road connectivity resulting in reduction in logistics cost for the EXIM 
business. 
 
 
Completed 
Under 
Implementation 
Under 
Development 


6  
Type 
Implementing 
Agency 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. cr) 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. cr) 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. cr) 
 
Rail 
Indian Railways 14 8,910 31 53,415 8 9,555 
Major Ports 21 1,054 9 634 3 604 
State/Minor Ports - - - - 4 2,596 
Total 35 9,964 40 54,049 15 12,700 
 
 
 
ROAD CONNECTIVITY 
 
 
17. There are 101 road connectivity projects identified for total estimated investment of Rs. 
51,340 Crore. Implementation of these projects is being done by MoRTH, Major Ports, Maritime 
Boards and State Govt. Of total projects, 19 projects worth Rs. 4,993 Cro re have been completed 
and 82 projects are in various stages of development and implementation. 
 
  
Completed 
Under 
Implementation 
Under Development 
Type 
Implementing 
Agency 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. Cr) 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. cr) 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. cr) 
 
 
Road 
MoRTH/NHAI 6 2,576 18 18,145 44 20,966 
Major Ports 10 589 9 839 2 317 
State/Minor Ports 3 1,828 3 3,229 6 2,852 
Total 19 4,993 30 22,212 52 24,135 
 
18. Going further, 9 ports are currently under implementation, would need connectivity to 
National Highways and rail connectivity in near future. 
 
19. The Committee notes that the Government has taken up large number of projects 
to remove the bottlenecks in road and rail connectivity to ports. The Committee has no 
doubt that once the  projects are implemented, the connectivit y problems may be resolved 
to a great extent. However, despite  the enormous importance of the  connectivity of ports, 
the Committee feels that the pace of work under the Port, Rail and Road connectivity 


7  
Projects have been slow. The Committee is of the opini on that more coordinated efforts are 
required to complete the connectivity projects by involving Railway Authorities/NHAI etc., 
addressing all technical aspects. The Committee emphasizes that interconnectivity of roads, 
ports, airports, railways, waterways  etc. should be part of the infrastructure planning 
process, right from inception stage. The Committee is also of opinion that approach to a 
port from  hinterland can be critical enough to make  or mar  a Terminal, because  it 
determines the  turn round time an d evacuation time -vital to  the functioning of the port. 
Evacuation is a vital component of any port project as the capacity and efficiency of the 
port vitally depend on the rate at which the cargo can be evacuated from  the terminal. The 
efficiency, viability and business depend on how well connected the port is.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the plans for the connectivity of a port to the roads 
and railway networks, to airports, to service roads connecting nearby towns and villages 
should be an essential component of the project from the its formulation stage itself and 
should be a part of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) so that the integrated infrastructure 
can be developed with proper connectivity and interlinking. 
 
 
INITIATIVES UNDERTAKEN BY MOPS&W TO EXPEDITE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF PORT CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS 
 
20. To expedite the implementation of connectivity projects, MoPS&W has taken the 
following initiatives: 
 
 Sagarmala identified 14 port-rail connectivity projects and requested Ministry of  Railways, 
to prioritize implementation. 
 Out of 14 rail projects, 2 projects have been completed so far. 
 Taken the issue of delayed projects and other issues related to Ministry of Railways vide 
communication dated 19th June 2020, 13th December 2021, 24th Jan 2022 . 
 MoPS&W has also shared list of priority projects with MoRTH which needs to be  
implemented to improve road connectivity of ports on 9th September 2020. In response, 
MoRTH/NHAI carried out a detailed prioritization exercise and  shared a detailed s tatus 
report with MoPS&W that shortlisted 38 road connectivity projects with a length of 544 
km and informed that they are in different stages of DPR and are planned for award by F.Y. 


8  
22. An SPV  under NHAI named “ National Highways  Logistics Management Limi ted” 
(NHLML) has been  incorporated in 2020to carry out the development of Multimodal 
Logistics parks (MMLP) and works related to National Highway connectivity for ports. 
 MoPS&W carried out an intensive exercise to find the connectivity gaps. Based on the 
consultation with major  ports and state  maritime boards, 52 last mile  road connectivity  
projects have been identified and conveyed to M/o Road Transport and Highways for 
assessment and development on 1st April 2022. 
 Similarly, MoR has been requested by  MoPS&W to provide a list of ports which have 
sizeable freight traffic but are still not connected with rail. Based on the list, MoR would 
carry out sanction surveys, etc. to determine the feasibility of rail connectivity and further 
development. 
 In line with PM Gati Shakti initiatives, MoPS&W carried out an intensive exercise to find 
the connectivity gaps. Based on the consultation with major ports and state maritime 
boards, 28 last mile rail connectivity projects have been identified and conveyed to M/o 
Railways for assessment and development on 04th April 2022. 
 During the Cabinet meeting held on 11th May 2022, it was observed that “ MoPS&W may 
identify the ports in India which are without rail or road connectivity and coordinate with 
the relevant Ministries / Departments for taking up these projects in a time bound manner 
through public-private partnerships”. 
 Based on above directions, Secretary, PSW held meeting with representatives of 
Ministry of Road, Transport &  Highways, Ministry of Railways, and Inland Waterways 
Authority of India on 26th May 2022 in presence of Special Secretary (Logistics) from DPIIT. 
 
21. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the various Ministries to expedite the 
implementation of the Port Connectivity Projects. It also notes that the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and NHAI has also carried out a detailed prioritization exercise 
and had shortlisted  38 road connectivity projects which are at DPR stage and likely to be 
awarded by the F.Y. 2022. The Committee is of the opinion that such a capital intensive 
infrastructure project which seeks to improve port, rail and road co nnectivity involving 
various ministries, State Governments can be successful, only if all the concerned agencies 
give utmost attention to the time-bound completion of the portion of work allocated to each 
one and maintain close coordination and cooperation  amongst themselves. The Committee 
hopes that all out efforts would be made by all the stakeholders to complete the work 
allocated within the time schedule. The Committee also desires to know the status of the 


9  
award of work relating to the 38 road connecti vity projects and the percentage of work 
completed. 
 
22. The Committee further notes that a SPV under NHAI viz.. National Highways 
Logistics Management Ltd. (NHLML) has been incorporated in 2020 to develop 
Multimodal Logistic Parks (MMLPs) and works related to  National Highways connectivity 
to ports. The Committee  is of the firm opinion that the MMLPs is a step in the right 
direction and such parks, if planned at strategic locations in the country would bring down 
logistics costs and boost the national economy. The parks will enable the shift from a point-
to-point to a hub –and-spoke model in logistics sector, eventually helping to bring down 
logistics costs and enabling more efficient movement through new -generation vehicles. The 
importance of a modern and effic ient logistics network cannot be overemphasized. Poor 
connectivity across various logistics modes not only increases the wear and tear of 
transport means and damages to goods, but also leads to uncertainty in supply chains 
leading to further decrease in th e route utilization by trade and thus, increasing 
transportation costs for the remaining users. Sagarmala aims at construction of wider 
roads for connectivity of Ports to another point. However, unfortunately, the Committee 
noticed that in some cases the S agarmala Projects are undertaken only up to major cross 
roads on the route and thereafter no effort is made to construct road up to point envisaged 
in the Sagarmala Project. The Committee is constrained to note that in such a situation the 
wider roads/conn ectivity between the Port and the point envisaged in the Sagarmala 
Project beyond the point of cross roads will remain unfulfilled. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the point –to–point Sagarmala connectivity envisaged may be 
implemented irrespective of the fact that there exists major cross roads in between. The 
Committee stresses that road connectivity under Sagarmala should not be only point to 
point but encompass the entire peripheral network of roadways interlinking nearby towns, 
villages, servi ce roads, important tourist places, national monuments etc. for the overall 
development of the areas. The Committee emphasizes that  service roads should be 
included in the DPR itself, and given as much importance. 
 
23. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the MoPS&W under the PM’s “Gati 
Shakti” Programme, to carry out an intensive exercise to find connectivity gaps and that 52 
last mile road connectivity projects have been identified in consultation with Major Ports 
and State Maritime Boards. The require ment of these projects has been conveyed to 


10  
MoRTH for assessment and development on 1 st April, 2022. The Committee may be 
furnished the information regarding the on -ground implementation of these road 
connectivity projects. Similarly, the Committee desires  to know the status of sanction 
surveys to be conducted by Ministry of Railways (MoR) to determine the feasibility of rail 
connectivity to ports which have sizeable freight traffic but are still not connected by rail. 
 
 
ISSUES WITH CONNECTIVITY TO PORT 
 
24. The Committee was also informed by the MoPSW of the following specific issues 
regarding connectivity to ports:- 
 
Improvement of Rail Share at Paradip Port 
I - Infrastructure Improvement: 
(i) Direct Rail Connectivity to Mines: The nearest railway sidings to various Iron Ore mines 
like Nuagaon, Gandhamardan and Gonua are situated in the vicinity of 20 -30 km. Iron Ore 
is transported by road to the railway sidings in the first mile connectivity, which leads to 
higher cost and environmental hazards. Steps may be taken to develop railway sidings close 
to the mine -heads by  obtaining necessary statutory clearances, to maximize  the rail 
movement of Iron Ore. 
(ii) Nayagarh – Koira – Barbil Railway Line: Feasibility of laying a new railway line from 
Nayagarh to Barbil via Ko ira may be examined. The above line will reduce the distance 
from mines of Sundargarh District, Odisha to Paradip Port and increase the rail share. 
(iii) Doubling of Sukinda – Jaroli Section: Original TDC of ongoing Sukinda – Jaroli doubling 
project is June 2022 , which is likely to get delayed for want of MoEF clearance and land 
acquisition. The above pro ject may be expedited for early completion to increase Ore rake 
movement. 
(iv) Improvement of Road Connectivity: Gandhamardan Iron Ore mines are  situated in 
Keonjhar District of Odisha. The nearest railway siding is at Naranpur (NANR) which is 
about 20km away from the mines. Condition of the existing road leading to the railway 
siding from the mines is not good, which needs to be developed to facilitate faster 
movement of Iron Ore to siding for further despatch by rail. 
 
II -Policy Issues: 
(i) Iron Ore Pellet and Export traffic of Iron Ore has been categorized under priority “D” as per 


11  
the “Iron-ore Policy 2021,” which is affecting rake allotment. Hence the Users like  
Triveni/BRPL are converging the Iron Ore Pell et by road (around 250 trucks/ day). 
Necessary changes in categorization may  be made to bring Iron Ore Pellet and Export Iron 
Ore under higher priority. 
 
III- Rake Availability: 
(i) JSW has developed  a 10 MMTPA capacity Iron Ore Terminal inside Paradip Port on PPP 
basis for loading of Iron Ore/ Pellet. They have more than 100 indents pending with SE 
Railway for supply of rakes for movement of their cargo from mines to Paradip Port for 
further despatch especially to their Steel Pla nt at Dolvi, Maharashtra through coastal 
shipping. Since supply of rakes is not adequate, they are despatching some Iron Ore by 
road to Port (500 trucks/ day). Hence, more BOXN rakes may be supplied by SE Railway, 
as per the demand, for movement of Iron Ore from Mines to Paradip Port. 
(ii) The Port is having a stock of more than 3 MMT of import cargo waiting for evacuation. 
More than 250 indents for rakes are pending with Railways. At least 22 rakes on daily basis 
may be supplied to the Port for loading of the import cargo. 
(iii) Gap between current and future capacity  for handling  rakes at Paradip port current 
allotment is too high which needs to be fulfilled to support demand of coastal shipping of 
coal. 
(iv) Current and future capacity addition at Paradip is provided below:- 
 
Proposed Capacity Addition 
(Average Rakes per day) 
April 2022 36 
May 2022 41 
July 2022 46 
October 2022 57 
Average rakes per day unloaded 
Jan-Mar 2022 25 
Apr 2022* 29 
 
(v) Increasing freight rates for short distance movement – Short distance railway freight has 
been increased disproportionately as compared to long distance freight. Below illustration 
provides the details of the increase in the freight for short distance: 
 
 
Mode 
 
Circuit 
Freight Rate as Post on 
01.04.2015 24.08.2016 31.10.2018 


12  
 
R-S-R 
Talcher-Paradip & 
Ennore-Mettur 
916 1035 1599 
 
(vi) It significantly affects the viability of coastal shipping wherein R-S-R route is necessary. 
 
 
Rail Connectivity Issues pertaining to Visakhapatnam Port Authority 
(i) Visakhapatnam Port Authority (VPA) is one of the largest Major Ports in the country and 
handles ~ 75 Million Tonnes per annum. The rail co -efficient of VPT is ~ 60% and is 
largely dependent on the Indian Railways for transportation of its EXIM cargo. The current 
cargo handling capacity of VPA is 127 Million Tonnes and will further increase in the next 
few years. VPA is largely dependent on Indian Railways for transporting its EXIM cargo 
and 80% of this Rail bound cargo is transported via the Raipur-Vizianagaram route (RV). 
(ii) Due to delay in completion of Electrification and Doubling works of the Titlagarh - Raipur 
and Titlagarh - Sambalpur sections on the RV line, during periods of peak demand, VPA as 
well as the Indian Railways experience severe congestion which causes heavy detention to 
rolling stock. 
(iii) As per the latest information ascertained from the Zonal Railways, it is understood that the 
TDC for electrification and doubling in the Titlagarh -Raipur and Titlagarh - Sambalpur 
sections are during 2022 -23. It is also to mention that as per the past experience that TDC 
has been regularly shifted to later dates due to certain project related constraints in the 
sections. 
(iv) In this regard, the Railway Board may be suitably addressed to strictly adhere to the TDC 
in the above two sections for facilitating quick transportation of EXIM cargo from / to 
VPA and thus enabling “Win-Win” situation for both the Indian Railways and VPA. 
 
25. The Committee notes the specific instances of connectivity issues. It notes with 
concern the lack of road connectivity from railway sidings at Paradip Port to iron -ore 
mines at places  like Nuagaon, Gandhamardan and Gonua, which leads to higher road 
transportation cost. It  also notes the lack of railway line to reduce mine -port distance at 
Nayagarh. While at places like Sukinda  - Jaroli, iron-ore rake movement is decreased due 
to delay in environmental clearance for doubling projects. The Committee is of the opinion 
that since railways is the fastest transport mode and can transport huge quantity of ore at 
one go and also causes less environmental pollution as compared to road transport, all out 
efforts should be made to hasten the Mine -to-port road projects in the said projects. 
Environmental Clearances should also be fast tracked to expeditiously complete the 


13  
projects. The Committee also recommends that necessary steps may be taken to develop 
railway sidings near mines and for obtaining necessary statutory c learances to maximize 
the rail movement of Iron Ore. The Committee notes that some of the Rail and  Road 
projects connecting the Paradip Port are pending for years due to various reasons. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministries of Railways; Ports, Shipping & Waterways; 
and State Governments should make concerted efforts to complete the projects at the 
earliest. Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways may take the initiative to 
complete the projects without delay. 
 
26. The Committee notes th at Vishakhapatnam Port is one of the largest Major 
Ports in the country handling 75 MTPA with a 60% rail co -efficient, and is largely 
dependent on the Indian Railways for transportation of its EXIM cargo. The delay in 
electrification and doubling work on this rail route is causing severe congestion at Port 
and also on railway lines. The Committee recommends that necessary steps should be 
taken to rectify the problem. 
 
27. The Committee is aware that Odisha is the largest iron ore producing Indian 
State playing a crucial role in the development of iron and steel industries across the 
nation as well as development of transportation system, aircraft industry, automobile 
industry, real estate and building industry etc. The Committee recommends that all out 
efforts should be made to ensure quick movement of iron ore from Paradip Port and 
connecting roads should be repaired in a time bound manner and policies should be 
framed in this regard, to ensure growth of aforesaid industries, which will result in 
economic growth of the country. 
 
 
 
CRUISE TOURIST TERMINAL FACILITIES AT PORTS 
 
28. MoPS&W, in its background note furnished to the Committee, stated that the coastline 
and inland waterways have enormous potential to develop Cruise Tourism, both for 
international and domesti c. To harness this and to promote Cruise Tourism, a Task force on 
Cruise Tourism was constituted on 23.11.2015 with the joint efforts of MoPS&W and M/o 
Tourism, with Secretary (Tourism) being the Chairman and Secretary (PSW) Co -Chairman of 
the Task force. 
29.  The Ministry informed the Committee that 13 meetings have been held on regular 


14  
intervals and that in the first meeting held in December, 2015 it was inter -alia decided that 
MoT and MoPSW will jointly  appoint a consultant for preparation of road map/Action  Plan 
for promotion of Cruise Tourism in India. 
 
30. The Ministry further informed the Committee that based on the discussions in the Task 
Force meetings and recommendations of the Consultant, several steps have been taken 
including revisions of SOPs for Cruise Vessels at Indian Ports, extension of Cabotage 
relaxation for passenger vessels beyond February, 2024  up to  February, 2029, biometric 
exemption to passengers arriving with e -visa, Rationalization of tariff for cruise vessels, 
participation in sea trade cruise conferences etc. 
 
31. The Ministry stated that the principal beneficiary of the cruise shipping is the economy 
of the respective maritime nations where home porting for cruise vessels exist. 451 cruise ships 
including domestic cruise vessel carrying 4 , 67,579 passengers have called five Indian Cruise 
Ports as compared to 291 cruise vessels and 2, 63,296 passengers in 2018-19. 
 
32. As per Bernello and Ajamil Report, a private consultant, appointed by IPA, Potential of 
India is as under: 
 2016 India’s Potential Potential of Mumbai 
Number of passengers 0.2 million 4 million 3.2 million 
Number of passenger ships 166 955 700 
Passengers per ship 1200 4100 4570 
Economic Potential INR 712 crore INR 35500 crore INR 28400 crore 
Employment potential 5000 250000 200000 
 
33. The Ministry informed the Committee that given the inherent potential of Cruise 
Shipping in India, actions around following 3 key areas have been taken: 
(i) Infrastructure and facilities development: Cruise Terminals have been constructed and are 
under operation in five major Ports namely Mumbai Port, New Mangalore Port, Mormugao 
Port, Cochin Port and Chennai Port. Cruise Terminals are under construction at 
Visakhapatnam Port and Syama Prasad Mukerjee Port. 
(ii) Process simplification: E-visa facility has been extended to five sea ports namely Mumbai, 
Goa, Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai. Immigration counters have been set up at the 
aforesaid five major ports visited by cruise ships. 
(iii) Fiscal incentives: The vision of  the Govt. is to put India on the global cruise market both 
for ocean & river cruises. To provide the much needed support to the Indian Cruise 
Shipping business which has tremendously suffered during the COVID -19 pandemic, a 


15  
meeting was  held on 30.07.2020 under chairmanship of Hon ’ble Minister of State for 
Shipping (IC) to discuss the proposal of India Cruise Lines Association (INCLA) for 
rationalization of Cruise Tariffs. 
(iv) The following tariff rates for cruise vessels were approved as discussed in the meeting: 
a. The port charges for a Cruise Ship to be charged at $ 0.085  per GRT for first 12 
hours stay  ('Fixed Rate') and $5 per passenger ("Head Tax").  The Ports will not 
charge any other rate like berth hire, port dues, pilotage, passenger fee, etc. 
b. For the period exceeding 12 hours stay, the fixed charges on Cruise Ships will be 
equal to the Berth Hire Charges payable as per SOR (with 40% discount as 
applicable for cruise ships). 
c. Further, cruise ships making: 
 1-50 calls per year to get 10% rebate. 
 51-100 calls per year to get 20% rebate. 
 Above 100 calls per year to get 30% rebate. 
d. The above rationalized tariff is effective up to 13.08.2022. 
 
 
Pre-Covid and Post-Covid Scenarios of Cruise Ships/Passengers handled by Indian Ports is as 
under: 
 


16  
34. Status of Cruise Terminals available at Ports, as informed by MoPS&W: – 
I. Cochin Port Trust: 
• Sagarika International Cruise Terminal inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 
14.02.2021 
• Fully air conditioned hall for tourists 
• Passenger lounge 
• 48 Immigration counters, 10 Customs clearance counters 
• Security check, /counters 
• PA System, Sign boards, Queue Managers 
• Parking lots for luxury coaches, Cars, Prepaid Taxi counters 
• Commercial space for Cafeteria, Duty free shopping etc 
• Baggage scanners, Trolleys, Buggies, Metal detectors etc 
• External toilet block 
• Mobile charging facilities/laptop plugging 
• Project cost: Rs. 23.25 crores for cruise terminal and Rs. 10.29 crores for additional 
infrastructure including parking area, Kochi Haat  etc, with the grant from the 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
II. Mumbai Port Trust: 
i. Name of the Project: “Up-gradation/ modernization to International Cruise Terminal at 
Indira Dock, Mumbai” 
ii. Brief Description of the Project: The objective of the project is to improve Cruise 
Infrastructure as per action plan prepared by Ministry of Shipping, Govt. of India to 
promote Cruise Tourism. The project envisages up -gradation / modernization of the 
present Cruise terminal to make it at par with the International standards. It co nsists of 
construction of G+3 structure. The Ground and First floor will comprise the operational 
International Cruise Terminal. The 2 nd and 3 rd Floor will be used for Commercial 
activities. Total built-up area of terminal building is 4, 15,000 Sq. Ft. 
iii. Estimated Cost: Rs. 495.3 Crore (EPC: Rs.303.3 cr + PPP: Rs.192 cr) 
iv. The work is being carried out under Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) 
and Public Private Partnership (PPP) route: 
a.  EPC: MbPT  is constructing bare shell structure and connected infrastructure 
development works (Rs. 303.30 crore). The investment of Rs. 303.30 Crore was 
approved by Delegated Investment Board in its meeting on 09.12.2019.The work is in 


17  
progress. 
b.     PPP: The block estimated cost to be incurred by Operation & Maintenance 
Operator on DBFOT (PPP) for interior works and equipment is Rs. 192 Crore. The 
proposal was approved by SFC in its meeting on 23.04.2020. 
v. Target Date of Completion – July 2024. 
 
 
III. Mormugao Port Trust: 
• Cruise Terminal building of 1650 sq.m area has been constructed. 
• New Cruise Terminal estimated cost of 26 million USD is planned to be 
constructed. Letter awarded to O & M Operator in March 2022 and work is 
expected to be completed by October 2023. 
Amenities Planned 
• Car / Coach Parking facilities 
• Customs Security, Immigration, Baggage handling 
• Waiting departure halls 
• Cafeteria /snack, lounge 
• Duty free shop 
• Business Centre 
• Office area 
• Counter information and hotel and travel reservations etc. 
 
IV. Chennai Port Trust: 
At Chennai Port, Passenger Terminal at WQ IV has been upgraded into state -of-the-art 
Cruise Passenger facilitation Centre. Modern facilities like cafeteria, escalators, baggage 
scanner, CCTV and 30  nos. Immigration  Counters are provided in the Cruise facilitation 
centre. The project was completed on 12.10.2018 and the Cost of the Project was Rs 17.21 
crores. 
 
V. New Mangalore Port Trust: 
• Dedicated AC Cruise Lounge is spread over 2150 Sq. Mt. 
• E-Visa clearance on arrival. Immigration Counters, Free WiFi, 
• Currency Exchange, ATM, etc. 
• Instant Access to Highways, Rail, Airport 
• Concession in port related charges 


18  
• Locker (Customs & Immigration) 
• Tourism Room 
• Public Address System. 
• Port Health Officers Room 
• Baggage Handling room 
• Duty free shop, Handicraft shop 
• Cafeteria/Snack Bar 
• Conference Hall and Toilets 
 
 
VI. Vishakhapatnam Port Trust: 
As part of the Sagarmala Programme i.e., Port modernization &  efficiency 
improvement, Ports connectivity enhancement, Port -led industrialization and coastal 
community development, Visakhapatnam Port Trust proposed for “Construction of Cruise 
Terminal at existing Channel Berth area duly  altering the orientation to su it the requirement 
in Outer Harbour of Visakhapatnam Port”.  In this connection, the existing Channel berth 
location has been identified to convert it as Cruise  Terminal cum Coastal Cargo Terminal at 
50m parallel to the dredge limit line towards landside du ly matching with the existing 
channel berth area, to accommodate 300m LOA, 37.6m Beam and 8.1m Draft vessels. 
• Work Order for Cruise Berth issued on 24.01.2022 and for Cruise Terminal Building 
issued on 02.02.2022. 
• The state run Shipping Corporation of India deploys large size passenger ships for 
ferrying passengers  and essential goods from Port of Vishakhapatnam Port to Port 
Blair is 1100 nautical miles. 
• Estimated Cost of New Terminal Rs. 96.05 crore. 
• The target date of completion is April 2023. 
 
 
VII. Syama Prasad Mukerjee Port Trust 
Development of River Cruise terminal and river tourism facility along with 
riverfront beautification works at KDS, SMP, Kolkata being done with project cost of 75 crore 
approx. 
 
35. The Committee appreciates the various actions being taken by the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping & Waterways in coordination with the Ministry of Tourism to develop 
the required infrastructure and facilities for cruise tourism and for promotion of the 


19  
same in India. The Committee, however, feels that cruise tourism is still in its nascent 
stage in India and requires well  thought out, concerted efforts of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways and Ministry of Tourism to tap the full potential of cruise 
tourism in India and reap the economic benefits thereof.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Task Force on Cruise Tourism comprising MoPS&W and 
MoT may continue to hold its meetings regularly and if required, the Task Force may 
seek consultations from international experts in the cruise tourism sector to prepare a 
comprehensive action plan for the development of cruise tourism in the country. 
 
36. The Committee notes from the projections regarding the potential for cruise 
shipping in India, that the p otential of Mumbai has been projected to be 3.2 million 
while the overall potential of India has been shown as 4 million. The Committee is 
surprised to note that Mumbai has been projected to have 80 percent of the total 
potential of India in terms of numbe r of cruise passengers. The Committee 
recommends that a thorough study may be made to fully  understand the potential of 
cruise tourism across other ports in the country so as to able to devise focused policies 
with the aim to tap such potential in the other States too. 
 
37. The Committee recommends that MoPSW, in co -ordination with MoT, may 
examine the feasibility for development and promotion of river tourism activities on 
rivers besides Brahmaputra and G anga as well, and take concerted efforts to this end 
by developing Inland Waterways and connecting them to port terminals. Cruise 
terminals/ Jetties may be constructed wherever feasible by the Government of India in 
coordination with the State Governments and the necessary budgetary allocation may 
be made for the purpose. The Government may also  take measures to increase the 
depths of the draft by undertaking dredging operations wherever required and 
feasible. If required, possible commercial exploitation o f dredged material (sand) may 
also be explored in coordination with the State Governments. 
 
38. The Committee further points out that the potential of augmenting tourism 
through Sagarmala Project, over and above the transportation of goods cannot be 
underestimated and recommends that Tourist Terminals should exist in every port to 
promote transportation facilities for tourists. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should vigorously pursue the matters with the concerned Ministries/ 


20  
Departments and hold reg ular meetings with them  in this regard to ensure that these 
connectivity projects are completed within a reasonable time frame. 
 
39. With regard to the ongoing development of Cruise Terminals at various Ports, 
the Committee recommends that it may be ensured th at all such terminals being 
developed are equipped with state -of-the-art facilities and amenities including 
comfortable passenger lounge, immigration counters, sign boards in various relevant 
languages, clean washroom facilities etc. for  the tourists, to offer them a comfortable 
experience. The development of terminals may be planned with a long-term analysis 
of the estimated capacity requirements so as to be able to efficiently handle a large 
number of tourists in the upcoming years. 
 
40. The Committee further notes that  the tourist  terminal/ cruise  facilities being 
developed at present are for the Government controlled port terminals only. The 
Committee recommends  that the Ministry may devise ways to promote the 
development of cruise tourist terminals at privately managed ports as well, as there are 
many existing and upcoming private ports, which have the potential to attract tourists 
due to their opportune location. 
 
41. From the data furnished by MoPS&W with regard to pre-Covid and post-Covid 
scenario of cruise s hips/passengers handled by Indian Ports, the Committee notes that 
while there was a discernible pattern of growth in terms of cruise ships/passengers 
handled by Indian Ports from FY 2016 -17 to FY 2019 -20, the onset of the Coronavirus 
pandemic has had a sub stantial deterrent effect on the number of vessels/passengers 
handled. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways and Ministry of Tourism may undertake  necessary remedial measures to 
boost the revival of the cruise tourism se ctor over and above the pre -Covid levels, at 
the earliest. 
 
 
MARITIME INDIA VISION (MIV) 2030 
 
42. The Committee was apprised regarding the following prioritized 
Initiatives/Actionable Points under MIV 2030:- 
A) Ocean Crushing: 14 actionable points are identified under this category 
B) Inland and Lighthouse: 2 Actionable Points are identified under this category 


21  
C) Inland/ River Crushing: 3 Actionable Points are identified under this category. 
 
 
43. The Committee notes that the ports and port–terminals, situated near industries 
and tourist sites/monuments, will play a vital role in shaping key theme of Maritime 
India Vision, 2030 through their capabilities to handle bulk cargo and heavy tourist 
traffic simultaneously. The Committee recommends that terminals be develope d under 
the MIV 2030 through linkages with modern transport system, globalized supply 
chains, tourist places and coastal communities and also by taking the views of 
stakeholders for improvement of terminal designs. 
 
Transshipment Hubs 
 
44. The Ministry informed the Committee that as per the new policy of the Government 
many transshipment hubs are being created in the  country to increase the  share of India in 
the transshipment of goods worldwide. In this direction Andaman and Nicobar Islands is 
being developed as a major transshipment hub, for which DPR has already been awarded. In-
principle Government approval for development of a major port at Vadhavan in Maharashtra 
has also been awarded. This port intends to develop the port infrastructure  and also establish 
connectivity to hinterland through the PPP model. With the development of Vadhavan port, 
India will break into the league of countries with top 10 container ports in the world. 
 
45. The Committee appreciates the new policy of the Government  to create 
transshipment hubs across the country, which will create connectivity to the areas near 
the coastal regions and also bring about growth in economy and generate employment. 
The Committee welcomes the development of Andaman & Nicobar Islands as 
transshipment hub and the development of Vadhavan  Port. The Committee also notes 
that Lakshadweep Islands is  strategically placed near the busiest worldwide 
commercial shipping routes. The Committee therefore desires that the Ministry may 
explore the possibility of setting up a transshipment hub at Lakshadweep Islands. This 
will also give a boost to the tourism, besides creating job opportunities for the youth. 
 
 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 


22  
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
 
The Committee is aware that ports have been centers of commerce for centuries and  
they remain crucial to the economy even today. Every year, hundreds of billions of 
rupees worth of products move through ports. Ports generate substantial business 
activity through their operations. The Committee notes that nation’s major ports are an 
important part of our  national economy and transportation system. Over 95% of 
India’s trading by volume and 65% by value is done through maritime transport. In 
addition to their impact on the national economy, ports also have an impact on local and 
regional economies of the states on which the ports are situated. The Committee is also 
of the opinion that a substantial portion of business activity in a variety of industries is 
driven by international trade, and the value of foreign trade has risen substantially over 
the years. Although trade volumes are affected by global economic conditions and have 
decreased slightly over the past few years due to COVID pandemic, trade volumes are 
expected to rise in the future, increasing the importance of ports and waterways in terms 
of export and import. The Committee recommends that at this crucial juncture of 
expected increase in global maritime trade, appropriate policy measures may be taken to 
increase maritime trade through port connectivity to boost the economy of the country. 
(Para 5)  
 
The Committee observes  that with the increase in port capacity to handle heavier 
cargo volumes and bigger size of container vessels in near future, there will be a need for 
development of modern terminal development, which will also challenge the ability of 
terminals to handle increasing  cargo volumes. The Committee recommends that 
appropriate guidelines and coordination mechanisms may be formulated to facilitate 
the development of modern terminals to  handle increased cargo volumes and bigger 
container vessels in near future which will decrease the  challenges of terminal 
operators as well. 
(Para 6) 
 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
The Committee notes that SDCL was incorporated on 31st August, 2016 for 
implementation of Sagarmala and currently out of 802 projects, 202 projects have been 
completed, 216 projects are under implementation, while 384 are under various stages of 


23  
development. Hence, only about 25% of the total projects under Sagarmala are complete 
as on date. The Committee expresses serious concern at the slow progress of work and 
recommends that Sagarmala, being a crucial step in the progress of India’s shipping 
sector, whi ch seeks to bring about port connectivity needs to be expedited. The 
Committee also desires to know whether  there has been cost escalation and time 
overrun as compared to original cost and timeline of the projects. The Committee 
while underlining the speedy implementation of the Sagarmala projects, also desires to 
know the precise reasons for delays, port -wise and concrete steps taken to address the 
delays. 
(Para 10) 
 
RAIL CONNECTIVITY 
The Committee notes that the Government has taken up large number of projects to 
remove the bottlenecks in road and rail connectivity to ports. The Committee has no 
doubt that once the  projects are implemented, the connectivity problems may be 
resolved to a great extent. However, despite the enormous importance of the connectivity 
of ports, the Committee  feels that the pace of work under the Port, Rail and Road 
connectivity Projects have been slow. The Committee is of the opinion that more 
coordinated efforts a re required to complete the connectivity projects by involving 
Railway Authorities/NHAI etc., addressing all technical aspects. The Committee 
emphasizes that interconnectivity of roads, ports, airports, railways, waterways etc. 
should be part of the infras tructure planning process, right from inception stage. The 
Committee is also of opinion that approach to a port from  hinterland can be critical 
enough to make  or mar  a Terminal, because  it determines the  turn round time and 
evacuation time-vital to the functioning of the port. Evacuation is a vital component of 
any port project as the capacity and efficiency of the port vitally depend on the rate at 
which the cargo can be evacuated from  the terminal. The efficiency, viability and 
business depend on how well  connected the port is.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the plans for the connectivity of a port to the roads and railway 
networks, to airports, to service roads connecting nearby towns and villages should be 
an essential component of the project  from the its formulation stage itself and should be 
a part of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) so that  the integrated infrastructure can be  
developed with proper connectivity and interlinking. 
(Para 19)  


24  
 
INITIATIVES UNDERTAKEN BY MOPS&W TO EXPEDITE IMPL EMENTATION 
OF PORT CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS 
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the various Ministries to expedite the 
implementation of the Port Connectivity Projects. It also notes that the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and NHAI has also ca rried out a detailed prioritization exercise 
and had shortlisted  38 road connectivity projects which are at DPR stage and likely to 
be awarded by the 
F.Y. 2022. The Committee is of the opinion that such a capital intensive infrastructure 
project which seeks to improve port, rail and road connectivity involving various 
ministries, State Governments can be successful, only if all the concerned agencies give 
utmost attention to the time -bound completion of the portion of work allocated to 
each one and maintain close coordination and cooperation amongst themselves. The 
Committee hopes that all out efforts would be made by all the stakeholders to complete 
the work allocated within the time schedule. The Committee also desires to know the 
status of the award of work rel ating to the 38 road connectivity projects and the 
percentage of work completed. 
(Para 21)  
 
The Committee further notes that a SPV under NHAI viz. National Highways Logistics 
Management Ltd. (NHLML) has been incorporated in 2020 to develop Multimodal 
Logistic Parks (MMLPs) and works related to National Highways connectivity to ports. 
The Committee is of the firm opinion that the MMLPs is a step in the right direction 
and such parks, if planned at  strategic locations in the country would bring down 
logistics costs and boost the national economy. The parks will enable the shift from 
a point-to-point to a hub–and-spoke model in logistics sector, eventually helping to 
bring down logistics costs and enabling more efficient movement through new -
generation vehicles. The importance of a modern and efficient logistics network  cannot 
be overemphasized. Poor connectivity across various logistics modes not only 
increases the wear and tear of transport means and damages to goods, but also 
leads to uncertainty  in supply chains leading to further decrease in the route 
utilization by trade and thus, increasing transportation costs for the remaining users. 
Sagarmala aims at construction of wider roads for connectivity of Ports to another 
point. However, unfortunately, the Committee noticed that in some cases the Sagarmala 


25  
Projects are underta ken only up to major cross roads on  the route and thereafter no 
effort is made to construct road up to point envisaged in the Sagarmala Project. The 
Committee is constrained to note that in such a situation the wider 
roads/connectivity between the Port and  the point envisaged in the Sagarmala  Project 
beyond the point of cross roads will remain unfulfilled. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the point –to–point Sagarmala  connectivity envisaged  may be 
implemented irrespective of  the fact that there exis ts major cross roads in between. 
The Committee  stresses that  road connectivity under Sagarmala should not be only 
point to point but encompass the entire peripheral network of roadways interlinking 
nearby towns, villages, service roads, important tourist places, national monuments etc. 
for the overall development of the areas. The Committee emphasizes that service 
roads should be included in the DPR itself, and given as much importance. 
(Para 22) 
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative of the MoPS&W under the PM’s “Gati Shakti” 
Programme, to carry out an intensive exercise to find connectivity gaps and that 52 
last mile road connectivity projects have been identified in consultation with Major 
Ports and State Maritime  Boards. The requirement of these projects has been 
conveyed to MoRTH for assessment and development on 1st April, 2022. The 
Committee may be furnished the information regarding the on -ground 
implementation of these road connectivity projects. Similarly, the Committee desires to 
know the status of sanction surveys to be conducted by Ministry of Railways (MoR) to 
determine the feasibility of rail connectivity  to ports which have sizeable freight traffic 
but are still not connected by rail. 
(Para 23) 
 
ISSUES WITH CONNECTIVITY TO PORT 
The Committee notes the specific instances of connectivity issues. It notes with concern 
the lack of road connectivity from railway sidings at Paradip Port to iron -ore mines at 
places like Nuagaon, Gandhamardan and Gonua, which leads to higher road 
transportation cost. It also notes the lack of railway line to reduce mine -port distance at 
Nayagarh. While at places like Sukinda - Jaroli, iron-ore rake movement is decreased 
due to delay in environmental clearance for  doubling projects. The Committee is of the 
opinion that since railways is the fastest transport mode and can transport huge quantity 


26  
of ore at one go and also causes less environmental pollution as compared to road 
transport, all out efforts should be made to hasten the Mine -to-port road projects in the 
said projects. Environmental Clearances should also be fast tracked to expeditiously 
complete the projects. The Commi ttee also recommends that necessary steps may be 
taken to develop railway sidings near mines and for obtaining necessary statutory 
clearances to maximize the rail movement of Iron Ore. The Committee notes that some 
of the Rail and Road projects connecting the Paradip Port are pending for years due to 
various reasons. The Committee recommends that the Ministries of Railways; Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways; and State Governments should make concerted efforts to 
complete the projects at the earliest. Secretary, M inistry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways may take the initiative to complete the projects without delay. 
(Para 25)  
 
The Committee notes  that Vishakhapatnam Port is  one of  the largest  Major Ports in 
the country handling 75 MTPA with a 60% rail co -efficient, and is largely dependent on 
the Indian Railways for transportation of its EXIM cargo. The delay in electrification 
and doubling work  on this rail route is causing severe congestion at Port and also on 
railway lines. The Committee recommends that necessary steps should be taken to 
rectify the problem. 
(Para 26)  
 
The Committee is aware that Odisha is the largest iron ore producing Indian 
State playing a crucial role in the development of iron and steel industries across the 
nation as well as development of transportation system, aircraft industry, automobile 
industry, real estate and building industry etc. The Committee recommends that all out 
efforts should be made to ensure quick  movement of iron ore from Paradip Port and 
connecting roads should be repaired in a time bound manner and policies should be 
framed in this regard, to ensure growth of aforesaid industries, which will result in 
economic growth of the country. 
(Para 27) 
 
CRUISE TOURIST TERMINAL FACILITIES AT PORTS 
The Committee appreciates the various actions being taken by the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways in coordination with the Ministry of Tourism to develop the 


27  
required infrastructure and facilities for cruise tourism and for promotion of the same 
in India. The Committee, however, feels that cruise tourism is still in its nascent stage in 
India and requires well thought out, concerted efforts of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
& Waterways and Ministry of Tourism to tap the full potential of cruise tourism in India 
and reap the economic benefits thereof. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Task Force on Cruise Tourism comprising MoPS&W and MoT may continue to hold its 
meetings regularly and if required, the Task Force may seek consultations fro m 
international experts in the cruise tourism sector to prepare a comprehensive action 
plan for the development of cruise tourism in the country. 
(Para 35) 
 
The Committee notes from the projections regarding the potential for cruise shipping in 
India, that the potential of Mumbai has been projected to be 3.2 million while the overall 
potential of India has been shown as 4 million. The Committee is surprised to note that 
Mumbai has been projected to have 80 percent of the total potential of India in terms of  
number of cruise passengers. The Committee recommends that a thorough study may be 
made to fully  understand the potential of cruise tourism across other ports in the 
country so as to able to devise focused policies with the aim to tap such potential in the 
other States too. 
(Para 36)  
 
The Committee recommends that MoPSW, in co-ordination with MoT, may examine the 
feasibility for development and promotion of river tourism activities on rivers 
besides Brahmaputra and Ganga as well, and take concerted efforts to this end by 
developing Inland Waterways and connecting them to port terminals. Cruise terminals/ 
Jetties may be constructed wherever feasible by the Government of India in 
coordination with the State Governments and the  necessary budgetary allocation may 
be made for the purpose. The Government may also take measures to increase the 
depths of the draft by undertaking dredging operations wherever required  and feasible. 
If required, possible commercial exploitation of dredged material (sand) may also be 
explored in coordination with the State Governments. 
(Para 37)  
 
The Committee further points out that the potential of augmenting tourism through 


28  
Sagarmala Project, over and above the transportation of goods cannot be 
underestimated and  recommends that Tourist Terminals should exist in every 
port to promote transportation facilities for tourists. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should vigorously pursue the matters with the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments and hold regular meet ings with them  in this regard to ensure that these 
connectivity projects are completed within a reasonable time frame. 
(Para 38) 
With regard to the ongoing development of Cruise Terminals at various Ports, the 
Committee recommends that it may be ensured that all such terminals being 
developed are equipped with state -of-the-art facilities and amenities including 
comfortable passenger lounge,  immigration counters, sign boards in various relevant 
languages, clean washroom facilities etc. for the tourists, to  offer them a comfortable 
experience. The development  of terminals may be  planned with a long-term analysis 
of the estimated capacity requirements so as to be able to efficiently handle a large 
number of tourists in the upcoming years. 
(Para 39)  
 
The Committee further notes that the tourist terminal/ cruise facilities being developed 
at present  are for the Government controlled port terminals only. The Committee 
recommends that  the Ministry may devise ways to promote the development of 
cruise tourist terminals at privately managed ports as well, as there are many existing 
and upcoming private ports, which have the potential to attract tourists due to their 
opportune location. 
(Para 40) 
 
From the data furnished by MoPS&W with regard to pre -Covid and post -Covid 
scenario of cruise ships/passengers handled by Indian Ports, the Committee notes that 
while there was a discernible pattern of growth in terms of cruise ships/passengers 
handled by Indian Ports from FY 2016 -17 to FY 2019 -20, the onset of th e Coronavirus 
pandemic has had a substantial deterrent effect on the number of vessels/passengers 
handled. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways and Ministry of Tourism may undertake  necessary remedial measures to 
boost the revival of the cruise tourism sector over and above the pre -Covid levels, at the 
earliest. 


29  
(Para 41) 
MARITIME INDIA VISION (MIV) 2030 
The Committee notes that the ports and port –terminals, situated near industries and 
tourist sites/monuments, will play  a vital role in shaping key theme of Maritime India 
Vision, 2030 through their capabilities to handle bulk cargo and heavy tourist traffic 
simultaneously. The Committee recommends that terminals be developed under the 
MIV 2030 through linkages with modern  transport system, globalized supply chains, 
tourist places and coastal communities and also by taking the views of stakeholders for 
improvement of terminal designs. 
(Para 43) 
Transshipment Hubs 
The Committee appreciates the new policy of the Government to  create transshipment 
hubs across the country, which will create connectivity to the areas near the coastal 
regions and also bring about growth in economy and generate employment. The 
Committee welcomes the development of Andaman & Nicobar Islands as trans shipment 
hub and the development of Vadhavan  Port. The  Committee also notes that 
Lakshadweep Islands is  strategically placed near the busiest worldwide commercial 
shipping routes. The Committee therefore desires that the Ministry may explore the 
possibility of setting up a transshipment hub at Lakshadweep Islands. This will also give 
a boost to the tourism, besides creating job opportunities for the youth. 
(Para 45) 
 
 
 
* * * * 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 


30  
XXIII 
TWENTY THIRD MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 1st June, 2022 in Committee Room 
‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh –  Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
 
(i) Shri Vikram Singh, Joint Secretary, Shipping; 
(ii) Shri Bhushan Kumar, Joint Secretary (Sagarmala); 
(iii) Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (Parliament); 
(iv) Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, Adviser (Statistics); 
(v) Shri Adesh Titarmare, Deputy Chairman, Mumbai Port; 
(vi) Shri Sandeep Gupta, Director; and 
(vii) Shri Parmeshwar Bali, Deputy Chief Controller of Chartering. 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
(i) Shri Gyan Bhushan, Economic Advisor; and 
(ii) Ms. Kimjamlhing Changloi, Director. 


31  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and Ministry of Tourism, 
and apprised them of the agenda of the meeting i.e. to deliberate on the subject ‘Connectivity and 
Tourist Termin al Facilities at Ports.’ Initiating the discussion, the Chairman asked the 
representatives of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways to give a gist of the comprehensive 
development made towards rail-road-air connectivity to ports as envisaged in ‘Gati Shakti-National 
Master Plan.’ He also desired to know about the solutions employed by the Ministry to improve the 
multi-modal transportation and last –mile connectivity between ports and hinterland/tourist sites, 
and the responsibilities of various agencies/stakeholders involved in the implementation of Port 
Connectivity projects. He also raised various issues regarding provision of fuel concession to ships, 
eliminating bottlenecks in port–road projects, construction of pipeline transport, etc. The Chairman 
expressed the view that the timeline of project completion be reduced from twenty years to ten 
years and a separate report of commercially viable projects should also be made available to the 
Committee. 
2. He then asked the Ministry of Tourism to apprise the Committee of the types of Tourist 
Terminals existing at various Indian ports and the facilities existing therein. He queried whether  
any performance analysis of port t erminals has been done keeping tourism prospects in mind, and 
whether the Ministry is being assisted by any consultants in implementation of Tourist Terminal 
development projects through Private Public Partnership (PPP) mode. He asked the Ministry to 
inform the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry to fund the terminal development 
projects and bottlenecks in expediting them, coordination mechanisms employed by the Ministry in 
ensuring safe and comfortable transportation for tourists from port term inals to hinterland and 
infrastructural bottlenecks identified in this regard, hurdles caused by any existing Acts/Rules etc. 
He also queried whether any market survey has been done by the Ministry and suggested that the 
provision of a separate passenger t erminal upon construction of a new private port should be made 
mandatory and private port owners should be informed of the guidelines with regard to that. 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee about the 
coordination mechanisms employed by the Ministries of Tourism and Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways where they closely work on the required need for a tourist terminal at cruise tourism 
destinations and that a Committee co –chaired by the Secretaries of both the Ministries id entified 
the pressure points regarding provision of amenities to the tourists. The Committee was further 
informed that 14 projects regarding air -conditioning of terminals, waiting areas, play areas etc. 
across all Major Ports have been approved, 10 project s of the Coastal Circuit under the ‘Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme’ have been funded with the investment of Rs. 650 crores across all the States and 
that Inland River Cruise, 9 jetties for Cruise Tourism in both National Waterways across the 
Ganges and Brahmaputra  rivers and River Cruise Terminal projects in the States of UP, Bihar, 


32  
West Bengal and Assam are being funded by the Ministry. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways informed  
the Committee of the plans of the Ministr y to set up a transshipment hub in Galathea Bay situated  
at the extreme south of the Andaman Nicobar Islands, for which the DPR has already been  
awarded and will be ready in another six to eight months. The Committee was further informed  
that Cabinet appro val was obtained in February, 2020 for setting up a new mega port called 
‘Vadhavan’ in Maharashtra, the work on which is under progress. The Committee was apprised  
that a study was done by Bermello Ajamil, a private consultant, on Cruise tourism in 2015 and that 
the Ministry is considering another market study to throw light on/analyze its competitiveness in 
the development of International Cruise Tourism. 
5. Various queries/issues were raised by the Members regarding lack of air connectivity and 
accommodation facilities at Andaman & Nicobar Islands, provision of airbus connectivity in 
various States of India, development of lighthouses as a tourist spots, dredging of rivers for smooth 
river transportation, hiring contractors to undertake the task of dredging  of rivers, status and target 
date for completion of rail –road connectivity projects, servicing and repairing facilities for smaller 
vessels/cruise ships in Cochin Shipyard Ltd., reducing logistics costs/short distance freight costs, 
skill & development centers not being at par with the shipping industry, etc. Some Members asked 
the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways to provide data on several queries regarding total 
length in Kilometres of the National Highways connecting to ports constructed by the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways and National Highways Authority of India, three actionable points 
identified by the Ministry under Inland River Cruising, status and future plans of the Ministry 
regarding new port being constructed near the Jawaharlal Nehru Port, etc. 
6. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of  
the Committee. The Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to ot her 
queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied 
during the meeting, to the Secretariat. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The meeting adjourned at 1:02 PM. 
 
 
NewDelhi, Swarabji B. 
1st June, 2022 Director 


33  
XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th June, 2022 in Committee Room –
‘4’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh – Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Draft Reports on:- 
 
(i) * * *; 
(ii) * * * * * ; and 
(iii) Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports. 
*Relates to other matters

34  
2. The Committee suggested some minor changes in the abovementioned draft 
Reports. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out the changes. The 
Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Reports alongwith some minor 
modifications/additions. 
3. The Committee also authorized its Chairman to present the aforesaid Reports to 
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, during the ongoing inter-Session period. 
4. The meeting adjourned at 3:07 P.M. 
 
 
NewDelhi.                   Swarabji B. 
8th June, 2022             Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Relates to other matter 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


35 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
LIST OF WITNESS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
1st June, 2022 (11:00 A.M.) 
 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
 
 
1 Shri Vikram Singh Joint Secretary (Shipping) 
2 Shri Bhushan Kumar Joint Secretary (SM) 
3 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh Joint Secretary (Ports) 
4 Shri Sunil Kumar Singh Adviser (Statistics) 
5 Shri Adesh Titarmare Dy. Chairman, Mumbai Port 
6 Shri Sandeep Gupta Director 
7 Shri Parmeshwar Bali Deputy Chief Controller of Chartering 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
 
8. Shri Gyan Bhushan Economic Advisor 
9. Ms. Kimjamlhing Changloi Director 
 
 
 
* * * * * 
 
