PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 149
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N T R A N S P O R T , T O U R IS M A N D C U L T U R E
ONE HUNDRED AND FOR TY -NINTH REPOR T
ON
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM INFRASTRUCTUR E AND
AMENITIES FOR  THE COMMONWEALTH GAMES 2010
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 24 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 24 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 24 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 24 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
FE B R U A R Y, 2009/PH A L G U N A , 1930 (SA K A )FE B R U A R Y, 2009/PH A L G U N A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE AND
AMENITIES FOR THE COMMONWEALTH GAMES 2010
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 24 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—25
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 26—34
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 35—39
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 41—51

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
6. Shri Shanta Kumar
7. Shrimati Hema Malini
8. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
9. Shri Biswajit Daimary
*10. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
15. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
16. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
17. Shrimati Priya Dutt
18. Shri Dip Gogoi
19. Shri P. Karunakaran
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
22. Shri Hemlal Murmu
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Suraj Singh
27. Shri Prahlad Joshi
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
@29. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
$30. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
#31. Dr. P . P . Koya
* Nominated on 18th February, 2009.
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  18th December, 2008.
$ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  19th December, 2008.
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th January, 2009.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf
this One Hundred Forty-ninth Report on ‘Development of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for
the Commonwealth Games 2010’,
2. Delhi is hosting 2010 Commonwealth Games from 3rd October, to 14th October, 2010. It
is expected to attract one lakh foreign tourists to Delhi during this period. As the Commonwealth
Games is expected to have large scale impact on India's tourism Sector, the Committee decided
to take stock of the preparedness and efforts of the Government and various stakeholders for
providing the tourists all the facilities including infrastructure development, transport infrastructure
and connectivity, conservation and preservation of monument, hotel accommodation and human
resource development etc. for making the event successful.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 12th and 27th November, 2008 and 19th January, 2009
discussed the subject with the representatives of Union Ministries of Tourism, Culture and Urban
Development; Archaeological Survey of India, Indian Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC);
Government of Delhi, INTACH, the recognized Tour, Travel and Hoteliers Associations namely
Hotel Association of India, Travel Agents Association of India, Indian Tourist Transporters
Association, Tourist Guides Federation of India, Adventure Tour Operators Association of India and
Indian Association of Tour Operators and Federation of Hotels Restaurants Association of India
with a view to ascertaining their views/suggestions on the subject and to know the details of the
preparation and progress of works of tourism infrastructure projects for the Commonwealth
Games, 2010. In this context, the Committee visited the world heritage sites maintained by ASI
namely the Qutab Minar and Humanyu Tomb on 6.1.2009 to assess the state of affairs of these
monuments.
4. The Committee during its study visit to Udaipur, Jaipur and Agra from 4th to 8th February, 2009
discussed the subject with the representatives of Union Ministry of Civil Aviation, Tourism and
Culture, Archaeological Survey of India, Airports Authority of India (AAI), National Aviation
Company of India Limited (NACIL), Government of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. During
the visit, the Committee selected four major areas for discussions: schemes/efforts made for
developing tourism infrastructure and amenities for the tourists during Commonwealth Games, 2010
per se ; availability of hotel accommodation; increasing air connectivity and expansion/modernization
of airports and; protection and preservation of ancient monuments and world heritage sites in the
States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana.
5. The Committee expresses its gratitude to the officers and representatives of the Ministries
of Tourism, Culture, Urban Development, Civil Aviation, Archaeological Survey of India, India
Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC); Airports Authority of India (AAI); National Aviation
Company of India Limited (NACIL), Governments of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Haryana;
INTACH and recognized Tour, Travel and Hoteliers Associations namely Hotel Association of India,
Travel Agents Association of India, Indian Tourist Transporters Association, Tourist Guides
Federation of India, Adventure Tour Operators Association of India and Indian Association of Tour
Operators and Federation of Hotels Restaurants Association of India for their cooperation in
furnishing the required feedback and information in connection with the examination of the subject

and also for making valuable suggestions for improving the tourism infrastructure for the
Commonwealth Games.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
19th February, 2009.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 19, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 30, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
(iv)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
India has always been an attractive tourist destination from far and wide since ages.
Importance of tourism as an instrument of economic development and employment generation has
been well recognized all over the world. Tourism plays an important and effective role in achieving
the growth with equity. During the last few years, tourism has been experiencing substantial
growth in terms of international tourist arrivals and tourism earnings. World tourism accelerated in
2007 posting a higher growth rate (6.6%) as compared to the previous year’s growth rate (5.5%).
The growth of tourism measured in terms of Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) and Foreign
Exchange Earnings (FEE) in India during 2007 were higher than those in the World and Asia and
Pacific. With the FTAs of 5.08 million and FEE of US$ 10.73 billion in 2007, India
achieved growth rate of 14.3% in FTAs and 24.3% in FEE in 2007. FTAs in India during January
- October, 2008 were 4.32 million, with a growth of 9.4% as compared to FTAs of 3.95 million
during January - October, 2007. FEE during January - October, 2008 were US$ 9.70 billion as
compared to US$ 8.29 billion during January - October, 2007, registering a growth of 16.9%. The
key factors driving the tourism boom include India’s sustained economic growth, strong foreign
direct investment inflows, increased air network, the availability of affordable air travel, a strong
domestic market, aggressive marketing campaigns, etc.
2. Delhi is hosting 2010 Commonwealth Games and like all events big or small, this mega
event too is expected to have significant impact on India’s economy. Around one lakh foreign
visitors are estimated to visit Delhi during the Games period. For creating various infrastructural
facilities for those tourists, a number of projects have been undertaken. In view of little time left,
the Committee decided to take stock of the preparedness of the Government and various other
agencies that are responsible for providing tourists all the facilities mainly relating to such areas
as safety and security, transport, air connectivity, hotel accommodation including conservation and
preservation of our ancient monuments, human resource development, etc. for making this event
successful.
3. The Committee discussed various aspects relating to development of tourism infrastructure
and other amenities for tourists during the Commonwealth Games, 2010’ with different
stakeholders in this regard. Apart from the representatives of Union Ministries of Tourism, Culture
and Urban Development, Archaeological Survey of India, Indian Tourism Development Corporation
(ITDC); Government of Delhi, it also interacted with representatives of INTACH, the recognized
Tour, Travel and Hoteliers Associations, namely, Hotel Association of India, Travel Agents
Association of India, Indian Tourist Transporters Association, Tourist Guides Federation of India,
Adventure Tour Operators Association of India, Indian Association of Tour Operators and
Federation of Hotels Restaurants Association of India. The Committee noted their views/suggestions
on different aspects of the subject and received non-official feedback from them on the preparation
and progress of tourism infrastructure projects for the Commonwealth Games, 2010.
4. The Committee notes that during the Commonwealth Games a large number of
tourists are expected into India besides the participants. The Committee feels that the
Commonwealth Games would provide us good opportunity to showcase our rich cultural
heritage and achievements of the contemporary India to the International community, that
would act as catalyst for development of infrastructure and capacity-building. The success
of Commonwealth Games will not only position India as a multifaceted destination but will
bring economic returns through business and tourism. The Committee, therefore, calls upon

2
the Government and all the stakeholders to make concerted efforts for creating best of the
facilities and infrastructure, renovation and better up-keep of our tourism and ancient sites,
improving road and air connectivity and safety and security of the tourist and providing
adequate accommodation at reasonable prices. The Committee also recommends that Delhi
being the Centre of important literary and cultural activities, should refurbish its Libraries,
Museums, Art Galleries, H aats, etc., for showcasing its rich and varied cultural and
intellectual heritage.
TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
5. With the Commonwealth Games 2010 drawing closer, the host city Delhi is gearing itself
up for the mega event. The Committee was informed that various plans were underway for
providing/creating adequate facilities for the tourists expected during the Commonwealth Games.
The city was set to undergo a major facelift while building adequate and modem infrastructure
by 2010. The tourist infrastructure development involved the upgradation as well as the growth of
hotel accommodation in Delhi and the NCR Region. For example, under the Central
Financial Assistance (CFA) Scheme, the Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned projects amounting
Rs.6123.36 lakh in Delhi under the Tenth Plan. Further, under the Eleventh Plan, projects
amounting to Rs.1780.68 Lakh have also been sanctioned during the year so far. During the
year 2008-09, an outlay of Rs.552 crore had been sanctioned to the Ministry of Tourism for
infrastructure development projects for all the States and Union territories of the country. Out of
the sanctioned amount, the Ministry has spent only 63 per cent of the budgeted outlay till
November 2008. The projects sanctioned for Delhi include:
(a) Development works at the Red Fort;
(b) Development of the Old Fort;
(c) Illumination of Humayuns Tomb;
(d) Illumination of Qutab Minar;
(e) Development of Dilli Haat at Pitampura;
(f) Special repairs and Reconditioning of Colonial Building at Red Fort etc.
6. Besides, the Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned the tourism projects and released funds
under CFA for holistic development of golden triangle circuit. The following tables shows the
projects sanctioned and the amount released so far, for the development of tourism projects in
Jaipur, Agra, Khajuraho and Haryana:
JAIPUR
Sl. CFA released for Project Period Amount Amount
No. Sanctioned Released
Rs. (in lakh) Rs. (in lakh)
12 3 4 5
1 Conservation of Nahargarh Fort 2002-2003 100.00 100.00
2 Public Utility Complex at Amer Fort, 2002-2003 54.00 54.00
Hawa Mahal and Albert hall
3 Rural Tourism project at Samode Village 2003-2004 50.00 40.00
4 Endogenous T ourism project, 2004-2005 20.00 20.00
Village Samode

3
12 3 4 5
5 Endogenous T ourism project, 2004-2005 20.00 16.00
Village Samode
6 Integrated development of T ourist 2004-2005 738.00 590.40
circuit of national capital region
7 Development of Elephant Village at 2005-2006 492.18 393.74
Amer, Jaipur
8 Fairs/festivals/Events An amount of Rs. 15.00 lakh each, during
2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 was sanctioned
and released. During the year 2006-07 an
amount of Rs. 10 lakh each was sanctioned
and released for two events.
AGRA
Sl. CFA released for Project Period Amount Amount
No. Sanctioned Released
Rs. (in lakh) Rs. (in lakh)
1 Interpretation center/Shopping 2002-2003 495.80 495.80
Complex at Fatehpur Sikri
2 Integrated development of Agra, 2005-2006 767.00 613.00
revitalization and visitor management
for Taj Mahal vicinity-East Gate
3 Integrated development of Agra, 2006-2007 758.00 606.00
revitalization and visitor management
for Taj Mahal vicinity-West Gate
4 Fairs/festivals/Events An amount of Rs. 15.00 lakh was sanctioned
and released during 2006-07
KHAJURAHO
Sl. CFA released for Project Period Amount Amount
No. Sanctioned Released
Rs. (in lakh) Rs. (in lakh)
1 Development around Western Group 2002-2003 190.80 190.80
of temples
2 Integrated development of T ourist 2005-2006 461.09 368.87
Circuit of Gwalior–Orchha–Khajuraho
3 Development of Western Group of 2007-2008 419.67 335.73
temples
4 Fairs/festivals/Events An amount of Rs.10.00 lakh each was
sanctioned and released during the years
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and
2006-07

4
HARYANA
Sl. CFA released for Project Period Amount Amount
No. Sanctioned Released
Rs. (in lakh) Rs. (in lakh)
1 Development at Udgam Sthal at ADI 2003-04 178.79 178.79
Badri (Adi Badri Dholavira circuit)
2 Renovation/Strengthtening of Tourist 2003-04 108.25 108.25
infrastructure at Kurukshetra, Jyotisar
3 Installation of Mahabharat Ratha at 2003-04 210.00 210.00
Jyotisar, Kurukshetra
4 Development of Kurukshetra, 2003-04 125.84 125.84
Tapovan Park Phase-II
5 Development of Morni Hills and 2003-04 170.76 136.00
Tikkar Tal
6 Convention Centre at Surajkund, 2003-04 127.84 1 15.87
Haryana
7 Integrated Development of Panipat- 2006-07 1630.03 735.49
Kurukshetra-Pinjore-Circuit as
Major Project
8 Development of Badkhal Lake 2006-07 181.13 144.90
tourist complex as tourist destination
9 Development of tourism in Morni- 2007-08 329.00 263.20
Pinjore Hills-Sultanpur National Park
10 Development of Suraj Kund 2007-08 367.25 183.62
11 Integrated Development of Panipat- 2008-09 1545.22 0.00
Kurukshetra-Pinjore-Circuit Phase-II
12 Development of Da mdama as a 2008-09 290.24 232.19
tourist destination
7. On being enquired about State-wise allocation of funds for different projects, the Ministry
informed that there was no State-wise allocation; the layout was for the infrastructure sector for
whole of the country. There is a different Head under which, assistance is given by the Ministry
of Tourism as and when a proposal came. It was also stated that there was no shortage of funds
at present and there was no proposal pending from any State/UTs. The representative of the
Ministry assured the Committee that they could spare Rs.l00 crore or more depending upon the
proposals of the Delhi Government under infrastructure upgradation of tourism destination schemes
for infrastructure development for the Commonwealth Games.
8. The Committee notes that there are adequate funds available with the Ministry of
Tourism under infrastructure upgradation of tourism destination schemes. However, the
Committee notes with concern that no proposals from the Delhi Government for
development of infrastructure and capacity building including creation and renovation of
hospitality facilities, modernization of tourism sites, etc., was submitted/pending with the
Ministry of Tourism till November, 2008. The Committee feels that since the Commonwealth

5
Games are drawing closer, so many projects have yet to be initiated, let alone completed.
In such a situation, absence of any proposal from the NCT of Delhi surprises the
Committee. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress
upon the Government of Delhi and also the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and
Rajasthan for submitting projects proposals for developing tourism infrastructure including
hotel accommodation for the Games and release the funds at the earliest for implementing
the development works on time.
9. In view of the fact that most of the tourists coming to Delhi shall also visit important
towns in Rajasthan and Agra, the Committee decided to see for itself the arrangements and
amenities at these places. The Committee, therefore, visited Udaipur, Jaipur and Agra from 4th to
8th February, 2009 alongwith the representatives of Union Ministry of Tourism, Culture and Civil
Aviation and ASI. Discussion was held with the officials of Government of Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh and Haryana with a view to ascertaining their views/suggestions on the issue of
connectivity and amenities to tourists during the CWG-2010.
10. During the discussion the Principal Secretary, Tourism, Government of Rajasthan informed
the Committee that the Rajasthan Government was making efforts for promoting tourism in the
State. It was closely associating the private sector also for launching attractive packages during the
Games. The State Government had already launched Tourism Policy, Golf Tourism, Resort
Tourism, Spa Tourism etc. to tap the tourist. During 2007-08, the Rajasthan received 25920529
domestic and 1401042 international tourists. The Principal Secretary further emphasized that hotels
which were under construction, may be provided financial assistance. As regards the financial
assistance from the Ministry of Tourism, it was informed that all the projects including Nahargarh
Fort and Amer Fort pending for Central Finance Assistance (CFA) have been cleared and as of date
no project in Rajasthan was pending for want of CFA.
11. About the connectivity issue, the Principal Secretary informed the Committee that with the
commissioning of new international airport terminal in Jaipur, there is a need to introduce more
international flights. There is also a need for air connectivity to Ajmer and Kota. The Rajasthan
Government was willing to provide land free-of-cost for development of airport infrastructure at
these places. The Principal Secretary demanded that the speed of Shatabdi train from New Delhi
to Jaipur, that takes five hours, may suitably be increased to reduce the travel time. The route also
demands double line for smooth passage of trains, he said.
12. As regards the security and safety of the tourists in Rajasthan, the Principal Secretary
replied that the state Government was organizing workshops for police personnel and the hotel
guards will be trained by the police personnel. Tourist police was also available throughout
Rajasthan to help tourists in a better way.
13. The Committee notes that the Government of Rajasthan is utilizing the opportunity
for promotion of tourism and introducing various packages for the guests/tourists visiting
Rajasthan during the games. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Tourism to
provide adequate funds to the Government of Rajasthan for promotion of various tourism
products in the State. It also recommends that the tax incentives/benefits as provided to the
hotels in the National Capital Region (NCR) of Delhi may suitably be extended to the hotels
in Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, so as to remove the imbalance
in the demand and supply of hotel rooms’ inventory. The Committee also recommends that
the Government of Rajasthan should make concerted efforts and coordinate with the
Ministry of Tourism (for promotional support), Ministry of Civil Aviation (for introduction
of more international flights to and from Jaipur and development of Airports and air
connectivity from Ajmer and Kota) and Ministry of Railways (for increasing the speed of the
trains and double lining of rail line between Delhi and Jaipur). The State Government should

6
also impress upon the hotels in the State to take adequate security measures such as
installing x-ray machines for screening of baggage which is a must in the present scenario.
14. While going around the Amber Fort, the Committee saw preparation for some film shooting
by erecting big sets. The Committee was assured that it was not going to cause any damage to
the monuments. The Committee’s apprehension came true just few days after when it was reported
that a part of wall inside the monuments came crashing down. The Committee recommends that
while allowing any activity including commercial in the monuments, which should
necessarily be remain very exceptional, the Governments must ensure that safety, security,
originality and cleanliness of the monuments is not impaired upon and no damages of any
kind is caused.
15. The Committee notes that the conservation work is being carried out in Amber Fort
by Amer Development Authority. The Committee however, desires that the concerned
agencies be cautioned not to destroy/alter the originality while making effort to renovate
the monuments. The Committee also notes with concern that the condition of monuments
like Jantar Mantar and Albert Hall is not upto the mark and desires that Amer
Development Authority should provide funds for their maintenance an upkeep.
16. The Secretary (Tourism), Government of Uttar Pradesh during the deliberations with the
Committee on the 8th February, 2009 in Agra stated that the State Government was already
engaged in preparation for the games and several new hotels were coming up. But in view of the
global meltdown, travel and tourism industry requires financial incentives. Further access roads to
Taj Mahal, Taj Express way right from Noida, Greater Noida was already under construction and
will be completed by the Commonwealth Games and this will considerably reduce the travel time
between Delhi and Agra. When the Committee enquired about the condition of roads inside the Agra
city, the Secretary informed that the Government of U.P. was already seized with the matter and
there was a proposal for construction of an under pass from Prithvi Nath to Shahganj and for
which an MoU had been signed with the Ministry of Railways. However, the approval from the
Ministry of Defence was awaited, he informed.
17. As regards the induction and training of tourist guides, it was informed that they were
inducted on demand and supply basis under the ASI Acts and are trained by the Ministry of
Tourism. Ministry of Tourism had issued guidelines for Regional Level guides, State Level guides
and Local guides. A number of court cases were pending filed by the guides/unauthorized guides.
The State Government emphasized the need for conducting training for these guides keeping
international travelers in mind. As per the figures available during 2007, around 37.5 lakh tourists
visited Agra including 7.5 lakh foreign tourists and 30 lakh domestic travelers. The State
Government demanded that there should be more state level and local level guides.
18. The Committee notes that a large number of persons were likely to stay in the
vicinity of Delhi during the games and the city of Taj Mahal is gearing up to meet the
expected tourists rush during the CWG 2010. The Committee also notes that the
Government of Uttar Pradesh is assessing and preparing the infrastructural needs of the
city to accommodate around a million tourists likely to visit the Taj Mahal during the
Games. The Committee feels that there is a need for expansion of hotels as more rooms
would be required to accommodate the tourist and recommends that the Government should
come up with some concessional/incentive packages to motivate the hoteliers to add rooms
to their existing structures. The Committee recommends that the guidelines for funding
existing hotels structures needs to be looked into and the Government should amend the
guidelines to provide financial assistance to the hotels which are under construction. The
State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan should be provided central
grants in order to meet the shortfall in hotel accommodation.

7
19. The Committee notes the problems like long and arduous train/road journey from
New Delhi to Agra, lack of tourist buses attached to the railway stations in Agra and Delhi,
inadequate access from Agra Cantt. Railway station to Taj Mahal and Sikandara, poor
condition of the battery operated vehicles, lack of adequate parking, cafeteria, security
check, long queues for tickets, drinking water, toilets, luggage room, facilitation centers,
etc. The Committee feels that these are not big issues and can be resolved by way of better
coordination among different agencies especially the Ministry of Defence for construction of
underpass in Shahganj area for proper road connectivity to Taj Mahal. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Government to find immediate solutions to these problems and
introduce easy ticketing procedures like prior ticketing, e-ticketing, composite tickets,
flexible tickets, group tickets, tatkal system, transit passes system, etc. for gaining entry
to Taj Mahal, besides restructuring and strengthening of the security. The drinking water,
toilet facilities and facilitation centers should be provided outside the Taj Mahal to facilitate
the tourists. The problems of guides should be resolved by the Ministry of Tourism, Culture
and Government of Uttar Pradesh with mutual interaction.
20. The Committee notes that the view of Taj from the other side of Yamuna from
Mehtab Bagh may be a thrilling experience for the tourists during full moon night that
creates a view of Taj being black. The Committee recommends that viewing of Taj Mahal
from this side should be promoted and permission for adequate parking and toilet facilities
should be provided there. The Committee desires that in maintaining the monuments,
environmental developments including horticulture works and landscaping, civic amenities
for tourists and display of cultural notice boards and signages should be taken care of. The
Government should make concerted efforts to involve public and corporate sector for the
purpose. The Committee also recommends that a survey should be conducted by the
Government to ascertain the carrying capacity of the monument to protect it from being
damaged by over crowd.
21. The Committee found the practice of night viewing of Taj more restrictive due to
tight security arrangements as well as lack of coordination between U.P. Police and CISF.
The distance between the monument and the tourists is too long to be able to feel the
beauty of the monument. The Committee without compromising the need for security of
Taj, feels that with a proper coordination and communication between the two forces and
with proper training for good behavior with the tourists, efforts can be made to allow the
tourists to see the Taj in night from the floor where the stairs reach the main structure.
It would be a lifetime experience for them.
AUGMENTATION OF HOTEL ACCOMMODATION FOR COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010
22. The Committee raised the question of availability of accommodation for the tourists during
the period of the Games and the details of incentives which have been announced in the Union
Budget for this purpose and their utilization by various agencies. The representative of the Ministry
of Tourism informed the Committee that with a view to encourage the growth of new budget
category hotels, the Finance Ministry had given a five-year tax holiday under Section 80-ID to
2, 3 and 4-star category hotels and convention centers which will be functional between 1.4.07
to 31.3.2010, in NCT of Delhi and the districts of Faridabad, Gurgaon, Gautam Buddh Nagar
(NOIDA) and Ghaziabad. In order to ensure that private sector takes benefits of incentives
proposed by the Government, the DDA have auctioned 33 hotel sites with a provision of 6000 Plus
rooms. DDA and the Ministry of Urban Development have been actively monitoring, from time to
time, the process to complete formalities regarding construction, approval and subsequent progress.
23. The Committee was informed that against about 30,000  rooms needed during the Game
period located in and around Delhi, only 1,924 rooms came under the ‘definite’ category; 2,015

8
rooms were under the ‘likely’ category; and the remaining 1,990 rooms come under the ‘doubtful’
category. However, this position was expected to undergo a change depending upon the future
progress of work. Based on the latest site inspection, it is expected that a large number of cases
under ‘likely’ category may become ‘definite’ category. In addition to what DDA was facilitating,
there were, some other hotel proposals which were being pursued with the concerned agencies.
24. The Ministry of Tourism submitted that as far as motels are concerned, as per the
provisions of Master Plan Delhi 2021, no fresh motels will be permitted. As per the information
available, a total of 104 motels had been sanctioned. About twelve motels were functioning, as
reported by the MCD. Conversion of motels into hotels goes against the very spirit of town and
city planning and more than a planning activity, it becomes a regularization exercise. Taking the
overall scenario into account, it is felt that since the zonal-development plans, which is the next
layout for the Master Plan, are under preparation, the actual number of motels that will be falling
in the commercial zone will be reflected in these plans and as such, such motels falling in the
commercial and permissible use zones may become eligible for construction of hotels.
25. About the development plan of DDA, the Ministry informed that another task mandated to
the DDA is to construct the Games Village at East Delhi, competition and training venues at Siri
Fort Complex, Yamuna Sports Complex and Saket Sports Complex. The Games Village is planned
to provide residential accommodation to 8,000 athletes and team officials. It also consists of
training areas for athletics, swimming pools, indoor halls, Village operation and other support areas.
With a view to supplementing the efforts to have more accommodation for the visitors during the
Games, DDA has initiated the process of identifying about 2,000 flats which will generate around
5,500 rooms in centrally located areas, which can be made available for augmenting
accommodation during the Games. The shortfall in hotel rooms, which were mandated to be
created on the hotel sites auctioned by the DDA, to a great extent is expected to be compensated
by providing these accommodations.
26. During the course of the discussion, the Hoteliers Associations submitted before the
Committee that with the current economic meltdown and terror attack on Mumbai had adversely
impacted the India’s tourism scenario. This had caused massive cancellation of hotel booking
throughout the country resulting in revenue losses to the tune of around Rs. 9731 crore. They
desired that the tourism may be declared as industry and given infrastructure status for the hotels
sector. This would provide added impetus to the development of tourism greatly. The
representatives of the Hotel Association of India and Federation of Hotels and Restaurants
Association of India presented the key issues highlighting the long and short terms challenges
impeding the growth of tourism infrastructure and amenities in the country and NCR. Some of
these are: absence of an updated Master Plan for tourism, high cost of land, creation of land banks
on lines of SEZ, FAR, tough lending norms by Indian banks, multiplicity of taxes, local Government
being unaware of the potential, Luxury tax computed on published rates in many States, lack of
enough fiscal incentives for entrepreneurs to invest in this capital intensive industry, Opaque
licensing process causing for delay in project execution, Archaic laws governing the operations of
Hotels, outdated Hotel Classification/rating system, acute lack of value-for-money proposition and
poor tourist infrastructure and ground support. They desired that the same may be addressed at
the highest level to bring tourism in the main stream of the national economy.
27. The Committee notes that the hotel accommodation is the key component of the
tourism infrastructure needed for the CWG-20l0. At present there is huge gap demand and
supply of the hotel rooms in India in general and Delhi in particular. The Committee finds
that the hotel development in India is ailing with many impediments such as regulatory,
financing, clearances, operations etc. The Committee is perturbed to note that the
countdown to CWG has begun but there seems inadequate infrastructure in all sectors such

9
as road, airport, accommodation, surface transport, entertainment, basic amenities, parking,
information centers, security, stadia and supply of powers. The Committee feels that the
problems brought out by the Hotel Association of India and Federation of Hotels and
Restaurants Association of India before the Committee are justified and needs serious
attention of Governments. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government to
address the key issues and challenges faced by the hotel sector in India including NCR for
development of tourism infrastructure and amenities for the CWG-2010.
28. The Committee notes that the Government has extended tax holiday scheme for
construction of budget hotels in NCT of Delhi and the districts of Faridabad, Gurgaon,
Gautam Buddh Nagar (NOIDA) and Ghaziabad. It seems to the Committee that the financial
incentives and tax holidays announced by the Government have not been used optimally by
the private parties for construction of the new hotels in Delhi and adjoining areas. The
Committee recommends the Government to pursue the State Governments of Haryana and
Uttar Pradesh and Delhi and various land owning agencies, DDA/Ministry of Urban
Development to allocate land on joint venture/revenue sharing basis and provide tax
incentives/benefits and tax holidays with single window clearances for the hotel projects to
these private players in State of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajashthan and Madhya Pradesh
who are interested in setting up of new hotels to facilitate the growth of the accommodation
sector to tourist during the period of the Games. The Committee also recommends that
since the CWG are almost the round the corner, the Government may, if necessary, further
liberalize the incentive schemes to attract investment in the hotel projects.
29. The Committee has serious doubts about the capability of the DDA for expediting the
issue of identification and allotment of hotel sites for construction of budget hotels for the
Games. The Committee notes with concerns that the pace of creation of additional hotel
accommodation at 39 hotel sites auctioned by DDA since January 2006 is lagging behind
schedule, though the Committee has been assured by the Ministry of Urban Development
that completion of these sites would generate 6019 rooms and the DDA and the Ministry
have been actively monitoring from time to time the process to complete the formalities
and progress of work. The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Ministry
of Urban Development as the recent assessment reveals that only 1924 rooms will be
available under the definite category, 2015 rooms under the likely category and the
remaining 1990 rooms under the doubtful category. This way only fewer rooms will be
available as per the assessment. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government to
once again ascertain the position with the concerned agencies and come out with more
realistic assessment in this regard. A concrete plan for facilitating the hotel proposals
including the alternative proposal for conversion of motels into hotels and identification of
vacant DDA flats to offset the deficit of hotel room before the commencement of the Games
should be considered. The Committee hopes that the Government will take the steps to
address the problem of shortage of rooms and complete the exercise for developing the
accommodation to the visitors well in time.
30. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry of Tourism that a ‘Task Force’ has been
constituted in the Ministry of Tourism for monitoring the progress of the various agencies for
creation of additional hotel accommodation in NCT of Delhi. These agencies include the
Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, the Ministries of Railways, Urban Development and
Civil Aviation, the Delhi Development Authority (DDA), Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC),
Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) etc. Regular meetings are held to review the progress
and so far, 18 meetings of the Task Force have been held since last two years. The Hon’ble
Minister of Tourism and Culture personally met the Hon’ble Minister of Urban Development on
4.1.2007 for expediting issues relating to DDA and MoUD. The Ministry of Urban Development

10
was requested to identify 75 hotel sites for construction of budget hotels. Secretary, Tourism met
Secretary (UD) on 21.11.07 to expedite the allotment of hotel sites for the Games. The issue of
infrastructure development and augmentation of accommodation has been also taken up in the
Meetings of the Group of Ministers (GOMs). Since the year 2004, the meetings of the GOM have
been held 14 times, the last one having being held on 9.4.08. The Committee of Secretaries (COS)
discussed the issue of infrastructure development and the augmentation of hotel accommodation
during its various meetings in the last three years. In order to assess the ground reality and exact
position, meetings were also held with the entrepreneurs of hotel projects. The meeting with
entrepreneurs of DDA projects was held on 14.5.2008 and the meeting for review of projects in
Haryana was held on 18.5.2008. All the land owning agencies have also been advised to regularly
document the project by taking periodical photographs during the review. The DDA is also holding
regular meetings with the entrepreneurs for close monitoring of the projects and also to facilitate
various clearances. Meetings to review and monitor the arrangements for the Commonwealth
Games-2010 are also being conducted regularly by Lt. Governor, Delhi, Chief Minister of Delhi and
Minister of State (Sports).
31. During the course of the oral evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism deposed before
the Committee that the Ministry of Tourism monitors and reviews all the hotel projects for the
Commonwealth Games by holding regular meetings of the Task Force. Nineteen such meetings
have been held. The Commonwealth Games projects and issues are also being reviewed regularly
by the Group of Ministers, in the Committee of Secretaries, headed by the Cabinet Secretary and
also by the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi. All efforts are being made to facilitate the promoters of
hotel projects to expedite the clearances and permissions. Attempts are being made to have a single
window clearance because various clearances are required by the hoteliers. The Ministry of
Tourism is also exploring all the possibilities for augmenting additional accommodation. Attempts
are being made, apart form the DDA, with the Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Civil Aviation, the
State Governments of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, DMRC, etc., in this regard.
32 The Ministry of Tourism has been requesting the Land Owning Agencies to create land
banks for hotels and facilitate the investment in the ‘Hotel Sector’ through friendly policies viz.
Single Window Clearance, Revenue sharing mode, etc. The Ministry of Urban Development is
facilitating the creation of additional rooms by way of the hotel sites auctioned by the Delhi
Development Authority. Also under the Master Plan for Delhi (MPD) 2021, provisions have been
incorporated to facilitate Guest Houses operating in residential areas. The MPD has been further
amended to include enhanced control norms for hotels to give boost to tourist accommodation.
Apart from this, several other measures have been undertaken by the GNCTD to upgrade the city
infrastructure. All this will contribute towards welcoming the tourists visiting the city for
Commonwealth Games 2010. Secretary (Tourism) has been in constant touch with Secretary (UD)
for allotment of hotel sites and other issues since 2005. The Minister, Tourism and Culture had
requested MoUD the following:
(a) To identify 75 hotel sites for construction of budget hotels with a total room capacity
of 30,000 rooms.
(b) In the meeting of the CoS, held on 18.10.07, nine to ten additional sites for budget
hotels were to be identified and the possibility be explored to give it on a long lease
and revenue sharing basis.
(c) It was also proposed that area within 4 kms around International airport in Delhi be
declared as hotel zone.
(d) DDA/MoUD was also requested to consider extending additional FAR/FSI for existing
hotels from 150 to 250.

11
(e) Permission to allow hotels in commercial areas.
(f) MoT had also requested for the re-classification of Farm land on payment of
appropriate charges and permission of hotel projects in such land.
(g) Decision on conversion of motels into hotels was also proposed.
33. The Ministry of Tourism further informed that the L&DO had identified 3 sites in Delhi.
The MoT was asked to pay for the sites and consequently a separate budget head “Creation of
Land Bank” was created with the approval of the Planning Commission and the MoF. An amount
of Rs. 10 Crore was provided under this head. However, the MoUD expressed inability to make
these 3 sites available. As per MoT request, they have amended the Master Plan of Delhi with a
view to allow hotels at transport nodes. As per the decision of COS meeting of 23.3.07 and the
GOM meeting of dated 10.03.08, DDA was supposed to provide 6600 hotel rooms in Delhi and
for this 33 sites were to be put to auction. In the COS meeting held on 09.09.08, the DDA stated
that the total number of rooms would be 6019 rooms and that 5,219 rooms are estimated to
be available by 31st March, 2010, and the balance 800 rooms are likely to be available by
31st October, 2010.
(ii) Ministry of Civil Aviation/Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL)
34. The Ministry of Civil Aviation was requested for at least 5000 rooms to be made available
while upgrading Delhi airport. DIAL had informed the Secretary (Tourism) on 24.11.06 that they
have 250 acres of commercial land and Master Plan was likely to be cleared by December, 2006,
with four hotel sites having total 1,000 rooms. In the Task Force meeting on 4.07.07, they had
also informed to explore the possibility to provide 2500 additional rooms. DIAL vide their letter
dated 13.02.08 had also stated that there was a possibility to develop 500 hotel rooms at IGI
Airport before 2010. Against earlier projected availability of 5,000 rooms from DIAL, only 500
rooms are now expected as per the Task Force meeting of 19.11.08 and have presently been placed
under the ‘doubtful’ category.
(iii) Ministry of Railways
35. The Minister, Tourism and Culture also met the Minister (Railways) on 4.1.2007 and
requested the latter to help provide approx. 5,000 hotel rooms. A meeting was also held between
Secretary (Tourism) and Chairman Railway Board on 9.1.2007 wherein the railways were requested
to finalize identification of 13 sites for the construction of Budget hotels subject to the feasibility
reports. Railways on 20.03.07, had also forwarded the latest status report for the 13 sites. Against
the earlier projected availability of 5,000 rooms from Railways, only 100 rooms would be
forthcoming as per the Task Force Meeting of 06.10.08; however, these rooms also have presently
been placed under the ‘doubtful’ category.
(iv) Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
36. Earlier, DMRC had proposed three plots, 1 at Patel Chowk and 2 at Dwarka with a total
700 rooms. The plot at Patel Chowk was falling in the Lutyens Zone and hence clearance was not
given by the MoUD. Clearance has been accorded for the Dwarka plot by DDA/MoUD. Out of 700
rooms, only 200 rooms would be coming up from DMRC as per the Task Force meeting of
19.11.08. These rooms, however, have presently been placed under the’ doubtful’ category.
(v) Government of Haryana
37. The Government of Haryana was asked to identify hotel sites for 10,000 hotel rooms in the
NCR Region. Hon’ble Minister (T&C) had requested CM, Haryana, to identify additional 5,000

12
rooms vide letter dated 18.01.07. In the COS of 23.03.07, representative of Government of
Haryana indicated that they would try for additional 4000 rooms, if connectivity issues are looked
into. Against, 10,000 rooms offered, however, as per the current status only 5,299 rooms are
definite and another 1,153 rooms were likely to be ready by the games as stated in the Task Force
Meeting of 19.11.2008. The Committee has been informed during the meeting in Agra by the
Government of Haryana on the 8th February, 2009, that the Government had auctioned/allotted
94+5 sites for creation of 8805 hotels rooms, but 5417 rooms are definite and 1195 rooms were
likely to be ready by the CWG and 2193 rooms falls under the doubtful category. Therefore, only
6612 rooms will be made available.
(vi) Government of Uttar Pradesh
38. The Government of Uttar Pradesh has identified 25 sites in NOIDA for 7,000 rooms. A total
of 14 sites were auctioned however, these were presently under litigation. Subsequently, the balance
11 sites were also put to bid but could not find suitable bidders. Similarly in Greater NOIDA,
12 sites for 3,000 rooms were put on bid. However, suitable bid came only for one site and for
the balance sites, no eligible bids was received. As regards NOIDA, the current status is that no
rooms are forthcoming. In case of Greater NOIDA only 500 rooms are definite. As per the COS
of 09.09.08, a total of 1,303 rooms are ‘definite’ to be available in Ghaziabad. The position was
reiterated in the meeting of the Task Force held on 19.11.2008.
(vii) Government of Delhi
39. Bed and Breakfast Scheme:  Ministry of Tourism had asked the Government of Delhi to
come out with legislation/orders for allowing establishments under Bed and Breakfast Scheme to
be treated residential, which means that there would be no V AT and luxury tax applicable and that
electricity and water charges would be at domestic rates for those units. Under the scheme, 3,000
rooms will be made available. Delhi Government has passed an Act to treat these units as domestic
which will help in registering more rooms. Around 1012 rooms have already been made available
by various establishments.
(viii) Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC)
40. The DTC proposed that 29 bus depots out of the 67 DTC bus depots in Delhi could be
used for constructing ‘Budget Hotels’ with 3,000 rooms. The CMD, DTC wrote to Ministry of
Tourism vide letter dated 20.6.07 and informed that a study has been conducted by DTTDC for
5000 rooms on DTC land and that financial and environmental viability study was yet to be
conducted. In the meeting of the Lt. Governor held on 6.7.07, the DTC was also asked to explore
possibility to offer at least 500 hotel rooms by March, 2010 in the budget category in their bus
depots/terminals. No rooms however, from DTC would be coming up at all out of the earlier
projected 3,000 rooms.
41. Final Assessment of Hotel Rooms as per Task Force Meeting of 06.10.2008 is tabulated
below:
Name of the agency Rooms definite Rooms likely Rooms doubtful
12 3 4
DDA 1,817 2,184 2,018
(1,282+535)
Haryana 5,299 1,153 4,163

13
12 3 4
Ghaziabad 1,303 — —
Greater NOIDA 500 — 2,500
NOIDA — — 7,000
Railways — — 100
DIAL — — 500
DMRC — — 200
T
OTAL: 8,919 3,337 16,481
(8,919 rooms- “Definite” + 3,337 rooms-“Likely” = 12,256 rooms)
42. The Committee notes that there are so many agencies including Task Force,
Committees of Secretaries and the Group of Ministers to monitor and review the
infrastructure development and hotel projects for the Commonwealth Games. These
agencies have conducted series of meetings in connection with the infrastructure
development work and augmentation of the accommodation besides monitoring the progress
of different tourism projects. The Committee notes that the large number of meetings with
various agencies did not yield any result; every thing was back to square one. The
Committee also notes that there are a large number of civic and other agencies like DDA,
CPWD, MCD, NDMC, ASI, Delhi Government and its agencies like Department of Tourism,
DTTDC, Delhi Jal Board, etc. engaged in the task. The Committee finds a distinct absence
of a coordinating mechanism to ensure that all the authorities/agencies worked in united
manner. The Committee emphasizes the need to designate a single authority which will
coordinate and develop synergies between all the agencies involved in developmental work
and augmentation of room capacity for the Commonwealth Games 2010.
43. The Committee further recommends the Government that in order to facilitate and
promote the hotel projects and expedite clearances, permissions, etc., there is a need to
implement a single-window clearance system for expedition the creation of accommodation
infrastructure. It is high time that the Government agencies should wake up and act fast
for the development/completion of various projects to keep the time schedule of the
Commonwealth Games.
44. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of Tourism for pursuing the
State Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and other land owning agencies for
identification of hotel sites and their auction notwithstanding, the response of the State
Governments and various agencies was not encouraging at all. Both the State Governments
have not come out with a concrete proposals for creation of additional rooms to meet the
requirements of the Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee finds that there had
always remained a large deficit on the projection and the actual availability of the rooms.
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to supplement the efforts for creation
of additional rooms and impress upon the Governments of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan in the neighborhood and other land owing agencies to act fast for creation of
additional hotel rooms before the Commonwealth Games.
45. The Committee notes that the Ministry has proposed several measures to meet the shortage
of about 30,000 rooms during the Commonwealth Games 2010 in Delhi and NCR. The Ministry has

14
mooted a proposal to Centre and State Governments for augmenting the accommodation
infrastructure and to convert selected Government properties into heritage hotels and making use of
the vacant land in Government premises including surplus land available with the Ministry of Civil
Aviation, Railways and D.D.A., D.M.R.C., DTC and DIAL for creation of land banks for developing
hotels. In order to offset the demand, the operation of Guest Houses has been liberalized in the
National Capital Territory of Delhi as per the Master Plan 2021 of the Ministry of Urban
Development. The conversion charges that are levied on the Guest Houses have also been rationalized.
However, the Committee is not hopeful that the Ministry will be able to make up the demand
of additional rooms before the Commonwealth Games. As with all sources taken into account,
there is still a shortage of around 15000 rooms. The Committee emphasizes upon the Ministry
that the State Governments would also need to consider various tax incentives and exemptions
in their respective jurisdictions to attract investments in tourist accommodation. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to find an early solution to the problem of
creation of rooms and encourage the Central and State agencies for expeditious allocation of
land for construction of hotels on surplus land, creation of single window facility for investor
in tourism projects to meet the demand for additional rooms for Commonwealth Games 2010.
Attempts should be made for exploring the possibilities for augmenting additional
accommodation on lands available with the Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Civil Aviation,
State Governments of Delhi, Haryana and DMRC etc. The hotel rooms in the vicinity of NCR
of Delhi like Mathura, Agra, Jaipur, Bhiwadi, Rewari may also be explored to make the room
inventory but for that train/road/air connectivity is a must.
46. To remove the fear of not getting the business after the games, the Government may
continue to grant the tax incentives/benefits to the hotel sector. The Committee may be
apprised of the details of the progress made in the matter. The Committee also urges the
Ministry to impress upon the Central and State Governments for implementation of single
window clearance system for tourism projects in order to encourage the private players to
build hotels in the country. This would not only optimize the utilization of infrastructure
facilities but also ensure the early completion of the projects.
OTHER INITIATIVES/MEASURES TO  AUGMENT ACCOMMODATION FOR THE
COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010
47. In order to meet the requirement of accommodation to tourist anticipated to visit the
country during the Commonwealth Games-2010, the Ministry of Tourism apart from big hotels,
also tried to explore other options of accommodation.
48. Guest Houses: On the request of Ministry of Tourism, conversion charges for Guest
Houses have been reduced considerably as per DDA notification of 22.6.2007 and one time
payment has been approved. It is estimated that more than fifteen thousand rooms would be
available in the NCT of Delhi and a mechanism is being worked out to standardize these facilities
for use during the CWG-2010. The Committee has been informed that the developmental control
norms for guest houses have been liberalized and there are 556 guest houses licensed in Delhi with
10,997 rooms. There are 338 other guest-houses that have applied for the license and would
provide 6,577 rooms and there are 252 guest houses with total of 4,537 rooms which have yet
not applied for the licence.
49. Upgradation/renovation of existing hotel rooms:  A multidimensional approach towards
the development of Delhi as a modem metropolis has led to a vibrant hospitality industry. The
upgradation of hotels is a regular exercise undertaken by the star rated hotels. MoT has also
requested the hotels to upgrade the properties and be ready for the games. Government of Haryana
is in the process of upgrading the tourism complexes run by Haryana Tourism.

15
50. Tented Accommodation :  The MOT has recently launched a new scheme for granting
Central Financial Assistance to the State Governments for the setting up various facilities like
“Tented Accommodation”. These facilities include approach roads, water supply, sewerage and
electrical connection etc. Further, the MOT also approves the operational tented accommodation
with a view to standardize the facilities and services. Delhi Government/DDA has been requested
to identify sites for setting up such tented accommodation which is a low cost and expeditious way
of accommodation augmentation in the open spaces in Delhi and the NCR.
51. Hostel Accommodation : In the COS meeting dated 09.09.08 Secretary (Sports) indicated
that he has discussed the proposal with the VC, Delhi University for making guest houses and
hostel rooms of the University and similar establishments available. The concerned hostels could be
upgraded for use during the Games and would benefit Delhi University thereafter. The open spaces
in such establishments could also be used as camping sites. The Ministry informed that a scheme
is being worked out to send the students on 15 days sojourn during the period for getting the
rooms from the students so that these can be used as a guest room.
52. Transfer of Akbar Bhawan :  The building of Akbar Bhawan is proposed to be transferred
to ITDC to be run as a hotel which can provide additional rooms. The proposals for conversion
of the Eastern and Western Court buildings into Heritage Hotels is also under consideration.
53. The Committee notes various options proposed to be explored by the Government for
meeting the shortage of the rooms during the Games. However, the Committee recommends
that in addition to the hostels of Delhi University the hostels of other Universities such as
JNU, Jamia Milia and various educational institutions such as IIT may also be utilized for
the Games’ accommodation. The Committee also notes that the Master Plan of Delhi 2021
have also been amended to make scope for construction of guest houses in terms of road
width, plot-size and permissible area for catering to lower tariff accommodation besides
allowing bed and breakfast accommodation in residential houses and flats for creation of
more accommodation. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to take
expeditious steps for facilitating additional hotel accommodation through “Incredible India
Bed and Breakfast Scheme”, Guest Houses, Upgradation and renovation of existing hotel
rooms, tented accommodation and hostel accommodation in the wake of the Commonwealth
Games 2010.
TRAVEL FACILITIES
54. The Ministry of Tourism has requested the Government of NCT of Delhi to explore
possibility for a seamless inter-state movement of traffic in the NCR. In order to ensure that hotel
accommodation located in Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana are utilized, the smooth movement of
tourist traffic would be required from Delhi to these States. Further, tourists would also be
traveling on the Golden Triangle Circuit. Presently, there is variable passenger and inter-state vehicle
taxes which are expensive and often cause halt and delay at the border checkpoints.
55. During the course of the meeting, the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism submitted before the
Committee that in order to promote free and easy travel to the tourists, the Ministry has taken up
the issue of seamless travel with the concerned agencies. As the travel will involve neighbouring
States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryana, a scheme will have to
be devised by which stopping tourist buses for road tax and other taxes can be avoided, and a
single point of collection could be thought of, at the nodal place that would give rise to seamless
travel. But, this will require pushing through with the neighbouring State Governments. Further,
DDA is also undertaking various infrastructure projects like improvement of flyover at Noida More
by adding clover leaves, flyover at the junction of National Highway-24 to facilitate free traffic
movement to the Games Village and construction of an underpass for smooth flow of traffic to

16
the Indira Gandhi International Airport. During the meeting with the Committee in Agra, attention
of Ministry of Tourism was drawn to the restrictions imposed by the Supreme Court of India on
the movement of vehicles in Delhi and likely shortage of CNG in the State of Delhi and NCR and
desired to from that Ministry of Tourism whether they have taken up the matter with the
concerned agencies in this regard. The representative of Ministry of Tourism replied in negative.
56. During the course of the discussion, the Tour and Travel Associations submitted before the
Committee that with the current economic meltdown and terror attack on Mumbai have severely
affected the Tour-Travel sector in India. The representatives of the Travel Agents Association of
India, Indian Tourist Transporters Association of India and Indian Association of Tour Operators
presented before the Committee the issues ailing the sector for long and demanded one-time
exemption from V AT on the purchase of new tourist vehicles, training and sensitization of drivers,
management and supporting staff, security clearance of the drivers and staff, one-time duty
exemption for import of luxury, secured parking facilities for vehicles at all locations, uniform for
drivers and supporting staff, permission to CNG operated tourist vehicles to move freely within the
NCR and provision of adequate transportation services to the participants/officials and other
dignitaries and identifications of number colour and type of vehicle that are required during the CWG.
57. The Committee notes that one of the major constraints being faced in the
development of tourism is lack of accessibility and road connectivity to many destinations
and monuments, resulting in near absence of tourists to such places. Although, the
Government has undertaken various infrastructure projects like constructions of flyovers at
NOIDA More and Badarpur Border; flyover at the junction of National Highways-24 to
facilitate free traffic movement to the Games Village and construction of an under-pass for
smooth flow of traffic to the Indira Gandhi International Airport. The Committee
recommends that the city monuments, places of tourist’s interest and the Games Village
should be well connected for easy accessibility to these places and for smooth flow of traffic.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Railway should be pursued for
providing basic amenities like, drinking water, tea, coffee, parking facilities, clean toilets
and well maintained clean waiting rooms, porters with trolleys at the main stations. The
Ministry of Civil Aviation should provide infrastructure facilities at the airport to meet the
ever increasing traffic requirements and quality of service. The Delhi Government should
make a comprehensive map for the entire city with all information regarding different bus
routes and metro-lines to make commuting easy. This way, the tourist will get wonderful
feeling and experience of reaching a place and coming back safe and sound.
58. The Committee notes with dismay that higher rate of taxes on tourist transport
vehicle in the States have had adverse impact on the growth of tourism. The Committee
recommends the Government to rationalize the transport taxes and design consolidated
entry tax on the tourist vehicles that would also be applicable in the neighbouring States
for hassle free movements of the tourist vehicles. The Committee also recommends that
sufficient number of CNG stations need to be provided in and beyond NCR to improve the
transportation system.
59. While making plans for tourist packages for the visitors, arrangement for Buddhist
circuit travel may also be explored which shall cover all the holy places of Buddhists. A
travel plan by Indian Railways is already in place. However, the road connecting to Lumbini,
which falls in Nepal is in a very bad condition resulting in chaos and traffic jam. The
Committee recommends that there is need to build a by-pass by using the Border
Development Fund and the Ministry should take steps to expedite the same.
60. The Committee notes that infrastructure is most important segment for successful
operation of the CWG-2010. The Committee is of the view that such international sporting

17
events trigger growth in different areas and creating tourism infrastructure. India is on the
cusp of high growth in tourism and has potential to attract 10 millions by 2012. The
Committee fully agrees with the points put forward by the Tour-travel Associations, especially
the requirement of type of fleet in car, buses, their colour, uniform for drivers and supporting
staff and their training etc. during the CWG. The Committee recommends the Ministry of
Tourism to look into the issues and areas of concern seriously and take up the matter with
concerned authorities either of the State Government or Government of India. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry of Tourism will come out with an early decision for
putting up the required infrastructure and policy framework in a definite time-frame.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
61. The Committee inquired about the shortage of trained manpower for the hospitality sector
and attempts made by the Ministry to augment these resources as well as the recruitment drive
to hire the guides and other volunteers to take tourists around the city. The Ministry of Tourism
informed the Committee that the Ministry has a scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers
(CBSP) under which training is being provided as an ongoing activity to the Tourism Service
Providers viz. taxi/auto and bus drivers, immigration/ customs staff, Police force, government
officials etc.
62. CWG would require an estimated 15,000 – 20,000 pool of trained and experienced
volunteers. V olunteer Programme would be operated by independent agency under the Delhi
Government. These volunteers would be trained under the capacity building of service provider
scheme of the Ministry of Tourism.
63. The Ministry of Tourism has introduced a short training scheme earn while you learn with
the objective to sensitize youths specific to tourism service that evince interest in becoming a
service provider in the field of tourism. Youths trained under this scheme will also be utilized for
the CWG 2010. The programme is a short term training programme of 21 days to encourage youth
to work as student volunteers in tourism industry. A college going student who is pursuing a
graduation course and who has attained the age of 18 years but is not more than an age of 25
years shall be eligible for the training programme. The first programme under the scheme was
conducted from 24th December, 2007 to 13th January, 2008. Subsequently 5 more training
programmes were conducted in May – June, 2008 covering about 300 students.
64. To meet the requirement trained man/people in hospitality sector the Ministry of Tourism’s
28 functional Institutes of Hotel Management (IHMs), comprising 21 central IHMs and 7 State
IHMs; 6 Food Craft Institutes (FCls) and the Institute of Tourism and Travel Management (IITTM)
with its centres at Gwalior, Delhi, Bhubaneswar and Goa. The Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned
12 more State IHMs and 7 FCIs. The MoT’s target is to set up 10 more IHMs and 19 more FCls
during the remaining period of the Eleventh Plan. All together, the MoT is aiming for 49 IHMs and
31 FCIs by the end of the Eleventh Plan, which will turn out, annually, about 27000 persons with
certificates and diplomas of one year or more and B.Sc. degree. Broad-basing of hospitality
education/training to include Universities, Colleges, Polytechnics, it is, is being adopted to fill up
the trained manpower gap. Ministry of Tourism would provide training to the students in the 28
functional Institutes of Hotel Management (IHMs) and Food Craft Institutes (FCIs) in the NCR,
which would be utilized for services in the catering sector.
65. The Tourist Guide Federation of India while presenting before the Committee desired the
need for printing of special tickets for CWG-2010 for foreign tourists, special queues for foreign
entry tickets, proper parking facilities, first-class pay toilets and state of art glow signs and
facilitation desk in all the monuments. They also informed the Committee that over 5000 guides
are needed to service the overwhelming number of visitors. Guide Training Programmes are needed

18
to meet the demand. The ASI monuments may be equipped with better lighting facilities. For
physically challenged people, cost ticket be made 50% less and calendar of events needed so that
tourist can enjoy our culture.
66. The Committee notes that the Ministry has a scheme for Capacity Building for
Service Providers (CBSP) to impart basic training to service providers, namely, taxi/auto and
bus drivers, majority of whom are in the unorganized sector. The Committee notes that a
large number of trained and experienced volunteers would be required for Commonwealth
Games. The volunteers may be adequately educated to explain the history and culture of
our country and most of the historic monuments in and around Delhi. Immigration/ customs
staff, Police force, government officials, etc. also need to be specifically trained for the
mega event.
67. The Committee notes that to offset shortage of trained manpower in the tourism
sector, the Ministry has proposed to setting up of more institute of Hotel Managements and
FCIs in the States and providing financial assistance for the modernization and capacity
upgradation of existing institutes and FCIs. The Committee recommends the Ministry that
to fill up the trained manpower gap, the Ministry should consider augmenting the
infrastructure of the existing institutes and setting up of more Institutes and FCls in the
private sectors in a phased manner so that the problem of manpower could be addressed to
some extent.
68. The Committee notes the suggestions given by the Tourist Guide Federation of India
especially the printing of special tickets for CWG-2010 for foreign tourists, special queues
for foreign entry tickets, proper parking facilities, first-class pay toilets, recruitments of
guide and state of art glow signs and facilitation desk in all the monuments. The Committee
recommends the Government to see that no inconvenience is caused to the tourist at the
monuments and the monuments should have these facilities including trained guides for the
tourists during the CWG.
BRANDING AND PUBLICITY
69. The Ministry of Tourism proposes to promote the CWG-20l0 overseas in a big way for
which branding and publicity campaigns would be held in Commonwealth markets like UK, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Singapore and Malaysia in the form of Familiarization Tours
for media and important players from trade etc.
70. Road Shows/India evenings would be conducted to promote the games; Specific events
would be held in key markets and Specific Media Campaigns in identified markets. Special
attractive brochures would be produced to promote the Games. An estimated expenditure of Rs.60
crores would be involved in this area for which separate additional funds would be required. The
Committee feels that it should be done as a part of Incredible India Campaign already being
done by the Department of Tourism.
CENTRAL RESERV ATION SYSTEM/GAMES TRA VEL OFFICE FOR THE CWG-2010
71. The Organizing Committee (OC) of the CWG-20l0 would be establishing an agency to
handle the travel and room requirement of the Commonwealth Games. This agency would be
dealing with the tour operators, travel agents, hotels etc. and the Ministry of Tourism would be
playing the role of a facilitator.
72. The Committee notes that the Ministry has the promotional plan to promote the
Commonwealth Games 2010 in the overseas market to showcase the rich cultural heritage
of India to the international community. The Committee feels that the tourists who come

19
for the Commonwealth Games will also like to see the India and its different tourist
destination. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to design comprehensive
tour packages to select places to suit to the need of the tourists coming for the
Commonwealth Games 2010 in collaboration with the Tour and Travel Operators so that the
tourists can see India in its entirety. The Ministry should also launch a dedicated portal on
the website and specific media campaigns for the Games in the identified tourism markets
to generate tourist traffic to India.
73. The Committee recommends that a dedicated Central Web Portal for Commonwealth
Games should be designed to cater to the need of the tourists. The website should be
interactive and must contain all the data inputs and feedbacks, that is required for the
tourists viz., booking of rooms, travel planner, etc. to facilitate their journey and make the
stay comfortable.
SPECIAL TOURISM FORCE
74. Following recent instances of harassment of and misbehaviour with tourists in India, the
Committee desired to know from the Ministry of Tourism about the steps taken to protect the
foreign tourist from being fleeced by the touts and the kind of harassment they suffer and other
such problems. The Ministry of Tourism informed that the security of tourists is on the top of
the agenda and the Ministry was trying to ensure the security of tourist by deploying the tourist
police. The Ministry is in the process of formulation of suitable legislation to tackle this menace.
They further informed that ensuring the safety and security of tourists is of paramount importance
and State Government/Union Territories must ensure the same.
75. The matter regarding constitution of Tourist Police in various States and UTs has been taken
up at appropriate levels and 10 State Governments have deployed Tourist Police in one form or
the other. The draft broad guidelines framed by Ministry of Tourism after receiving comments of
Ministry of Home Affairs and Directorate General of Resettlement (Ministry of Defence) regarding
formation of Tourist Security Force has been circulated to State/Union Territories for seeking their
comments on the proposals. Their comments are awaited.
76. The Ministry of Tourism has taken the following steps to curb the cases of cheating,
overcharging and victimization of tourists.
(i) A tourist complaint cell is functioning in the Ministry of Tourism and Regional
Complaint Cells have also been set up in the India Tourism offices for redressal of
complaints from tourists.
(ii) In order to curb cases of cheating, fleecing and mistreatment of tourists, the Ministry
of Tourism advised the State Governments/UTs for the deployment of Tourist Police
at all important tourist centres/destinations. The States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
Goa, Kerala, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, J & K, Uttar Pradesh and
Delhi have deployed Tourist Police Force in one form or the other. Secretary (Tourism)
has issued letters to all State Governments to deploy tourist police at all tourist centres/
destinations.
77. During the course of evidence, the Principal Secretary (Tourism), Delhi Government
informed the Committee that Delhi Tourist Safety Act which has been drafted and circulated to
various departments for their comments. The Committee has initiated action on it and will have
registration of tour operators to prevent fleecing of tourists and misbehaviour with them. Several
measures have been proposed to be initiated for tourist safety. A lot of complaints emanate from
the tourists being harassed at the airport. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has been suggested that
the disembarkation card that is signed when the tourist come out of a flight should have printed

20
on the back of it an advisory to the tourists and to the people coming to Delhi stating that they
should take pre-paid transport only through Delhi Police, ITDC or Delhi Tourism vehicles so that
they do not go to any private operator.
78. The Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India has been requested to limit
the giving of space to the Delhi Tourism, the ITDC and the Government bodies, rather than to
private tour operators because, then, the responsibility will be there with the Government bodies.
79. Commissioner, Delhi Police informed that adequate police vehicles were being stationed at
airports and important tourist sites. Coordination mechanism has also been started with them.
Meetings has been held where the Delhi Government has tried to work out how to make the
mechanism more effective. The tourists need to know how to locate tourism police vehicles. Delhi
Police has been requested to equip the tourist vehicles with mobile telephones and to provide
training in English language because unless they can speak, at least, English, it would not be quite
useful. In addition, Registrar of the Delhi High Court, has also been requested for proposing a fast-
track court for tourist grievances which will help in gaining tourists confidence as the tourists are
a little reluctant to lodge complaints with the police.
80. The Committee is surprised to know that there is no specific law to deal with the
touts stringently. At present the action is taken under Section 151 of CrPC and Section 97
of the Delhi Police Act for creating nuisance that provide very minor punishment. The
Committee welcomes the move of the Government of Delhi for enactment of a law for the
safety of the tourists and to protect the tourist from the touts. The Committee is of the
opinion that the safety and security of tourists is paramount and should be looked into
seriously and recommends the Ministry to pursue the other State Governments for
enactment of the law and creation of tourist police force for ensuring of the safety and
security of the tourists at the earliest.
81. The Committee appreciates the work done by the U.P. Tourism Police in Agra to
prevent fleecing of tourists and misbehavior with them. However, the Committee feels the
need for strengthening the Tourist Police at all the tourist centers/destination and
recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress upon the Government of U.P. for looking
into the service conditions of the personnel deployed as Tourism Police, who are all ex-
servicemen. The Tourism Police must be provided tourist vehicles with mobile telephones
and given training in English language for providing information/guidance to tourist.
PROTECTION AND PRESERV ATION OF MONUMENTS
82. The Archaeological Survey of India (Delhi Circle) has under its protection 172 monuments
in Delhi including three World Heritage Sites. Several of these are located in large complexes, such
as Red Fort, Humayun’s Tomb, Purana Qila, Kotla Feroz Shah, Tughlaqabad, Adilabad, Safdarjung
Tomb, etc. Generally, these protected monuments are in presentable condition. Some of them being
quite popular and attract a large number of visitors every day. In the context of the Commonwealth
Games 2010, an attempt has been made to identify those monuments that are important from the
tourism point of view and/or are located on the Commonwealth Games routes. The items of work
to be done at these monuments have been identified laying emphasis on sprucing up of the
monuments for the event. A tentative estimation of the cost has been made, which mainly
comprises the following major areas—
(a) Conservation/repairs at the monuments.
(b) Sprucing up of the monuments by way of improving the pathways, repairs and
painting to the railings/boundary walls, upgradation of toilets, drinking water,
publication counters, signage, etc.

21
(c) Chemical treatment of certain monuments.
(d) Environmental development.
(e) Illumination/floor lighting of the monuments.
83. The works under the categories (a) and (b) above will be looked after by the Delhi Circle
of ASI, those at (c) by the Science Branch of ASI, those at (d) by the ASI’s Horticulture Branch
and those at (e) by the ITDC or Department of Tourism, Government of India. The ASI has
selected 46 Monuments for the purpose of attending to their special repairs and upgradation work.
The projected expenditure for the conservation, preservation, environmental development and
illumination at the monuments is at Annexure-I. Since these works can not be taken up within
the resources made available to Delhi Circle from the normal budgetary provisions, the Planning
Commission has recommended an additional allocation of Rs.25.73 crores to the ASI for this
purpose, which ASI proposes to utilize as follows:
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. Activity Amount
No. earmarked
1. Conservation/repairs at the monuments 849.20
2. Sprucing up of the monuments by way of improving the 631.40
pathways, repairs and painting to railings/boundary wall,
upgradation of toilets, drinking water, publication counters,
signage, etc.
3. Chemical treatment of certain monuments 90.20
4. Environmental development 517.00
5. Illumination/floor lighting of the monuments 485.10
T
OTAL: 2572.90
Say 2573.00
84. For the current financial year Rs.7.28 crores are required to execute the various works as
stated above. The preparation of estimates and completion of other formalities to take up the works
are in progress. The works are required to be executed in a time bound manner and finished by
31 August, 2010 well before the start of the Games. Timely availability of funds is therefore of
critical importance. Ministry of Culture has approached the Ministry of Finance to include an
amount of Rs.7.28 crore for conservation, restoration and upgradation of public amenities at the
selected 46 protected monuments in the 1st Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for the
year 2008-09. The details of budget allotment under plan and non-plan of archaeological survey of
India and conservation of monuments for the last three years are at Annexure-II. The year-wise
expenditure incurred by Delhi circle on conservation of monuments during the last three years is
also shown at Annexure-II.
85. The committee notes that Delhi is the home to around 1200 heritage buildings, out
of which 173 are listed as protected by the ASI. Three protected sites i.e., Red Fort, Qutab
Minar and Humayun Tomb have been given World Heritage Status by the UNESCO and get
top priority for providing visitors’ amenities and their overall maintenance. The Committee
notes that the Ministry of Culture and the ASI has already identified the monuments for
sprucing them up that are important from tourism point of view and are located on the
games route. The Committee notes that the conservation and preservation of monuments

22
has started and good work has been done by the ASI in this regard. However, a lot of work
on building essential tourists facilities at city monuments was yet to be done, inspite of the
additional allocation of funds for this purpose to the ASI. The Committee feels that the
Commonwealth Games will be a great opportunity for state to showcase its heritage to a
large number of tourists who will be coming to the city for the event. The Committee
therefore, recommends the Government to renovate and repair to conserve the monuments
and create more tourist facilities like, canteens, toilets, interpretation centre, museums,
ramps for disabled and enhanced parking lots. The Committee recommends that the
Government should take immediate steps for proper maintenance of the pathways and
approach roads, illuminations/floor lighting of the monuments etc. need immediate
attention. The Committee also recommends the Government to promote lesser known
monuments, places, like Kashmiri Gate, Sheesh Mahal, Baradari and other tourist sites for
the tourists with improved connectivity.
86. The Committee notes that 13 monuments have been taken up for illumination by the
ITDC. The Committee recommends the Government to consider illumination work for other
popular monuments in Delhi to attract a large number of tourists. However, the Committee
cautions the Government that while carrying out the illumination work, the originality of
the monuments should be restored and in no way the monuments should be subjected to
damage by installing the lightening equipments, etc.
87. The Committee notes with dismay that the Government and the civic authorities
have not paid much attention for laying the approach roads to monuments, pathways,
structural repairs, etc. The Committee feels that the beautiful building and the monuments
will loose out the visitors because of their location, inadequate parking facilities, poor
access route, trained guides and encroachment. The Committee recommends the
Government to improve on the overall ambience of the site itself and make it more
approachable and attractive for the visitors besides, removing encroachment from the places
of historical and tourist’s interest.
DEMOLITION OF LAL MAHAL
88. While examining the aspect of protection of monuments in Delhi, the recent episode of
demolition of Lal Mahal in Nizamudin area in New Delhi has come to the notice of the Committee.
The 1245 AD structure called Lal Mahal or Kushaki Lal was built by the Ghiyasuddin Balban, the
Slave Dynasty ruler during the reign of Sultan Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah, before Balban ascended
the throne. This is one of the relics of the Delhi Sultanate era which is located in Nizammudin area
of Delhi. The monument once gave shelter to Arab traveler Ibn Batuta in the 14th century. The
red sandstone monument found a mention in Zafar Hasan’s List of ‘Mohammedan and Hindu
Monuments’ in the early 1920s. The Lal Mahal is situated less than 20 meters away from Bara
Khamba, which is an ASI protected monument. Under the existing laws, no building activity can
take place within 100 meters of a monument protected by ASI. Under the DMC Act, no alteration
or demolition can take place in any existing structure or heritage building without seeking prior
approval of MCD. The monument has been prominently mentioned in the list of heritage buildings
by both MCD and Delhi Government’s State Department of Archaeology. INTACH, Delhi Chapter
has placed the monument in category-A in terms of heritage value. Lal Mahal is not a notified
monument despite being over 800 years old. Many structures like Lal Mahal are disappearing
because they are not notified heritage building. Lal Mahal is listed as a heritage structure by MCD,
INTACH and Delhi Government. But this list has not been notified by MCD. Lal Mahal was partly
demolished by private builder for construction activities on 31st October, 2008. The Ministry of
Culture informed that Lal Mahal is the unprotected monument but it is listed in the INTACH list
as protected. The ASI responsibility extend to the Centrally protected monuments, the State

23
Government of Delhi has its own law under which it protects monuments which are not of national
importance. The ASI is bound by AMASR Act which says that monuments must be of artistic
archaeological and historical importance and must be of national importance for it to be protected
by the Central Government and it is only those centrally protected monuments which the ASI looks
after. Lal Mahal happens to fall in the prohibited area of centrally protected monument, that is, Bara
Khamba in the Nizamuddin Area. On the 21st October well before the matter appeared in the Press,
an FIR was lodged by the ASI. Unfortunately, there was no action taken and the demolition
continued for a few days till the media and other agencies brought it up. The land is under the
private ownership. Any construction or reconstruction or repair in the prohibited area of a Centrally
protected area requires the ASI’s permission. The person who owns the land on which Lal Mahal
stands did not apply to the ASI for permission and that is why need arose to file an FIR when
this demolition started.
89. The Committee during its meeting held on 27th November, 2008 inquired the solution to
prevent demolition of such heritage structures. The Secretary, Urban Development informed the
Committee that “Sir, since it is specific issue, I will have to look into what exactly the issue is.
If there is any facilitation required by any of the agencies present here, we will do that. Otherwise,
we will have to look at it... I shall look at it from the content of the Heritage Committee and it
is not in my knowledge whether anything is held up at our level. I shall try to find out whether
it is the Municipal Corporation of Delhi or the ASI”.
90. The Committee pointed out the dismal picture of state of affairs relating to the poor
management and upkeep of the monuments which is evident through the demolition of Lal
Mahal. The Committee is perturbed to note that the concerned agencies are shying away
from their responsibility and passing the buck and blame each other. The ASI has washed
its hands off claiming that Lal Mahal was not a protected monument and that the MCD
should have preserved it. The MCD claims that it was not on the heritage list and it was
protected in the INTACH list as it cares about unprotected ones. The Ministry of Urban
Development does not know anything about the incident, although it has been much
highlighted in the media. The ASI is being blamed for inaction despite Lal Mahal being in
the Zafar Hasan’s List for the Central Protection. The State Government is being blamed
for not notifying monuments like the Lal Mahal despite a list sent to them three years ago
and the police have not been able to nab the culprits so far. This shows the utter lack of
coordination and confusion between different agencies of the Union as well as the State
Government and the local bodies. In this connection a communication was sent to the
Ministries of Tourism and Culture to provide information about the role of different
agencies in protection of the monuments in Delhi and NCR region, but the Committee is
constrained to say that no response was given by the Ministries till the adoption of the
report.
91. The representatives of Union Ministry of Urban Development who was asked about
the role and performance of the Heritage Conservation Committee, was not able to say
much about it. Be that as it may, the Committee has no option but to express its
unhappiness about the whole affair. As a result of this, a large number  of our monuments
have either withered away or have been encroached/demolished by the unscrupulous
elements. This cannot happen without the connivance of the local agencies/authority. Police
do not have adequate legal backup to try the culprit in a deterrent way.
92. The Committee therefore, recommends the Governments to prepare an authentic list
of monuments at various levels – central, state and local and notify them so that it is easy
to remove encroachments from the monuments and fix responsibility for their protection,
maintenance and conservation. The heritage conservation committee needs to be made more

24
active. The Committee recommends to the Governments that they should take immediate
steps to notify all the unprotected in Delhi and evolve a coordination mechanism among
different agencies involved in the protection of monuments. Role of INTACH also needs to
be highlighted in this regard. It has done good work and needs to be promoted.
BEAUTIFICATION OF DELHI
93. The pollution of River Yamuna and its cleansing up was another issue caught the attentions
of the Committee. The Committee wanted to know about the plans of the MCD or Delhi Jal Board
for its cleaning and maintenance and river front development. The MCD informed that the entire
Yamuna operation is with the Delhi Jal Board. The MCD is implementing a part of it. The Yamuna
front is actually belongs to the DDA. The entire Yamuna belt belongs to the Delhi Development
Authority and the mechanism to keep it clean is with the Delhi Jal Board, because all the effluents
come from the Delhi Jal Board nalas, etc. The DDA informed that the responsibility of cleaning
all the nalas which fall into the river Yamuna lies with the Delhi Jal Board itself. The river itself
is the joint responsibility of the Delhi Jal Board and the Irrigation Department of the Delhi
Government. As far as river-front is concerned, they have taken up this project of detailed
landscaping of the river front in phases. In fact, near ISBT, a part has already been developed.
DDA are taking up the whole length from Wazirabad bridge to Okhla both sides of the river, for
a detailed landscaping. The Delhi Jal Board informed the Committee that the problem of cleaning
of Yamuna is a massive one and to clean Yamuna by 2010 will not be possible. However, they have
drawn specific schemes for rehabilitation of the sewer system by intercepting the water from the
three major drains is Nazafgarh Shahdara and supplementary drain. These three drains carry about
75 per cent of the pollution to Yamuna and they are fed by 220 or so smaller drains. The DDA
is also executing environmental improvement upgradation programmes by covering nallahs,
providing greenery and landscaping at Defence Colony and Lajpat Nagar. The Barapullah Nallah is
also going to be substantially improved to provide a good environment to traffic meant for Games
Village and Nehru Stadium.
94. The Committee notes the sorry state of affairs in cleaning and maintenance of river
Yamuna. The concerned agencies are not aware of who is doing what and passing the blame
and responsibility to one and other. The Committee feels that there appears a lack of
coordination between different agencies of Union, State and the local bodies. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the work of cleaning and beautification of river-bed
should be integrated and designated to a single agency for better result or else, there
should be close coordination between DJB and the DDA who are mandated to do the two
works. The Committee was surprised to find that DDA was blissfully unaware of its
responsibility of developing Y amuna river front. These works – cleansing and beautification
of river front – should be given utmost importance and urgency because the entire Games
Village is being erected just on the banks of Yamuna.
95. The Committee observes that the entire Delhi should be clean and neat for attracting
tourists. However, the nallahs crisscrossing the city, give an unpleasant experience to
anyone who visits Delhi. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Tourism should take up the issue of cleaning of nallahs at the highest level to ensure that
all the drains are cleaned and landscaping and beautifications work is done before the
Commonwealth Games 2010.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
96. The Committee sees the Commonwealth Games, 2010 an opportunity for us to
showcase besides our contemporary achievements our rich culture heritage to the world and

25
also to conceptualize ‘Atithi Devo Bhava’ in true sense. After hearing the views of different
agencies of the Government and representatives of hoteliers, tour operators, etc. and the
views of the representatives of Governments of Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, the
Committee is constrained to note that there appear utter lack of coordination,
determination and sense of urgency amongst the agencies engaged in providing facilities to
the tourists who will be visiting India in connection with the Commonwealth Games. The
Committee finds that these agencies are still confused about their roles. This fact is evident
when Committee raised the issues of demolition of Lal Mahal, cleaning of Yamuna River
and beautification of the cities. Though not much time is left, however numbers of schemes
are still at planning stage. As per Government’ s estimate about 1 lac foreign tourists likely
to visit Delhi to witness the sports events. The Government has projected the shortage of
about 30,000 rooms. However, by March, 2010 about 14,000 rooms likely to be ready.
Entrepreneurs are shying away from making investment in hotel industry. There is need to
instill confidence among them about the sustainability of business in hotel industry even
after Common Wealth Games, 2010. To meet the requirement of hotel accommodations we
have to look for hotel accommodations beyond Delhi and NCR. In such a situation cities
like Agra, Jaipur, Udaipur, Jodhpur, Khajurao can serve as alternative. It appears to be a
difficult task, but not impossible. There is need to increase the speed of trains running
between Delhi and Agra and Delhi and Jaipur. There should be direct air connectivity to and
from Delhi to these cities where tourists can stay and come to Delhi to enjoy game events
without much loss of time. Even other cities like Mumbai and Kolkata may be sensitized
to accommodate the tourists pressure during Commonwealth Games. We have to ensure
better roads in and around Delhi. Efforts are also required to make our cities beautiful.
Agra need special attention not only in terms of beautification, but also for providing
smooth connectivity of world famous monuments there. Let there be dedicated heritage
corridors which should be free from all types of encroachments and connect the monuments
of the national importants either to National Highways or the State Highways. To begin with
the monuments of Agra i.e. Fatehpur Sikri, Taj Mahal, I’timad-ud-Daula Tomb and Secundra
Tomb can be connected by way of heritage corridor. It will be possible to make the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 a successful event only when each and every one of us is
prepared for the occasion especially the police to ensure safety and security of the tourists,
well behaved drivers and officials working at the airports. Students may also be trained and
engaged as volunteers during the Common Wealth Games. The Committee is of the view
that the need is of concerted and coordinated efforts by different wings of the Government
at Centre viz. DDA, MCD, ASI, Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of
Railways, Department of Road Transport and Highways with Governments of the States to
make Commonwealth Games a successful event.

26
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes that during the Commonwealth Games a large number of
tourists are expected into India besides the participants. The Committee feels that the
Commonwealth Games would provide us good opportunity to showcase our rich cultural
heritage and achievements of the contemporary India to the International community, that
would act as catalyst for development of infrastructure and capacity-building. The success
of Commonwealth Games will not only position India as a multifaceted destination but will
bring economic returns through business and tourism. The Committee, therefore, calls upon
the Government and all the stakeholders to make concerted efforts for creating best of the
facilities and infrastructure, renovation and better up-keep of our tourism and ancient sites,
improving road and air connectivity and safety and security of the tourist and providing
adequate accommodation at reasonable prices. The Committee also recommends that Delhi
being the Centre of important literary and cultural activities, should refurbish its Libraries,
Museums, Art Galleries, H aats, etc., for showcasing its rich and varied cultural and
intellectual heritage. (Para 4)
TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that there are adequate funds available with the Ministry of
Tourism under infrastructure upgradation of tourism destination schemes. However, the
Committee notes with concern that no proposals from the Delhi Government for
development of infrastructure and capacity building including creation and renovation of
hospitality facilities, modernization of tourism sites, etc., was submitted/pending with the
Ministry of Tourism till November, 2008. The Committee feels that since the Commonwealth
Games are drawing closer, so many projects have yet to be initiated, let alone completed.
In such a situation, absence of any proposal from the NCT of Delhi surprises the
Committee. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress
upon the Government of Delhi and also the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and
Rajasthan for submitting projects proposals for developing tourism infrastructure including
hotel accommodation for the Games and release the funds at the earliest for implementing
the development works on time. (Para 8)
The Committee notes that the Government of Rajasthan is utilizing the opportunity
for promotion of tourism and introducing various packages for the guests/tourists visiting
Rajasthan during the games. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Tourism to provide
adequate funds to the Government of Rajasthan for promotion of various tourism products in
the State. It also recommends that the tax incentives/benefits as provided to the hotels in the
National Capital Region (NCR) of Delhi may suitably be extended to the hotels in Uttar
Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, so as to remove the imbalance in the
demand and supply of hotel rooms’ inventory. The Committee also recommends that the
Government of Rajasthan should make concerted efforts and coordinate with the Ministry of
Tourism (for promotional support), Ministry of Civil Aviation (for introduction of more
international flights to and from Jaipur and development of Airports and air connectivity from
Ajmer and Kota) and Ministry of Railways (for increasing the speed of the trains and double
lining of rail line between Delhi and Jaipur). The State Government should also impress upon
the hotels in the State to take adequate security measures such as installing x-ray machines
for screening of baggage which is a must in the present scenario. (Para 13)
26

27
The Committee recommends that while allowing any activity including commercial in
the monuments, which should necessarily be remain very exceptional, the Governments
must ensure that safety, security, originality and cleanliness of the monuments is not
impaired upon and no damages of any kind is caused. (Para 14)
The Committee notes that the conservation work is being carried out in Amber Fort
by Amer Development Authority. The Committee however, desires that the concerned
agencies be cautioned not to destroy/alter the originality while making effort to renovate
the monuments. The Committee also notes with concern that the condition of monuments
like Jantar Mantar and Albert Hall is not upto the mark and desires that Amer
Development Authority should provide funds for their maintenance and upkeep. (Para 15)
The Committee notes that a large number of persons were likely to stay in the
vicinity of Delhi during the games and the city of Taj Mahal is gearing up to meet the
expected tourists rush during the CWG 2010. The Committee also notes that the
Government of Uttar Pradesh is assessing and preparing the infrastructural needs of the
city to accommodate around a million tourists likely to visit the Taj Mahal during the
Games. The Committee feels that there is a need for expansion of hotels as more rooms
would be required to accommodate the tourist and recommends that the Government should
come up with some concessional/incentive packages to motivate the hoteliers to add rooms
to their existing structures. The Committee recommends that the guidelines for funding
existing hotels structures needs to be looked into and the Government should amend the
guidelines to provide financial assistance to the hotels which are under construction. The
State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan should be provided central
grants in order to meet the shortfall in hotel accommodation. (Para 18)
The Committee notes the problems like long and arduous train/road journey from
New Delhi to Agra, lack of tourist buses attached to the railway stations in Agra and Delhi,
inadequate access from Agra Cantt. Railway station to Taj Mahal and Sikandara, poor
condition of the battery operated vehicles, lack of adequate parking, cafeteria, security
check, long queues for tickets, drinking water, toilets, luggage room, facilitation centres,
etc. The Committee feels that these are not big issues and can be resolved by way of better
coordination among different agencies especially the Ministry of Defence for construction of
underpass in Shahganj area for proper road connectivity to Taj Mahal. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Government to find immediate solutions to these problems and
introduce easy ticketing procedures like prior ticketing, e-ticketing, composite tickets,
flexible tickets, group tickets, tatkal system, transit passes system, etc. for gaining entry
to Taj Mahal, besides restructuring and strengthening of the security. The drinking water,
toilet facilities and facilitation centres should be provided outside the Taj Mahal to facilitate
the tourists. The problems of guides should be resolved by the Ministry of Tourism, Culture
and Government of Uttar Pradesh with mutual interaction. (Para 19)
The Committee notes that the view of Taj from the other side of Yamuna from
Mehtab Bagh may be a thrilling experience for the tourists during full moon night that
creates a view of Taj being black. The Committee recommends that viewing of Taj Mahal
from this side should be promoted and permission for adequate parking and toilet facilities
should be provided there. The Committee desires that in maintaining the monuments,
environmental developments including horticulture works and landscaping, civic amenities
for tourists and display of cultural notice boards and signages should be taken care of. The
Government should make concerted efforts to involve public and corporate sector for the
purpose. The Committee also recommends that a survey should be conducted by the
Government to ascertain the carrying capacity of the monument to protect it from being
damaged by over crowd. (Para 20)

28
The Committee found the practice of night viewing of Taj more restrictive due to
tight security arrangements as well as lack of coordination between U.P. Police and CISF.
The distance between the monument and the tourists is too long to be able to feel the
beauty of the monument. The Committee without compromising the need for security of
Taj, feels that with a proper coordination and communication between the two forces and
with proper training for good behaviour with the tourists, efforts can be made to allow the
tourists to see the Taj in night from the floor where the stairs reach the main structure.
It would be a lifetime experience for them. (Para 21)
AUGMENTATION OF HOTEL ACCOMMODATION FOR COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010
The Committee notes that the hotel accommodation is the key component of the
tourism infrastructure needed for the CWG-2010. At present there is huge gap demand and
supply of the hotel rooms in India in general and Delhi in particular. The Committee finds
that the hotel development in India is ailing with many impediments such as regulatory,
financing, clearances, operations etc. The Committee is perturbed to note that the
countdown to CWG has begun but there seems inadequate infrastructure in all sectors such
as road, airport, accommodation, surface transport, entertainment, basic amenities, parking,
information centres, security, stadia and supply of powers. The Committee feels that the
problems brought out by the Hotel Association of India and Federation of Hotels and
Restaurants Association of India before the Committee are justified and needs serious
attention of Governments. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government to
address the key issues and challenges faced by the hotel sector in India including NCR for
development of tourism infrastructure and amenities for the CWG-2010. (Para 27)
The Committee notes that the Government has extended tax holiday scheme for
construction of budget hotels in NCT of Delhi and the districts of Faridabad, Gurgaon,
Gautam Buddh Nagar (NOIDA) and Ghaziabad. It seems to the Committee that the financial
incentives and tax holidays announced by the Government have not been used optimally by
the private parties for construction of the new hotels in Delhi and adjoining areas. The
Committee recommends the Government to pursue the State Governments of Haryana and
Uttar Pradesh and Delhi and various land owning agencies, DDA/Ministry of Urban
Development to allocate land on joint venture/revenue sharing basis and provide tax
incentives/benefits and tax holidays with single window clearances for the hotel projects to
these private players in State of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajashthan and Madhya Pradesh
who are interested in setting up of new hotels to facilitate the growth of the accommodation
sector to tourist during the period of the Games. The Committee also recommends that
since the CWG are almost the round the corner, the Government may, if necessary, further
liberalize the incentive schemes to attract investment in the hotel projects. (Para 28)
The Committee has serious doubts about the capability of the DDA for expediting the
issue of identification and allotment of hotel sites for construction of budget hotels for the
Games. The Committee notes with concerns that the pace of creation of additional hotel
accommodation at 39 hotel sites auctioned by DDA since January, 2006 is lagging behind
schedule, though the Committee has been assured by the Ministry of Urban Development
that completion of these sites would generate 6019 rooms and the DDA and the Ministry
have been actively monitoring from time to time the process to complete the formalities
and progress of work. The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Ministry
of Urban Development as the recent assessment reveals that only 1924 rooms will be
available under the definite category, 2015 rooms under the likely category and the
remaining 1990 rooms under the doubtful category. This way only fewer rooms will be
available as per the assessment. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government to

29
once again ascertain the position with the concerned agencies and come out with more
realistic assessment in this regard. A concrete plan for facilitating the hotel proposals
including the alternative proposal for conversion of motels into hotels and identification of
vacant DDA flats to offset the deficit of hotel room before the commencement of the Games
should be considered. The Committee hopes that the Government will take the steps to
address the problem of shortage of rooms and complete the exercise for developing the
accommodation to the visitors well in time. (Para 29)
The Committee notes that there are so many agencies including Task Force,
Committees of Secretaries and the Group of Ministers to monitor and review the
infrastructure development and hotel projects for the Commonwealth Games. These
agencies have conducted series of meetings in connection with the infrastructure
development work and augmentation of the accommodation besides monitoring the progress
of different tourism projects. The Committee notes that the large number of meetings with
various agencies did not yield any result; every thing was back to square one. The
Committee also notes that there are a large number of civic and other agencies like DDA,
CPWD, MCD, NDMC, ASI, Delhi Government and its agencies like Department of Tourism,
DTTDC, Delhi Jal Board, etc. engaged in the task. The Committee finds a distinct absence
of a coordinating mechanism to ensure that all the authorities/agencies worked in united
manner. The Committee emphasizes the need to designate a single authority which will
coordinate and develop synergies between all the agencies involved in developmental work
and augmentation of room capacity for the Commonwealth Games 2010. (Para 42)
The Committee further recommends the Government that in order to facilitate and
promote the hotel projects and expedite clearances, permissions, etc., there is a need to
implement a single-window clearance system for expedition the creation of accommodation
infrastructure. It is high time that the Government agencies should wake up and act fast
for the development/completion of various projects to keep the time schedule of the
Commonwealth Games. (Para 43)
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of Tourism for pursuing the
State Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and other land owning agencies for
identification of hotel sites and their auction notwithstanding, the response of the State
Governments and various agencies was not encouraging at all. Both the States Governments
have not come out with a concrete proposals for creation of additional rooms to meet the
requirements of the Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee finds that there had
always remained a large deficit on the projection and the actual availability of the rooms.
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to supplement the efforts for creation
of additional rooms and impress upon the Governments of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan in the neighbourhood and other land owing agencies to act fast for creation of
additional hotel rooms before the Commonwealth Games. (Para 44)
However, the Committee is not hopeful that the Ministry will be able to make up the
demand of additional rooms before the Commonwealth Games. As with all sources taken
into account, there is still a shortage of around 15000 rooms. The Committee emphasizes
upon the Ministry that the State Governments would also need to consider various tax
incentives and exemptions in their respective jurisdictions to attract investments in tourist
accommodation. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to find an early
solution to the problem of creation of rooms and encourage the Central and State agencies
for expeditious allocation of land for construction of hotels on surplus land, creation of
single window facility for investor in tourism projects to meet the demand for additional
rooms for Commonwealth Games 2010. Attempts should be made for exploring the

30
possibilities for augmenting additional accommodation on lands available with the Ministry
of Railways, Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Governments of Delhi, Haryana and DMRC
etc. The hotel rooms in the vicinity of NCR of Delhi like Mathura, Agra, Jaipur, Bhiwadi,
Rewari may also be explored to make the room inventory but for that train/road/air
connectivity is a must. (Para 45)
To remove the fear of not getting the business after the games, the Government may
continue to grant the tax incentives/benefits to the hotel sector. The Committee may be
apprised of the details of the progress made in the matter. The Committee also urges the
Ministry to impress upon the Central and State Governments for implementation of single
window clearance system for tourism projects in order to encourage the private players to
build hotels in the country. This would not only optimize the utilization of infrastructure
facilities but also ensure the early completion of the projects. (Para 46)
OTHER INITIATIVES/MEASURES TO  AUGMENT ACCOMMODATION FOR THE
COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010
The Committee notes various options proposed to be explored by the Government for
meeting the shortage of the rooms during the Games. However, the Committee recommends
that in addition to the hostels of Delhi University the hostels of other Universities such as
JNU, Jamia Milia and various educational institutions such as IIT may also be utilized for
the Games’ accommodation. The Committee also notes that the Master Plan of Delhi 2021
have also been amended to make scope for construction of guest houses in terms of road
width, plot-size and permissible area for catering to lower tariff accommodation besides
allowing bed and breakfast accommodation in residential houses and flats for creation of
more accommodation. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to take
expeditious steps for facilitating additional hotel accommodation through “Incredible India
Bed and Breakfast Scheme”, Guest Houses, upgradation and renovation of existing hotel
rooms, tented accommodation and hostel accommodation in the wake of the Commonwealth
Games 2010. (Para 53)
TRAVEL FACILITIES
The Committee notes that one of the major constraints being faced in the
development of tourism is lack of accessibility and road connectivity to many destinations
and monuments, resulting in near absence of tourists to such places. Although, the
Government has undertaken various infrastructure projects like constructions of flyovers at
NOIDA More and Badarpur Border; flyover at the junction of National Highways-24 to
facilitate free traffic movement to the Games Village and construction of an under-pass for
smooth flow of traffic to the Indira Gandhi International Airport. The Committee
recommends that the city monuments, places of tourist’s interest and the Games Village
should be well connected for easy accessibility to these places and for smooth flow of traffic.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Railways should be pursued for
providing basic amenities like, drinking water, tea, coffee, parking facilities, clean toilets
and well maintained clean waiting rooms, porters with trolleys at the main stations. The
Ministry of Civil Aviation should provide infrastructure facilities at the airport to meet the
ever increasing traffic requirements and quality of service. The Delhi Government should
make a comprehensive map for the entire city with all information regarding different bus
routes and metro-lines to make commuting easy. This way, the tourist will get wonderful
feeling and experience of reaching a place and coming back safe and sound. (Para 57)
The Committee notes with dismay that higher rate of taxes on tourist transport
vehicle in the States have had adverse impact on the growth of tourism. The Committee

31
recommends the Government to rationalize the transport taxes and design consolidated
entry tax on the tourist vehicles that would also be applicable in the neighbouring States
for hassle free movements of the tourist vehicles. The Committee also recommends that
sufficient number of CNG stations need to be provided in and beyond NCR to improve the
transportation system. (Para 58)
While making plans for tourist packages for the visitors; arrangement for Buddhist
circuit travel may also be explored which shall cover all the holy places of Buddhists. A
travel plan by Indian Railways is already in place. However, the road connecting to Lumbini,
which falls in Nepal is in a very bad condition resulting in chaos and traffic jam. The
Committee recommends that there is need to build a by-pass by using the Border
Development Fund and the Ministry should take steps to expedite the same. (Para 59)
The Committee notes that infrastructure is most important segment for successful
operation of the CWG-2010. The Committee is of the view that such international sporting
events trigger growth in different areas and creating tourism infrastructure. India is on the
cusp of high growth in tourism and has potential to attract 10 millions by 2012. The
Committee fully agrees with the points put forward by the Tour-travel Associations,
especially the requirement of type of fleet in car, buses, their colour, uniform for drivers
and supporting staff and their training etc. during the CWG. The Committee recommends
the Ministry of Tourism to look into the issues and areas of concern seriously and take up
the matter with concerned authorities either of the State Government or Government of
India. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Tourism will come out with an early
decision for putting up the required infrastructure and policy framework in a definite time
frame. (Para 60)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that the Ministry has a scheme for Capacity Building for
Service Providers (CBSP) to impart basic training to service providers, namely, taxi/auto and
bus drivers, majority of whom are in the unorganized sector. The Committee notes that a
large number of trained and experienced volunteers would be required for Commonwealth
Games. The volunteers may be adequately educated to explain the history and culture of
our country and most of the historic monuments in and around Delhi. Immigration/customs
staff, Police force, government officials, etc. also need to be specifically trained for the
mega event. (Para 66)
The Committee notes that to offset shortage of trained manpower in the tourism
sector, the Ministry has proposed to setting up of more institute of Hotel Managements and
FCls in the States and providing financial assistance for the modernization and capacity
upgradation of existing institutes and FCls. The Committee recommends the Ministry that
to fill up the trained manpower gap, the Ministry should consider augmenting the
infrastructure of the existing institutes and setting up of more Institutes and FCls in the
private sectors in a phased manner so that the problem of manpower could be addressed to
some extent. (Para 67)
The Committee notes the suggestions given by the Tourist Guide Federation of India
especially the printing of special tickets for CWG-2010 for foreign tourists, special queues
for foreign entry tickets, proper parking facilities, first-class pay toilets, recruitments of
guide and state of art glow signs and facilitation desk in all the monuments. The Committee
recommends the Government to see that no inconvenience is caused to the tourist at the
monuments and the monuments should have these facilities including trained guides for the
tourists during the CWG. (Para 68)

32
BRANDING AND PUBLICITY
The Committee feels that it should be done as a part of Incredible India Campaign
already being done by the Department of Tourism. (Para 70)
CENTRAL RESERV ATION SYSTEM/GAMES TRA VEL OFFICE FOR THE CWG-2010
The Committee notes that the Ministry has the promotional plan to promote the
Commonwealth Games 2010 in the overseas market to showcase the rich cultural heritage
of India to the international community. The Committee feels that the tourists who come
for the Commonwealth Games will also like to see the India and its different tourist
destination. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to design comprehensive
tour packages to select places to suit to the need of the tourists coming for the
Commonwealth Games 2010 in collaboration with the Tour and Travel Operators so that the
tourists can see India in its entirety. The Ministry should also launch a dedicated portal on
the website and specific media campaigns for the Games in the identified tourism markets
to generate tourist traffic to India. (Para 72)
The Committee recommends that a dedicated Central Web Portal for Commonwealth
Games should be designed to cater to the need of the tourists. The website should be
interactive and must contain all the data inputs and feedbacks, that is required for the
tourists viz., booking of rooms, travel planner, etc. to facilitate their journey and make the
stay comfortable. (Para 73)
SPECIAL TOURISM FORCE
The Committee is surprised to know that there is no specific law to deal with the
touts stringently. At present the action is taken under Section 151 of CrPC and Section 97
of the Delhi Police Act for creating nuisance that provide very minor punishment. The
Committee welcomes the move of the Government of Delhi for enactment of a law for the
safety of the tourists and to protect the tourist from the touts. The Committee is of the
opinion that the safety and security of tourists is paramount and should be looked into
seriously and recommends the Ministry to pursue the other State Governments for
enactment of the law and creation of tourist police force for ensuring of the safety and
security of the tourists at the earliest. (Para 80)
The Committee appreciates the work done by the U.P. Tourism Police in Agra to
prevent fleecing of tourists and misbehaviour with them. However, the Committee feels the
need for strengthening the Tourist Police at all the tourist centres/destination and
recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress upon the Government of U.P. for looking
into the service conditions of the personnel deployed as Tourism Police, who are all
ex-servicemen. The Tourism Police must be provided tourist vehicles with mobile telephones
and given training in English language for providing information/guidance to tourist.
(Para 81)
PROTECTION AND PRESERV ATION OF MONUMENTS
The Committee notes that Delhi is the home to around 1200 heritage buildings, out
of which 173 are listed as protected by the ASI. Three protected sites i.e., Red Fort, Qutab
Minar and Humayun Tomb have been given World Heritage Status by the UNESCO and get
top priority for providing visitors’ amenities and their overall maintenance. The Committee
notes that the Ministry of Culture and the ASI has already identified the monuments for
sprucing them up that are important from tourism point of view and are located on the

33
games route. The Committee notes that the conservation and preservation of monuments
has started and good work has been done by the ASI in this regard. However, a lot of work
on building essential tourists facilities at city monuments was yet to be done, inspite of the
additional allocation of funds for this purpose to the ASI. The Committee feels that the
Commonwealth Games will be a great opportunity for state to showcase its heritage to a
large number of tourists who will be coming to the city for the event. The Committee
therefore, recommends the Government to renovate and repair to conserve the monuments
and create more tourist facilities like, canteens, toilets, interpretation centre, museums,
ramps for disabled and enhanced parking lots. The Committee recommends that the
Government should take immediate steps for proper maintenance of the pathways and
approach roads, illuminations/floor lighting of the monuments etc. need immediate
attention. The Committee also recommends the Government to promote lesser known
monuments, places, like Kashmiri Gate, Sheesh Mahal, Baradari and other tourist sites for
the tourists with improved connectivity. (Para 85)
The Committee notes that 13 monuments have been taken up for illumination by the
ITDC. The Committee recommends the Government to consider illumination work for other
popular monuments in Delhi to attract a large number of tourists. However, the Committee
cautions the Government that while carrying out the illumination work, the originality of
the monuments should be restored and in no way the monuments should be subjected to
damage by installing the lightening equipments, etc. (Para 86)
The Committee notes with dismay that the Government and the civic authorities
have not paid much attention for laying the approach roads to monuments, pathways,
structural repairs, etc. The Committee feels that the beautiful building and the monuments
will loose out the visitors because of their location, inadequate parking facilities, poor
access route, trained guides and encroachment. The Committee recommends the
Government to improve on the overall ambience of the site itself and make it more
approachable and attractive for the visitors besides, removing encroachment from the places
of historical and tourist’s interest. (Para 87)
DEMOLITION OF LAL MAHAL
The Committee pointed out the dismal picture of state of affairs relating to the poor
management and upkeep of the monuments which is evident through the demolition of Lal
Mahal. The Committee is perturbed to note that the concerned agencies are shying away
from their responsibility and passing the buck and blame each other. The ASI has washed
its hands off claiming that Lal Mahal was not a protected monument and that the MCD
should have preserved it. The MCD claims that it was not on the heritage list and it was
protected in the INTACH list as it cares about unprotected ones. The Ministry of Urban
Development does not know anything about the incident, although it has been much
highlighted in the media. The ASI is being blamed for inaction despite Lal Mahal being in
the Zafar Hasan’s List for the Central Protection. The State Government is being blamed
for not notifying monuments like the Lal Mahal despite a list sent to them three years ago
and the police have not been able to nab the culprits so far. This shows the utter lack of
coordination and confusion between different agencies of the Union as well as the State
Government and the local bodies. In this connection a communication was sent to the
Ministries of Tourism and Culture to provide information about the role of different
agencies in protection of the monuments in Delhi and NCR region, but the Committee is
constrained to say that no response was given by the Ministries till the adoption of the
report. (Para 90)

34
The representatives of Union Ministry of Urban Development who was asked about
the role and performance of the Heritage Conservation Committee, was not able to say
much about it. Be that as it may, the Committee has no option but to express its
unhappiness about the whole affair. As a result of this, a large number  of our monuments
have either withered away or have been encroached/demolished by the unscrupulous
elements. This cannot happen without the connivance of the local agencies/authority. Police
do not have adequate legal backup to try the culprit in a deterrent way. (Para 91)
The Committee therefore, recommends the Governments to prepare an authentic list
of monuments at various levels – central, state and local and notify them so that it is easy
to remove encroachments from the monuments and fix responsibility for their protection,
maintenance and conservation. The heritage conservation committee needs to be made more
active. The Committee recommends to the Governments that they should take immediate
steps to notify all the unprotected in Delhi and evolve a coordination mechanism among
different agencies involved in the protection of monuments. Role of INTACH also needs to be
highlighted in this regard. It has done good work and needs to be promoted. (Para 92)
BEAUTIFICATION OF DELHI
The Committee notes the sorry state of affairs in cleaning and maintenance of river
Yamuna. The concerned agencies are not aware of who is doing what and passing the blame
and responsibility to one and other. The Committee feels that there appears a lack of
coordination between different agencies of Union, State and the local bodies. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the work of cleaning and beautification of river-bed
should be integrated and designated to a single agency for better result or else, there
should be close coordination between DJB and the DDA who are mandated to do the two
works. The Committee was surprised to find that DDA was blissfully unaware of its
responsibility of developing Y amuna river front. These works – cleansing and beautification
of river front – should be given utmost importance and urgency because the entire Games
Village is being erected just on the banks of Yamuna. (Para 94)
The Committee observes that the entire Delhi should be clean and neat for attracting
tourists. However, the nallahs crisscrossing the city, give an unpleasant experience to
anyone who visits Delhi. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Tourism should take up the issue of cleaning of nallahs at the highest level to ensure that
all the drains are cleaned and landscaping and beautifications work is done before the
Commonwealth Games 2010. (Para 95)

35
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
(Vide Para 83 of the Report)
THE LIST OF 46 MONUMENTS IDENTIFIED AND PROJECTED EXPENDITURE
FOR THESE MONUMENTS FOR COMMONWEALTH GAMES - 2010
Sl. Name of the monument Fund Required
No. (In lacs)
12 3
1. Purana Qila Complex 229.00
2. Khairul-Manazi’l-Mosque 37.00
3. Sher Shah Gate 75.00
4. Humayun’s Tomb Complex 160.00
5. Khan-i-Khana’s Tomb 45.00
6. Subz Burj 17.00
7. Nila Gumbad 40.00
8. Bu-Halima Tomb 15.00
9. Arab-ki-Sarai 65.00
10. Bara Khambha 13.00
11. Group of monuments Hazarat Nizamuddin Complex 22.00
12. Safdarjung Tomb Complex 25.00
13. Lodi Garden Monuments (5 nos)
(i) Muhammad Shah’s Tomb
(ii) Bara Gumbad Masjid
(iii) Shish-Gumbad
(iv) Sikandar Lodi’s Tomb 25.00
(v) Athpula
Total
14. Najaf Khan Tomb 55.00
15. City Wall, Kashmiri Gate 75.00
16. Wazirabad Bridge, Tomb and Mosque 15.00
17. Kotla Feroz Shah 105.00
18. Delhi Gate, Daria Ganj 11.00
19. City Wall, Daria Ganj 50.00
20. Khuni Darwaza 15.00
37

38
12 3
21. Jantar Mantar Complex 65.00
22. Lal Bangla 5.00
23. Ugrasen-ki-Baoli 30.00
24. Red Fort Complex 275.00
25. Ajmeri Gate 23.00
26. Salim Garh Fort 80.00
27. Ashokan Rock Edict 30.00
28. Biran ka Gumbad 20.00
29. Dadi Poti 20.00
30. Sakri Gumti 15.00
31. Bara Khambha 22.00
32. Mohamadiwali Mosque 20.00
33. Lal Gumbad (Malviya Nagar) 35.00
34. Teen Burji 10.00
35. Siri Fort Wall
(i) Stretch adjoining Panchsheel Park 50.00
(ii) S tretch adjoining Asiad Village 5.00
(iii) S tretch of the Wall from Asiad tower to Siri Fort Sports 30.00
Complex
TOTAL: 85.00
36. Hauz Khas Complex 70.00
37. Jahanpanah Wall 55.00
38. Qila Rai Pithora Wall 105.00
39. Satpula 20.00
40. Qutb Minar Complex 95.00
41. Jamali Kamali Tomb and Mosque 15.00
42. Ajim Khan’s Tomb 15.00
43. Balban’s Tomb and Ruins 45.00
44. Tughluqabad Fort 30.00
45. Ghiasuddin Tughluq’s Tomb 20.00
46. Adilabad Fort 40.00
TOTAL: 2339.00
Contingencies and unforeseen expenses @ 10% of the total cost 233.90
GRAND T OTAL: 2572.90
Say 2573.00

39
ANNEXURE-II
THE DETAILS OF BUDGET ALLOTMENT UNDER PLAN AND NON-PLAN OF
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA FOR CONSERV ATION, PRESERV ATION
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF MONUMENTS FOR THE LAST
THREE YEARS
(Year-wise final grant/expenditure in respect of
conservation works) for the last Three Years
(Rupees in lacs)
Years Final Estimates Actual expenditure
Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total
2005-06 4842.06 5200.00 10042.06 4852.35 5342.19 10194.54
2006-07 5775.43 5085.00 10860.43 5747.97 5068.92 10816.89
2007-08 7142.46 5754.00 12896.46 6474.48 5745.27 12219.75
2008-09 7595.00 5600.00 13195.00 4927.63* 13906.07* 18833.70*
*Expenditure upto 31st October, 2008.
Year-wise expenditure in respect of Delhi circle for
conservation of Monuments for the last Three Years
(Rupees in lacs)
Years Final Estimates Actual expenditure
Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total
2005-06 269.30 471.64 740.94 269.26 485.00 754.26
2006-07 394.10 450.00 844.10 390.11 446.46 836.57
2007-08 373.20 413.16 786.36 373.20 413.16 786.36
2008-09 300.00 380.00 680.00 137.28* 187.16* 324.44*
*Expenditure upto 31st October, 2008.
39

MINUTES

42

43
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 12th November, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri Shanta Kumar
5. Shrimati Hema Malini
6. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
7. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
9. Shri Joachim Baxla
10. Shri P. Karunakaran
11. Dr. P.P. Koya
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Shri Jawhar Sircar, Secretary
Shri R.C. Mishra, Additional Secretary
Shri Lov V erma, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Goel, Joint Secretary
Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, Joint Secretary and FA
Shri Avtar Singh Chauhan, Chief Controller of Accounts
43

44
REPRESENTATIVES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Shrimati Anshu Vaish, Director-General
Shri Vijay Madan, Additional Director-General
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
Ms. Reena Ray, Secretary (Culture)
Shri Manpreet Singh, Joint Secretary (Tourism)
REPRESENTATIVE OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Shri Ashok Kumar, Vice-Chairman
REPRESENTATIVES OF NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
Shri Parimal Rai, Chairman
Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Secretary
Shri A.K. Malik, Chief Architect
REPRESENTATIVES OF MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI
Shri K.S. Mehra, Commissioner
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI POLICE
Shri Y .S. Dadwal, Commissioner of Police
REPRESENTATIVE OF INTACH
Shri A.G .K. Menon, Convener (Delhi Chapter)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and officials of
Government of India and Government of Delhi present in the meeting.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Culture alongwith Director-
General, Archaeological Survey of India; Secretary (Culture), Delhi Government; Commissioner of
Police, Delhi; Chairman, New Delhi Municipal Council; Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of
Delhi; Vice-Chairman, Delhi Development Authority; and the Convener (Delhi Chapter), INTACH
on the development of tourism infrastructure and amenities in Delhi and National Capital Territory
particularly, at ancient sites in view of the Commonwealth Games, 2010 .
4. The Convener, Delhi Chapter of INTACH informed about the role of his organization in
maintaining monuments in Delhi in cooperation with other agencies. The Committee expressed its
displeasure over the lack of co-ordination and communication between different agencies—Union
and State Ministries, ASI, Local Bodies, Police, etc.—involved in developing and maintaining our
ancient monument. The Lal Mahal episode is the symptomatic of the existing confusion between
different bodies.
5. The Committee then asked the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi and
Chairman, New Delhi Municipal Council on their agencies' preparedness for the Commonwealth
Games, who explained in detail about the steps taken with regard to availability of water,
electricity, resurfacing of roads and completion of all other infrastructural projects assigned to
them for the Commonwealth Games. The Committee also enquired about the cleaning of Yamuna
and development of its front. The Vice-Chairman, DDA gave necessary information about the
river-front development and informed that cleaning etc. are being done by the Delhi Jal Board.
The Committee decided to hear the representatives of Delhi Jal Board in its next meeting.

45
6. The Commissioner of Police, Delhi responded to the question put by the Members
specifically on the issues of tourist police, controlling the menace of touts near airport and other
major tourist spots, streamlining of traffic force and other related matters. He underlined the need
to have a specific law to deal with these, as the existing laws lacked deterent effect.
7. The officials of the said Ministries/Departments replied to the points raised by the
Members on the subject. To several other queries raised by the Members, the representatives of
all Ministries/Departments were requested to furnish written replies subsequently.
8. A verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 1:00 
P.M. to meet again on the 27th November, 2008.

46
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Thursday, the 27th November, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri Shanta Kumar
5. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Joachim Baxla
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
9. Dr. P.P. Koya
10. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF TOURISM
Shri Sujit Banerjee, Secretary
Shri Sanjay Kothari, Addl. Secretary
Shri Devesh Chaturvedi, Director
Dr. R.N. Pandey, ADG (MR)
Shri Umesh Kumar Kalra, Director (Admn.)
Shri M.N. Javed, DDG
Smt. Madhu Dubey, DDG
Shri S.P. Singh, Regional Director (North)
46

47
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Dr. M. Ramachandran, Secretary
Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sujata Chaturvedi, Director
Shri D.S. Sachdeva, ADG (CPWD)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC)
Shri Parvez Dewan, CMD
Shri Rajiv Makin, Director (C&M)
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Shri V .K. Sadhu, Principal Commissioner
Shrimati Veena Ish, Principal Commissioner
Shri Vijay Risbud, Commissioner (Planning)
Shri B.K. Chugh, Engineer Member
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
Shrimati Sumati Mehta, Principal Secretary (Tourism)
Shri Manpreet Singh, Joint Secretary (T)
Shri M.C.T. Pareva, Chief Engineer, Flood and Irrigation (Irrigation)
Shri Ramesh Negi, CEO, Delhi Jal Board
Shri R.S. Tyagi, Superintendenting Engineer
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI TOURISM AND TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION (DTDC)
Shri Kulanand Joshi, GM
Shri Gulazari Lal, FA
Shri B.L. Agarwala, Chief Manager and CS
Shri Vijay Sharma, Consultant (T)
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Committee about the terrorist attack in Mumbai
on the night of the 26th November, 2008. The Committee condemned the brutal attack and
condoled the death of security personnel and innocent people. The Committee then observed
silence as a mark of respect to the departed souls.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up further examination of development of tourist
infrastructure and amenities for Commonwealth Games 2010 to be held in Delhi and heard the
Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Urban Development alongwith Principal Secretary
(Tourism); Chief Engineer, Flood and Irrigation, Delhi Government; Chief Executive Officer, Delhi
Jal Board; Chairman and Managing Director, India Tourism Development Corporation
representatives of Delhi Development Authority and Delhi Tourism and Transportation
Development Corporation to take stock of preparedness of various agencies in respect of the
development of tourism infrastructure and amenities in Delhi in view of the Commonwealth
Games, 2010.

48
4. When asked about the available facilities for the tourists, the Secretary, Ministry of
Tourism explained in detail about the steps taken to enhance hotel accommodations and
developing tourism infrastructure at major tourist places in and around Delhi. The Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development presented his views before the Committee on the infrastructural
issues related to the Commonwealth Games Village and also the initiatives taken by the
Government to construct required number of hotel and other rooms before the commencement
of Commonwealth Games.
5. The Chief Executive Officer, Delhi Jal Board explained to the Committee about the
construction of new sewer plants on the Yamuna bed and also the rehabilitation of the existing
sewer system in Delhi. The Committee also raised the issue of cleansing of Yamuna river with
the representative of Flood and Irrigation Department of Government of Delhi. The Committee
expressed its dismay over the casual approach and apparent slackness of both the Central and
State Governments over the issue of cleansing of Yamuna river and making it pollutant free
before the Commonwealth Games.
6. The officials of the said Ministries/Departments replied to most of the points raised by
the Members on the subject. To some queries raised by the Members, the representatives of all
Ministries/Departments were requested to furnish written replies subsequently.
7. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 1:45 
P.M.

49
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 19th January, 2009 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Shanta Kumar
4. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
6. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
7. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
8. Shri P. Karunakaran
9. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
** *
REPRESENTATIVES OF HOTEL ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
Ms Priya Paul, President
Shri R.K. Puri, Secretary-General
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRA VEL AGENTS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
Shri Rajinder Rai, President.
Shri Harkripal Singh, Chief Representative
49
*** Relates to other matters.

50
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN TOURIST TRANSPORTERS ASSOCIATION
Shri Sarbjit Singh, President
Shri Krishan Dutt Yadav
Shri Bobby K.S. Sawhney
REPRESENTATIVES OF TOURIST GUIDES FEDERATION OF INDIA
Shri Ashok Sharda, President
Shri Awdesh Mishra, General Secretary
REPRESENTATIVE OF ADVENTURE TOUR OPERATORS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
Shri Ajeet Bajaj, President
REPRESENTATIVE OF INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF TOUR OPERATORS
Dr. Sanat Kaul, Advisor
REPRESENTATIVES OF FEDERATION OF HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS
ASSOCIATION OF INDIA (FHRAI)
Shri Rajendra Kumar, Vice-President
Shri Harish Sood, Secretary-General
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard various Associations of Travel and Hotel Industry on the
‘Development of Tourism infrastructure and amenities for the Commonwealth Games, 2010’ to
be held in Delhi. The representatives of the associations expressed their apprehension about the
availability of adequate hotel rooms. They emphasized the need for installation of multi-lingual
signage on the roads, tackling touts and beggar menace around major monuments, availability of
adequate transport facilities for the tourists as well as the sportspersons during the games,
shortage of guides and other infrastructural related issues in view of the requirements for the
Commonwealth Games, 2010.
The witnesses then withdrew.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5:30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

51
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 19th February, 2009 in Room No ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri Shanta Kumar
5. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
6. Shri Biswajit Daimary
7. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
9. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
10. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12. Shri Dushyant Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
** *
2. The Committee considered the draft 149th Report on the Development of Tourism
Infrastructure and amenities for the Commonwealth Games, 2010. After some discussion, the
Committee adopted the report.
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Shanta Kumar
to present the report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul and Shri Adhir
Chowdhury to lay the report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 24th February, 2009.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4:30 
P.M.
51
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.