Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY EIGHTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
198
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
Management of Road Transport in National Capital Region: 
Issues and Challenges 

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

35
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY EIGHTH REPORT
Management of Road Transport in National Capital Region:
Issues and Challenges
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—14
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 15— 22
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 3—34
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 37—52

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
/circlex10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
17. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
@18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Prabodh Panda
20. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
21. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
22. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@23. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sudhakaran
29. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
*30. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
#31. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
(i)
/circlexNominated on 12 th February, 2013 vice  Shri Thomas Sangma.
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.
28th  October, 2012.
* Nominated on 14 th December, 2012 vice  Shri Khagen Das.
# Nominated on 9 th January, 2013 vice  Dr. Kruparani Killi, who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent
upon her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Ninety Eighth Report on ‘Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges’
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture decided to look into various issues relating to regulation and management of public
transport system in Delhi in the background of gang rape of a young medical student in a running
bus in Delhi last December and the subsequent investigations revealed that the bus involved in the
incident was plying without the mandatory permit to carry passengers. Other inquiries exposed the
fragmented authority and lack of coordination between various agencies involved in managing,
regulating and implementing transport related Acts and Rules in the national capital. As large number
of public transport vehicles from the neighboring States-part of National Capital Region, it was
further decided to have a detailed study on the public transport system of entire National Capital
Region.
3. A detailed background note was obtained from Union Ministries of Road Transport and
Highways, Home Affairs, Urban Development along with National Capital Region Planning Board
and Transport Department of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Committee
heard the views of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Home Affairs, Urban Development,
Delhi Police, National Capital Region Planning Board, representatives of State Governments of
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh in its meetings held on 3
rd and 16 th January, 6 th and
15th February, 2013.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officials of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways, Home Affairs, Urban Development, Delhi Police, National Capital Region Planning
Board, State Governments of Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for providing necessary inputs
and clarifications during deliberations on the subject.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 23
rd August, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 23rd, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Bhadrapada 1, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
CNG – Compressed Natural Gas
DDA – Delhi Development Authority
DMRC – Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DPR – Detailed Project Report
DTC – Delhi Transport Corporation
DUAC – Delhi Urban Arts Commission
DUMTA – Delhi Urban Mass Transit Authority
EPE – Eastern Peripheral Expressway
ETVMS – Enhanced Television Monitoring System
GPS – Global Positioning System
GPRS – Global Packet Radio Service
HSIDC – Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation
IT – Information Technology
ITS – Intelligence Transportation System
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MORTH – Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
MoUD – Ministry of Urban Development
MV Act – Motor Vehicles Act
MCD – Municipal Corporation of Delhi
NCR – National Capital Region
(iv)

(v)
NCRPB – National Capital Region Planning Board
NCRTC – National Capital Region Transport Corporation
NCT – National Capital Territory
NDMC – New Delhi Municipal Council
NH – National Highways
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India
NUTAI – National Urban Transport Authority of India
RRTS – Regional Rapid Transport System
UMTA – Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority
UTTIPEC – Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning and Engineering)
WPE – Western Peripheral Expressway

1
REPORT
The one incident which shook the conscience of the Nation resulting in unexpected public
protests and condemnation was that of gang rape of a young medical student in a running bus in
Delhi. The bus in which the incident happened was able to move freely throughout the city that
night without being noticed or stopped at several barriers put up by the Delhi Police. Subsequent
investigations revealed that the bus involved in the incident was plying without the mandatory
permit to carry passengers and that it was challenged several times in the past and was let off each
time. Preliminary inquires revealed that it was possible mainly due to fragmented authority and lack
of coordination between various agencies involved in managing, regulating and implementing
transport related Acts and Rules in the national capital.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture then decided to look into various issues relating to regulation and management of public
transport system in Delhi. Since large number of public transport vehicles from the neighboring
States (which are part of National Capital Region), criss-cross Delhi roads daily, it decided to have
a detailed study on the public transport system of entire National Capital Region.
3. Keeping in mind the multi-dimensional nature of public transport system in the National
Capital Region where, apart from Delhi Government and the three State Governments, Union
Ministries and various other agencies are involved, the Committee decided to concentrate only on
legal and administrative issue involved in the management of transport system in the NCR.
4. The Committee first heard the representatives of the Union Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, Transport Department, Government of NCT of Delhi and Delhi Police. Thereafter, the
Committee decided to hear the representatives of Union Ministries of Urban Development and Home
Affairs along with those from the State Governments of Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh that constitute National Capital Region (NCR). The Committee also heard the National
Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB), the apex body for planning for NCR. During the
Committee’s discussion, several key functional areas in Transport sector in respect of National
Capital Region came up.
Unique Features of National Capital Region
5. The National Capital Region (NCR) is a unique example of inter-state regional development
planning for a region, having a total area of over 33500 sq km. spanning over 15 districts in the
States of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan and National Capital Territory of Delhi, with the
National Capital as its core. It is one of the largest National Capital Region of the World and
constitutes about 1.60% of the country’s land area. It is a rural-urban region being the home of
371 lakhs people living in 108 towns of which 17 are Class I cities and more than 7500 rural
settlements.
6. The national capital, Delhi with a population of about 17 million and an area of nearly 1500
sq. km., offers a unique challenge for a transport planner. In terms of its spatial structure, it is
a ‘poly-nucleated’ city. Being the core of the NCR, the physical control at its boundaries with other
States is fuzzy as a huge number of vehicles are coming from/going to neighboring suburbs like
Gurgaon, Faridabad, NOIDA and Ghaziabad etc. The neighboring suburbs are located in other
States- namely Haryana, UP and Rajasthan have different administrative set-up. This situation gets
further complicated due to multiplicity of authorities and agencies involved in transport management
in Delhi. Such complexity does not exist in other metros like Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata etc. because

2
of having same administrative and political control in their suburbs. This is what makes an effective
policy and control mechanism a daunting challenge for the NCR.
Dimension of the transport problem
7. National Capital Territory of Delhi has, by far, the highest number of motor vehicles,
compared to any other city in the country. As on 31 st December, 2012, the total number of registered
vehicles in Delhi was 7.6 million, which is more than the vehicles in Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai
put together. A large part of Delhi has fairly wide roads, almost 30% of the city area is under roads.
Even then, the heavy traffic congestions have become a regular phenomenon on Delhi roads. The
number of vehicles now grow at 7.2% annually as compared to 4.72% during the last decade.
Besides, the number of vehicles coming to Delhi from adjoining States is also growing equally faster
every year. Thus the share of road-space can not keep pace with the unabated growth of vehicular
traffic in Delhi. The city in this way is bound to face still higher levels of traffic related problems
in future, unless there is a slowdown in the growth of motor vehicles on the roads. The break-up
showing growth of different kinds of vehicles shows that personalized vehicles such as two wheelers
and cars are the largest segment in this regard (Annexure-I).
8. The road network in the city is structured around radials, combined with circular roads
known as Ring Roads. It, therefore, has a fairly well-structured grid-iron pattern. However, there
is no clear hierarchy in the road network as is prevalent in most parts of the developed world or
in any city with a well planned transport network. Thus, there is no clear classification of arterial,
collector and community roads.
9. Air pollution levels are very high with Delhi being considered amongst the most polluted
cities in the world. The conversion of public transport vehicles to CNG has helped to improve the
situation, but the rapidly growing number of personal vehicles have almost neutralized the gains
realized from the conversion of large number of vehicles to green fuel i.e. CNG.
10. Representatives of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi informed that there is
a shortage of qualified Drivers for Public Service V ehicles. Against the requirement of about
3,00,000 qualified Drivers, there are about 1,00,000 only. This shortage affects augmentation of
public transport adversely. As a result, Delhi has to depend upon the drivers registered/licensed in
neighboring states like UP, Haryana, Rajasthan etc. and sometimes from farther areas like Bihar,
Odisha, Punjab etc. Besides, due to lack of a reliable network database for driving licenses/criminal
record, it is difficult to verify the antecedents of the drivers and other crew members reliably.
11. The Transport Department of Government of NCT of Delhi further informed the Committee
about its plan for augmentation of DTC fleet, restructuring of private bus operations-cluster
system, augmentation of para- transit modes, Delhi metro and introduction of Monorail and
strengthening of Ring railway. The various public transport systems used in Delhi as informed by
the Transport Department of Government of Delhi is placed at Annexure-II.
National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB)
12. The National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) was set up in 1985 by an Act of
Parliament to address the problems of land, transport, housing and management of essential
infrastructure. The National Capital Region was constituted under the National Capital Region
Planning Board Act, 1985 to promote balanced and harmonized development of the Region, and to
contain haphazard and unplanned urban growth by channelizing the flow and direction of economic
growth along more balanced and spatially-oriented paths. The representatives of the Board who
appeared before the Committee informed about the following peculiarities of the existing transport
system in NCR- Road System:-

3
– Road network Pattern of NCR is ‘Radial’;
– Five national highways (NH-1, NH-2, NH-8, NH-10 and NH-24) either pass through
Delhi or connect it, are also used by daily inter-city commuters;
– 23% passengers modes and 30% goods modes are non-destined to Delhi;
– No bypass for Delhi.
13. NCRPB, therefore, emphasized the need for various peripheral expressways around Delhi
for decongesting the vehicular grid lock.
Functional Plan on Transport for NCR
14. The Committee was informed that National Capital Region Planning Board prepared in
2009, a ‘Functional Plan on Transport for NCR-2032’ after conducting a detailed study focusing
on:
– Provision of efficient, economic rail and road based transportation system well
integrated with the land use;
– Accessibility to all parts of the region;
– Discourage transit of passengers and goods through the core are of NCT-Delhi;
– Efficient public transport system in NCR for a modal shift from private to public
transport;
– Reduction of vehicular Air Pollution in entire NCR.
15. The Committee was further informed by NCRPB that the travel demand will increase from
3.63 million trips (2007) to 13.25 million trips (2032) per day. 6.4 million tonnes of goods per day
would be transported by year 2032. If Functional Plan on Transport for NCR – 2032 as envisaged
by NCRPB is fully implemented:
– Private modes share will be reduced from 55.5% to 26.3%;
– Public Transport share will increase from 44.5% to 73.6%;
– Rail based Public Transport share will increase from 16.5 to 22%.
16. The representatives of National Capital Region Planning Board informed the Committee that
for a better bus and other public transport system in NCR 37,734 buses and 377 bus depots are
required as on date. Buses should be equipped with ITS/GPS/GPRS/ETVMS.
Multiple agencies in transport sector
17. As has been discussed earlier, a major feature of transport system in NCR is the multiplicity
of agencies, directly or indirectly, in planning, provisioning, operation, management, etc. of
transport facilities as also in enforcing and regulating transport related laws. There is thus a high
degree of fragmentation in the operation and governance of urban transport. Multiple agencies like
DDA, MCD, Delhi Police, DMRC, DUAC to name a few, are responsible for different aspects of
urban transport often not being fully aware of what the other agencies were doing. Some of these
are under the Central Government and others under the State Government and yet others under the
local Government. Therefore, overlapping in the work of different agencies, lack of proper
coordination and lack of dissemination of relevant data and information amongst different
authorities are main drawbacks in the prevailing system in the NCR transport.

4
18. Amongst that plethora of agencies, the major ones that manage and operate the public
transport system in Delhi are DMRC, Indian Railways, DTC and private bus operator. Fares are
fixed under three separate Central Government enactments, namely the Delhi Metro Act, the Motor
Vehicles Act and the Indian Railways Act. There is little or no coordination between these entities,
with the exception that DTC and the Transport Department of NCT of Delhi work closely together.
19. Further there are para-transit services, infrastructure providers, enforcement agencies, etc.
between whom there is little or no coordination. When one crosses the boundaries of NCT of
Delhi, situation becomes even worse with inter-state issues coming into play.
20. The Committee was surprised to see that there are around 27 odd agencies/
authorities involved in managing and operationlising transport in Delhi at different stages.
Similarly, we have different legal back up such as Acts/Rules/Regulations that are enforced
by several authorities under different control-Union and States. A list of these agencies
involved with matters relating urban transport is placed at Annexure-III.
Acts/Rules for motor transport
21. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is responsible for the formulation of broad
policies relating to regulation of road transport in the country. The following Acts/Rules, which
embody the policy relating to motor vehicles and State Road Transport Corporations are being
administered by the Ministry:–
– Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
– Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989;
– Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950;
– Carriage by Road Act, 2007;
– Carriage by Road Rules, 2011.
22. The Motor Vehicles Act contains detailed provisions inter-alia regarding licensing of drivers
of motor vehicles (Chapter II), licensing of conductors of stage carriages (Chapter III), registration
of motor vehicles (Chapter IV), control of transport vehicles (Chapter V), special provisions
relating to State Transport Undertakings (Chapter VI), construction, equipment and maintenance of
motor vehicles (Chapter VII) and offences, penalties and procedure therefor (Chapter XIII).
23. Different sections of the MV Act empower the Central Government and the State
Governments to frame rules on certain matters in their respective jurisdictions.
24. Government of NCT of Delhi informed the Committee that Section 213 of the MV Act,
1988 give powers to State Governments to establish a Motor Vehicles Department for the purpose
of carrying into effect the provisions of the MV Act and to appoint Officers thereof such persons
as it thinks fit. Government of NCT of Delhi has already delegated powers of enforcement to the
officers of Delhi Police.
Development of public transport system
25. The representatives of Ministry of Urban Development presented before the Committee the
following as requirements for modern transport system in the city:-
– Well-integrated, seamless and multi-modal with integrated ticketing;
– Inclusive and easily accessible to all – the physically challenged, old, young, women, etc.;

5
– Offer services of different types to cater to different needs –express, deluxe, low cost,
airport link, station link, school buses, University Specials, etc.;
– Offer high speed travel with few inter-changes and short inter-change time;
– Perceived as one system, even if its operations are fragmented across different modes/
operators;
– Intelligent Transport System enabled with synchronized signals, variable message signs,
passenger information system, etc.;
– Clean, green and sustainable.
26. The National Urban Transport Policy-2006, the Ministry informed, prioritizes movement of
people and not vehicles and envisages prioritization of investment in public transport,
pedestrianisation and non-motorized transport, land use and transport integration, Intelligent
Transport System, setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority, seamless connectivity,
etc. for a modern transport system for Delhi and NCR.
27. It was argued that considering huge volume of traffic in Delhi, it is extremely difficult to
manage it through a manual system. The Government is automating its systems, so that in future
the regime will be much stricter and, without any manual intervention, manual calculations, the
persons concerned can be challaned and booked. The Government is developing a system in which
there will be complete integration of information between our systems like the permits, prosecution,
penalties along with the Police.
28. The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi also informed about the various
measures being taken to improve the public transport system which is placed at Annexure IV .
Establishing a National Capital Region Transport Corporation
29. The Committee was informed that a Task Force was constituted by the Ministry of Urban
Development, Government of India, for establishing a Regional Transit System in the NCR.
Government of Delhi is one of the stakeholders in this project. A MoU has been signed by the
Government of India and States of U.P., Rajashtan, Haryana including Delhi to establish a Special
Purpose Vehicle namely, ‘National Capital Region Transport Corporation’ for implementing the
Regional Rapid Transport System (RRTS). As per the recommendation of the Task Force, following
three corridors are being taken now on priority basis.
Corridor Length Estimated cost Daily Ridership
(km.) (Rs. in crores) (in lakhs)
2016 2041
Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut 90 1040 5.7 11.43
Delhi-Gurgaon-Alwar 180 2660 6.9 15.1
Delhi-Sonipat-Panipat 111 1260 3.77 9.83
30. It was further informed that the Union Cabinet has approved constitution of National Capital
Region Transport Corporation Limited (NCRTC) under the Companies Act, 1956 with initial seed
capital of Rs.100 crore for designing, developing, implementing, financing, operating and
maintaining Regional Rapid Transit system (RRTS) in National Capital Region (NCR) to provide
comfortable and fast transit to NCR towns and meet the high growth in transport demand. This
company may form subsidiary companies for implementing each corridor.

6
 31. The seed capital of Rs. 100 crore shall be contributed as follows:-
Central Government   
Ministry of Urban Development : 22.5%
Ministry of Railways : 22.5%
National Capital Region Planning Board : 5.0%
State Government
Government of NCT Delhi : 12.5%
Government of Haryana : 12.5%
Government of Rajasthan : 12.5%
Government of UP : 12.5%
32. The actual cost, financing plan, RRTS alignments, real estate development, financing
through Transit Oriented Development, etc. will be firmed up and frozen in the DPRs of these
projects while processing proposals for each corridor for sanction subsequently. The DPRs are
under finalization. The NCRTC shall be set up within two months after approval of the Cabinet.
NCRTC has been proposed as SPV for implementing the RRTS project in the NCR. It is envisaged
to work on a similar pattern as the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC). It will cover the States
of Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
Peripheral Expressways
33. The Committee was informed that currently the Western Peripheral Expressway (WPE) and
Eastern Peripheral Expressway (EPE) are being constructed. The Western Peripheral Expressway,
on the western side of Delhi, passes through Haryana. The total cost of the project is Rs.1367
crores and the project will be implemented by Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation
(HSIDC).
34. It was further informed that due to inordinate delay, the cost of land acquisition and other
activities has increased from Rs.844 crores to Rs.2550 crores and both these projects are running
years behind original target date of completion.
35. The Eastern Peripheral Expressway on the eastern side of Delhi, passes through Haryana
and UP with the project cost of Rs.2290 crores. The project will be implemented by National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI). The total cost of land acquisition for these two expressways
is about Rs.1307 crores. On completion of Western Peripheral Expressway and Eastern Peripheral
Expressway, Delhi is expected to get relief from those inter-state vehicles which are passing
through Delhi at present although not destined for Delhi. The total length of the WPE is 135.65
km and in EPE the total length is 135 km.
National Urban Transport Authority of India
36. The Committee was informed that at present, there is no unified law in the country
governing urban transport/urban mobility. In the absence of any unified law on the subject, all
agencies under Central/State/Urban local governments work in isolation. As such it is proposed to
set up a National Urban Transport Authority of India with the following proposed functions under
a separate Act:

7
(i) Set standards including safety standards and specifications for all urban transport
modes;
(ii) Setting and monitoring standard service level benchmarks for urban transport in
general and different modes in particular;
(iii) Setting standards and overseeing the implementation of standards/parameters for
National Mission for Sustainable Habitat;
(iv) Standardization and indigenization;
(v) Develop alternative financial models for UT projects;
(vi) Preparation of model documents, model concession agreements for P&P, national
database for urban transport, guidelines to regulate and manage urban freight
transport;
(vii) Setting and monitoring standards for urban road safety including urban road safety
audit;
(viii) Setting standards and overseeing implementation of National Public Transport Helpline
and National Common Mobility Card ‘More’;
(ix) Manage dedicated Urban Transport Fund at Central Government level;
(x) To develop capacity building across different levels of Government to achieve above
objectives;
(xi) To promote research and innovation in the field of urban transport;
(xii) Overseeing the implementation of NUTP across India;
(xiii) Advise centre, states and ULB on various aspects relating to Urban Transport as may
be referred to it.
37. In this context, a Working Group for drafting law on urban transport/urban mobility/NUTAI
has been constituted.
Legislative/Rules framework
38. The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi informed the Committee that its
Transport Department carries out various functions relating to policy formulation in Delhi. These
functions include statute related work and also physical policies as enumerated earlier. Normally,
the responsibility for managing the urban transport rests with the State Governments but as far as
NCT of Delhi is concerned, there are several key agencies like DDA, MCD, NDMC, Traffic Police
and Transport Department that play important role in urban transport planning and implementation.
Further, several Acts and Rules, which have important implication in dealing with urban transport
issues, are administered by the Central Government.
Constitution of Delhi Urban Mass Transit Authority (DUMTA)
39. The Committee was informed by the Delhi Government that the international experience
suggests that in all major cities transport functions are integrated and are handled by one agency
which performs different functions through its subsidiaries or instrumentalities. ‘Transport of
London’ is not only responsible for city transport in London but also handles the road networking
and traffic regulation, is responsible and has the freedom to plan, set-up, operate and manage such
networking through various subsidiaries. It has set-up separate wings for technical analysis and

8
input including demand assessment, fair fixing, route and frequency planning to provide sustainable
public transport network. Similar is the situation in major cities of US. Mass Transit Authority of
Boston and of New York handle all transport issues for the respective cities. In fact, in US, all
the major cities have set up such Transit Authorities to handle city transport matters including
traffic policing, the Committee was informed.
40. Delhi being a metropolitan city and growing at a faster pace, there is a need to look into
the quality of transport infrastructure it has and the level of infrastructure it needs to meet the
requirement of a world class city. It was in this context as also in order to tackle the problem
of multiplicity of agencies dealing with transport, the Government of NCT of Delhi has decided
to constitute an integrated unified authority for handling all transport related functions. Accordingly
in April 2010, the Council of Ministers of the Government of NCT of Delhi cleared a draft bill for
setting of ‘Delhi Urban Mass Transit Authority’ (DUMTA) for comprehensive planning,
development, operation, management and regulation of mass transit facilities under unified structure
in the NCT of Delhi for accessible, economic, efficient, reliable, safe and sustainable public
transport in NCT of Delhi. An attempt thus was made by Delhi Government to combine planning,
provisioning and regulatory functions including land use planning of areas meant for public transit
facility under one agency. It would be an Authority on the lines of Land Transport Authority of
Singapore City, Transport for London for City of London and Mass Transit Authority for City of
New York, the Committee was informed.
41. The Authority is proposed to be an empowered and apex multi member representative body
consisting of Chief Minister as its Chairperson with several members from various organizations
including the one from Delhi Traffic Police. For better operation, efficiency and co-ordination,
PWD and Traffic Police is to be managed by the proposed Authority. In April 2010, the said draft
Bill, as required, was sent to the Union Ministry of Home Affairs for prior approval of the Central
Government before its introduction in the Legislative Assembly of Delhi.
42. When the Committee enquired about the status of the Delhi Urban Mass Transit Authority
(DUMTA) Bill, 2010, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed that it is still under consideration of
the Ministry. They further informed that the Union Ministry of Urban Development was working
on a draft Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) Bill, 2012 meant to be created in
million plus cities and was still to be finalized. Like UMTA, the DUMTA Bill, 2010 will also require
wider consultations with various stakeholders in order to avoid possible overlapping, encroachment
etc. upon the powers of Central Government agencies/Acts, etc.
Setting up a Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA)
43. When asked about DUMTA as well as UMTA Bills, the Ministry of Urban Development
informed the Committee that setting up a single authority in the form of a Unified Metropolitan
Transport Authority (UMTA) for planning, coordination, management and monitoring was on the
anvil for the entire public transport system for Delhi and NCR. To start with, it may be set up
for Delhi. It is extremely important that one single body is established under legislation to be
chaired at the highest level, to coordinate all planning and operations of the transport system in the
city. The city must have one single agency that develops the Transport Plan and there cannot be
separate plans developed by agencies such as DMRC, DTC, etc. without proper coordination
between them. Such a body must include all the major stakeholders including the Traffic Police,
so that it ensures effective coordination and strongly discourages planning in isolation. This could
be on the lines of similar organizations for Transport working for major cities like London,
Singapore, Vancouver, etc. All of them have strong legislative backing.
44. This proposed agency i.e. UMTA, it was argued, could function at two levels, one level
undertakes strategic planning and fund allocation from dedicated urban transport fund, and the

9
second level could be responsible for the overall coordination between the different components of
the overall transport system, monitoring and enforcement of plans formulated by UMTA. One such
unified authority, the Committee was informed, has been constituted for Hyderabad Metropolitan
Region by an Act of the Andhra Pradesh Legislature (G.O. MS. No.624) deals with issues related
to traffic and transportation in the Hyderabad Metropolitan Region. Some of its functions are to
oversee the implementation of various traffic and transportation measures undertaken by various
agencies in the region, to ensure that effective public transport systems are in place for the
metropolitan region, and to integrate various routes of public transport and issues including
combined ticketing and feeder services.
45. The Committee was further informed that the Master Plan of Delhi-2021 also talks of
setting up a single authority for planning/development, implementation and enforcement of the
policies which may be framed in transport sector. A Committee under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Union Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India had made recommendations
about UMTA for Delhi in February, 2006 to Government of Delhi. However, the same is yet to be
implemented.
46. The Committee was informed that a Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure
(Planning and Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) had already been set up in 2008 in DDA under the
Chairmanship of Lt. Governor, Delhi, under Section 57 of the Delhi Development Act. The primary
aim of UTTIPEC is to ensure that various engineering solutions being implemented by various
agencies are well coordinated and not mutually exclusive. While setting it up, it was intended that
it would ultimately become a part of the UMTA for Delhi as and when it is set up.
47. The Ministry of Urban Development argued before the Committee for having better
institutional machinery like UMTA for public transport system in NCR, all the operators should be
brought under its fold. This would, inter-alia , include:
(a) A robust mechanism to develop a comprehensive long range mobility plan for Delhi and
NCR;
(b) A common fare collection system;
(c) A common passenger information system i.e, a public transport help line;
(d) Multi-modal integration at the level of infrastructure, fares, operations and information;
(e) A data collection and analysis centre;
(f) An IT and communications backbone;
(g) A mobility agency to function as a centralized command and control centre;
(h) A common control centre for automated and computerized management of auto
rickshaws and taxis;
(i) Implementing and operationalizing Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement in NCR;
(j) Developing legislative cover that supersedes the existing enactments and allows the
UMTA to take over the complete planning, coordination and management functions.
UTTIPEC can become the technical arm of UMTA.
48. The Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee that till such time UMTA is
set up, it is proposed that a Task Force under Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development can
function as the policy making body for Delhi and NCR considering its special nature wherein
different States, agencies and host of other Central and State agencies were involved. As regards
States, their Chief Secretaries may be invited to the meetings of the said Task Force. UTTIPEC

10
can become the technical arm of UMTA, as and when set up, and be responsible for overall
coordination, management and enforcement issues.
49. The Ministry of Urban Development further informed the Committee that even after
extensive network of metro rail as well as buses by DTC, the availability of safe, affordable, quick,
comfortable and accessible public transport in the National capital Region is far lesser as compared
to the demand. Presently, the focus is more on supply side. For providing more space to
personalized vehicles, pedestrian paths and cycle paths are being encroached upon through parking
and widening of roads for motor vehicles which is making accessing public transport cumbersome
and unsafe as each public transport user is essentially a pedestrian first. There is also a need to
curtailing the use of private transport for example, by congestion charging, restrictions on parking
and high parking fee, etc.
NCT Government and Traffic enforcement in Delhi
50. Regarding the implementation and enforcement of the Motor Vehicle Act (hereinafter
referred as MV Act) and the Rules made thereunder, the representative of the Government of NCT
of Delhi submitted before the Committee that Section 213 of the MV Act, 1988 gives powers to
State Governments to establish a Motor Vehicles Department for carrying into effect the provisions
of the MV Act. Government of NCT of Delhi has already delegated powers to the officers of the
rank of Assistant Commissioners of Police and above of Delhi Police to suspend the permits of
transport vehicles for violating the various provisions of the MV Act. Delhi Police has also been
vested with powers under the MV Act to prosecute the drivers and owners of the motor vehicles
for offences relating to license, registration, permit, limits of speed, driving regulation and
adherence to traffic signs and signals. In addition, Delhi Police has also powers under the Delhi
Police Act to regulate and control the motor-vehicles. On the specific request of Delhi Police and
Directions of Court of Law, Government of NCT of Delhi has also delegated its powers to Delhi
Police under relevant Section of the MV Act for compounding of offences, removal of unauthorized
hoardings and to get particulars of drivers or conductors of motor-vehicles committing any
offence.
51. It may also be noted that currently, Delhi Traffic Police is regulating the traffic and
checking violations of various provisions of the MV Act and Rules framed thereunder. Delhi
Transport Department also has an ‘Enforcement Wing’ to deal with enforcement issues arising from
time to time in focused manner. Of the staff strength of 193 personnel, 150 are deployed in about
30 teams of 5 officials each. These teams are deployed in the field with specific instructions to
focus on particular type of vehicles or offences, as following:–
● Focused enforcement on offences – most of which cannot be delegated by the State
Government or can be enforced only by these officers of the Motor V ehicles
Department or are not delegated to the Police: such as over loading of goods vehicles
etc.
● Conduct special drives from time to time in which the limited manpower concentrates
its attention on specific offences/categories of vehicles.
● Traffic investigation of specific complaints and necessary action thereon.
Delhi Government and Delhi Traffic Police
52. Government of NCT of Delhi also submitted that although Traffic Police is the main agency
for enforcement of the Motor Vehicle Act and Rules, there is hardly any information flow in a
structured manner to the Transport Department. It is a very strange situation where the Traffic
Police is enforcing the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act on behalf of Transport Department in view

11
of certain powers delegated to it, but it reports to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of
India. Hence, the Rules are made by the one set of officials while these are enforced by another
set of officials, both of whom report to different authorities. Government of NCT of Delhi realizes
that the responsibility of the Transport Department does not go away with the delegation of power
but it cannot be exercised in vacuum of information. Comprehensive guidelines are being finalized
for proper feed-back from Traffic Police being enforcement agency with respect of various powers
delegated by the Government regarding transport sector.
53. While the Government of NCT of Delhi has decided to strengthen its Enforcement Branch
with additional manpower, vehicles and technological support, even then the primary responsibility
of enforcing the rules, permit conditions etc. is going to rest with the Traffic Police due to their
size of the manpower, powers delegated by the Transport Department and specific power given
under the Motor Vehicle Act and Rules.
54. According to the Government of NCT of Delhi, it is unable to seek full cooperation from
the Delhi Police in managing the ever increasing traffic problems in Delhi. It was suggested that
the Police Department should be reorganized into Traffic, Law and Order (General Security) and
VIP security. It was suggested that while the security may be looked after by the Central
Government directly, ‘General Security’ and ‘Traffic Wing’ may be placed under the Government
of NCT of Delhi. Thus, the Government of NCT of Delhi tried to make out a strong case for
transferring the Delhi Traffic Police to its control. The Committee was informed that the proposal
for transferring the control of Delhi Traffic Police to Government of NCT of Delhi was taken up
with the Union Ministry of Home Affairs which controls Delhi Police and their comments were still
awaited.
55. When asked, the Union Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that the proposal
was being examined in detail. The Ministry of Home Affairs argued that the Traffic Police was an
intrinsic part of the Delhi Police and Section 3 of the Delhi Police Act provides that “There shall
be one police, force for the whole of Delhi and all officers and subordinate ranks of the police
force shall be liable for posting to any branch of the force including the Delhi Armed Police”.
Under Article 239 AA, of the Constitution of India (Special provisions with respect to Delhi),
entries 1 and 2 of the State List i.e. “Public Order” and “Police” are the subjects outside the
purview of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi and function under the control of an Administrator
appointed under Article 239 of the Constitution i.e., Lt. Governor. The functioning of the Traffic
Unit, Police district, Security, Police Control Room, etc. are complementary to each other and
function in tandem, particularly during VVIP movements, rallies/processions and demonstrations,
sports events, events of national importance such as Republic Day, Independence Day, police
bandobust for the occasions like Trade Fair, Ramlilas, Religious festivals, etc. This aside, there are
administrative and disciplinary issues, which warrant the existence of one single police force in the
capital. Therefore, a standalone traffic unit is not feasible. The Committee was informed that in
view of the position explained above, it is not considered feasible to accept the request to bring
the control of Delhi Police under the Government of NCT of Delhi.
56. Regarding enforcement of MV Act and Rules made thereunder, the Ministry of Urban
Development submitted before the Committee that the enforcement mechanism needs considerable
improvement. It would be appropriate if all the functions of enforcement including the traffic police
are brought under the jurisdiction of the UMTA and all enforcement responsibilities should rest with
the proposed UMTA.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
57. The Committee, after examining the papers/documents submitted to it and hearing
the arguments of various stakeholders on the subject learnt that there are around 27 odd

12
authorities/agencies for managing the public transport in the National Capital Region and
the existing arrangement needs a total revamp. In fact, the creation of NCR posed newer
challenges for promoting a seamless, accessible, safe, affordable and comfortable transport
in the region. A large number of non-destined vehicles, commercial and private, pass
through Delhi everyday to reach other States. Five National Highways are converging in
NCT Delhi adding to insurmountable pressure on the Delhi Roads.
58. The Committee feels that pressure of ever increasing population, unprecedented
proliferation of private vehicles, lack of adequate space for roads, parking etc., existence of
multiple authorities/agencies responsible for different aspects of transport management
leads to the existing chaos on the roads in the NCR. Even the Metro connectivity has also
reached its saturation point. The Committee finds that these authorities and agencies
responsible for planning, development, operation, management, etc. of transport facilities/
services available in NCR being independent of one another work in isolation. Hence, the
existing confusion and chaos on the roads.
59. Another major challenge is the absence of a unified law for governing urban
transport in the country. As a result, the enforcement of different Rules/Regulations by
different State Governments and other agencies within the NCR is done in isolation. Thus,
the existing enforcement arrangement for concerned rules/regulations, in fact, is highly
fragmented and diffused. As such, there is an absence of an effective and integrated
enforcement formal mechanism having a shared mandate/authority from all the concerned
- NCT Government, State Governments, Union Ministries of Urban Development and Home
Affairs and various agencies such NDMC, MCD, DDA, DMRC, DTC, Delhi Police etc.
60. The Committee finds that as far as Delhi is concerned, while planning is with the
Union Ministry of Urban Development, management of traffic is with the Delhi Police, which
is under the Union Ministry of Home Affairs, NCT Transport Department is responsible for
issuing licenses and registering vehicles under the Motor Vehicle Acts and Rules. From
planning to enforcement each Ministry/Department perform its duties exclusively without
having any formal coordination between them.
61. The Committee finds that an interim solution for the problems in public transport
system in National Capital Region is the proper and planned traffic management, stricter
licensing system, integration of bus services with metro and effective utilization of ring
railways in the entire region. The long term solution will be introduction of Unified
Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) having a jurisdiction over National Capital Region
at the earliest. Such a unified authority would be empowered to deal with important aspects
relating to planning, operationalizing, management, regulation, enforcement, etc. of an
effective transport system which has the consent/approval from all the State Governments
including NCT Government and Union Ministries of Road Transport and Highways, MOUD
and MHA.
62. The Committee noted a perceptible resistance on the part of various authorities
and agencies like Delhi Government, State Governments, Ministries of Urban Development
and Home Affairs, Delhi Police, Delhi Development Authority, DMRC, etc. to effect any
change in the existing control over different aspects of public transport system. They
appeared to be unwilling to forego their authority, even while each authority is working
at cross purposes. There is a lack of clear vision and coordination regarding how the
transport network should be designed, developed and implemented. Individual agencies
such as the NCT Government, Union Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Home
Affairs/Delhi Police, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), the Delhi Transport
Corporation (DTC), the Indian Railways appear to be making their plans in isolation. As

13
a result, services of different modes do not complement each other. Coupled with this,
policies with regard to other inter-linked issues such as creation of parking facilities,
transit-oriented development, road-widening activities, are not aligned with those of
others.
63. The Committee is aware that some amount of multiplicity of authorities is in-built
into our system which is unavoidable. Many activities that are involved fall in the domain
of authorities at different levels supported by constitutional and statutory provisions. The
only option in this situation could be having a unified authority which could be delegated
necessary powers in respect of everything required for managing/providing a seamless,
efficient, affordable, safe and sustainable transport in NCR.
64. The Committee feels that this unified authority could coordinate between various
authorities in Transport Sector which is extremely essential to ensure world class transport
facility with adequate safety and security for the citizens of Delhi particularly for the
women using these faculties. Technology can play a crucial role in effective co-ordination
also.
65. The Committee finds that currently there are many authorities for enforcement of
traffic related Rules and Regulations, traffic police and the motor vehicle inspectorate being
two of them. This causes undue rivalry and ‘empire building’. This is further compounded
by the fact that the Police does not function under the Government of Delhi but under the
Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).
66. Besides, Union Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORTH) which is
responsible for administering six Acts/Rules/Regulations in this regard. Motor Vehicles
Rules and Carriage by Roads, Road Transport Corporation being few of these. Delhi Police
that enforces important Rules for traffic control comes under the MHA. Delhi Government,
now being an elected one having an elected Assembly cannot be expected to remain outside
of the loop because people hold it responsible for problems of traffic in Delhi. This
helplessness is reflected in its several attempts (by NCT Government) to get control of
Traffic Police and have DUMTA for this purpose.
67. DUMTA Bill prepared by NCT Government is pending with MHA and the Ministry of
Urban Development (MOUD). But the MOUD has come up with an idea of UMTA for Delhi
for which it will be the controlling authority . Whether this pr oposal had been discussed with
NCT Government and the Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan as well as
the Ministry of Home Affairs is not known. Now, we have a situation where we have a
proposal for DUMTA under NCT Government, UMTA by Union Ministry of Urban
Development. More recently, NCRPB has also taken some steps to set up National Urban
Transport Authority of India (NUTAI), a separate agency to ensure smooth transportation in
the region. The Committee learnt that State Governments have some reservations about
certain important issues involved. The Committee appreciates this effort of NCRPB but has
serious reservations about its smooth functioning. It should not be allowed to turn out to
be yet another agency adding to existing confusion.
68. The Committee wishes to point out that the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways (MORTH) had brought a National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill
in 2010 which was considered by this Committee and returned to the Ministry with certain
suggestions/recommendations as 160
th Report in July, 2010. This Bill sought to set up a
Board for, among other things, ensuring an effective road safety and traffic management
system and practices. When asked, the MORTH informed that the Bill is in the process of
finalization and will be introduced in Parliament after it is ready.

14
69. The MORTH argues that there should be a single Act to control the movement of
motor vehicles over the entire country for better efficiency and results. It is also of the
view that the existing system of control/implementation gets diluted due to involvement of
other Ministries/Departments who propose to bring their own Act for regulation of various
aspects resulting in conflict/duplicity in Regulations. These also sometimes do not reflect
the point of view of all the stakeholders. Therefore, the various issues relating to road
transport should remain under the umbrella of one Act and one Ministry to optimize the
responsibility and administration with respect to these regulations. It suggests to utilize the
existing Transport Development Council under this Ministry to integrate all these aspects.
70. In view of several such proposals to set up different Authorities separately, the
Committee feels that there is a need for constitution of a Task Force or GOM to consider/
examine all the issues in consultation with the concerned Governments/Ministries to work
out the most workable mechanism for this purpose. It may consider the considering
proposals of MOUD for UMTA that of NCT Government for DUMTA, National Road Safety
and Transport Management Board of MORTH and NUTAI by NCRPB. The existing system
should be revamped at the earliest which is acceptable to all and has consent/mandate of
all.
71. The Committee feels that there is a need for reviewing the role and performance of
National Capital Region Planning Board in addressing the transportation issues of NCR.
Whether the NCRPB set up way back in 1985 has been able to fulfill its mandate during
these more than three decades of its existence? The Committee notes that the Western
Peripheral Expressway (KMP Expressway) and the Eastern Peripheral Expressway can bring
a lot of relief to the transport in Delhi Region. However, the Committee also notes that the
construction of the Expressways are moving in a snail’s pace which need to be completed
at the earliest. The Committee also notes the problems faced in funding of these projects
and hopes that the Union Government will sort out the issues with the respective
stakeholders of these projects to complete them without further delay.
72. The Committee finds that another impediment in management of public transport
system in NCR is the implementation of Central Motor Vehicle Acts/Rules by the respective
States individually. The Committee feels that to address this issue, Central Motor Vehicle
Acts/Rules may be implemented uniformly for the entire NCR in consultation with the State
Governments.
73. The Committee feels that the focus for public transport in NCR should be a multi-
modal, efficient and integrated (rail, road and pedestrian). In absence of this, personalized
transport will continue to increase and public transport will remain fragmented and scanty.
The Committee hopes that the Union Government in consultation with the State
Governments of Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh will address the issues
concerning public transport system in NCR on priority.

15
ANNEXURE

17
ANNEXURE -I
(vide Para 7)
Number of Registered vehicles in Delhi
Year Personal Vehicles Commercial Vehicles Total
Cars & Motor Auto T axis Buses Goods
Jeeps Cycles/ rickshaw V ehicle
Scooters
1980-81 1 17213 334389 19947 6225 7912 35741 521457
1990-91 383610 1191186 62007 10026 18651 99078 1764558
2000-01 920723 2230534 86985 18362 41483 158492 3456579
2008-09 1859370 3797943 83948 40072 55148 175250 6011731
2009-10 2013680 4055229 86482 45240 58047 193205 6451883
2010-11 2173323 4342403 88181 57958 61471 209370 6932706
2011-12 2343113 4644146 88197 69780 64033 228886 7438155
Percentage distribution of registered vehicles to the total
Year Personal Vehicles Commercial Vehicles Total
Cars & Motor Auto T axis Buses Goods
Jeeps Cycles/ rickshaw V ehicle
Scooters
1980-81 22.48 64.13 3.83 1.20 1.52 6.85 100.00
1990-91 21.74 67.51 3.51 0.57 1.06 5.61 100.00
2000-01 26.64 64.53 2.52 0.53 1.20 4.59 100.00
2008-09 30.92 63.17 1.40 0.66 0.91 2.91 100.00
2009-10 31.21 62.85 1.34 0.70 0.89 2.99 100.00
2010-11 31.34 62.64 1.27 0.84 0.89 3.02 100.00
2011-12 31.50 62.43 1.19 0.94 0.86 3.08 100.00

18
18
ANNEXURE -II
(vide Para 11)
Public transport systems used in Delhi
(a) Metro Rail system being operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), which is
a joint venture company between the Government of India and the Government of NCT of
Delhi;
(b) A suburban railway system, operated by the Indian Railways, connecting the satellite towns
of Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Rohtak and Panipat.
(c) An extensive bus network with the following modes of Transport:
o Buses operated by the Delhi Transport Corporation – approx. 5500 in number;
o Buses operated by the Transport Department through DIMTS Ltd. under Cluster
System-presently 430 and to be increased upto 5500;
o Chartered buses, directly licensed to private operators by the Transport Department for
Point to Point operation for a group of persons;
o Feeder buses operated by the DMRC, through private operators- Presently 100 and to
be increased upto 400;
o Mini Feeder buses operated by private stage carriage operators- Presently 1500 and to
be increased upto 3000.
c) A range of para transit services comprising of:
o Radio taxies- About 9000;
o Taxies that can be run for the day- 8000;
o Yellow and black taxies which are paid on the basis of a fare meter- About 8000;
o Auto rickshaws, which too are paid on the basis of a fare meter-60,000 to be
increased upto 1 Lac;
o Point-to-point shared taxies on limited routes (Phatphat Seva)- about 300 vehicles;
o Cycle rickshaws that are allowed to operate in the older parts of the city. – Regulated
by Local Bodies.

19
19
ANNEXURE -III
(vide Para 20)
Different agencies involved with matters relating urban transport
Construction stage
– United Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning and Engineering Centre
(UTTIPEC) – a DDA agency
– Land Owning Agency/Road Owning Agency of the Project premises
Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)
New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)
Public Works Department (PWD)
Central Public Works Department (CPWD)
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) (if in DMRC’s land or affecting its
network)
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)
Northern Railways – if in Railways premises and for Road over Bridges (ROB)
and Road under Bridges (RuB)
– Delhi Urban Arts Commission
– Delhi Fire Services
– Utility Diversion
Water Supply and Sewerage – Delhi Jal Board (DJB), NDMC, MCD, CPWD
Power – Delhi Transco Limited, BSES (Rajdhani and Yamuna), NDPL
OFC Cable – MTNL, Private operators
Indraprastha Gas Limited
– Transport Department – GNCTD
– Trees cutting involved – Conservator of Forest
– Environmental Impact Assessment – Ministry of Environment and Forest, Delhi
Pollution Control Committee
– If land acquisition involved – DDA
– If traffic diversion involved – Delhi Traffic Police
– If drains falling in the project premises – Flood Control Department, MCD for their
respective drains

20
– If any monuments involved – Archaeological survey of India
– If land use change/master plan modification required – Town and Country Planning
Organization through DDA
– If tower or any high rise structure involved – Ministry of Civil Aviation
– If rolling stock involved – Commissioner of Railway Safety
– If CNG Station/petrol pump or tunneling involved – Department of Explosives
Planning stage
– UTTIPEC (DDA)
– Land owning agency/road owning agency of the project premises – DDA, MCD,
NDMC, PWD, CPWD, DMRC, NHAI, Northern Railways
– DUAC
– EIA – DPCC, MoEF
– Delhi Fire Service
– Land Use Change – DDA
– Delhi Traffic Police – for traffic management related
– Transport Department
– Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC)(if bus routing/re-routing involved)
Bus Operation
– Time table, adherence to Motor V ehicle Act 1988 and Delhi Motor Vehicle Rules 1989 –
permit from State Transport Authority (STA)
– Certificate for fitness under Central Motor Vehicle Rules 1989
– For crew standards – Delhi Motor Vehicle Rules 1989
– Fare as per STA
Bus Depot Construction
– UTTIPEC
– Land owning agency – DDA, MCD, NDMC
– DPCC
– Fire Service Department
Bus Depot Operation
– DPCC for noise and affluent discharge
– Factory licence from MCD
– Land owning agency – DDA, MCD, NDMC
– Explosive licence from Department of Explosives for dispensing CNG
– Fire services department

21
21
ANNEXURE-IV
(vide Para 28)
Measures to improve the public transport system in Delhi
Technological upgradation
(i) GPS Based Bus Tracking and Monitoring System:  With a view to improve reliability of bus
operations, GPSs have been installed in about 3000 DTC and all 430 cluster buses. Now on line
real time monitoring of the bus operations is being carried out from the ‘‘Command and Control
Centre” established at ISBT, Kashmere Gate with a cost of Rs. 30 crores. The system has helped
in better regulation for safety and reliability of the bus operations by monitoring of relevant data
with regard to routes, deviations, over-speeding, unauthorized stoppages etc. for buses.
(ii)  Operations Control Centre (OCC): There has been a quantum leap in terms of the
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) based transportation projects. Each being
interlinked with the other, a need was felt to develop a Command and Control Centre to integrate,
manage and monitor the transportation system and intervene in case of a crisis. Transport
Department has developed a state of the art Operations Control Centre at ISBT, Kashmere Gate.
The OCC shall operate and control the following systems:-
o Intelligent Signaling System (ISS)
o Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Corridor
o Automatic Vehicle Location System (A VL)
o Automatic fare collection Systems (AFCS)
o Private Stage carriage buses in 17 Clusters
OCC is equipped with servers that are linked to the ISS, A VL and AFCS components in the field,
in real time through GPRS and Optical Fiber Cable (OFC). The activities will be monitored on
Barco screens installed in the OCC and LCD panel in addition to the work stations of the respective
staff. The Command Centre is manned 24 hours for real time monitoring of all activities. For the
ISS the OCC work towards facilitating a smooth flow of traffic. It will be capable of:
o Live traffic monitoring on BARCO Screen
o on-line fault detection system
o Advanced traffic information and management system
o CCTV recording system
o Management and Operation of entire signaling system.
(iii) Passenger Information System (PIS):  It is a part of the GPS based Bus Tracking System.
The GPS gives the location of the bus and a backend application uses this information to calculate
the Expected Arrival Time of the bus. This information is then transmitted to the PIS boards that
are installed at the bus stops. The PIS has been installed by DIMTS in 90 BQS on the BRT
corridor and 125 BQS in the NDMC area. It is in the process of coordinating the roll out of PIS

22
in 375 additional BQS in Delhi. The project is expected to be completed within the next six months.
With full roll out of PIS, the commuter would also be able to plan his/her journey by sending the
bus arrival query through SMS.
(iv) Electronic Ticketing Systems:  Electronic Ticketing System is functioning successfully in
cluster buses for last one year. It is planned to extend this System in DTC buses. It has been
decided to have a Common Mobility Card for Metro and Public Transport Buses. Modalities in this
regard are being worked out for the extension of Metro card on cluster and DTC buses.
(v) Automated Vehicle Inspection System:  With a view to improve road worthiness for safe
transportation, the transport department of national capital territory of Delhi is modernizing its road-
worthiness inspection facilities for commercial vehicles provided at the Vehicles Inspection Unit,
Burari. Five automated Inspection and checking lanes have been made operational and
e-commissioning of another six lanes is in progress. As of now, all buses, trucks, tourist taxis,
school cabs and three-wheeled goods carriages vehicles tests are conducted on automated I and
C test lanes before grant/renewal of certificate of fitness.
(vi) Interlinking of Zonal offices and Inspection Unit: All zonal transport offices, Vehicles
Inspection Unit and Auto rickshaw Unit at Burari have been interlinked. The interlinking of data
base of driving licenses in real time has made it possible for the issuance of driving license to the
citizens of Delhi from any zonal transport office in Delhi.
(vii) Networking of Pollution checking facilities: About 600 Pollution Checking Centers have
been authorized to facilitate checking of pollution levels and issue of Pollution under Control
Certificates (PUCCs) to the motorists. All the Centers have been connected in a web-based
network. Now the pollution levels of vehicles checked at these centers are uploaded on real time
basis. This helps in creation of comprehensive database on emission characteristics of vehicles in
different categories and age groups and issuance of automatic notices etc. It has been made
mandatory for these Centers to affix a hologram having security features on the Certificates being
issued by them with a view to curb the issue of fake Certificates.

23
MINUTES

24

25
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd January, 2013 in Committee Room
‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
1. Shri A.K. Upadhyay, Secretary
2. Shri C. Kandaswamy, DG (RD) and SS
3. Shri V .L. Patankar, ADG (RD)
4. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, Joint Secretary (T)
5. Shri Rohit Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (H)
6. Shrimati S. Narendra, Joint Secretary (IC)
7. Shri U.D. Bhargava, Director (MVL)
8. Shri Puneet Kumar, Director (H)
9 Shri Rajeev Lochan, Director (RS)
25

26
*** Relates to other matters.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI)
Shri Rajiv Yadav, Member (A)
TRANSPORT RESEARCH WING
Shri O.P. Shemar, Advisor TR
GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
1. Shri Rajendar Kumar, Secretary-cum-Commissioner
2. Shri Yashpal Garg, Special Commissioner
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC)
Shri Mahesh Chandra, DDG (NIC)
2. * * *
3. The Chairman, thereafter, informed that the officials of the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways alongwith those from Delhi Government had been invited for a presentation on the
issues, policies, programmes, relating to the road transport in the country. The Chairman in his
opening remarks raised the issue of poor condition of roads and the lack of resources for their
maintenance, problem relating to toll collection, massive increase in number of private vehicles
disproportionate to availability of motorable roads, higher road taxes, lack of wayside amenities and
first aid facilities, telephones, rest places, violation of road safety and traffic laws and lack of co-
operation/co-ordination among different States with regard to motor transport. The Committee
pointed out the reduction in allocation for road transport sector for the year 2012-13 from Rs.400
crores at BE level to Rs.160 crores at RE level and sought the reasons for such a drastic cut in
allocation.
4. The Committee, then, raised the issue of proliferation of private vehicles in the absence of
a viable public transport system in the major cities resulting in chaos at roads in such cities. The
Committee desired to know the policy of Government in promoting public transport system in the
country and the interface of Central and State Governments in this regard. Issues of poor
monitoring of transport system, violation of licensing terms and conditions by the private carriers
and vehicles and the constraints faced in providing an affordable and efficient public transport
system in Delhi, were also raised by the Committee.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee about the
status of road transport in the country and the steps taken by Government to mitigate the problems
in the sector. He further informed the Committee on the status of various new legislations/rules
related to road safety and the measures taken to provide wayside amenities on the roads throughout
the country. The Secretary stated that Government had initiated a multi-pronged strategy to address
the issue of road safety in the country and the role of drivers’ training institutes in imparting
training in road safety rules to drivers.
6. The representative of Transport Department of Government of NCT of Delhi informed the
Committee that though the rules governing transportation system in Delhi is issued by them, the
enforcement of such rules were in the hand of traffic police wing of Delhi Police which is under
the Ministry of Home Affairs. He also stressed the need for single authority for the efficient
management of transportation system in the national capital. He informed the Committee that the
‘Delhi Urban Mass Transit Authority Bill, 2010’ for constituting an authority for the comprehensive
planning development, operation, management and regulation of mass transit facilities under unified
structure in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, is pending with the Ministry of Home Affairs.

27
7. The Committee was of the view that there seems to be a lack of coordination between
Transport Department of Government of NCT Delhi and Delhi Police which was the nodal agency
for implementation of Rules/Regulations relating to management of transportation system in Delhi.
The Committee, therefore, decided to call the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs alongwith
the Commissioner of Police, Delhi to hear his views in the matter.
8. Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues to which the concerned
officials replied. For those questions which were not answered during the meeting and other
information sought, the Chairman directed the officials to submit written replies to the Committee.
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again on 16 th January, 2013.
*** Relates to other matters.

28
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 16 th January, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
3. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
4. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
6. Shri Prabodh Panda
7. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
8. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
9. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
1. Shri A.K. Upadhyay, Secretary
2. Shri C. Kandaswamy, DG (RD) and SS
3. Shri V .L. Patankar, ADG (RD)
4. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, Joint Secretary (T)
5. Shrimati S. Narendra, Joint Secretary (Parl.)
6. Shri U.D. Bhargava, Director (RT)
7. Shri Rajeev Lochan, Director (RS)
28

29
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI)
1. Shri R.P. Singh, Chairman
2. Shri Rajiv Yadav, Member (A)
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Dr. A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary (Delhi)
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
1. Shri Rajendar Kumar, Secretary-cum-Commissioner
2. Shri Yashpal Garg, Special Commissioner
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE  (NIC)
Shri Mahesh Chandra, DDG (NIC)
DELHI POLICE
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri Sudhir Yadav, Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
3. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
4. Shri Rajan Bhagat, Additional DCP/CRO
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Chairman
thereafter briefed the Members about the agenda of the Meeting and informed that the officials of
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Home Affairs, Delhi Police and Transport
Department of Government of NCT of Delhi had been invited for a presentation on the issues,
policies, programmes, etc. relating to the public transport system in the National Capital Region.
The Chairman also recalled the deliberations of the previous meeting on the same subject before
initiating the proceedings.
3. The Chairman in opening remarks raised the issues of problems faced in transport sector
due to involvement of multiple agencies in enforcing motor vehicle rules/acts, guidelines and rules
available with Delhi police for dealing with violation of traffic and safety rules in the national
capital, interface between transport department of Delhi Government and traffic police wing of
Delhi police, availability of institutional mechanism for coordination between transport department
of Government of Delhi and Delhi police to tackle the problems of traffic/transport issues in Delhi,
coordination between Delhi police and its counterparts in neighboring states and the problems faced
by Delhi police in providing an effective and credible road safety in Delhi. The Committee desired
to know the views of Delhi Police on the creation of a unified ‘Delhi Urban Mass Transit Authority’
for which the bill is pending with the Ministry of Home Affairs for approval.
4. The Committee further raised the issues of violation of contract/private carriage permits by
bus operators, mechanism available with the Transport Department of NCT Delhi to monitor proper
usage of bus permits, rules/guidelines for operation of RTVs within the city and rural limits in Delhi
and the shortcomings faced by the Department in providing an efficient and affordable transport
system in the capital.
5. The representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee
on the role of their Ministry in framing Motor Vehicle Acts and Rules and coordination with State
Governments for implementing the same. It was further informed about the National Transport
Development Council which met once in a year to have a coordinated discussion with State
Governments on common issues relating to enforcement and development of transport systems.
The Ministry stated that State Governments were funded for GPS-based systems, automatic ticketing

30
and surveillance under providing IT solutions in transport sector. The Committee was further
informed about the steps taken to integrate urban and rural roads to have a unified road safety
norms throughout the country.
6. The representatives of Delhi Police briefed the Committee about their role in enforcement
of motor vehicle acts/rules in coordination with Transport Department of Delhi Government in the
national capital. It was informed that a coordination mechanism had been set up to have a regular
interaction with the Transport Department for implementing motor vehicle acts/rules. The Delhi
Police further informed the Committee about the various steps taken by them to prosecute violators
of road rules and providing road safety education to public.
7. The representatives of Transport Department of Delhi Government informed the Committee
about the steps taken to strengthen the licensing system and integration of various data relating to
road transport. It was further informed that the Delhi Urban mass Transport Authority Bill prepared
by Delhi Government for a unified road transport authority was pending with the Ministry of Home
Affairs for their approval.
8. The Secretary and other officials of the Ministry replied to the points raised by the
Members of the Committee. The Committee directed that written replies to those points which
remained unanswered may be sent within a week.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.

31
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 15 th February, 2013 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
3. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
5. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
7. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sumsher K. Sheriff, Secretary-General
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
1. Shri Vijay Chhibber, Secretary
2. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, Joint Secretary (T)
3. Shri Nandan Singh, Deputy Secretary (T)
4. Shri A.D. James, Deputy Secretary (Parl.)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
1. Dr. Sudhir Krishna, Secretary (UD)
2. Shri S.K. Lohia, OSD (UT) Ex-Officio Joint Secretary
3. Shri C.K. Khaitan, Joint Secretary
4. Shri R.K. Singh, Director
5. Shrimati Ruth Changsan, Deputy Secretary
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA)
Shri Ashok Bhattacharya, Director
31

32
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
1. Shri Khurshid Ahmed Ganai, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary
3. Shri T. Narasimhan, Under Secretary
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
1. Shri P.K. Goyal, Secretary-cum-Commissioner
2. Shri Yashpal Garg, Special Commissioner
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD
1. Ms. Naini Jayaseelan, Member Secretary (NCRPB)
2. Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary
DELHI POLICE
Shri Sudhir Yadav, Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
2. At outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and introduced the
Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha to the Committee. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the above organizations. The Chairman while initiating the proceedings recalled the deliberations of
earlier meetings on the subject held with officials of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
Home Affairs, Transport Department of Government of NCT of Delhi and State Governments of
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. He stated that a number of issues identified during those
meetings and a large amount of grey area of fragmented governance structure with multiple
authorities for planning, development and management of transport facilities at various levels in
National Capital Region.
3. The Committee raised issues like lack of an effective and well-coordinated enforcement of
Motor Vehicles Act and the absence of a unified authority for enforcement of transport rules and
regulations in the NCR. The representatives of various Ministries presented their views on the
issues raised by Chairman and the Members. The Ministries of Home Affairs and Urban
Development assured the Committee to look into the various issues in creation of a Unified Mass
Transport Authority for Delhi Region.
4. Members of the Committee also raised various queries. The representatives of various
Ministries replied to the points raised by the Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed
that written replies to the points not answered, may be sent within a week.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.

33
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd August, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
10. Yogi Adityanath
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and requested them to offer their
comments/suggestions on the following draft Reports circulated to them:
(i) 198
th Report on “Management of Road Transport in National Capital Region: Issues and
Challenges”;
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
33
*** Relates to other matters.

34
3. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera, M.P.
to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and S/Shri Prabodh Panda, M.P. and M. Krishnaswamy,
M.P. to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha on the 27
th August, 2013.
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.