90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM &
 CULTURE
 
NINETIETH REPORT
ON
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORT SECTOR WITH SPECIAL
EMPHASIS ON NEW MODERN AIRPORTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   23.8.2005)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON   23.8.2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/BHADRAPADA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.         INTRODUCTION
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.         ANNEXURES
5.         MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2004-2005)
 
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.
      Smt. Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Ramdas Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
15.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
16.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju 
17.  Shri Dip Gogoi
18.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
19.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
20.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
21.  Shri Samik Lahiri
22.  Shri Sudam Marandi
23.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
24.  Shri Ravindra Naik
25.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
26.  Shri Manabendra Shah
27.  Shri Dushyant Singh
28.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
29.  Shri Sartaj Singh
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav
 
 
 * Nominated w.e.f. 14.04.2005 vice Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
 
 (2005-2006)
 
1.        Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.        Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.      Shri S.S. Chandran
5.      Shrimati Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
11.  11.Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Sudam Marandi

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27.  Shri Manabendra Shah
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Naresh Chandra Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninetieth Report on
 “Development of Airport Sector with Special Emphasis on new Modern Airports”.
 
2.      The Committee, at its meeting held on the 8
th September 2004, decided to take up this subject for examination and
 accordingly, heard the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 8 th November and 28 th
 December 2004 and 6th June and 29th June 2005.
 
3.      The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for placing before the
 Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by
 the Members.
 
4.      The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 7th August 2005.
 
New Delhi;
August 17, 2005
Sarvana 26, 1927 (Saka)
Nilotpal Basu
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
 
R E P O R T
            Airports are the gateways to a nation.  However, in our country, the state of the airports, both domestic and
 international, leaves much to be desired.  The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
 Tourism and Culture discussed the state of airports in the country and was of the opinion that the situation at the
 airports in the country was a cause of concern.  Air travel has registered tremendous growth due to various factors such
 as higher incomes, more corporate activity, low cost airlines, cheaper fares and absence of adequate rail and road
 transport infrastructure.  At a time when the civil aviation sector was taking wings in the country, the airport
 infrastructure in the country had come under tremendous stress.  The infrastructure available at the airports and the
 amenities inside the airports are grossly inadequate and are in urgent need of replacement or modernization. 
 Accordingly, during the last few years, the Government of India had taken some steps for the modernization of airports
 in the country. The steps initiated by the Government for the development/modernization of airport sector in the

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 country drew the attention of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture and accordingly the Committee decided to take up the various aspects of  'Development of Airport Sector with
 special emphasis on new modern airports' for study and examination.
 
2.         The Committee requested the Ministry of Civil Aviation to furnish a detailed background note on the subject for
 consideration of the Committee.  The Committee also held the oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Civil
 Aviation and Airports Authority of India on the 8 th November and 28 th December 2004 and 6 th June and 29 th June
 2005.  The Committee also sought replies to the queries on the subject during the oral evidence of the Secretary and
 other representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation during the examination of Demands for Grants 2005-06 of the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The various aspects of the subject discussed by the Committee and the Committee's
 observations thereon have been brought out in the succeeding paragraphs of the report.
MODERNISATION AND RESTRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
 
3.         As per their plans for developmental process of airports, the Ministry of Civil Aviation had taken steps to
 modernize and restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through Joint Venture route.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation
 provided the following brief consisting of the details of various steps the Government took towards restructuring and
 modernization of Delhi and Mumbai airports:-
 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 11 th September 2003 accorded its approval for the restructuring of Delhi and
 Mumbai airports by adopting the Joint-Venture route.
 
The AAI Amendment Bill introduced in the Parliament (Budget Session 2003) was passed by the Parliament in
 the Monsoon Session of June 2003.  The Amendment Bill authorizes AAI to transfer the operations and
 management of its existing airports by way of long-term lease to private players.  The Bill inter alia provides for
 exclusion of private airports (like BIAL) from the ambit of AAI Act, excepting security and ATC functions,
 which will continue to be discharged by AAI.  The Bill also authorizes AAI to change Advance Development
 Fee (ADF) for the development/upgradation of existing airports and for the setting up of Greenfield airports.  In
 addition, the Bill also seeks to prevent and remove encroachments of airport land.  The provisions of Airports
 Authority of India (Amendment) Act 2003 became effective w.e.f. 1 st July 2004, as per Gazette Notification
 dated 1st July 2004. 
 
The Cabinet constituted an Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) to take up decisions on various issues
 connected with the restructuring of Mumbai and Delhi airports. In this connection the Cabinet also decided to
 constitute an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) to assist EGOM.  The IMG was accordingly constituted by Ministry
 of Civil Aviation during October 2003 under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor of
 MCA and other Members from the MCA, MoF, Department of Disinvestment and Ministry of Law, Justice &
 Company Affairs and AAI.
 
To assist Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA)/Airports Authority of India (AAI) in the restructuring process, AAI
 invited technical & financial bids for the appointment of Financial Consultants.  M/s. ABN AMRO were selected
 as Financial Consultants and they started the work in January 2004.
 
After obtaining the approval of EGOM, Registration of Expressions of Interest were solicited from interested
 parties to acquire 74% equity state in the JVC and the complete documentation, in this regard, was uploaded in
 the websites of AAI and MCA on 17.02.2004.  The last date for submission of EOI was 04.06.2004.
 
Subsequent to formation of the new Government, the Hon'ble Minister of State for Civil Aviation discussed in

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 detail few critical issues relating to the Transaction including the quantum of foreign direct investments.  In order
 to address these critical issues, the last date of submission of Expression of Interest was extended to 20 th July
 2004.
 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 15 th June 2004 reconstituted the EGOM under the Chairmanship of Defence
 Minister to take the Transaction forward.
 
The reconstituted EGOM has, inter-alia, approved the 49% cap of FDI, restriction of equity participation by
 Indian Scheduled Airlines upto 10% increasing the deputation period of employees in the JVCs from 2 to 3 years
 and also decided to give weightage to bidders who will induct more number of employees over and above the
 mandatory induction of 40% net.
 
The EGOM also approved the appointment of M/s. Airplan, Australia as the Global Technical Advisor and M/s.
 Amarchand & Mangaldas Suresh A. Shroff as legal Consultant.
 
Ten entities have lodged their EOIs by 20th July 2004 (i.e. last date of the receipt of EOIs).  Evaluation of EOIs is
 on hand.  
 
Subsequent to the approval of the Board of AAI, M/s. Thakur, Vaidyanath Aiyar & Co. has been appointed an
 Accounting and Tax Advisor for the Transaction and they have since started their assignment.
 
4.         The Committee desired to know from Ministry of Civil Aviation as to what was meant by modernization of
 these airports.  In response, the Committee was informed by Ministry that the modernization of these airports would
 mean the attainment/achievement of the key strategic objectives of the Government of India as envisaged for the
 transaction, which are as under:
 
(i)                  World Class development and expansion - Under this objective, a world-class phased
 development/expansion is contemplated through timely provision of high quality airport infrastructure
 on both airside and landside to meet growing traffic demands.
 
(ii)                World Class airport management - Under this objective, a world class airport management team and
 systems is contemplated by selection of successful bidders with suitable operational experience,
 managerial and financial capability, financial commitment and the commitment to provide quality
 airport service.
 
5.         In addition to the key Transaction objectives, other Transaction objectives include:
·        Timely completion and certainty of closure, with minimal residual risks;
·        Smooth transition of operations, under concession agreements;
·        Appropriate regulation-achieving economic regulation of aeronautical assets that is fair, commercially and
 economically appropriate,  transparent, predictable, consistent and stable while protecting the interest of
 users and ensuring that the Airports are operated in accordance with world standards;
 
·        Fair and equitable treatment of AAI employees, including preservation of accrued entitlement; and
 
·
        Diversity of ownership between Delhi and Mumbai airports, to enhance competition, encourage innovation
 and allow competitive benchmarking.

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
6.         During the course of oral evidence of the Meeting held on 8 th November 2004, the Secretary, Ministry of Civil
 Aviation while giving details of development of airport sector in the country informed the Committee as under:-
           
"We have estimated that Delhi and Mumbai Airports would require an investment of roughly
 around Rs.10,000/- to Rs.20,000/- crore .  There are 23 smaller airports which would require an
 investment of around Rs.5000/- each.  The Greenfield airports would requirement of Rs.3,596 crore."
 
7.         The Committee was surprised to note the statement of the Secretary that as per their estimates, Delhi and
 Mumbai airports would require an investment of Rs.10,000 to Rs.20,000 crore.  The Committee, therefore, desired to
 know the budget cost estimates for modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Ministry of
 Civil Aviation vide their O.M. No.H-11013/3/2004-AAI dated 12th January 2005 informed the Committee that so far as
 Mumbai airport was concerned, based on the study carried out by the Financial Consultant appointed by Airports
 Authority of India, the annual aircraft movement is expected to grow up from 151,000 movements in 2004 to 500,000
 movements in 2024 and correspondingly the annual passenger movement is expected to go up from 14 million in 2004
 to 52 million in 2024.  This increase in traffic will call for airfield capacity enhancement as also enhancement in
 terminal capacity.  As per the staged development plan worked out by M/s. Airplan Limited, Australia (Global
 Technical Adviser appointed by AAI), the budget cost estimates in respect of Mumbai Airport is of the order of
 Rs.6300 crore for the period from 2005-2019.
 
8.         As regards Delhi Airport, based on the study carried out by the Financial Consultant appointed by Airports
 Authority of India, the annual aircraft  movement is expected to grow up from 117,000 movements in 2004 to 402,000
 movements in 2024 and correspondingly the annual passenger movement is expected to go up from 11.2 million in
 2004 to 42.8 million in 2024.  This increase in traffic will call for airfield capacity enhancement as also enhancement in
 terminal capacity.  As per the staged development plan worked out by M/s. Airplan Limited, Australia [Global
 Technical Adviser appointed by Airports Authority of India], the Budget cost estimates in respect of Delhi Airport is of
 the order of Rs.6500 crore for the period from 2005-2024.
 
9.         The Ministry of Civil Aviation further informed that while the above estimates have been made by the Global
 Technical Adviser (which does not include costs on account of relocation of some existing assets and for removal of
 encroachments), as per the transaction process, the prospective bidders are required to submit their development plans
 taking into account the mandatory facilities to be created in the short-term, which would be prescribed by Airports
 Authority of India/Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The successful bidders will have to submit their master plan within one
 year of their selection, which will be in conformity with the development plans submitted alongwith their bids. 
 Accordingly, the cost estimates as indicated above may undergo appropriate/suitable changes (upward or downward) in
 the light of development plans/master plan of the successful bidders.
 

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
10.       In reply to another query, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their O.M. No.13/7/2004-F.I. dated 2 nd March 2004
 informed the Committee that as per the staged development plan worked out by M/s. Air Plan (Global Technical
 Adviser) the expected traffic at Mumbai has been estimated at 52 million by 2024.  It has been estimated that a cost of
 Approx. Rs.6400 crore need to be incurred in the next 20 years.  Similarly, Delhi is expected to handle 428 million
 passengers by 2024 and investment of approx. Rs.8720 crore is required in the next 20 years.
 
11.       The Committee noted that there was huge difference in the figures quoted by Ministry of Civil Aviation in the
 communications dated 12.1.2005 and 2.3.2005.  The Committee sought a clarification from Ministry of Civil Aviation
 with respect to the difference in figures quoted by them.  In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the
 Committee that so far as the investment to be made over the development plan of Delhi and Mumbai Airports was
 concerned, the figures furnished during January 2005 were preliminary estimates made by the Global Technical
 Advisor appointed by Airports Authority of India.  Subsequent to further discussions during January & February 2005,
 the quantum of capital expenditure estimated to be spent at these airports are as under:
Delhi (IGI Airport)
:
Mandatory Capital Expenditure                                           Rs.4220 crore
(for the first five years)
Capital Expenditure during the 20 year plan period              Rs.7961 crore
(including the first five years)
 
Mumbai (CSI Airport):
Mandatory Capital Expenditure                                           Rs.4478 crore
(for the first five years)
 
Capital Expenditure during the 20 year plan period              Rs.6131 crore
(including the first five years)
 
12.       Again, during the oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation held on 29
th June 2005 the
 Committee expressed surprise at the statement made by the Secretary regarding the quantum of investment estimated
 for development of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Secretary, while clarifying the statement made by him on 8 th
 November 2004 regarding the likely investment of Rs.10,000 crore to Rs.20,000  crore for modernization of Delhi and
 Mumbai airports, stated as under:-
 
"I said that tentatively the estimated cost of modernization and development of these airports would be
 around ten to twenty thousand crore.  You had very rightly pointed out that the range was quite wide and
 that it showed that full examination of the question had not taken place.  Since then, there have been a
 number of things that have happened.  We had appointed a global technical advisor, an Australian
 company, which has been working as consultant and advisor to a number of international airports,
 including Hong Kong etc., in Asia.   We tasked them to draw up an initial development plan for Delhi
 and Mumbai, both.  They have now come up with an initial development plan.  I would hasten to add
 here that this is not the final plan.  The final plan will be prepared by the concessionaire who wins the
 bid.  This is an initial development plan prepared by our technical advisers and according to this the
 investment in Delhi Airport is to be done in four stages.  The first stage would commence now. As soon
 as the bidding process is completed by the concession agreements, it will go up to year 2009.  This
 figure of 2009, we have determined keeping in view the hosting by Delhi of the Commonwealth Games
 which are going to be held in 2010.  The second phase would be between 2010 and 2014 and the third
 phase would be between 2015 and 2019.  The fourth phase would be between 2020 and 2024.  By 2024,

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 final stages of the Delhi Airport can sufficiently handle a traffic flow of about 43 million passengers and
 3.2 million tones of cargo.  So far as financial requirement is concerned, the total estimated expenditure
 by the global technical advisor at current prices is Rs.7960 crore for Delhi, out of which Rs.2800 crore
 are to be in the first phase, that is, up to 2009.
 
Similarly, for Mumbai also, the initial development has been broken into three stages - 2005-09,
 2010-14 and 2015-19.  In stage one, which would start when the concession agreement is signed
 sometimes later in the year, an investment of Rs.2600 crore is envisaged and the total investment is
 Rs.5825 crore.  So, if you take these two together, it comes to about Rs.13500 crores or so for these two
 airports."
 
13.       Later, vide  their O.M. No.H-11013/03/2004-AAI dated 20
th July 2005, Ministry of Civil Aviation furnished the
 following details with respect to the investment as projected by the Global Technical Advisor to be made at Delhi and
 Mumbai airports.
Delhi Airport
Investment (Rs. in crore)
Stage 1 (2005-2009) 2800
Stage 2 (2010-2014) 1414
Stage 3 (2015-2019) 1556
Stage 4 (2020-2024) 2191
   Total Investment:               Rs. 7961 crore
 
Mumbai Airport
Investment (Rs. in crore)
Stage 1 (2005-2009) 2600
Stage 2 (2010-2014) 1690
Stage 3 (2015-2019) 1535
Total Investment:      Rs.5825 crore
 
14.       The above investment does not include the cost of construction of a parallel runway and associated taxiways etc. 
 Further it is estimated that the total cost of construction of parallel runway (which would include compensation for
 removal of hangers, land acquisition and removal of encroachments) and associated taxi tracks shall be around Rs.900
 crore.
 
15.       The Committee also sought information about the procedure adopted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for
 executing the development plan for Delhi and Mumbai airports.  During the course of oral evidence held on 29
th June
 2004, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that they had invited Expression of Interest (EoI)
 from interested parties for the development of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  Offers were received from ten interested
 parties.  After a process of short-listing, nine parties were identified and request for proposals were issued to these nine
 parties.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation was in the process of issuing these parties the final set of transaction documents
 which had received the approval of the empowered Group of Ministers on 22
nd June 2005.  It was further stated that by
 early August, the bids will come in and then a process of evaluation will start by technically qualified people.  Then,
 revenue sharing will be decided.  When the bids come in, each of the bidders will submit his own plan for development
 of these airports.  The bidder can configure the development plan and find a better way of providing all the facilities.  It

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 could be different from what the initial development plan prepared by the Technical Advisor of Ministry of Civil
 Aviation.  Then, they would also do their own estimation.  They would submit those plan, which would be evaluated by
 the Airports Authority of India in consultation with the Technical Adviser.  Ministry of Civil Aviation also stated that
 they had mandated certain minimal level of services, facilities and capacities which have to be created in this time
 schedule and the bidders had to prepare their plan conforming to these requirements.  The final cost of the development
 of these two airports would be known only after the successful bidder has submitted his final bid and his master plan
 for development has been frozen.
 
16.       The Committee also desired to know as to what were the minimum level of services and facilities which the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation had prescribed for the bidders to undertake at Delhi and Mumbai airports.  In response, vide
 their O.M. No. H.11013/03/2004-AAI dated 22
nd July 2005, the Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted the list of
 mandatory capital projects in respect of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  This list is annexed at Annexure-I.  As regards,
 Delhi airport, the Committee was informed that one of the most important works that was being mandated was the
 construction of the second parallel runway which will permit simultaneous take off and landing at the airport.
           
17.       During the course of discussion, the Committee desired to know the reasons behind inviting private sector
 participation in development of Airports and especially modernization of Mumbai and Delhi Airports.  The Ministry
 officials, during the oral evidence held on 6
th June 2005, explained as under :
           
"If you entirely depend on the resources of the Government, those resources will always be inadequate to
 meet the huge investment requirements.  For modernization, restructuring of the existing airports, as also
 the construction of new airports, we must have different strategies.  In that sense, where we required
 huge investments, say, for Greenfield airports, for modernization and restructuring of airports, for Delhi
 and Mumbai airports, we must have resources from, and the involvement of, the private sector.  Where
 we do not require huge investment, it is the Airport authority which generally looks after the airports and
 from their surpluses, their revenues as also with the support of the State Governments and the Central
 Government, they can take up such investment plans and development plans in other parts of the
 country.  For mobilization of resources, we have the Government of India, we have the private sector,
 we have the financial institutions and so on. Of course, finance is important.  But, at the same time, we
 have to provide the international standards at our airports.  So, we have to boost up not only the
 infrastructural part of it and the revenue that will be generated with the increase of airports, but the non-
revenue aspects of it also.  So, it is not merely a Government-oriented thing.  If we entirely depend upon
 the Government, maybe, it will further languish."
 
18.       While deliberating on the restructuring of Delhi & Mumbai airports, the Ministry of Civil Aviation constantly
 referred to the term 'world-class and internationally accepted airports'.  The Committee desired to know the physical
 and financial benchmarks of world-class airports.  In response, the Committee was informed by Ministry of Civil
 Aviation that the physical benchmarking of world class airports are generally done by measuring performance of the
 airport on the basis of two broad parameters i.e. (a) Objective Service Quality Parameters (b) Subjective Service
 Quality Parameters. The Objective Parameters generally relate to the availability of various facilities in the city side and
 airside such as baggage trolleys, passenger boarding bridges, cleanliness of the airport, time taken for check-in, time
 taken for baggage delivery, delay in arrival/departure of aircrafts etc.  These parameters are measured in terms of

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 percentage of availability such 95 to 100%.  The subjective parameters relate to the surveys conducted by AETRA,
 which is a joint venture of International Air Transport Association [IATA] and Airport Council International [ACI]. As
 part of the program, surveys of passengers are conducted by way of questionnaires covering various areas such as
 Service Facilities [availability of trolleys, wash rooms, shopping facilities, parking facilities etc.,], Service Delivery
 [Speed of Baggage Delivery Service, Courtesy of airport staff etc., Environmental factors [cleanliness and ambience of
 airport], Connectivity [ease of making connections, ground transportation etc.,], Navigational Items [Flight Information
 Screen, Ease of finding ways etc.,] etc., Based on the Survey, the airports are ranked in the scale of 1 to 5 with 5
 depicting Excellence and 1 depicting Poor. As per the results of the Survey conducted in the year 2003, the top five
 airports in terms of Overall Passenger Satisfaction with their respective ratings are (1) Dubai International, 4.35 (2)
 Singapore Changi, 4.22 (3) Hong Kong International, 4.12 (4) Copenhagen, 3.99 (5) Kaula Lumpur, 3.96.    
 
19.       The Committee wanted to know about the standards achieved by AAI in the existing Delhi and Mumbai
 airports.  In response, the representatives, the Ministry of Civil Aviation replied as under:-
"I would like to submit that so far, the assessment of performance standards was not carried out in the
 Airport Authority.  Recently, we engaged an IATA agency for this survey and we have got the survey
 report for the period January to March 2005.  According to this report, the performance standard for
 Delhi, including both international and domestic sectors is an average of 2.72.  Mumbai has an average
 of 3.2, for both international and domestic sectors………. the Asian average is 3.5……… We are
 aiming at the average of 3.75.  The provision under the transaction document is that we have stage-wise
 development, stage-I, stage-II, stage-III and so on and so forth.  At the end of stage-I, which will end
 around March 2010, we have prescribed that the average of 3.5 must be achieved ……. For the Delhi
 airport, the average will have to travel from 2.72 to 3.5; for Mumbai, it will have to travel from 3.2 to
 3.5.  In the second phase, it will have to achieve the average of 4.  We will have to ensure that it attains
 the average of 3.75, which is the world average, under all conditions."
 
20.       The Committee is constrained to note that the proposal regarding modernization and restructuring of Delhi and
 Mumbai airports has been lingering on for a fairly long period and still the Government has not been able to come up
 with any concrete plans in this regard.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation has also not been able to even firm up the
 financial requirements for these projects.  The Government has been quoting different cost estimates at different
 stages.  The Committee also notes that the initial figures of Rs.10,000 crore to Rs.20,000 crore stated by the Secretary
 of the Ministry were too inflated and also gave the impression that the money was required immediately in one go
 which infact was actually required in phases spread over 15 to 20 years.
 
21.       The Committee feels that the process of modernization as explained by the Ministry, is very slow and the target
 to be achieved is also minimal in terms of global standards.   The Committee observes that Airports Authority of India
 at present has already achieved the target with the present rate of investment.    The Committee does not agree with the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation that resource crunch is the main reason for inviting private sector participation for the
 modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The quantum of investment which is to the tune of
 Rs.13,786 crore, required for modernization of Delhi and Mumbai airports is not on the higher side and that too is
 required in a phased manner over a period of 15 to 20 years.  The Committee feels that the Government can even
 mobilize the funds required.  This will ensure not only the management control of the proposed operators of the airports
 in the hands of Indian nationals but also result in protecting the safety, security and sovereignty of the country.  

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
22.       The Committee pointed out that while Ministry of Civil Aviation was planning to invest a huge amount on the
 modernization of Mumbai airport, there was no scope for any further development on the airside at the Mumbai airport
 since there was no scope of having the second runway at Mumbai airport which could be helpful in terms of air
 operations.  Hence, capacity constraint at Mumbai airport was likely to continue. 
 
23.       The Committee desired to know as to whether it was possible to construct a second runway at Mumbai.  The
 Ministry of Civil Aviation in their reply stated that as per GTA's recommendation, a short parallel runway of 2500 x 45
 m is possible at CSI Airport, Mumbai provided hangars belonging to Air India are relocated, additional land is acquired
 for relocating hangars and for runway and obstruction in the pathways are removed.  These solutions are costly and
 involve legal problems.
 
24.       Further, the Committee sought information as to how any increase in traffic is envisaged under modernization
 and restructuring of Mumbai airport when the runway capacity of the airport could not be increased.  In response,
 Ministry of Civil Aviation vide  their O.M. No.H.11013/3/2004-AAI dated 12
th January 2005 stated that under the
 modernization and restructuring of Mumbai airport, based on the development plan as worked out by the GTA, the
 runway capacity is expected to go up from 25 movements per hour to 45 movements per hour to accommodate the
 increase in the aircraft movements, which is expected to go up from 151000 in 2004 to 500000 in 2024. 
 Correspondingly the passenger traffic  movement is also expected to go up from 14 million in 2004 to 52 million in
 2024.  As such, increase in traffic is envisaged and in order to accommodate the said increase, increase in runway
 capacity is also contemplated in Mumbai.
 
25.       The Committee also desired to know as to why the Ministry of Civil Aviation was not going in for Greenfield
 airport at Mumbai rather than investing such a huge amount at the airport when creation of a second runway was not
 possible at the airport.  Responding to this observation of the Committee, the Secretary of the Ministry, during the
 course of his oral evidence held on 8
th November 2004 stated as under:-
 
"On the expansion side, as you made another observation, why we are not thinking of Greenfield projects along
 with Delhi and Mumbai; the Hon'ble Chairman also raised the issue as to how we are going to solve the problem
 of capacity at Mumbai.  I would submit that there are some short-term measures which we are taking at present
 at Mumbai airport which would ease the situation somewhat.   For example, Sir, if you are familiar with the
 layout, we are wasting a lot of time today in Mumbai on taxi because certain areas which are encroached upon,
 if they were to be evicted, another taxi could come up which would considerably reduce the on-ground time of
 aircraft by about 15-20 minutes.  Simultaneously, with our ATC, we are increasing the number of movements
 per hour.  We have now brought it to 25 to 30 movements per hour by reducing the vertical separation and
 better instrumentation being available.  Sir, this is what I want to tell you.  In the Greenfield projects in
 Mumbai, there are two possibilities which have been mentioned here.  One is expansion of Juhu.  Now, as you
 are aware, the only possibility of expanding Juhu, would be sea-ward.  There are some project studies,
 preliminary studies, that have been made in this direction.  We are also studying the environmental and other
 aspects of taking this into the sea-coast.  This will be a major issue.  This is something which we are studying. 
 The other possibility that is being considered in case of Mumbai is a new airport at Navi Mumbai.  Now, the
 State Government has identified the land.  Sir, when they came to us with this site, we said that there is no point
 having a single runway at this site, and therefore, in future projects, if this airport has to come up, it must cater
 to two parallel runways.  Now, the State Government has identified land and they are going to acquire more
 land to permit an additional runway to come up at this site.  The long term answer to Mumbai's problem may be

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 an airport at Navi Mumbai and the present Santacruz-Sahar airport would continue to function.  This would
 mean that only the international traffic would go to Mumbai. 
           
26.       The Committee notes that the Government intends to attract investment worth Rs.5825 crore spread over a
 period of 15 years for the modernization and restructuring of Mumbai airport.  The Committee has been informed by
 the Ministry that there is no scope of having a second runway at Mumbai airport which could be helpful in terms of air
 operations.  Further, the passenger traffic movement is also expected to go up from 14 million in 2004 to 52 million in
 2024.  The Committee also understands that by 2012, Mumbai airport would get absolutely choked.  However, the
 development plans of Ministry of Civil Aviation for Mumbai airport goes beyond 2012 i.e. upto 2019.  The Committee
 fails to understand as to how the huge investment to be made at the airport could be justified when the existing capacity
 constraints would not permit capacity addition.  The Committee is of the opinion that modernization is not merely
 about the creation of facilities, expansion of the terminal buildings and putting up fancy malls at the airports.  It should
 rather increase the capacity of the airports to handle more flights, by construction of additional runways, which is
 certainly not a probability in the case of Mumbai airport.  The Committee feels that if international flights have to move
 around on the skies for half-an-hour to forty-five minutes after having reached the destination, then there could be no
 commensurate return as far as the investment, increase in the number of aircraft and the number of passengers actually
 traveling to the airport are concerned.  The Committee is of the firm view that investing huge money on modernization
 of Mumbai airport would be a waste.  The Committee is of the opinion that there are certain inherent technological
 constraints while reconstructing an existing structure, particularly in the case of Mumbai airport and the option of going
 in for a new Greenfield airport rather than proposed modernization of Mumbai airport will be more prudent.  However,
 some investment towards augmenting the capacity will have to be made to address the immediate exigencies of the
 situation at least till such time a new Greenfield airport comes into operation. The Committee, therefore, recommends
 that the Government should rather go in for construction of a new Greenfield airport with much more capacity at
 Mumbai which would require much less investment and the efforts in this direction should begin at the earliest.  In such
 case both the Greenfield and the existing airport can compete with each other.  The Committee is also of the opinion
 that given the growth of aviation sector in country, the existing infrastructure at Delhi airport also possesses that
 inherent lacuna and is therefore, inadequate to handle the growth being projected for the future by the Government.  
 The Committee recommends that the Government should explore the possibility of having a Greenfield airport in Delhi
 also.       
27.       The Committee had sought information from the Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding the profit making airports
 being managed by the Airports Authority of India.  The Committee, was provided the list of eleven profit making
 airports during the year 2003-04 which is as under:-
                                                                                                                                    (Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. No. Name of Airports Net Profit
1. Mumbai Airport 34527.98
2. Delhi Airport 27203.49
3. Chennai Airport 6365.71
4. Kolkata Airport 4058.54
5. Bangalore Airport 3639.95
6. Hyderabad Airport 1479.41
7. Calicut Airport 956.21
8. Juhu Airport 671.42
9. Goa Airport 475.44

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
10. Pune Airport 340.69
11. Trivandrum Airport 135.79
 
28.       From the figures furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the Committee observed that almost 77 per cent of
 the profit generated by Airports Authority of India during 2003-04 was form Delhi and Mumbai airports and that it is
 these two airports that the Government proposes the restructure and modernize through Joint Venture route.  The
 Ministry had stated that the overall revenue of Airports Authority of India was expected to increase after the
 modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airport.   The Committee desired to know as to how the revenue
 of Airports Authority of India was expected to increase after the modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai
 airports.  In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation vide  their O.M. No.H.11013/3/2004-AAI dated 12
th January 2005
 informed the Committee that subsequent to the completion of the transaction, Airports Authority of India will continue
 to get revenue from the following sources:
(i)                  AAI share from upfront fee, annual lease rentals and dividend income from the restructuring exercise at
 Delhi & Mumbai airports.
 
(ii)                Increase in aeronautical revenue at Delhi & Mumbai airports after increasing the runway capacity,
 which in turn will increase aircraft movements and passenger movements.
 
(iii)               Increase in non-aeronautical revenue at these airports on account of enhanced exploitation of non-
aeronautical revenue generation resources and AAI's share of upside on the same.
 
(iv)              Increase in aeronautical and non-aeronautical revenue at other airports of AAI, as the same will be
 developed and capacity will be increased.
 
(v)                Route Navigation Facilities & Terminal Navigation landing charges will continue to accrue to AAI.
 
29.       During the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 6 th June 2005, the
 Committee sought clarification as to whether the revenue sharing arrangement will be revenue neutral for Airports
 Authority of India.  In response, the Joint Secretary of the Ministry emphasized as under: -
 
"Sir, as per our estimates after this restructuring process, the Airports Authority of India will continue to
 get its route navigation facility charges, and it will continue to receive terminal navigation landing
 charges, which constitutes more than 50 per cent of the total income from all aeronautical charges. 
 Then, the Airports Authority of India will receive upfront fees.  It will also receive annual lease rental by
 way of concession fees.  The Airports Authority of India will be an equity holder in the company that
 will receive the dividend also per year.  When the investment is carried out by the JVC on the airside, it
 will add to the capacity and aeronautical income of the Authority.  Sir, the JVC will also undertake non-
aeronautical development that will add to the grow revenue of the JVC and from the gross revenue of the
 JVC, the concession fees will flow to the AAI."
 
30.       The Committee then sought specific calculations regarding the revenue neutrality after the modernization and
 restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that a cash
 flow impact analysis of Airports Authority of India was conducted with joint venture transaction and without
 transaction for a period from 2006-24.  It has been found that the present value of cash flow to Airports Authority of
 India during the period from 2006-24 from Delhi/Mumbai airports will be to the tune of Rs.1286.5 crore with the JV
 transaction.  On the other hand, the total present value of cash flow to AAI is estimated as          Rs.(-) 998.8 crore if

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 Airports Authority of India does not undertake the JV transaction and carry out the modernization of these airports with
 the same level of investment raised through debt etc.  It was also mentioned  that in case Airports Authority of India
 itself decides to develop both these metro airports on their own, the entire revenue surplus will have to be utilized for
 this project and there will not be any surplus funds available for development of non metro airports, other smaller
 airports and airports in North East and other remote areas.  Development of Delhi and Mumbai airports through JV
 transaction would enable AAI to utilize its surplus funds for raising loans to develop other airports as per the 10 th Five
 Year Plan.  Besides, development through Joint Venture Route will also enable AAI to bring world-class management
 standards to these airports.  Each consortium that will manage Delhi/Mumbai airport will have an Airport Operator,
 who will manage the airport under an Operational Management and Development Agreement (OMDA) with the
 consortium.
 
31.       The Committee is not convinced with the replies submitted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation with regard to
 revenue neutrality of Airports Authority of India after modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports. 
 From the figures furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, it is evident that almost 77 per cent of the profits
 generated by Airports Authority of India during 2003-04 were from Delhi and Mumbai airports and it is these two
 airports that the Government intends to restructure and modernize through joint venture route.  The Committee had
 commented upon this matter in its 88
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Civil Aviation and had
 made the following recommendation:-
"The Committee understands that the revenue generated by the Government from the profit making airports is
 used to fulfil the developmental needs as well as day-to-day activities of the other airports.  The Committee fails
 to understand as to how the Government would fulfil the developmental needs of the other airports after the
 management of these airports is passed on the Joint Venture Companies.  The sustained existence of such
 airports would become difficult in such a scenario.  The Committee is in favour of modernization of the
 Mumbai and Delhi airports, but not at the cost of the other airports in the country maintained by the Airports
 Authority of India.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should re-look at the
 modernization process of Delhi and Mumbai airports so that the development and maintenance of the other
 airports in the country is not compromised."
 
The Committee recommends that the Government may consider its observation enumerated above seriously and review
 the strategy for modernization of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  Further, the Committee strongly recommends that the
 revenue sharing arrangements have to remain revenue neutral on a dynamic basis for the Airports Authority of India
 and the interest of this PSU should be protected even after modernization of these two airports.  
 
GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AT BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD
32.       The Government has been in the recent times going in Greenfield airports.  In this direction, the Government has
 been actively going ahead with Greenfield airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad.  The Committee sought details
 regarding the proposed Greenfield International airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation
 furnished the following brief on the Greeenfield airport at Devanhalli near Bangalore.
 
§
         Greenfield airport at Devanahalli near Bangalore is being implemented on a Build Own Operate and Transfer
 (BOOT) basis with Public Private Participation.
§         Government of Karnataka (GoK) through Karnataka State Industrial Investment Development Corporation
 (KSIIDC) and AAI together hold 26% equity and the strategic joint venture partners hold the balance 74%

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 AAI's investment in the equity is capped at Rs.50 crore.
§         A Memorandum of Understanding to this effect signed on 3rd May 1999 between AAI and KSIIDC to facilitate
 further action leading to implementation of the project.
§         Based on a Global tendering process initiated in August 1999, a Consortium lead by Siemens, Germany with
 Unique Zurich, Switzerland an Larsen & Toubro India Limited as other members, was chosen as the strategic
 Joint Venture Partner in July 2001.
§         A Shareholders Agreement was executed amongst AAI, GoK, Siemens, Unique Zurich and Larsen & Toubro in
 January 2002.
§         In order to address the issue of excluding Greenfield airports from the ambit of AAI Act 1994, the amendments
 proposed to the AAI Act was introduced in April-May 2003 session of the Parliament.  The Amendment Bill
 was passed by Lok Sabha on 9 th May 2003 and subsequently by Rajya Sabha on 28 th July 2003.  A formal
 notification of the amended Act was issued on 1st July 2004.
§         The Working Group constituted by the Prime Minister Office (PMO) comprising of representatives from the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Law and Government of Karnataka finalized the
 draft Concession Agreement (CA), which was approved by the Cabinet in January 2004/15 th June 2004.  The
 approved version of the CA was signed on 5th July 2004.
§         GoK is extending of Rs.350 crore as State support for which a State Support Agreement is being executed by
 GoK with BIAL.  Further, GoK is providing 4300 acres of land (approximately having the valued of Rs.175
 crore) on concessional rent and a Land Lease Agreement is being executed.
§         Other agreement such a Communication Navigation Surveillance/ Air Traffic Management Agreement etc.,
 Financing Agreements etc., are currently under progress.
§         Financial Close is expected to be achieved shortly.
§         The target opening date of the airport is 33 months from the date of Financial Close.
 
33.       The Committee was further informed that the Private investors, selected based on a Global tendering process, led
 by Siemens, Germany with Unique Zurich, Switzerland and Larsen & Toubro India Limited as other members, hold the
 balance 74% with Siemens holding 40% and Unique Zurich and L&T holding 17% each. The total project cost is
 estimated to be Rs.1411 crore being financed as per the following funding sources:
 
Debt                                         Rs.735 crore (from lenders)
 
Equity                                       Rs.326 crore (includes 85 crore of AAI and Government of Karnataka) Rest 240
 crore belong to the Private Investors.
 
State Support                           Rs.350 crore
                                               
34.       The debt component of Rs.735 crore was being arranged through ICICI Bank Limited and for this purpose
 Financing Agreements have already been executed between BIAL and ICICI Bank.
 
35.       During the oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation held on the 8
th November 2004, the
 Committee brought to the notice of Ministry of Civil Aviation that there were reports that the private investors in the
 BIAL were getting the contract for works for construction and installation of the complete electric system without any

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 competitive tender.  The Committee expressed its apprehension and also sought to know whether suitable clauses were
 there in the concession agreement of BIAL which check the private investors from taking any undue advantage from
 getting contracts relating to the construction of the airports.  In response, the Secretary of the Ministry stated as under: 
"Another question which you raised is whether Siemens and L & T are getting the contracts without any
 tendering process, etc.  I may submit that once this new entity is incorporated, the Board of Directors of
 this company, where both the Airports Authority of India and the Karnataka IDC will have a seat, will
 be taking the operational decisions on allocation, tendering process, sub-contracting, work supervision,
 management, etc.  It will be the Board which will be taking this decision. ……. I would like to submit
 one more thing.  We are keeping a provision in our agreements.  There are certain special powers
 which the Government will reserve for itself in the shareholders' agreement."
 
36.       Later giving a detailed reply in this context, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their O.M. No. H.11013/3/2004-AAI
 dated 12.1.2005 informed the Committee as under:-
 
In connection with the development of a Greenfield airport near Bangalore, a Memorandum of Understanding
 (MoU) was signed between Airports Authority of India (AAI) and Karnataka State Industrial Investment
 Development Corporation (KSIIDC) on 3
rd May 1999 to commerce the process leading to implementation of
 the Bangalore International Airport Project.  As per this MoU, the project shall be implemented by implemented
 by a Joint Venture Company (JVC), wherein AAI and KSIIDC shall jointly hold 26% equity stake and the
 balance shall be invested/arranged by the private Joint Venture Partner (JVP).
 
A Steering Committee comprising two representatives each of AAI, KSIIDC, Government of India (Ministry of
 Civil Aviation) and Government of Karnataka (GoK) was formed to process and oversee the entire tendering
 process for the selection of a JVP to partner AAI and KSIIDC in implementing the project.  Following the
 constitution of the Steering Committee, M/s. Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services (IL&FS) was
 appointed as advisor by the Steering Committee to set in place a process for the selection of JVP.  M/s. Dua
 Associates were also appointed as Legal Advisors.
 
The selection process for the JVP following International Competitive Bidding commenced with the global
 release of invitation for an Expression of Interest (EoI) document during May 1999.  This invitation elicited 17
 EoI from various global firms and consortia.  Out of the 17 EoIs, seven consortia were short-listed as per the
 eligibility criteria in the EoI document.  Two consortia withdrew after short-listing.  This left 5 Bidders in the
 contention.
 
In the second stage of the selection process, after issuing the RFP documents to the short-listed bidders on
 20/03/2000, a site visit was organized on 17
th April 2000 followed by a pre-bid conference with bidders on 18 th
 April 2000 morning.  The IL&FS presented to the Steering Committee meeting held in the afternoon of 18 th
 April 2000 all the queries/clarifications received from the bidders with the draft responses.  The IL&FS also
 brought before the Steering Committee certain queries for which specific decisions are required to be taken. 
 One of such queries was that about the applicability of any limitations to the role of JVC/JVP with regard to the
 realization and operation of the project and whether the JVP could participate directly in the realization and
 operation of the Project (i.e. as contractor, operator etc.,)  or an open bidding was compulsory.
 
 
The Steering Committee after deliberations, decided as follows for the above query:
 
"In view of the project, and the complexities, it would be desirable to harness the vast experience and resources
 commanded by the bidders to enable its successful implementation.  This can be done by providing the JVP
 freedom to implement and operate the project, subject to some supervisory guidelines.  It is envisaged that the
 project implementation would be guided by the DPR, which has been scrutinized and approved by the GoI and

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 GoK.  After finalization of the DPR, including the project specifications and cost basis, the JVP would be
 provided freedom to implement the project and also enable it to create value to the project through its vast
 experience in implementing, financing and operating large infrastructure projects."
 
The above decision of the Steering Committee was also forwarded to the legal Advisors for their comments. 
 The Legal Advisor has opined that the involvement of the Government in the venture makes it important that
 any decision involving the expenditure of public money must generally be carried out through a transparent
 competitive bidding process and the deviation from the bidding process can be resorted to in certain exceptional
 case.  Therefore any decision of the Government to disregard the process of competitive bidding should be
 properly reasoned.  Further, the legal advisor has also stated that the procedure adopted for selection of the JVP
 being in itself a bidding process the same is a valid ground for not adopting a bidding process for the realization
 and operation of the project.
 
This matter was again taken up for discussions by the Steering Committee meeting held on 22
nd May 2000 by
 the members who were not present in the previous meeting held on 18th April 2000.  After detailed deliberations
 and with the opinion of the legal advisors, which was forming part of the proceedings and with the reasoning, as
 recorded in the Minutes, which inter-alia, included the adoption of global tendering process with EoI and RFP
 stage, short-listing of bidders at the EoI stage based on 'go, no-go' approach, EoI criteria evolved to demonstrate
 operational financial capabilities of bidders, requirement of an airport operator in the consortia, participation by
 17 bidders at the EoI stage, short-listing of 7 bidders for RFP stage, splitting of RFP stage into two parts to
 enable further filtering with first part based on detailed technical, commercial and financial data with specific
 emphasis on airport operating experience and airport development plan and the second part based on
 preparation of detailed project report etc., the Steering Committee approved decisions taken in this regard.
 
Further, as per the concession agreement entered into between Government of India and Bangalore International
 Airport Limited (BIAL), BIAL is required to ensure that the reports and/or certificates prepared by the
 Independent Engineer appointed by the Lenders, under the Financing Agreements entered into between BIAL
 and the Lenders, will be forwarded to Government of India (GOI) to enable GOI to monitor the progress of
 construction and commissioning of the airport.  Further, BIAL is also required to ensure that the project is
 completed with materials and goods, which  are manufactured in accordance with the applicable law and in
 conformity with good industry practices as are applicable at the time of construction/installation.
 
In so far as the contracts to Siemens and L&T are concerned, it may be noted that as per the bidding condition,
 the selection of the private promoters was on the basis that they have the requisite experience in handling the
 diverse components of the airport projects and that they will be awarded contracts for certain components of the
 projects.  In order to safeguard the interest of the company, a specific provision has been made in the
 Shareholders Agreement that any transaction between any of the private promoters or their affiliates shall be on
 arm's length basis and further that any proposals received from private promoters of their affiliates in respect of
 any contract will be evaluated by an Independent Consulting Engineer appointed by the Board of BIAL and the
 same shall also be subject to detailed procurement guidelines to ensure competitiveness.  Further, the nominee
 directors and any interested party will not participate in respect of transactions concerning the said party, which
 are put up to the Board of BIAL for consideration.
 
 
37.       The Committee noted that the sum and substance of the reply submitted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation was
 that there will be an open transparent tendering for the award of contracts at BIAL and there will be no conflict of
 interest in the awarding of the contracts.  However, later the Committee learnt that L&T and Siemens had got the
 awards for construction and electric systems of BIAL respectively.  The Committee brought this to the notice of
 Ministry of Civil Aviation and sought information as to what were the contracting procedures for awarding construction
 and other contracts in BIAL.  The Committee also sought information regarding the break up of EPC contracts awarded
 to equity holders of BIAL.  In response, Ministry of Civil Aviation vide  their O.M. No.H.11013/3/2004-AAI dated 28
th

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 June 2005 informed the Committee that the EPC contracts awarded to the shareholders in BIAL were as under:
 
§         M/s. Siemens Germany             :           Rs.159 crore
§         M/s. Siemens India Limited                   :           Rs.175 crore
§         M/s. L&T                                             :           Rs.550 crore
 
38.       As regards the contracting procedures for awarding construction and other contracts in BIAL, Ministry of Civil
 Aviation informed the Committee that the bid documents evolved by the State Promoters for selecting Private
 Promoters for the Bangalore International Airport Project stipulated minimum eligibility criteria which inter-alia
 included the following:
 
(i)                  Should have completed at least one core or infrastructure project contract of value not less than Rs.400
 crore; and
 
(ii)                At least one of the consortium members should have experience in overall management of airport
 operations of at least one international airport for a minimum period of three years.
 
39.       Seven consortia which fulfilled the above eligibility criteria were asked to go to the next stage of bidding
 process.  During the bidding process, in one of the very first pre-bid conferences, all the bidders unanimously and
 strongly wanted categorical assurance that the selected JV Partner would have right for the underlying EPC/O&M
 Contracts.  This was deliberated by the Steering Committee set up under the MoU between GOI (AAI) & GoK
 (KSIIDC) for over-seeing the bidding process.  Among other factors, the difference between normal investors who seek
 reasonable return on their equity versus the trade/ strategic investors who take-up equity in infrastructure related
 projects was pertinent.  Strategic investors in infrastructure related project look for an associate to create 'value' by
 bringing in their expertise and through such value additional seek to justify their investment, for reasonable returns.  It
 was in this context that the bidders had unanimously sought categorical assurance on their participation (as equity
 investors holding majority stake) in contracts/works through their own consortium members in the project.
 
40.       Other factors weighing in favour of considering the demand of the prospective bidders to participate in contracts
 were:
§
         The Bids invited were to design, finance, construct, operate and maintain the new Airport and not to mere
 74% equity investment;
 
§         In view of the unique nature of the project, and the complexities, it would be desirable to harness the vast
 experience and resources commanded by the bidders to enable its successful implementation.  Stimulating
 efficiency, improved management methods, prevention of cost and time overruns are critical in this project;
 
§
         This can be done by providing the JVP freedom to implement and operate the project, subject to some
 supervisory guidelines;
 
§
         Further, public interest would be adequately safeguarded and satisfied through 'Airport Regulator'.  As in the
 telecom and power sectors, the capital cost as well as operating costs for the airport would be scrutinized by
 this regulator;
 
§
         Thus regulator provides another opportunity to independently assess the reasonableness of costs incurred by
 the project;
 

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
§         Further, all infrastructure projects having financing by the financial institutions carry out detailed due
 diligence studies.  At this stage also the project and costs undergo details review before achieving financial
 closure.
 
41.       The shareholders agreement also enunciates arms-length principle for related party transactions and award of
 contracts to any promoters or their affiliates.  Procurement guidelines and process of transparent review by Independent
 Consulting Engineers were laid down and followed in this regard to ensure that the contracts are on competitive
 commercial terms.  The Board of BIAL had constituted an EPC Negotiations Committee headed by a director from
 State Promoters to negotiate the construction and equipment supply contracts.
 
42.       In view of the replies submitted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the Committee, during the course of oral
 evidence held on 29.6.2005, specifically asked the Secretary of the Ministry to state whether the Ministry was
 convinced with the deal and whether the deal was transparent.  In response, the Secretary stated as under:-
"Firstly, whatever may be the arrangement, it was not only restricted to this bidder but it was known to
 all the other bidders.  Therefore, to the question whether this had the transparency in that sense, I would
 say, yes.  There was transparency.  All the seven short-listed bidders knew that they had the option of
 getting contracts.  There was this openness about this decision.  That is one thing.
 
            Secondly, the arrangements have been made, to some extent, to see that no unfair benefit is
 given.  They have also appointed an independent consultant engineer who is supposed to review and
 check the building plans, the cost estimates, etc…..
           
            It was transparent to the extent that all the seven short-listed bidders know about it."
 
43.       The Committee observes that the replies of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in the context of award of contracts at
 Bangalore International Airport Limited are evasive and highly unsatisfactory.  The Committee notes that the Ministry
 of Civil Aviation was aware that as per the provisions of the concession agreement of BIAL, the promoters themselves
 would be participants in executing contracts.  Since the equity holders are themselves the service providers in
 Bangalore International Airport Limited, there is certainly a case for conflict of interest involved in Bangalore
 International Airport Limited.  The Committee would like to highlight that it had expressed its apprehensions on the
 issue during the oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation held on the 8
th November 2004. 
 However, at that time, the Ministry of Civil Aviation had not accepted the observations of the Committee.  Ministry of
 Civil Aviation had, on the other hand, emphasized that there is going to be an open tendering and there will be no
 conflict of interest reflected in the awarding of the contracts.  Now the apprehensions of the Committee have come
 true.   The Committee is of the view that there was complete lack of transparency in the awarding of EPC contracts at
 Bangalore International Airport Limited and that the role of Government of India representatives on the Board of
 Bangalore International Airport Limited was not above board.  The Committee recommends that in view of the facts
 brought out above, a proper enquiry should be conducted into the entire matter by an independent agency. 
 
44.       As regards the Greenfield airport at Shamshabad near Hyderabad i.e. Hyderabad International Airport Limited
 was being implemented on a Build Own Operate and Transfer (BOOT) basis with Public Private Participation.  Brief
 details regarding this project are as under:-
 
§
         The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) have selected a consortium led by M/s. GMR infrastructure Ltd.
 With Malaysian Airport Holding Behard (MAHB) as the Developer for Greenfield Airport at Shamshabad near

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 Hyderabad.
 
§         Government of Andhra Pradesh and AAI together hold 26% equity with AAI's investment in the equity capped
 at Rs.50 crore and the strategic joint venture partners, GMR infrastructure Ltd. With Malaysian Airport Holding
 Berhard (MAHB), hold the balance 74% in the Company namely Hyderabad International Airport Ltd. (HIAL)
 set up to implement the project.
 
§         A shareholders' Agreement was executed by the parties viz. M/s. GMR, M/s. MAHB (Sponsors), AAI and
 GoAP (State Promoters) on 30th September 2003.
 
§         GoAP has also entered into the State Support Agreement and the Land Lease Agreement with the GMR led
 Consortium on 30th September 2003.
 
§         Government of Andhra Pradesh is extending Rs.315 crore as State Support and Rs.107 crore as grant.  Further,
 Government of Andhra Pradesh is providing 5000 acres of land on concessional rent.
 
§
         GMR-MAHB consortium has prepared a Detailed Project 
 Report (DPR) which is under scrutiny by Airports Authority of India.
 
§         The concession Agreement between the GoI and HIAL has been executed on 20th December 2004.
 
§         The target opening date of the airport is 36 months from the date of Financial Close.
 
45.       The Committee was further informed that the total project cost, as per the DPR submitted by HIAL, was
 estimated to be Rs.1400 crore. This was being financed by State Support to the extent of Rs.422 crore and rest by way
 of Debt and Equity to the tune of 40% and 60%, respectively.  Exact amount will be known at financial closure.
 
46.       The Committee had also taken up this issue in its 88 th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of
 Civil Aviation.  In this context, the Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made in the report in respect
 of which the Action Taken Report from the Ministry is awaited :-
"The Committee also recommends that in case of Hyderabad Airport, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should
 clearly fix the ratio of share holding amongst the State Governments, private players and the Airports Authority
 of India. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should structure a financial model for these
 airports detailing the total project cost in terms of debt and equity and the ratio in financing."
 
CLOSURE OF EXISTING HYDERABAD AIRPORT
47.       The Committee had also taken up the matter regarding closure of existing Hyderabad airport in its 88
th Report
 on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Civil Aviation the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation that the existing Hyderabad Airport would be closed for commercial flights once the new Hyderabad
 International Airport Limited is operational.  The Committee pointed out that Ministry of Civil Aviation had earlier
 mentioned that the existing airport at Hyderabad can continue for 10 to 12 more years with light expansion of the
 runway. The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation the rationale for the decision to close the existing
 Hyderabad airport once the Hyderabad International Airport Limited is operational.  The Committee further desired to
 know whether due diligence was undertaken by Ministry of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of India before arriving

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 at this decision in view of the facts brought out above.
 
48.       In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that the Task Force on Infrastructure under
 the chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning had on 11 th March 2000, while deciding to declare Hyderabad airport
 as international airport, decided that the old airport should be closed for civil operations once the new airport is
 commissioned. Subsequently, based on the recommendations of Task Force on Infrastructure, the Government on 13 th
 April 2000, inter-alia, decided to declare the existing airport at Hyderabad as international, construction of new airport
 of international standards on Joint Venture basis at Shamshabad near Hyderabad and closure of existing airport at
 Hyderabad for civil operations on commissioning of the new airport. The existing airport can be used for operations of
 IAF, other Armed Forces, Para Military Forces, Police or other such authorities or for transportation of dignitaries by
 Government owned or leased aircraft or for general aviation services other than commercial flights.  While taking this
 decision in 2000, the Cabinet had also noted that the existing Hyderabad airport had severe limitations for expansion
 because of natural and manmade obstructions like hill, railway over bridge, factory chimney, poles, building etc. Even
 though the present runway length is 9080 feet, landing length is 7760 feet only due to the obstructions in the approach
 path. As a result, even A300 class type of aircraft can be operated only with payload penalty. B 747 type of aircraft
 operations are not possible, which may be required to operate to various destinations like Europe and beyond. The
 Government had considered the increased industrialization of the State and particularly the expected growth in the
 information technology industry, which were likely to result in higher traffic demand.  While taking the decision for
 closure for civil operations the Government noted that the existing airport  is in the heart of the city and has got
 immense commercial value. Real estate development like shopping complexes, housing etc. on a commercial basis can
 be taken up by AAI to compensate for the loss of airport revenue.
 
49.       In this context, the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Government towards the recommendation
 made in its 88
th Report and hopes that the details of the action taken by the Government would be furnished to the
 Committee at the earliest.  The recommendation is reproduced below:-
"The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has decided to shut down the existing
 airport at Hyderabad for commercial operations.  The Committee fails to understand as to why such kind of
 concessional agreement was signed when the Ministry itself was of the opinion that the present terminals could
 be utilized at least for one more decade.  The Committee also expresses its doubt as to how the Ministry is
 planning to compensate with the losses to be incurred, in case the existing terminal at Hyderabad is closed, by
 developing shopping complexes, housing etc. on commercial basis.   The Committee is opposed to this move of
 the Government for closing the existing airport at Hyderabad for commercial flights once the new Hyderabad
 International Airport Limited is operational and urges the Government to reconsider this decision."
 
ACCORDING MINI RATNA STATUS TO THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
50.       The Committee also sought the opinion of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation as to whether Airports Authority
 of India should be accorded the status of 'Mini Ratna' so as to enhance its functional autonomy.  In response, the
 Secretary of the Ministry stated:
"It is also our desire that the Airports Authority of India should be designated as a 'Mini Ratna'.  One of
 the conditions for an organization to be declared a 'Mini Ratna' is that before starting operations, it
 should not be in receipt of any budgetary support.  Now, we get a small quantum of money from the
 government's budgetary resources for maintenance of certain airports in the North-eastern region. This is

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 part of a conscious policy of the Government to build more activity in that region and that, perhaps, is
 one of the inhibiting factors."
           
51.       The Committee strongly recommends that the status of 'Mini Ratna' should be accorded to the Airports Authority
 of India so that it gets adequate opportunity to utilize its professional excellence in the area of development and
 maintenance of airports in the country. The status of 'Mini Ratna' would certainly strengthen the hands of Airports
 Authority of India by providing more functional autonomy which would in effect also ensure a speedy progress of
 decision-making in financial matters.    However, the Committee also feels that the inhibiting factor cited by the
 Ministry i.e., budgetary support for the maintenance of certain airports in the North-eastern region may be sorted out by
 generating additional revenue sources for bearing this minor expenditure.  
 
PROTECTION TO THE INTERESTS OF THE EMPLOYEES OF AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
52.       The Committee was also concerned about the interests of employees of Airports Authority of India working at
 Hyderabad and Bangalore airports, where new Greenfield airports were proposed to come up, and Delhi and Mumbai
 airports which were proposed to be restructured.  The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation as to
 what provision has been made for absorption of Airports Authority of India employees in Bangalore International
 Airport Limited, Hyderabad International Airport Limited, Delhi and Mumbai Airports. 
 
53.       In response, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the process of promoting
 Greenfield airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad was done by concerned State Governments. The absorption of
 employees was not the bidding criteria at the level of State Government. Accordingly, no specific provisions in
 Concession Agreements were made for the absorption of employees from the existing airports. However, a comfort
 letter has been obtained in the case of HIAL for absorption of existing employees of Hyderabad airport in HIAL.
 Remaining employees of Hyderabad and Bangalore airports will be absorbed at other airports of Airports Authority of
 India elsewhere. In case of Delhi and Mumbai airports the JVCs will be required to absorb a minimum of net 40% of
 the existing employees working at these airports excepting those engaged in Communication Navigation Surveillance
 (CNS), Air Traffic Management (ATM), Security, employees retiring during the period of deputation and those
 absorbed by AAI in any other manner during the above deputation period. Further, during evaluation of the proposals
 submitted by the bidders, suitable weightage will be given for those bidders who propose to absorb a higher percentage
 of AAI employees. In the event the JVCs do not meet the requirements, suitable penalties can be levied on the JVCs.
           
54.       The Committee is of the opinion that due protection must be given to the interests of employees of Airports
 Authority of India while proceeding with the commissioning of new international airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad
 and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Committee recommends that all decisions relating to absorption
 of employees of Airports Authority of India by other companies should be taken in a transparent manner in consultation
 with the representatives of the employees of Airports Authority of India.  The Committee cautions that adequate care
 should be taken to protect the interests of the employees of the Authority and it should be ensured that the existing
 terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Authority are not altered after their absorption into the said

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 companies.
 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO THE AIRPORTS
 
55.       During its deliberations on the subject, the Committee expressed concern over the lack of proper connectivity to
 the airports due to locational constraints etc.  The Committee was of the opinion that the approach roads to the airports
 in the country had become rather congested and that the commuters had to spend a lot of time in undertaking their
 journey to and from airports.  The Committee brought this issue to the notice of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
 during the course of his oral evidence held before the Committee on 8
th November 2005.  The Secretary of the
 Ministry, while responding to this issue stated as under:-
 
"As far as the Delhi project is concerned, we have had a number of discussion with the Delhi Metro and we have
 told them that in their plans, they must connect the airport with the metro lines.  We have, in fact, funded a
 study for extending the metro lines up to the airport terminals.  So, that is our initiative at providing this kind of
 blueprint on the Metro.  Simultaneously, we have taken up with the National Highways Authority of India. 
 They are building the expressways, like the Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway.  We have told them that they must give
 connecting link to the airport terminals on the same standard and specifications as the main expressway.  You
 observed, Sir, that immediately you come out with an airport, the traffic problem arises.  We have requested
 them to plan for this and extend this expressway……
           
We are ready even for cost sharing.  The need is there.  Similarly, Sir, for Bangalore and Hyderabad, we have
 taken it up with the State Governments and I had personally called on the Chief Ministers of the two States and
 requested them.  For example, Bangalore also is having a metro project, and I requested the State Government
 and the Chief Minister that they must plan for the metro going up to the new airport."
 
56.       The Committee is of the opinion that connectivity is an important element in the optimum utilization of the
 airports.  The Committee notes that due to problems of capacity and locational constraints, the new airports are being
 planned outside the city centers.  The utilization of the Greenfield airports and the existing airports would greatly
 depend on the kind of connectivity that will be provided to these airports from the city centers.  The Committee would
 like to cite the example of Kuala Lumpur airport which is 85 kilometers outside the city but this distance can be
 covered in just 35 minutes.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation must emphasize
 upon the respective state governments to provide connecting link to the airport terminals on the same standard and
 specifications as the expressways so that the approach and exit time to and from the airports could be reduced to a large
 extent.  To sum it up, plans for development of Greenfield airports should be holistic looking at technical facilities,
 terminal buildings as well as transport links.
 
PARKING SPACE AND INFRASTRUCTRUAL FACILITIES AT THE AIRPORTS
 
57.       The Committee noticed that with the opening up of Civil Aviation sector, a large number of new airlines were
 commencing operations and the existing airlines were expanding their fleet.  In this context, the Committee sought to
 know the details of total parking space on the airside at 10 major airports and how the airlines share these space.  In
 their reply, Ministry of Civil Aviation  informed the Committee that the total number of domestic parking stands at IGI
 Delhi, CSI Mumbai, NSCBI Kolkata, Chennai, Trivandrum, Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Goa, Guwahati and Hyderabad are
 as under:
            IGI                   -           34

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
            CSI                  -           41
            NSCBI            -           7
            Chennai            -           23
            Trivandrum       -            4
            Ahmedabad      -           12
            Amritsar           -           4
            Goa                  -           7
            Guwahati          -           7
            Hyderabad       -           7
           
The parking spaces allotted to various domestic airlines at the four major international airports is as under:         
 
            IGI Airport, Delhi
                                         
            Indian Airlines               -           10                               
            Alliance Air                  -           02                               
            Jet Airways                  -           11                               
            Air Sahara                    -           07                               
            Air Deccan                   -           02                               
            Blue Dart                      -           02
                                                                   
Total                                       34                               
           
CSI Airport, Mumbai
Indian Airlines   -                       08
Alliance Air                  -           04
Jet Airways                  -           18
Air Sahara                    -           06
Air Deccan                   -           02
Blue Dart                      -           01
M.P. Govt.                   -           01
Turnaround flights
of Jet Airways/ Blue
Dart etc.                       -           01
Total                                       41
 
NSCBI Airport, Kolkata                  
            Indian Airlines               -           3         
            Alliance Air                  -           4         
            Jet Airways                  -           3         
            Air Sahara                    -           3         
            Blue Dart                      -           1 
        
            Total:                                      14       
Remote parking stand of International Apron is utilized for night halt of 7 domestic flights.
 
Chennai International Airport, Chennai
            Indian Airlines               -           3
            Alliance Air                  -           1
            Jet Airways                  -           7
            Air Sahara                    -           2
            Air Deccan                   -           4
            Blue Dart                      -           3
            VVIP Airport               -           2  
            Total                                       22
 
At the remaining airports namely Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Goa, Trivandrum, Guwahati and Hyderabad parking stands are

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 shared by various airlines depending upon operational requirements and availability apron space.
 
58.       The Committee desired to know regarding the details of the parking bays allotment system and space availability
 parking bays, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in its written replies informed the Committee that the system of allocation
 of parking bays for overnight halt is in vogue only for the domestic schedule carriers. In the past, the domestic carriers
 were allotted parking stands for overnight halt based on first-cum-first services. However, in the recent past, some
 parking stands have been allotted to the new airlines so that passengers can have a wider choice of airlines.  Presently, a
 large number of parking stands are available for overnight halt by the airlines at most of the airports in the country
 except at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports. However, AAI has undertaken a number of projects on top
 priority to increase the number of parking stands at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports.
 
59.       Regarding availability of physical facilities such as airport infrastructure, parking space, security, availability of
 pilots and engineers etc. the Ministry of Civil Aviation apprised the Committee that of the 8 new airlines which have
 been issued No Objection Certificate so far, only one i.e. M/s. Kingfisher Airlines have submitted their detailed
 proposal to DGCA for commencing their scheduled operations.  In accordance with the Civil Aviation Requirements, a
 preparedness meeting was held to ascertain adequacy and availability of their infrastructure in terms of maintenance
 facilities, hangers, parking bays and other requirements with respect to flight operations including availability of pilots
 and engineers, security aspects etc.  On production of satisfactory evidence with regard to the above items, the airlines
 will thereafter be permitted to import aircraft.  Scheduled operations thereafter will be permitted after physical
 inspection is carried out on all the above items to ensure their availability and adequacy with respect to the standards
 laid down. As per the Civil Aviation requirements for scheduled operations, an airline has to have 5 aircraft in his fleet
 with 3 sets of flying crew per aircraft and matching maintenance engineering personnel with supporting ground
 infrastructure.
 
60.       During the oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation held on the 29
th June 2005, the Committee
 drew the attention of the Secretary to the inadequacy of the existing infrastructure in terms of parking space, hangers
 etc. for the existing and new airlines.  Responding to this observation of the Committee, the Secretary of the Ministry
 stated as under:
"On the question of a plan for preparing the ground infrastructure, today, Sir, the major constraint that we have is
 that all new start-up airlines also want to use Delhi and Mumbai as their main center of activity keeping in view
 the traffic potential that exists between these Airports.  So, they all want to have their bases and operating
 spaces at these Airports, and, for the reasons, as are very well known to the hon'ble Committee, these are the
 main constraints.  These are the most difficult Airports at present.  Sir, the Airports Authority has last year
 stated a programme of building new parking spaces at both these Airports as well as at a number of smaller
 Airports, and we have furnished construction of eight in Delhi, and, by July, eight are going to be ready in
 Mumbai.  Similarly, Sir, we are adding more parking spaces at Kolkata, at Chennai, at Hyderabad, at
 Trivandrum and a number of other station. …...… Sir, what we are doing is that for the new entrants which are
 now coming in, we are giving them at least one parking space at Delhi and Mumbai.  But, we are also
 suggesting to them that they cannot base their whole philosophy of operations out of Delhi and Mumbai because
 that kind of quantum of parking space will not be here till this large modernization expansion project is put in
 place, and in Mumbai, it will, perhaps, be possible only when the new Airport becomes available.  So, we are
 suggesting to them that in their operations, they must think of parking facilities at other stations.  In that way the

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 new entrants are using other cities also as the base for their operations.  Sir, for example, the new parking spaces
 that have been created at Delhi and Mumbai have been allocated to the existing players, i.e., the Indian Airlines,
 Jet, Sahara, Deccan, etc., and we have also given one or two to the new start-ups.  So, that is the way in which
 we are trying to handle this new situation."          
 
61.       The Committee is of the view that with the arrival of new private domestic airlines and expansion of fleet by the
 existing airlines in the country, there is an urgent need to create parking space and other infrastructural facilities at the
 airports.  The Committee is constrained to note that before giving licenses to new airlines to commence operations, the
 Government did not deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities like, taxi ways, additional bays, runways
 etc. required at the airports.  As a result of this, the already congested infrastructure available at the airports has come
 under tremendous stress.  The Committee is of the view that no transparent policy is being followed for allotment of
 parking space.  The Committee recommends that the Government should draw up a comprehensive assessment of the
 requirement of infrastructural facility required in future. The Naresh Chandra Committee, whose report the Government
 has used elsewhere in modifying some of its policies, also does not throw any light on this aspect. The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that the Government should frame a transparent policy for the allocation and access to the
 existing infrastructure and take immediate steps to ensure that adequate infrastructure and maintenance facilities are
 made available and allocated fairly and rationally amongst all the airlines.
 
62.       The Committee is of the view that Delhi and Mumbai airports are most constrained in terms of infrastructure and
 that with the growth of civil aviation sector in the country, the pressure and strain on these airports is also increasing. 
 There is, therefore, a need for development of alternative centers to ease the pressure at these airports.  In this context,
 the Committee would like to reiterate the recommendation, made in 88
th Report which stated that Ministry of Civil
 Aviation should take steps for the creation of a eastern hub at Kolkata and southern hub at Chennai.  The Committee
 also recommends that the Government should prepare schemes for positive incentives for use of airports other than
 Delhi and Mumbai for parking and greater utilization in terms of levying lesser charges for use of these airports as
 compared to Delhi and Mumbai so that the airlines are encouraged to use other airports also.
 
63.       The Committee also brought to the notice of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that a number of new airlines were
 coming up but it was not clear as to how their operations were being scrutinized.  The Committee desired to know how
 vigilance was being exercised in such cases.  While responding to this query, Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
 during his oral evidence held on 29
th June 2005 stated as under:
 
"If I could just explain the process, when we receive an application from any company, for anything that
 they wish to start, say, a new operation, the first step is, based on their application, we try to see whether
 they meet the existing eligibility criteria or not.  In case they do, then the second step is that a security
 vetting in done.  We request the Ministry of Home Affairs and, through them, the security agencies, to
 check the credentials of the Directors of the company, etc.  Once that security vetting has been done and
 we receive the clearance, we give them a provisional 'No Objection Certificate based on which they start

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 trying to negotiating for purchase of planes, etc.  We also insist on knowing what would be the kind of
 schedules that they would be flying, what kind of aircraft and what routes they would like to have and
 also, whether their parking arrangements would be made, etc.  Only after satisfying these details, further
 steps are initiated."
 
 
64.       The Committee pointed out that for importing aircraft, an Airline Company has to show that a particular parking
 slot is available to them.   However, a few airlines were showing that a particular parking slot was available to them but
 they were not parking their aircraft there.   The Committee desire to know whether the Government had any mechanism
 to monitor such cases.   In response, the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation stated as under:
"What we do is that the Airport Authority has allotted a space to them.  The airport belongs to the Airport
 Authority, and the DGCA and the Ministry, before they sanction and proposal of the company, get a
 certificate from the Airport Authority that the company has been allotted one, or maybe two, parking
 spaces, wherever they have undertaken that they have got them.  That cross-check is done."
 
65.       The Committee is of the opinion that exercising vigilance over the new airlines coming up in the country and
 their methods of seeking permission for procurement of aircraft and allotment of parking bays at airports is quite
 essential.  The Committee recommends that the role of all concerned agencies i.e., Airports Authority of India, DGCA,
 etc. in this regard should be closely monitored and compliance of all necessary regulations ensured.
 
UNDERUTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL
 AIRPORT, DELHI
 
66.       The Committee had, in its 69
th and 88th Reports on Demands for Grants 2003-04 and 2005-06 respectively of
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation, noted that as part of the ongoing modernisation and development of airports, state-of-
the-art Instrument Landing System (ILS) CAT IIIA had been installed at Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi
 to enable the operation of flights and ensuring least inconvenience to the passengers due to extreme fog.  All
 directional, location and runway vacated signs associated with CAT IIIA operations had also been installed at the
 airport.  However, even afterwards the system was not being utilised and the flights were delayed/diverted to other
 locations during foggy situations at Delhi. 
67.       During the examination of the Demands for Grants 2005-06 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the Committee
 further desired to know the preparedness of the national carriers i.e. Indian Airlines and Air India and the private
 airlines for optimally utilizing the ILS CAT-III system at IGI, Airport, Delhi with respect to the training of pilots etc.,
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written replies submitted that the present status on pilots trained by Indian
 Airlines, Air India and private airlines and approved by DGCA for ILS CAT-III Operations is as under :-
Air India
Cat-IIIA                      CAT-III-B
            A-310 – Pilots                              27                                  03
            B-747 – Pilots                              29                                  15
 
 
 

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
Indian Airlines
 
            A-320                                            52                                22
 
 
68.       The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation about the conditions stipulated while permitting
 private airlines to operate with regard to making them CAT-III B compliant.  In response, the Committee has been
 informed that as of now, there is no legal requirement in the Aircraft Rules and Civil Aviation Requirements that makes
 it mandatory for private airlines to train their pilots on ILS CAT- III B System.  However, various airlines have been
 coordinated from time to time to train their pilots for using the ILS CAT-III System in order to improve their
 operational efficiency during poor visibility conditions. 
 
69.       The Committee enquired about the details of the Training facilities available with the private airlines and
 monitoring mechanism available with the DGCA, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that the
 private airlines have their own arrangements for training both in ground courses as well as on simulator.  Jet Airways
 have their training establishments at Mumbai excepting simulator training for ATR which is done at Bangkok. 
 Similarly, Sahara Airlines has arrangements with Alteon, U.K. for both ground and simulator training on Boeing type
 aircraft and at CAE Facility, Spain for CRJ-200 aircraft.  Air Deccan carries out both ground and simulator training for
 their pilots on Airbus-320 and ATR aircraft at the Aircraft Manufacturer’s Facility at Toulouse, France.  These training
 facilities are initially approved by the DGCA based on their quality and capacity of training and on the basis of the
 approval of the state in which these establishments are located.  The training establishments in India are also
 periodically inspected by DGCA officers in the course of Safety Audits, Main Base Inspections and other surveillance
 activities.
 
70.       The Committee is constrained to note that on the one hand, the Government has cited resource crunch as the
 prime reason for inviting private sector participation in modernization of airports while on the other hand, the costly
 technologies installed at the airports after making huge investments remain idle due to want of trained personnel.  Also
 while the current policy of the Government aims at allowing more and more airlines to operate in the country, it has not
 made it obligatory for them to utilize the modern facilities installed at the airports with huge investments for the
 convenience of the passengers.  The Committee is surprised to note that the three private airlines i.e. Jet Airways,
 Sahara Airlines and Air Deccan have not trained any of their pilots for CAT-III operations and there is no legal
 requirement in the Aircraft Rules and Civil Aviation requirements to make it mandatory for private airlines to train their
 pilots on ILS CAT-III System.  The Committee is also not satisfied with the progress achieved with respect to the
 training of the pilots by the National Carriers viz. Indian Airlines and Air India, for utilizing the CAT-III System.  The
 Committee recommends that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy conditions, the
 Ministry should amend 'Aircraft Rules' to incorporate a provision for making training of pilots compulsory by the
 private airlines on CAT-III System so that the investment made by the Government on the installation of the system
 through the tax payers' money is not underutilized.  The Committee hopes that the national carriers and the private

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 airlines will optimally utilize the ILS CAT-III System installed in the IGI Airport, New Delhi during the period of poor
 visibility, which will certainly reduce the hardships faced by the passengers. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NON-METRO AIRPORTS
71.       The Committee also sought details regarding the development on non-metro airports in the country.  The
 Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted a brief on the subject which stated that a concept paper was circulated by Ministry
 of Civil Aviation in August 2002 for city side development of Non-Metro Airports.  The proposal envisaged that entire
 operational area i.e. runway, taxiway, apron, communication & navigation aids, Air Traffic Management will remain
 with Airports Authority of India.  The expenditure incurred thereon and the revenue earned thereof shall be that of
 Airports Authority of India.  The city side of the airports i.e. non-operational areas which include the terminal building,
 car park, entire area outside the operational boundary wall will only be taken up for development.  The security and
 safety of viable Non-Metro Airports will continue with Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), Government of
 India and Airports Authority of India and will be maintained as per Government of India guidelines.
 
72.       The proposal provided for appointment of Global Technical Advisor (GTA) and Indian Financial Consultant
 (IFC) who would assist AAI in identifying viable Airports and commercial activities to enhance non-aeronautical
 revenue including world class design for the Terminal Building.   AAI would hold minimum of 26% & maximum of
 49% equity in the said joint venture in the form of its assets and balance will be provided by Private Sector/Financial
 Institution/State Government for city side development of viable Non-Metro Airports.
 
73.       The Board of AAI has approved the appointment of Global Technical Advisor, Indian Financial Consultant and
 empanelment of Architectural Firm/Consortia for Ahmedabad and Trivandrum Airport.  The AAI Board has also
 formed a Sub-Committee consisting of Joint Secretary (N), Ministry of Civil Aviation, Chairman AAI, and Member
 Finance, AAI to take decisions as needed and place before the AAI Board for post-facto approval.
     
74.       Indian Financial Consultant (IFC) and Global Technical Advisor (GTA), two each, have been appointed for
 under mentioned 10 non-metro airports:
(i)
                  Ahmedabad
(ii)                Amritsar
(iii)               Goa
(iv)              Guwahati
(v)                Lucknow
(vi)              Madurai
(vii)             Jaipur
(viii)           Mangalore
(ix)              Trivandrum
(x)                Udaipur.
 
75.       Appointment letters for 02 sets each of IFC and GTA for 10 Non Metro Airports i.e. Set-I -  Ahmedabad,
 Amritsar, Guwahati, Jaipur and Udaipur and Set-II - Goa, Lucknow, Madurai, Mangalore and Trivandrum have been
 issued on 8.12.2004. These consultants will carry out a detailed Techno Economic Feasibility Study and prepare
 business and financial plan and model specific to each airport for adoption by AAI. The GTA IFC have started their
 work and have visited Trivandrum Airport from 14-17
th December 2004.   The other set of GTA/IFC will be visiting

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 Ahmedabad on 18/12/2004.  Report on Ahmedabad and Trivandrum is expected by 31.12.2004.
 
76.       In order to have world class International Terminals, Architectural design competition have been finalized in
 respect of Ahmedabad, Trivandrum, Udaipur.  For Jaipur design entries have been received on 8.11.04 and will be
 adjudicated by the jury.  The Architectural design consultant and GTA will assist AAI in finalizing the modalities
 involved for over all development of the Airports. 
 
77.       In addition to 10 airports already identified, AAI proposes to take up similar study for under mentioned 15
 airports:
(i)
                        Agatti
(ii)                      Aurangabad
(iii)                     Bhopal
(iv)                    Bhubhaneshwar
(v)                      Coimbatore
(vi)                    Indore
(vii)                   Khajuraho
(viii)                 Patna
(ix)                    Portblair
(x)                      Nagpur
(xi)                    Rajkot
(xii)                   Trichy
(xiii)                 Vadodra
(xiv)                 Varanasi
(xv)                  Vishakhapatnam
 
78.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation has constituted a committee under Secretary (CA) to monitor the development of
 non-metro airports.  The Secretary (CA) had taken a meeting on 22.9.04 which was participated by AAI, HUDCO &
 HDFC.  The AAI Board Sub Committee in its meeting held on 29.10.04 has finalized an action plan for city side
 development of Non-Metro Airports, which has been approved by Airports Authority of India Board in its meeting held
 on 8.11.2004.  The progress was reviewed by Secretary (CA) on 3.12.2004.
                 
79.       Expression of Interest (EOI) have been invited for appointment of one set of IFC/GTA each of 5 airports
 covering these 15 airports for submission of Techno Economic Feasibility Report, Business & Financial Plan & Model
 specific to each airport for city side development with last date of receipt - 24
th January 2005.  The Consultant's report
 will clearly indicate the modification, expansion, and/or new construction of terminal buildings, land use plans and
 model with options available to AAI, specific to each airport, for undertaking the development works.
 
80.       The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding the parameters adopted by Ministry for
 selection of Non Metro Airports for modernization.  Ministry of Civil Aviation replied that these airports have been
 identified based on their significance from the point of view of capital city/traffic/tourist potential/business potential
 and availability of land for enhancing non-aeronautical revenue and modifications/new construction required to the
 terminal building to meet the customer satisfaction.
 
81.       Later, during the oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation held on 28.12.2004, the Secretary
 clarified as under:-

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 
"The first concept which the Airport Authority had created some years back was to appoint a Technical Advisor
 and a Financial Consultant who would also hold equity in this.  But that was the original proposal.  Later on, I
 had submitted in the last meeting and we have clarified in the note later that this is not the approach now.  Sir,
 what we are doing today is, as I submitted in the last meeting, we have tentatively identified 25 stations based
 on their present level of traffic, the business potential, tourism, etc.  We have appointed one Technical Advisor
 and one Financial Consultant for a group of five airports.  So far, we have appointed two sets of these advisors
 and we are also going to appoint more for a group of five.  These Technical Advisors and Financial Consultants
 will not be holding any equity.  They have been commissioned for a purpose.  The Technical Advisor will do
 forecasting of the traffic growth etc., and will also suggest improvements on the operational side as to how to
 cater to the future traffic projections.  The Financial Consultant will try to create a financial mode.  Once these
 reports are available with us, we will, then, look at the viability of these airports, and, then, take up
 improvement of these airports."
 
82.       The Committee recommends that the groundwork relating to development of non-metro airports should be
 completed without losing much time and these non-metro airports should not be marginalized.  The Committee further
 recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should expedite the work of appointing Technical Advisor and
 Financial Consultant in order to assess traffic growth and to finalize financial mode etc.  The Committee feels that
 development of non-metro airports will help in improving connectivity as well as firmly linking up newly emerging
 cities having tremendous tourism and business potential with the mainstream.
 
ENCROACHMENT OF LAND AT AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA AIRPORTS
 
83.       The Committee drew the attention of Ministry of Civil Aviation to the reports that vast areas of land at the
 disposal of Airports Authority of India were under encroachment.  The Committee sought the details regarding the land
 of Airports Authority of India under encroachment.  The Committee also sought to know the strategy of the
 Government and time frame to deal with the problem of encroachment on lands of Airports Authority of India.  The
 Committee also enquired about the preventive action being taken by Airports Authority of India against encroachments.
 
84.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation vide  their O.M. No. H.11013/3/2004-AAI dated 12
th January 2005 informed the
 Committee that approximately 702 acres of land of Airports Authority of India at 20 airports was under encroachment,
 details of which are at Annexure-II.  The Committee was further informed that detailed surveys of actual number of
 encroachments have not been carried out at most of the airports.  However, at Mumbai Airport, based on Electoral Roll
 of 1994, as on 1.1.1995 there were 85,000 hutments on AAI land.  Encroachments are in the form of 'Kacha'/ 'Semi-
Pucca" hutments; makeshift commercial establishments like shops, kiosks etc.  Encroachments are also in the form of
 unauthorized cultivation/farming.
 
85.       As far as policy for removal of encroachments is concerned, the Committee was informed that the
 encroachments are required to be removed by following due procedure.  Help of State Government in the form of
 police protection is sought in case force is required to remove such encroachments to maintain law and order situation. 
 Further, Airports Authority of India has constructed boundary wall, barbed wire fencing etc. on vacant lands available
 at various airports so that no further encroachments take place.  Further, Airport Directors/ Airports In-charge have
 been advised to carry out routine inspection and as and when any such encroachment is noticed, action to remove the
 same be taken.  As regards encroachments, which are already in existence like at Mumbai and Hyderabad Airport, it is

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 stated that law relating to land differ from State to State and keeping in view the different socio-political considerations
 and State Government policies, Airports Authority of India takes up with the state Government for removal of
 encroachments on AAI land.
 
86.       The Committee notes with concern that there is widespread encroachment at the land of Airports Authority of
 India at various airports in the country.  The Committee regrets that Airports Authority of India has not been able to
 take due care of its assets as a result of which developmental activities at many airports have suffered.  The Committee
 recommends that Airports Authority of India should take up the matter regarding removal of encroachments with the
 concerned state governments.  The Committee further recommends that the Airports Authority of India should evolve
 some mechanism to take better care of the vast lands at its disposal, so that no further encroachments take place on the
 lands of Airports Authority of India.  The Government should come up with a transparent policy for land utilization and
 mobilization of resources at airports.  The Committee had, in its 69
th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) on the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation, drawn the attention of the Ministry to an incident wherein a portion of land of Malda
 Airport was sold by the previous owner on the basis of forged documents.   The Committee would like to know the
 steps taken to recover the land as well as the present status of the case. 
 
ACQUISITION OF LAND BY AAI FOR AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT
87.       During the deliberations of the Committee held on 28
th December 2004, the Committee enquired about the
 developmental activities for Gaya airport vide their O.M. No.H.11013/3/2004-AAI dated 12 th January 2005 informed
 the Committee that the Airports Authority of India has taken up development of infrastructure facilities at Gaya airport
 in a phased manner to provide world class facilities at this airport.  The salient features of proposed facility are as
 under:
(i)                  New Centrally airconditioned terminal building for 500 passengers with modern passenger amenities
 like passenger boarding bridge, escalators, elevators, conveyor belts, flight information display system,
 customs and immigration counter, health counter etc. for handling international passengers.  This work
 is in progress and likely to be completed by March 2005.
 
(ii)                New Fire station for category VI with equipments etc. and tender actions are in hand.
 
(iii)               Construction of a new control tower cum technical block with modern air traffic management facilities
 is also planned and drawings are being finalized.
 
(iv)              Installation of ILS system and ground lighting facilities for night operation and work is in progress.
 
(v)                Strengthening of runway, expansion of apron and associated works for A310 operations.  Work is in
 progress.
 
(vi)              Total development cost for above works is Rs.49 crore.
 
88.       The Committee pointed out that the proposal to extend the runway of Gaya airport had been held up due to the
 insistence of the Airports Authority of India to provide land free of cost to Airports Authority of India.  In response,
 Ministry of Civil Aviation pointed out that there is a proposal to extend the runway from 7500 ft. to 9000 ft. and for
 which additional land measuring about 102 acres has been requisitioned to State Government.  State Government has
 been requested to provide the land free of cost and free from encumbrances.  Deputy Commissioner, Gaya has

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
 intimated that that Government of Bihar cannot give land free of cost and AAI has to pay cost of land acquisition.  As
 per para 17.3 of the Policy on Airport Infrastructure, besides insuring provision of all essential and basic facilities, it is
 also the responsibility of the State Government for acquisition of private land and allotment of Government land to the
 Central Government for acquisition of private land and allotment of Government land to the Central Government free
 of cost.  State Government only charge at the same rate as is charge from other industrial ventures in the State for the
 land is an airport is owned by a private party.
 
89.       The Committee then requested the Ministry of Civil Aviation to furnish a list of places where land was
 purchased for development/upgradation of airports also to furnish the reasons for purchase of land.  The Ministry vide
 their O.M. No.H.11013/3/2004-AAI dated 20
th July 2005 furnished the information which is at Annexure-III.
 
90.       A perusal of the information submitted by Ministry of Civil Aviation reveals that Ministry of Civil Aviation has
 on certain occasions purchased land for developmental works, such as extension of runway, extension of car parking
 etc. at other airports.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should consider purchasing of
 land required for extension of runway at Gaya airport in similar pattern as they have done in many other cases.
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
ANNEXURE- I
(Vide Para … of the Report)
Delhi Airport
 
(A)          Mandatory Capital Project to be completed within 2 years & by year 2010
 
Sl.No. Name of Project Date of
 commencement
Completion period/Date
1. New Parallel Runway (Runway 10R/28L) Not later than 15
 months from the date
 of signing of OMDA.
24 months
2. Initial parallel taxiways to Runway 10R/28L) -do- -do-
3. High speed exit taxiways and other Entry/exit
 taxiways to Runway 10R/28L)
-do- -do-
4. Western pair of cross link taxiways -do- -do-
5. Satellite rescue and fire station -do- 24 months
6. New link taxiway from taxiway P to Taxiways
 C and E (leading to the domestic apron)
-do- -do-
7. International/domestic terminal development. 
 Terminal design to cater for design year not
 earlier than 2012.
-do- 1
st October 2009
8. New landside road to International/domestic
 complex
-do- -do-
9. New car park -do- -do-
10. Expand apron at International/domestic
 terminal
-do- -do-
11. New elevated terminal front (departures) road
 Demolish existing elevated road.
-do- -do-
12. New ground level terminal front road (arrivals) -do- -do-

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
13. Taxi/coach park -do- -do-
14. Close terminal access road to non-airport
 through traffic.
-do- Before commissioning of
 Parallel Runway
Works in Progress (Commenced by AAI).
15. Rapid exit taxiway for landing Rwy 10
Estimated cost 4.5. crore
13
th March 2005 February 2006
16. Domestic Apron - 5 additional Bays Estimated
 cost 5.41 crore
19th March 2005 February 2006
17. Second Source of Power Supply Estimated  December 2005
18. Docking Guidance System T2 Estimated cost
 1.70 crore
31.05.2005 October 2005
(C) Works to be undertaken by JVC after taking over the Airport.
19. Ceremonial Lounge T-II Date to be indicated by
 the bidders
Within 24 months from the
 date of signing of OMDA.
20. Crash Fire Tenders -do- -do-
21. New Taxiway parallel to Rwy 09/27 between
 taxiways D and E and associated rapid exit
 taxiway.
-do- -do-
22. Expansion of International Apron to provide for
 peak stand demand prior to completion of
 major terminal development.
-do- -do-
23. Redevelop terminals 1B/Arrival -do- -do-
24. Provision of in-line X-ray baggage scanning
 system
-do- -do-
25. Reconfiguration, relocation, expansion of
 critical passenger processing and operational
 support areas within the existing terminal
 facilities, including at least the areas listed.
-do- -do-
26. Upgrade general aesthetics of all terminals -do- -do-
27. Traffic Plan outside the terminal -do- -do-
28. Upgrade signage within all terminals -do- -do-
29. Upgrade flight information and PA System -do- -do-
30. Improve passenger amenities and services
 within all terminals
-do- -do-
31. Upgrade retail offering within all terminals -do- -do-
32. Public information displays in all terminals -do- -do-
33. T1 (A/B Arrival) and T2 traffic improvement
 scheme
-do- -do-
 
Note:-
1.
                  The above list has been made part of the Operation, Maintenance and Development Agreement.  The cost of
 projects under (A) has not been to the bidders.  The bidders shall furnish cost of these projects based on their
 estimates and provide the same in the business plan.  However, as per internal estimates of the Global
 Technical Advisor/AAI the cost is approx. Rs.2800 crore.
2.
                  The cost of works in progress under (B), has been shown as these works have already commenced by AAI.
3.                  The costs of work under (C) will be furnished by the bidders at the time of the bid and will  be over and
 above the costs of projects mentioned in note-1 above.
 
Mumbai Airport
 
(A)        Mandatory Capital Project to be completed within 2 years & by year 2010
 

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
Sl.No. Name of Project Date of
 commencement
Completion period/Date
1. New high speed exit taxiways from runway
 09/27.
Not later than 15
 months from the date
 of signing of OMDA.
24 months
2. Intl. Cargo Terminal. -do- -do-
3. Int'l car park expansion. -do- 24 months
4. New International terminal access road
 (develop existing road system).
-do- -do-
5. Realign domestic terminal access road. -do- 24 months
6. Realign Taxiway B1 to Code F offset
 dimension from Runway 09/27.
-do- -do-
7. Modify international stand-off positions. -do- -do-
8. Domestic apron expansion. -do- -do-
9. International terminal expansion -do- 1
st October 2009
10. New domestic terminal. -do- -do-
11. Internaional Apron expansion. -do- -do-
12. New domestic terminal car park. -do- -do-
(B)  Works in Progress/Planned to be completed by JVC
13. International remote parking bays (4 nos.).
Estimated cost 17.11 crore
June 2004 January 2006
14. International remote parking bays (3 nos.).
Estimated cost 17.05 crore
June 2005 September 2006
15. Link taxiway to new hanger area.
Estimated cost 9.46 crore
June 2004 February 2006
16. Part Parallel Taxiway to Rwy 14/32.
Estimated cost 17.26 crore
August 2004 March 2006
17. Extension and Modification of terminal 1B.
Estimated cost 85.66 crore
December 2004 September 2005
(C) Works to be undertaken by JVC after taking over the Airport.
18. Resurfacing of Secondary Runway. Date to be indicated by
 the bidders
Within 24 months from the
 date of signing of OMDA.
19. Modification to existing Bridge. -do- -do-
20. Crash Fire Tenders. -do- -do-
21. Extend taxiway B3 to Runway 27 end. -do- -do-
22. Rapid exit taxiways.
 
-do- -do-
23. Provision of in-line X-ray baggage scanning
 system.
-do- -do-
24. Additional remote domestic parking bays to
 provide for peak stand demand prior to
 completion of major terminal development.
-do- -do-
25. Modification and extension of terminal 2-B
 including widening of flyover of terminal-II
 and modification of car park, provision of
 walkways, escalators etc.
-do- -do-
26. Upgrade general aesthetic of all terminals. -do- -do-
27. Upgrade signage within all terminals -do- -do-
28. Upgrade flight information and PA System -do- -do-
29. Improve passenger amenities and services
 within all terminals
-do- -do-
30. Upgrade retail offering within all terminals -do- -do-
31. Public information displays in all terminals -do- -do-

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
33. T1 (A/B) and T2 (A/B/C) traffic improvement
 scheme
-do- -do-
 
Note:-
1. The above list has been made part of the Operation, Maintenance and Development Agreement.  The cost of
 projects under (A) has not been to the bidders.  The bidders shall furnish cost of these projects based on their
 estimates and provide the same in the business plan.  However, as per internal estimates of the Global Technical
 Advisor/AAI the cost is approx. Rs.2600 crore.
2. The cost of works in progress under (B), has been shown as these works have already commenced by AAI.
3. The costs of work under (C) will be furnished by the bidders at the time of the bid and will  be over and above the
 costs of projects mentioned in note-1 above.
ANNEXURE- II
(Vide Para …  of the Report)
 
ENCROACHMENT AT AAI AIRPORTS IN INDIA
S.NO. Airport Name State Encroachment
(in Acres)
Airport/Region
1. Mumbai Maharashtra 171 Mumbai
2. Satna Madhya Pradesh 150 Northern Region
3. Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh 97 Southern Region
4. Amritsar Punjab 83 Northern Region
5. Kolkata West Bengal 75.7 Kolkata
6. Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 30 Western Region
7. Juhu Maharashtra 29 Western Region
8. Ahmedabad Gujrat 20 Western Region
9. Nagpur Maharashtra 13 Western Region
10. Ranchi Jharkhand 9 Eastern Region
11. Rajamundhary Andhra Pradsh 8 Southern Region
12. Gaya Bihar 5 Eastern Region
13. Delhi Delhi 4.5 IGI Airport
14. Lucknow U.P. 1.7 Northern Region
15. Port Blair UT 1.5 Eastern Region
16. Safdarjung Delhi 1.5 Northern Region
17. Belgaum Karnataka 1 Western Region
18. Rajkot Gujrat 1 Western Region
19. Tirupati Andhra Pradesh 0.3 Southern Region
20. Visakhapatnam Andhra Pradesh 0.2 Southern Region
TOTAL : 702.4  
 
ANNEXURE- III
(Vide Para … of the Report)
 
 
List of places where land was purchased for

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
development/upgradation of airports and reasons for purchase
 
Sl.No. Airport Land Acquired Purpose Cost
1. Coimbatore 80.92 Acres Extension of Runway Rs.16,95,00,000/-
2. Madurai 60 Acres Extension of Runway Rs.4,70,00,000/-
3. Agatti 2.472 Hectares DVOR Installation Rs.1,11,30,012/-
4. Calicut 11.3 Acres Extension of Car Park Rs.2,56,73,412/-
5. Jammu 102 Kanals 8 Marlas Extension of Runway Rs.3,04,98,381/-
6. Bijwasan 426 Bigha 13 Biswa Construction of New
 Transmitting Station
Rs.1,01,51,443/-
7. Behrampur 1.05 Acres MSSR Rs.46,88,624/-
8. Lilabari 30.70 Acres For installation of ILS and
 simple approach light at
 Runway 04/22
Rs.77,64,313/-
9. Lucknow 32.15 Acres Runway extension Rs.11,08,94,357/-
 
The State Govt. has
 already issued
 notification for
 acquisition of land.  The
 land is yet to be handed
 over by State Govt. to
 AAI.
10. Silchar 33.930 Acres Runway extension Rs.3,17,06,962/-
11. Patna 6.42. Acres Enhancing the operational
 efficiency of Runway at Patna
 Airport
Rs.7,97,49,922/-
12. Jaipur 20.36 Acres Operational purpose Rs.1,19,40,115/-
13. Gaya 1 Acre Operational purpose Rs.8,00,000/-
14. Trivandrum 0.79 Acres Development expansion Rs.58,64,982.03
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 8 th September 2004 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri S.S. Chandran 
4. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary 
6. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
7. Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ramdas Athawale

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
9. Shri Anil Basu
10. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
11. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
12. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
13. Shri Dip Gogoi 
14. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
15. Shri Samik Lahiri
16. Shri Sudam Marandi
17. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
18. Shri Ravindra Naik
19. Shri Sartaj Singh
20. Shri Chengara Surendran
21. Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.            The Committee discussed its future course of action.  It was decided that the Committee will take up two
 subjects i.e. *       *   * and the 'Development of Airport Sector with special emphasis on new Modern Airports' on
 priority basis.  *   *   *
3.            *                               *                                  *
4.            The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 11.45 a.m. to meet again on the 17th September 2004.
_______________________________________    
*** Relates to matters not included in this report.
 
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m on Monday, the 8 th November 2004 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Janardhana Poojary
4. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma  
5. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
6. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
7. Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ramdas Athawale
9. Shri Anil Basu
10. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
11. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
12. Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak
13. Shri Samik Lahiri

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
14. Shri Sudam Marandi 
15. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Ravindra Naik
17. Shri Dushyant Singh
18. Shri Sartaj Singh
19. Shri Chengara Surendran
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Shri Ajay Prasad, Secretary
Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director
Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
Shri V. D. V. Prasad Rao, Member (F), Airports Authority of India
Shri M. C. Kishore, Company Secretary, Airports Authority of India
 
2.         The Committee took up the examination of the subject - "Development of Airport sector with special emphasis
 on new modern airports" and heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Chairman, Airports
 Authority of India on the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry of Civil  Aviation, while presenting their views,
 replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.  On certain queries raised by the Members, the Ministry
 representatives were requested to give written replies.
 
3.
                  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
4.         The Committee then decided to meet next on Wednesday, the 17th November 2004.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.50 p.m.
 
 
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 28 th December 2004 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Janardhana Poojary
4. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ramdas Athawale
6. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
7. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
8. Shri Samik Lahiri
9. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
10. Shri Ravindra Naik

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
11. Shri Manabendra Shah
12. Shri Sartaj Singh
13. Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
           
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION AND AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF
 INDIA
Shri Ajay Prasad, Secretary
      Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman. Airports Authority of India
Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary
      Shri P.S. Nair, Member (P& P), Airports Authority of India
Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director
Shri M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
Shri P.B. Daswani, GM (Plg.), Airports Authority of India
 
 
2.         *                                  *                                  *
 
3.         *                                  *                                  *
 
_____________________________________    
*** Relates to matters not included in this report.
 
4.         The Committee, then, took up the examination of the development of Airport sector with special emphasis on
 new modern airports and heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Chairman, Airports Authority
 of India on the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, while presenting their views, replied to
 the points raised by the Members on the subject.  To some queries raised by the Members, the Ministry representatives
 were requested to give written replies within a week.
 
5.
      A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.20 p.m.
 
XXXV
THIRTY-FIFTH MEETING
           
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 6 th June 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Chandran
3. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
4. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anil Basu
7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
11. Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Ravindra Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
            Shri Prashant Kumar Mishra, Additional Secretary & FA
            Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary
            Shri Sanjay Narayen, Joint Secretary
            Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
            Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman
            Shri V.D.V. Prasad Rao, Member (Finance)
 
2.         *                                  *                                  *
3.         *                                  *                                  *
 
_______________________________________    
*** Relates to matters not included in this report.
4.         Thereafter, the Committee took-up further consideration of the 'Development of Airport Sector with special
 emphasis on new modern airports’ and heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
 Airports Authority of India on the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority
 of India, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.
4.1.      Due to paucity of time, discussion on the above subject remained inconclusive and the Committee decided to
 continue the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation at 3.00 p.m. on the 20
th June 2005.
4.2       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m. to meet again on 20th June 2005.
 
XXXVII
THIRTY-SEVENTH MEETING
 
           
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 29 th June 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri S.S. Chandran

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
4. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ramdas Athawale
6. Shri Anil Basu
7. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
8. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
9. Shri Samik Lahiri
10. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
11. Shri Ravindra Naik
12. Shri Manabendra Shah
13. Shri Dushyant Singh
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Sartaj Singh
16. Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
            Shri Ajay Prasad, Secretary
Shri Prashant Kumar Mishra, Additional Secretary & FA
            Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary
            Shri Sanjay Narayen, Joint Secretary
           
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
            Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman
            Shri V.D.V. Prasad Rao, Member (Finance)
            Shri A.K. Misra, Member (Planning)
 
2.         *                                  *                                  *
3.         Thereafter, the Committee took-up further consideration of the 'Development of Airport Sector with special
 emphasis on new modern airports’ and heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
 Airports Authority of India on the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority
 of India, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.  To certain queries the
 Ministry representatives could not provide immediate replies and promised to furnish the information to the Committee
 at the earliest.
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. to meet again on 8
th July 2005.
 
_______________________________________   
*** Relates to matters not included in this report.
 
I
FIRST MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 17 th August 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

90th Report of the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/90threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:13:41]
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Shri S. S. Chandran
4. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anil Basu
6. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
7. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
8. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
9. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
10. Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
11. Shri Manabendra Shah
SECRETARIAT
           
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.         At the outset the Chairman of the Committee extended heartiest welcome to the Members of re-constituted
 Committee.
3.         *                                  *                                  *
 
4.         The Committee, then considered the draft report on the "'Development of Airport Sector with Special emphasis
 on new Modern Airports" and after some discussion adopted the report.    The Committee also authorized the Chairman
 to fix a date and nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.50 p.m.
_______________________________________   
*** Relates to matters not included in this report.
 
 