 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
329
_ 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Twelfth Report 
on the subject ‘Review of Central Road and Infrastructure 
Fund (CRIF) Works’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Twelfth Report 
on the subject ‘Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
(CRIF) Works’ 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
4. REPORT                                1-11 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   12 
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
13-15

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Twenty Ninth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations as contained in its Three Hundred 
Twelfth Report on the subject ‘ Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
Works’. 
2. The Three Hundred Twelfth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 3rd February, 2022 to the 
Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred  Twelfth Report were received from the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on 17th June, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th 
November, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
November 25, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 4, 1944 (Saka)                              Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
BISAG-N Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-informatics 
BOS Bank of Sanctions 
CRF Central Road Fund  
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund  
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
EI&ISC Economic Importance and Inter State Connectivity 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NMP National Master Plan  
PM Prime Minister 
PWD Public Works Department 
ROB Road-Over-Bridge 
RUB Road-Under-Bridge 
UT Union Territory 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred and Twelfth Report on 
„Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Works ‟ which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 3rd February, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 17th June, 2022 in respect of all 
the recommendations/observations contained in the 312th Report. The replies have been categorized 
as follows:— 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:  25 
Total:  1 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  8, 10, 17, 18, 19, 24, 26, 29 
Total:   8 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry  have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  20, 21, 30  
Total:  3 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:   Nil  
Total:   Nil 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
 
CRIF State Roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and State Governments should coordinate to 
address the issues being faced regarding the disbursal of CRIF funds to the State. A high -level 
meeting of officials of the Ministry and the State Governments should take place every month to 
resolve issues pertaining to land acquisition, forest clearances, CRIF disbursal, and other 
problems being faced in the development of NHs in the State. The Committee further recommends 
that a comprehensive Master Plan should be formulated for improving road connectivity to 
important tourism places, cultural places, ports etc. across the country and that CRIF fun ds may 
be utilized for implementing the same. The Committee recommends that the criteria for sanction of 
road projects under CRIF may be modified so as to give higher priority for sanctions to roads that 
provide connectivity to places of tourism and cultur al significance and last -mile connectivity to 
ports. 
(Para 25)  
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 Views of the Committee has been duly incorporated in the amendments to the criteria dated 
31.01.2020 issued on 08.04.2022 wherein it has been stipulated to include the Connectivity to 
Pilgrim and Tourist Centres, Air Ports, Important Monuments and Heritage Places. 
 
 
  

3 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that through the amendment made by Finance Act, 2018, more sectors 
viz., Ports, Shipyards, Inland Waterways, Airports, Railway track and Commercial Infrastructure/ 
Stations, Urban Public Transport, etc., in Transport Sector besides other Sectors (Energy, Water 
and Sanitation, Communication, Social and Commercial Infrastructure), have been included under 
the CRIF. The Committee feels that the budgetary support that CRIF now provides  to all these 
crucial sectors will help in achieving all round growth of the Indian economy. The Committee 
further notes that the distribution under CRIF has been made more transparent as it is to now be 
decided by a Committee headed by Hon‟ble Finance Min ister as per Section 7A of the CRIF Act, 
2000 depending on the priorities of the project. 
(Para 8)  
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 Observations of the Committee are noted. 
 
CRIF State Roads 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that as per the CRIF Act, 2000 and its amendment vide the Finance 
Act, 2019, the  Central Government is no  longer responsible for formulation of rules for State 
roads. The Committee feels that the Ministry should specify the  guidelines and technical 
specifications that must be  followed by States to construct State roads funded by CRIF. The 
Committee recommends that a mechanism should be put in place by the Ministry to carry out 
random checks regarding the quality of such State roads. This would go a long way in improving 
the quality of State roads being constructed by using CRIF. 
(Para 10)  
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 As per Section 10 of the Central Road Fund  (CRF) Act, 2000 the Central Government was 
inter-alia responsible for (i)  sanction of schemes for State roads, (ii) formulation of criteria for  
approval and financing of  specific State road projects (iii) monitoring of State road projects and  
expenditure incurred thereon, etc. However, as  per Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
Act, 2000 (i.e. CRF Act 2000 amended by the Finance Act 2018 and 2019) the Central Government 
is no more responsible for these functions. The Central Govt. is responsible only  for the 
“formulation of criteria for allocation of funds for development and maintenance of State  road 
projects including the projects of inter-State and economic importance”. 
2.2 Accordingly, the Ministry finalized the criteria for allocation of funds for development and 
maintenance of State Roads under the CRIF Act, 2000 in consultation with the Ministry of Finance 

4 
 
and circulated the same to all State Governments and UTs vide Ministry‟s letter dated 31.01.2020, 
which was further amended vide Ministry‟s letter dated 08.04.2022. 
2.3      As per the applicable CRIF criteria the list of works proposed  to be taken up on State roads 
under CRIF scheme  are forwarded by State Govt./ UT to the Ministry  for finalisation. Ministry 
finalises the list of works  recommended by State Govt./UT and communicates the finalised list of 
works to States/ UTs and the concerned State Govt./ UT has to do the technical approval, financial 
sanction and accord administrative approval of  these projects. The criteria specifies the guidelines 
and technical specifications based on which the works of State  roads under CRIF scheme are to be 
taken up by the States/ UTs on State roads under CRIF scheme. 
 
2.4 As per the CRIF Act, 2000 the Central Govt. has no role in monitoring of State road projects. 
Therefore, the Ministry has no role in checking quality control of the State Road Projects under the 
scheme. Necessary provisions have been made in Para no. 7 of the Criteria circulated on 
31.01.2020 regarding responsibility  of State Governments for quality control of projects. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes the State / UT-wise accrual and release made for CRIF State roads 
since 2014-15 and the State / UT -wise allocation and expenditure made for EI&ISC works since 
2014-15 including BOS as on 01.04.2021. The Committee feels that most of the States are making 
efficient use of the CRIF funds. Since the CRIF fund is non -lapsable in nature, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry must take up the issue of inordinate delays in submitting the 
utilization certificates with the State Government, at the top -most level. The Minist ry must impress 
upon the State Governments that sincere efforts have to be made to ensure that the projects 
sanctioned under CRIF are completed on time and the available funds are timely utilized. 
(Para 17) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The Ministry has been taking up the matter from time to time with State Governments/ UTs 
and recently also the Ministry requested all State Governments/UTs vide letter dated 13.05.2022 to 
ensure the projects sanctioned under CRIF Schemes are implemented ti mely, delays are avoided in 
Utilisation of funds under the Scheme and Utilisation Certificates are submitted promptly. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee takes note of the issue highlighted by the Ministry regarding Bank of 
Sanctions already being high and the Ministry not having any funds for further release as the 
unspent balance and current accruals of State Governments have been completely released. 
Considering the backlog of funds to be released under CRIF which has been caused by Bank of  
Sanctions being high, the  Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to keep the 
Bank of Sanctions within the prescribed limits so that the funds for the sanctioned projects can be 
released to the State Governments on time. 
(Para 18)  
 

5 
 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 The Ministry generally restricts new sanctions within admissible limits as per the provisions 
of Para no. 6 (10) of the criteria circulated on 31.01.2020. However, at times based on the 
priorities of the State Governments/ UTs, the Ministry  considers additional projects under the 
scheme on a case -to-case basis subject to conditions that (i) no additional fund in excess of 
possible accrual/ allocation of fund shall be sought by the State Government/ UT, (ii) the State 
Government/ UT shall ens ure that the progress of work shall not suffer for delay in payment for 
want of additional funds under CRIF, (iii) payment of bills in excess of possible allocation of 
funds, if needed, shall be temporarily arranged by the State Government/ UT. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
  5. The Committee observes a major negative impact that the Coronavirus pandemic has had on 
the number of projects sanctioned under CRIF during 2020-21 and 2021-22. The Committee hopes 
that the subsequent waves, if any, of the pandemic do  not have a significant impact on the road 
projects across the country and that the Ministry would be able to sanction a greater number of 
works under CRIF in the coming years. 
(Para 19)  
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 Views of the Committee have been noted for needful consideration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.  The Committee takes note of the issue highlighted by the representatives of State 
Government of Kerala regarding the criteria for allocation of CRIF funds based on 70% 
weightage to area of the State and 30% weightage to fuel consumption in the State, and 
recommends that the criteria may be reassessed to ensure that there is a logical, equitable 
distribution of CRIF funds and smaller States are not at a disadvantage in terms of the CRIF 
allocation that they receive. The Committee feels that the existing criteria might be resulting into 
very low allocation of CRIF funds to the North -Eastern States since they are smaller in area and 
the traffic plying in those States is also on the lower side. The Committ ee recommends that the 
Ministry may consider making some special changes to the existing criteria to permit higher 
allocation under  CRIF to the North -Eastern States given their sensitive location and difficult 
terrain. 
(Para 24)  
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 The criteria of distribution of funds amongst the States/ UTs has been finalized considering 
the earlier provisions, views of State Governments/ UTs over the years and detailed deliberations. 
Accordingly, it is submitted that the Ministry may continue with the existing provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. With regard to delays faced by projects under CRIF, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should have a system to identify the pending issues with State and Central Governments 
and the same should be followed up with the Chief Secretary of the States. CRIF funds should also 
be recommended for linkage of inner state roads, small towns to nearby NH roads and when 
linkage between two states is being worked out, it should be ensured that both Sta tes cooperate for 
executing the works on time. The Committee further recommends that all concerned 
Ministries/State Departments viz., tourism, culture, airport, shipping, railways, etc. should 
formulate a master plan and plan of action for their respective  sector and convene periodical 
meetings to carry out the same in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 26)  
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 The amendments to the criteria dated 31.01.2020 issued on 08.04.2022 has stipulated that 
the framework of GatiShakti should be the guiding principle for identification, sanction and 
implementation of the Projects to ensure effective convergence to improve connectivity. DPIIT is 
in the process of on -boarding all State Governments/ UTs on the National Master Plan (NMP) 
portal developed by DPIIT through BISAG-N under PM GatiShakti initiative. This would facilitate 
coordinated and synergised planning and implementation of projects by States and various 
Ministries/ Departments dealing with various infrastructure sectors duly factoring in th e 
requirements and expectations of other infrastructure sectors. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 10 of this Report and states that 
the Ministry should urgently work upon devising a monitoring mechanism to ensure that the roads 
constructed using the CRIF fund are of high quality. 
(Para 29)  
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 As per Section 10 of the Central Road Fund  (CRF) Act, 2000 the Central Government was 
inter-alia responsible for (i)  sanction of schemes for State roads, (ii) formulation of criteria for  
approval and financing of  specific State road projects (iii) monitoring of State road projects and  
expenditure incurred thereon, etc. However, as  per Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
Act, 2000 (i.e. CRF Act 2000 amended  by the Finance Act 2018 and 2019) the Central Government 
is no more responsible for these functions. The Central Govt. is responsible only  for the 
“formulation of criteria for allocation of funds for development and maintenance of State  road 
projects including the projects of inter-State and economic importance”. 
8.2 Accordingly, the Ministry finalized the criteria for allocation of funds for development and 
maintenance of State Roads under the CRIF Act, 2000 in consultation with the Ministry of Finance 
and circulated the same to all State Governments and UTs vide Ministry‟s letter dated 31.01.2020, 
which was further amended vide Ministry‟s letter dated 08.04.2022. 
8.3 As per the applicable CRIF criteria the list of works proposed to be taken up on State 
roads under CRIF scheme  are forwarded by State Govt./ UT to the Ministry  for finalisation. 

7 
 
Ministry finalises the list of works  recommended by State Govt./UT and communicates the 
finalised list of works to  States/ UTs and the concerned State Govt./ UT has to do the technical  
approval, financial sanction and accord administrative approval of  these projects. The criteria 
specifies the guidelines and technical specifications based on which the works of State roads under 
CRIF scheme are to be taken up by the States/ UTs on State roads under CRIF scheme. 
8.4 As per the CRIF Act, 2000 the Central Govt. has no role in monitoring of State road projects. 
Therefore, the Ministry has no role in checking quality control of the State Road Projects under the 
scheme. Necessary provisions have been made in Para no. 7 of the Criteria circulated on 
31.01.2020 regarding responsibility of State Governments for quality control of projects. 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
CRIF State Roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. On the issue of Bank of Sanctions (BOS), the Committee reiterates its recommendation made 
in para 376 of its 296 th Report on „Role of Highways in Nation Building‟, which states the 
following:  
“The Committee is of the view that the existing mechanism of bank of sanctions is 
causing a visible lack of clarity between the State Government Departments 
concerned and the Mi nistry of Road Transport & Highways, regarding the amount 
that the State is yet to be awarded. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may look into the issue and come up with suitable guidelines to ensure that there is 
no confusion among the State Gove rnment Departments and the Ministry, regarding 
the share of funds to be received by the State, in any particular year, after factoring 
in the Bank of Sanctions.”  
(Para 20)  
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry generally restricts new sanctions within admissible limits as per the provisions 
of Para no. 6 (10) of the criteria circulated on 31.01.2020. However, at times based on the 
priorities of the State Governments/ UTs, the Ministry considers additional projects under the 
scheme on a case -to-case basi s subject to conditions that (i) no additional fund in excess of 
possible accrual/ allocation of fund shall be sought by the State Government/ UT, (ii) the State 
Government/ UT shall ensure that the progress of work shall not suffer for delay in payment fo r 
want of additional funds under CRIF, (iii) payment of bills in excess of possible allocation of 
funds, if needed, shall be temporarily arranged by the State Government/ UT. 
Further recommendation/observation 
1.2 The Committee’s recommendation regarding guidelines to ensure clarity among State 
Governments regarding the share of funds to be received by them has not been answered. 
The Committee would like to know if the Ministry has formulated any such guidelines. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that 10% of the allocation made to States under CRIF is to be 
earmarked for road safety works. Keeping in mind that India has the highest number of deaths in 
the world on account of road accidents and the immeasurable impact that the  same has on 
countless families as well as on the overall Indian economy, the Committee feels that the efforts 
being made by the Ministry in this regard would give a big boost if a higher share of CRIF funds 

9 
 
allocated to the State Governments are earmarked  for carrying out road safety works. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider increasing the percentage of 
funds that are earmarked for road safety works under CRIF, from the existing 10 percent. Further, 
the Ministry may  evolve an effective mechanism to oversee and monitor optimal utilization of the 
funds earmarked for road safety works under CRIF. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 Provisions have been made in the criteria dated 31.01.2020 for earmarking of 10% of funds 
for Road Safety works. However, many of the works taken up also enhances Road Safety aspects 
and the Ministry is committed to continue the same. 
2.2 Effective from the current financial year 2022 -23, the Ministry has started allocating 
separate funds of about Rs. 1 ,326 crore for State Governments/ UTs for construction of ROBs/ 
RUBs in replacement of existing Railways level crossings and Bridges on State roads under 
“SETU BANDHAN” Programme under CRIF Scheme. This is intended at enhancing Road Safety 
aspects at these vulnerable locations where many accidents takes place. For this, the Ministry has 
also finalised a Tripartite MOU in consultation with M/o Railways and circulated to State 
Governments/ UTs for their consent. The SETU BANDHAN Programme shall include the 
construction of ROBs/ RUBs on State roads under CRIF which are not considered for funding by 
M/o Railways in any of their programmes. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.3 The Committee appreciates the ‘Setu Bandhan’ Programme under which the Ministry 
has started allocating funds to State Governments/UTs for construction of ROBs/ RUBs in 
replacement of existing Railways level crossings and Bridges on State roads, under the CRIF 
scheme. However, given the worrisome number of road accidents and accident -related 
deaths, the Committee  feels that a lot more needs to be done by the Ministry/NHAI/State 
PWDs to improve road safety in the country at an urgent pace and earmarking higher funds 
under CRIF for this purpose should help in the same. The Committee, therefor e, reiterates 
its recommendation that the Ministry should increase the percentage of funds earmarked for 
road safety works under CRIF from the existing 10 percent to a higher figure.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee further recommends that the  Ministry may review the existing guidelines for 
awarding of tenders for road projects under CRIF or otherwise, since it is often found that the 
projects get awarded at substantially lower bids than the amount projected by the Ministry/NHAI. 
In such cases, the concessionaire is more likely to not actually complete the work at all, or do it 
with sub-par quality. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may either come 
out with upper and lower limits for bidding for road projects or establ ish a mechanism to strictly 
monitor the quality and progress of road projects awarded to substantially low bids. In cases 
where poor performance and sub -par quality of road projects is noticed, the contractor must be 
suitably penalized and their past project record must be duly considered before awarding any road 
projects in the future. 
(Para 30)  
 

10 
 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 As per the CRIF Criteria dated 31.01.2020 Para 6 , the State Governments/ UTs are 
authorized for administrative approval, technical approval  and financial sanction of the CRIF 
works. State Governments/ UTs are only responsible for finalization of the bid documents, 
invitation of tenders, award and management of contracts, including taking up of penal action for 
poor performance and sub -standard quality of the works/ any defaults of contractors. As per the 
CRIF Act, 2000 amended through Finance Act, 2019, the Central Government is no longer 
responsible for monitoring of State road projects under these schemes and expenditure incurred 
thereon. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee notes that State Governments/UTs are responsible for finalization of 
the bid documents, invitation of tenders, award and management of contracts etc . However, 
the reply furnished by the Ministry does not make any mention of the action  taken, if any, to 
address the issue of the road projects which are not funded through CRIF, being awarded to 
bids substantially lower than the amount projected by the Min istry/NHAI. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter of fixing upper and lower limits for 
bidding for road projects and a mechanism to strictly monitor the quality and progress of 
road projects awarded to substantially low bids, with the State Governments/UTs. 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
-NIL- 
 
**** 
  

12 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
CRIF State Roads 
The Committee’s recommendation regarding guidelines to ensure clarity among State 
Governments regarding the share of funds to be received by them has not been answ ered. 
The Committee would like to know if the Ministry has formulated any such guidelines. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
The Committee appreciates the ‘Setu Bandhan’ Programme under which the Ministry has 
started allocating funds to State Governments/UTs for construction of ROBs/ RUBs in 
replacement of existing Railways level crossings and Bridges on State roads, under the C RIF 
scheme. However, given the worrisome number of road accidents and accident -related 
deaths, the Committee feels that a lot more needs to be done by the Ministry/NHAI/State 
PWDs to improve road safety in the country at an urgent pace and earmarking highe r funds 
under CRIF for this purpose should help in the same. The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
its recommendation that the Ministry should increase the percentage of funds earmarked for 
road safety works under CRIF from the existing 10 percent to a higher figure.  
(Para 2.3) 
 
The Committee notes that State Governments/UTs are responsible for finalization of the bid 
documents, invitation of tenders, award and management of contracts etc. However, the 
reply furnished by the Ministry does not make any menti on of the action taken, if any, to 
address the issue of the road projects which are not funded through CRIF, being awarded to 
bids substantially lower than the amount projected by the Ministry/NHAI. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take up th e matter of fixing upper and lower limits for 
bidding for road projects and a mechanism to strictly monitor the quality and progress of 
road projects awarded to substantially low bids, with the State Governments/UTs. 
(Para 3.2) 
 
***** 

91 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
13 

92 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES:  xxx xxx xxx 
 
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
  
14

93 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
five draft Reports on Action Taken by the government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its various Reports; and (ii) 
xxx  xxx  xxx 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration 
of the five draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i)  xxx xxx xxx 
(ii)  312th Report on Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) 
Works; 
(iii)  xxx xxx xxx 
(iv)  xxx xxx xxx 
(v)  xxx xxx xxx 
  
4. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
all the five draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.  
  
5 to 35.The Committee also authorized Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak, M.P. and in her absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha on 13 th 
December, 2022 and Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Chhedi Paswan, M.P. to 
lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date.  xxx xxx xxx 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
36. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
37. The meeting adjourned at 5:04 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,       Swarabji B. 
25th November, 2022     Director 
 
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
15