REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
REPORT
            The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport & Tourism at its meeting held on the
 27th June, 2000; inter-alia took note of the decision of the Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment with regard to
 disinvestment of Air India and decided to discuss the matter with the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation and
 Air India.  In connection with the subject, the Ministry of Civil Aviation have furnished a background note informing
 therein that the Disinvestment Commission, in its VIII Report submitted in August 1998, had recommended
 restructuring/disinvestment in Air India.  The main recommendations of the Commission are as under :-
(i)   Infusion of Government equity of Rs.1000 crores and finally bringing down the Government share holding in Air India
 to 40 per cent.
(ii)   Induction of a strategic partner holding 40 per cent equity on the basis of global bids.
(iii) 10 per cent equity to be offered to the domestic institutional investors and 10 per cent to retail investors and employees.
2.  The recommendations were considered extensively and in a meeting held on June 26, 1999 chaired by the former
 Finance Secretary and attended by the Secretary (Expenditure), Secretary (DPE) and Secretary (CA), the following
 decisions were taken:-
(i) The Government would presently be unable to infuse this amount into the airlines.
(ii) However, since the Government is unable to put in additional funds in the airlines, the process of disinvestment should
 not be stopped.
(iii) It was felt that a separate proposal should be submitted by Air India to the Department of Expenditure for infusion of
 Rs.110 crores interest subsidy for working capital for 1999-2000.
(iv)  It was decided that the Ministry of Civil Aviation would immediately take a note to the Cabinet Committee on
 Disinvestment in regard to disinvestment in Air India.
3. Subsequently, in December 1999, Government had set-up a separate Department namely the Department of
 Disinvestment under the Ministry of Finance.   The work regarding disinvestment has been transferred to that
 Department for further necessary action.
4.         The Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment (CCD) met on May 26, 2000 and considered the Note dated February
 12, 2000 submitted by the Department of Disinvestment and approved, in principle bringing down the equity of the
 Government of India in Air India to 40 per cent through a process of disinvestment by sale of 40 per cent of equity to a
 strategic partner, upto 10 per cent to employees and the balance by sale to financial institutions and/or on the share
 market.  The Committee further decided that in the event of the strategic partner being a joint venture with an element
 of foreign holding, the arrangement should be such as would limit foreign holding in Air India to a maximum of 26 per
 cent of the total equity.
4.1        The Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment (CCD) also approved that an Advisor be appointed to prepare a
 detailed scheme for disinvestment of Air India.
5.         An Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) has been constituted on May 30, 2000 with the following:-
1.      Shri Pradip Baijal, Secretary (Disinvestment).
2.      Shri Sanat Kaul, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
3.      Shri S. Talwar, Joint Secretary, Deptt. Of Public Enterprises.
4.      Shri S.Behura, Joint Secretary, Deptt. Of Economic Affairs.
5.      Shri M.P. Mascarenhas, MD, Air India
6.      Shri S.Ranganathan, Director Finance, Air India.
6.         The first meeting of the Inter Ministerial Group was held on May 31, 2000.  In this meeting, a draft format of the
 advertisement for inviting Expressions of Interest from parties was approved.  It was also decided that presentation may

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
 be held on 29th-30th June, at Delhi Centaur.
7.         On June 23, 2000 the Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment considered the revised disinvestment programme for
 2000-01 and a three-year Plan 2000-2003.  Among the various decisions taken in the meeting, the following decision are
 relevant for the Ministry:-
·         Action for appointment of Advisors and action for disinvestment be expedited in cases among others of Air
 India and Indian Airlines.
·         Disinvestment in respect of PSUs including Air India, Indian Airlines and HCI (a subsidiary of Air India) was
 approved in principle.
8.         In response to the advertisements, Expressions of Interest were received from four parties and presentations were
 held before the IMG members on the 29 th and 30th June 2000.  Based on the technical evaluation short listing criteria,
 the IMG has made its recommendations for appointment of JM Morgan Stanley.
9.         The Committee, at its meeting held on the 19 th July 2000, took up the matter for discussion in the light of the
 background note furnished by the Ministry and heard the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and representatives of
 Air India.  The Committee was surprised to note that the Ministry was silent about the report of the Kelkar Committee,
 which was constituted to examine the matter of restructuring of Air India.  In this connection, the Committee invited
 the attention of the representatives of the Ministry to the recommendations contained in its 35 th Report on Functioning
 of Air India wherein the Committee had recommended that the Kelkar Committee Report should be finalised
 immediately and appropriate action should be taken at the earliest.   In reply to this point about the report of the Kelkar
 Committee, the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation pleaded their ignorance in the matter and stated that
 the Kelkar Committee Report was never 
finalised or published. 
10.        Ministry of Civil Aviation have vide their O.M. No.AV-18050/070/2000-AI dated July 25, 2000 informed the
 Committee as under:-
“A Committee of Experts under the Chairmanship of Dr. Vijay Kelkar, the then Secretary, Ministry of
 Petroleum & Natural Gas, was constituted on September 4, 1997 to undertake a comprehensive examination of
 the reasons for the losses incurred by Air India and to develop strategies for turning around the company.   The
 Committee, which was required to submit its report by November 1997, had sought extension of time upto
 October 1998, which was granted by the Government.   However, the report has not been submitted by Dr. V.
 Kelkar, Chairman of the Committee so far.”
11.        The Committee observed that the Ministry is lackadaisical in its approach towards the issue of disinvestment of
 Air India and pointed out that the Joint Secretary (Financial Advisor) [JS(FA)], Ministry of Civil Aviation did not find
 a place in the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted for the purpose of disinvestment of Air India.  On being
 pointed out, the Secretary informed the Committee that JS(FA) is a special invitee in the Inter Ministerial Group and 
in
 fact JS(FA) should have been a Member of the Group.  He assured the Committee that he would get the error rectified. 
12.        The Committee was informed that the limit of foreign holding in Air India has been fixed to a maximum of 26
 per cent of the total equity in the event of the strategic partner being a joint venture with an element of foreign holding. 
 The Committee desired to know the justification for fixing the limit of 26 per cent and not less than 26 per cent.  In this
 connection, the Committee also invited attention of the representatives of the Ministry to the fact that even countries
 like China, Australia, Mexico, Taiwan, Canada etc, while allowing foreign investment participation in their national
 carriers, have not allowed foreign equity partners from enjoying majority shares of the equity and the management
 control remains with the respective governments. Even the United States, the pioneer in the field of 
privatisation, does
 not permit foreign airlines to hold more than 20 per cent equity and voting in the US carriers.   It is, therefore, evident that other
 countries in the world have kept management control in their hands even after disinvestment. 
13.        In reply, the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that the aviation industry is a growing sector and it is
 changing very fast.  In such a climate, one should have large airlines.   In the present scenario, they require expertise
 and management of international level.  To make Air India a top class airline, the skills of a professional who can make

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
 a turn around are required.  As per the Company Law, 26 per cent equity will give the foreign partner total management
 control.  The offer of 26 per cent equity will instill confidence among the foreign strategic partners.  Also they will be
 able to gauge the intention of the Government not only to have money, but money with more sovereign rights.  He also
 submitted that with a meager amount of Rs.30,000/- to Rs.40,000/-, it is not possible to engage the services of
 professional managers who can turn around the fortunes of Air India.
14.        The Committee also asked the Managing Director, Air India, to offer his viewpoint on the proposed
 disinvestment of Air India.  While offering no comments on the aspect of disinvestment, he observed that aviation
 industry is a dynamic industry, which is growing, but Air India has not been growing.  Instead Air India’s capacity
 share, frequency and the profitability have gone down.  He further stated that in order to expand the fleet of Air India,
 to upgrade its assets and for growth of the airlines, infusion of funds was required.  The management of Air India has
 also impressed upon the Government in this regard but the funds have not come for the last one and a half years and
 now it seems that disinvestment was the only alternative.
15.        Also, the Disinvestment Commission has recommended for infusion of Government equity of Rs.1000 crores. 
 The Committee has been informed that Air India would have been happy even with Rs.750 crores.  Air India has
 claimed that with an infusion of the said amount, they could have retained the working capital and shown better results. 
 They could have changed the debt-equity ratio and changed their net worth.  Infusion of funds would have helped them
 grow and upgrade their operational facilities and service.   The Committee was informed that during 1998-99 the
 company’s actual losses were to the tune of Rs.174.48 crores, during 1999-2000, the estimated losses were Rs.146.18
 crores and the projected loss during 2000-2001 are likely to be    Rs.92.13 crores.  Air India would have been able to
 report a profit last year had there not been an unprecedented increase of 75 per cent in the cost of air turbine fuel. 
16.        The Committee desired to know whether there was any Civil Aviation Policy under which the disinvestment of
 Air India was being undertaken.  The Committee was informed that the Ministry did not have as yet an Aviation Policy
 approved by the Cabinet.  The stated position of the Government on aviation has been taken into account.  The decision
 on disinvestment is basically a decision taken by the Government to further develop a particular sector.  The Committee
 was further informed that a draft Aviation Policy has been prepared containing chapters on safety, domestic travel,
 foreign travel, define environment, will have a regulatory apparatus and that, having been approved by the Cabinet, the
 Aviation Policy will come out in a short span of time. 
17.        The Committee expresses its anguish at the Government’s failure to take any steps for restructuring of Air India
 or to arrest the decline in the fortunes of Air India.  Firstly, the Government did not make any efforts to obtain the
 report from the Kelkar Committee, which had been constituted to look into the restructuring of Air India.  Thereafter,
 the Government did not agree to provide equity of Rs.1000 crores, as recommended by the Disinvestment
 Commission.  Even Rs.750 crores, as required by Air India to make a turn around, have not been provided.   The
 Government has been virtually ignoring the assets of Air India built over a period of nearly 50 years.  Without taking
 any concrete and effective steps for the revival of Air India, the Government has straightaway decided to go in for
 disinvestment of Air India.  Air India had been a profit making undertaking for quite a long period.  The Committee
 feels that the Government’s decision to go in for disinvestment of Air India might have affected the morale of the
 employees and management of Air India which led to the deterioration in the functioning of Air India. 
18.        The Committee also strongly disapproves the idea of the Government to offer 26 per cent equity and the
 management control of Air India to the foreign strategic partner.   At no time did the Government take any step to
 engage the services of efficient managers of international repute who could have been hired for a limited period to train
 and assist the Indians in management and transfer of technology, transplantation system, procedures and technology.  
 The Government is now prepared to hand over management control to the foreign partner but it gave no free hand to
 the Indian managers of Air India.  The Committee pointed out that Air India has been for quite a long time without a
 full time regular Chairman and it is evident from the fact that even now the Secretary (Civil Aviation) has been acting
 as Chairman, Air India.  The Committee strongly disapproves the idea of the Government to resort to disinvestment on
 the plea to bring private management expertise.  On the one hand, the Government has been assigning additional charge
 to the Additional Secretary/Joint Secretaries in the Ministry of Civil Aviation for years together to head the PSUs, and
 on the other hand, it is going to sell the Undertakings in order to bring professional management.   Even while going in
 for disinvestment, the Government forgot to include JS(FA), Ministry of Civil Aviation in the Inter Ministerial Group

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
 which shows a lackadaisical approach of the Government to the PSU.
19.        The Committee fails to understand as to why the Government is permitting, at one go, the foreign strategic
 partner to acquire 26 per cent equity and the management control whereas even countries like the United States, China,
 Taiwan, Australia, Canada etc, which have earned a big name as the champions of liberalisation and privatisation, are not
 allowing total management control to the foreign partners.  A chart showing the percentage of Government and private
 holding in international air carriers, including private airline stakes where applicable in the equity, is annexed with this
 report as Annexure.  The Committee fears that with only 14 per cent share, the Indian partner may not withstand the
 pressures of the foreign partner with 26 per cent equity and may be influenced by the foreign partner.  Thus, the foreign
 partner will be able to effectively control the Indian partner and through it the entire Air India. The Chicago Convention
 puts on sovereign nations certain obligations.   One of such obligations is that an airline must be “substantially owned
 and effectively controlled” by the nationals of that country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to
 protect the sovereign rights of the country, the Government should reconsider the proposal regarding allowing 26 per
 cent of the equity to the foreign partner and restrict the same to 25 per cent so that the de-facto control of the
 management of Air India remains with Indian nationals.
20.        The Committee is surprised that there is no linkage between the proposed Aviation Policy and Disinvestment of
 Air India.  The Committee notes with concern that on the one hand the Government is in the process of having a new
 Aviation Policy and on the other hand, the Government is taking steps and implementing certain decision, which will
 have repercussions on the aviation sector in the long run.  The Committee fails to understand as to why the Government
 was carrying out the two activities simultaneously and why the Government is rushing for disinvestment and does not
 have the patience to wait till the Aviation Policy of the government is 
finalised.   The Committee feels that disinvestment is
 a major decision and it should not be carried out in haste.  The Government should have first come out with the Aviation Policy
 and thereafter, in the light of the policy on the subject, a decision on the Disinvestment could have been taken. 
21.        The Committee also discussed as to what would be the position of the Government vis-à-vis Air India when
 there is a situation like war, natural calamity, emergency etc.   The Committee was also concerned about the security
 aspects of the VVIP movements, the Haj operations etc.  The Committee wanted to know how the Government would
 ensure the synchronization of the national/social objectives of the Government/Air India as a national carrier vis-à-vis
 the commercial objectives of management of Air India after the proposed disinvestment.  The Committee was informed
 that these issues would be addressed in the Aviation Policy.  The Committee was assured that the Aviation Policy will
 be having overriding powers in cases of natural calamity/war/emergencies/in meeting social obligations etc. and that in
 such situations, the Government of India will take over regardless of who manages the Air India.  The Committee does
 not agree with the contention of the Ministry that these issues will be addressed in the Aviation Policy, which in itself is
 yet to be 
finalised.  The Committee feels that since the disinvestment process has already begun, all these issues should be
 sorted out before the disinvestment takes place.   It would be possible only when the management control of Air India remains
 in the hands of the Government/Indian nationals.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must keep in
 mind the national interests and that, while going in for disinvestment, the sovereign rights of the country, with regard to the
 safety and security of the country, must be protected. 
22.        The Committee also pointed out that the Background Note, submitted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, does
 not provide any information as to how the interests of the employees of Air India will be safeguarded.  The Committee
 understands that Air India has a fleet size of 26 aircrafts and it employs a workforce of 17836 people, implying 686
 employees per aircraft, which seems to be on the higher side.  The Committee is also aware that Air India is planning to
 cut down its employee strength through lucrative retirement schemes, roll back of retirement age from 60 to 58 years,
 freezing fresh employment etc.   The Committee has also been informed that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is in the
 process of acquiring five dry lease aircrafts for Air India by April 2001, which will help them to undertake additional
 routes.
23.        The Committee is not sure as to whether the interests of the so called additional manpower will be protected in
 Air India with the advent of a new management which will be guided by commercial objectives.  The Committee
 recommends that the Government should acquire the new aircrafts at the earliest and the additional manpower in Air
 India could be accommodated in the maintenance/operation of these aircrafts.  The Committee hopes that keeping in
 mind the interests of its employees and their families, the Government of India should include a clause in their
 agreement with the new management of Air India that there would be no retrenchment of employees in Air India and

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
 that the new management of Air India would abide by the commitments made earlier by the Government of India.  The
 Committee also hopes that the new management in Air India will not scuttle the Government’s decision on induction of
 new aircrafts in Air India’s fleet.
24.        The Committee was apprised by the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, that the process of disinvestment in
 Air India would be completed within one year.  The Committee then pointed out that in the Union Budget for 2000-
2001, the Government has planned to collect Rs.10,000 crores from the disinvestment process by 31st March 2000.  The
 Government has now, therefore, decided to go in for disinvestment of Air India and that that is the only reason why the
 Government is in a hurry to carry out the disinvestment of Air India.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that it is
 likely to give the prospective strategic partners the impression that it is a sale in distress.  There are certain recent press
 reports that the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) has decided to solicit Expression of Interest (EoI) from potential bidders
 for equity stake in Air India through an advertisement in the first fortnight of August 2000.  However, the basis on
 which the bidders would like to express interest is not yet known.  The Committee was then informed that we have got
 a large share in the international market with the Indian Airlines holding 11 per cent and Air India holding 19 per cent
 of the traffic.  The total share can be easily enhanced to 50-55 per cent.  However, The Committee feels that the present
 scenario of projecting disinvestment in Air India paints a grim picture of the marketability of the airline.  Keeping in
 view the airline’s past performance and future potential, no fair valuation of the assets of the airline has been made.  
 There are reports that Air India’s asset value is Rs.24,000 crores including routes available by virtue of its bilateral
 agreements.  Air India has over 55 bilateral agreements.  However, the airline is able to 
utilise only 37 per cent of it
 because it has no aircrafts to operate on other routes.  There are a lot of unutilised rights on lucrative routes such as India-
Singapore, India-Germany (Frankfurt), India-Australia and the Gulf Sector.  The Government should also allow more
 and more international flights to India, even if on a temporary basis, so as to give the foreign strategic partner a better
 picture of marketing potential of aviation sector in India.   Air India’s hidden value is far more than what appears on the
 surface and unless a brighter vision is presented to the prospective bidders of Air India, Disinvestment process of Air
 India may not yield much.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must take steps to highlight
 the positive aspects of Air India in order to make the potential strategic partners to come up with lucrative offers.
25.        Finally, the disinvestment of Air India should not appear to be desperate and a distress sale.  Proper guidelines
 should be formulated and announced framing the parameters for the Global Advisor.  
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
The Committee expresses its anguish at the Government’s failure to take any steps for restructuring of Air India or to
 arrest the decline in the fortunes of Air India.  Firstly, the Government did not make any efforts to obtain the report
 from the Kelkar Committee, which had been constituted to look into the restructuring of Air India.  Thereafter, the
 Government did not agree to provide equity of Rs.1000 crores, as recommended by the Disinvestment Commission. 
 Even Rs.750 crores, as required by Air India to make a turn around, have not been provided.   The Government has
 been virtually ignoring the assets of Air India built over a period of nearly 50 years.  Without taking any concrete and
 effective steps for the revival of Air India, the Government has straightaway decided to go in for disinvestment of Air
 India.  Air India had been a profit making undertaking for quite a long period.  The Committee feels that the
 Government’s decision to go in for disinvestment of Air India might have affected the morale of the employees and
 management of Air India which led to the deterioration in the functioning of Air India.  (Para 17)
The Committee also strongly disapproves the idea of the Government to offer 26 per cent equity and the management
 control of Air India to the foreign strategic partner.  At no time did the Government take any step to engage the services
 of efficient managers of international repute who could have been hired for a limited period to train and assist the
 Indians in management and transfer of technology, transplantation system, procedures and technology.   The
 Government is now prepared to hand over management control to the foreign partner but it gave no free hand to the
 Indian managers of Air India.  The Committee pointed out that Air India has been for quite a long time without a full
 time regular Chairman and it is evident from the fact that even now the Secretary (Civil Aviation) has been acting as
 Chairman, Air India.  The Committee strongly disapproves the idea of the Government to resort to disinvestment on the
 plea to bring private management expertise.  On the one hand, the Government has been assigning additional charge to
 the Additional Secretary/Joint Secretaries in the Ministry of Civil Aviation for years together to head the PSUs, and on
 the other hand, it is going to sell the Undertakings in order to bring professional management.   Even while going in for

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
 disinvestment, the Government forgot to include JS(FA), Ministry of Civil Aviation in the Inter Ministerial Group
 which shows a lackadaisical approach of the Government to the PSU.(Para 18)
The Committee fails to understand as to why the Government is permitting, at one go, the foreign strategic partner to
 acquire 26 per cent equity and the management control whereas even countries like the United States, China, Taiwan,
 Australia, Canada etc, which have earned a big name as the champions of liberalisation and privatisation , are not
 allowing total management control to the foreign partners.  A chart showing the percentage of Government and private
 holding in international air carriers, including private airline stakes where applicable in the equity, is annexed with this
 report as Annexure.  The Committee fears that with only 14 per cent share, the Indian partner may not withstand the
 pressures of the foreign partner with 26 per cent equity and may be influenced by the foreign partner.  Thus, the foreign
 partner will be able to effectively control the Indian partner and through it the entire Air India. The Chicago Convention
 puts on sovereign nations certain obligations.  One of such obligations is that an airline must be “substantially owned
 and effectively controlled” by the nationals of that country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to
 protect the sovereign rights of the country, the Government should reconsider the proposal regarding allowing 26 per
 cent of the equity to the foreign partner and restrict the same to 25 per cent so that the de-facto control of the
 management of Air India remains with Indian nationals.(Para 19) 
The Committee is surprised that there is no linkage between the proposed Aviation Policy and Disinvestment of Air
 India.  The Committee notes with concern that on the one hand the Government is in the process of having a new
 Aviation Policy and on the other hand, the Government is taking steps and implementing certain decision, which will
 have repercussions on the aviation sector in the long run.  The Committee fails to understand as to why the Government
 was carrying out the two activities simultaneously and why the Government is rushing for disinvestment and does not
 have the patience to wait till the Aviation Policy of the government is 
finalised.   The Committee feels that disinvestment is
 a major decision and it should not be carried out in haste.  The Government should have first come out with the Aviation Policy
 and thereafter, in the light of the policy on the subject, a decision on the Disinvestment could have been taken.(Para 20)
The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Ministry that these issues will be addressed in the Aviation
 Policy, which in itself is yet to be finalised.  The Committee feels that since the disinvestment process has already begun, all
 these issues should be sorted out before the disinvestment takes place.  It would be possible only when the management control
 of Air India remains in the hands of the Government/Indian nationals.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
 Government must keep in mind the national interests and that, while going in for disinvestment, the sovereign rights of the
 country, with regard to the safety and security of the country, must be protected.(Para 21)
The Committee is not sure as to whether the interests of the so called additional manpower will be protected in Air India
 with the advent of a new management which will be guided by commercial objectives.    The Committee recommends
 that the Government should acquire the new aircrafts at the earliest and the additional manpower in Air India could be
 accommodated in the maintenance/operation of these aircrafts.  The Committee hopes that keeping in mind the interests
 of its employees and their families, the Government of India should include a clause in their agreement with the new
 management of Air India that there would be no retrenchment of employees in Air India and that the new management
 of Air India would abide by the commitments made earlier by the Government of India.  The Committee also hopes
 that the new management in Air India will not scuttle the Government’s decision on induction of new aircrafts in Air
 India’s fleet.(Para 23)
The Committee is, therefore, of the view that it is likely to give the prospective strategic partners the impression that it is
 a sale in distress.  There are certain recent press reports that the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) has decided to solicit
 Expression of Interest (EoI) from potential bidders for equity stake in Air India through an advertisement in the first
 fortnight of August 2000.  However, the basis on which the bidders would like to express interest is not yet known. 
 The Committee was then informed that we have got a large share in the international market with the Indian Airlines
 holding 11 per cent and Air India holding 19 per cent of the traffic.  The total share can be easily enhanced to 50-55 per
 cent.  However, The Committee feels that the present scenario of projecting disinvestment in Air India paints a grim
 picture of the marketability of the airline.  Keeping in view the airline’s past performance and future potential, no fair
 valuation of the assets of the airline has been made.   There are reports that Air India’s asset value is Rs.24,000 crores
 including routes available by virtue of its bilateral agreements.  Air India has over 55 bilateral agreements.  However,
 the airline is able to 
utilise only 37 per cent of it because it has no aircrafts to operate on other routes.  There are a lot of
 unutilised rights on lucrative routes such as India-Singapore, India-Germany (Frankfurt), India-Australia and the Gulf

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
AIRLINE NATIONAL
 GOVT.
FOREIGN
 AIRLINE
EMPLOYEES OTHERS TOTAL
Aeroflot 51 - 49 - 100
Aerolines
 Argentinas
5 - 10 85 100
Air Canada - - - 100 100
Air France 62 - - 38 100
Air Mauritius 90.82    BA
   AF  9.18  AI
- - 100
Air New Zealand -   SIA  25 - 75 100
Alitalia 53 - 20 27 100
ANA - - - 100 100
American
 Airlines
- - - 100 100
Ansett Australia - NZ  100 - - 100
Asiana - - - 100 100
Austrian 39.7 SR  11.5   AF 30 18.8 100
British Airways - - - 100 100
British Midland -    LH  40   SR - 60 100
Cathay Pacific - - - 100 100
Continental - - - 100 100
Delta - SR  4.6 - 95.4 100
Egypt Air 100 - - - 100
EI AI 100 - - - 100
Emirates 100 - - - 100
Ethiopian 100 - - - 100
Gulf Air 100(By 4 Govt.) - - - 100
 Sector.  The Government should also allow more and more international flights to India, even if on a temporary basis,
 so as to give the foreign strategic partner a better picture of marketing potential of aviation sector in India.   Air India’s
 hidden value is far more than what appears on the surface and unless a brighter vision is presented to the prospective
 bidders of Air India, Disinvestment process of Air India may not yield much.   The Committee, therefore, recommends
 that the Government must take steps to highlight the positive aspects of Air India in order to make the potential
 strategic partners to come up with lucrative offers. (Para 24)
Finally, the disinvestment of Air India should not appear to be desperate and a distress sale.  Proper guidelines should be
 formulated and announced framing the parameters for the Global Advisor.(Para 25) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
AIRLINE NATIONAL
 GOVT.
FOREIGN
 AIRLINE
EMPLOYEES OTHERS TOTAL
Lberia 54 BA  10
    AF
- 36 100
Japan Airlines - - - 100 100
Kenya Airways 23 KL  26 3 48 100
KLM 14 - - 86 100
Korean Air - - - 100 100
Kuwait
 Airways
100 - - - 100
LOT 62.4 SR  37.6 - - 100
Lufthansa - - 5 95 100
Malaysia
 Airlines
- - - 100 100
Northwest - - 27 73 100
Oman Air 33.8 - - 66.2 100
Pakistan Int’l 56 - - 44 100
Qantas - BA 25 - 75 100
Qatar Airways - - - 100 100
Royal Brunei
 Airlines
100 - - - 100
Royal
 Jordanian
100 - - - 100
Sabena 15 SR 85 - - 100
SAS 50(3 Govt.) - - 50 100
Saudia 100 - - - 100
Singapore
 Airlines
53 - - 47 100
South African 80 SR 20 - - 100
Sri Lankan 51 EK 40* 9 - 100
Swissair 35 - - 65 100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
CHART SHOWING THE PERCENTAGE OF GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE HOLDING IN INTERNATIONAL
 AIR CARRIERS 
PERCENTAGE OF EQUITY HELD BY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT ON
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/44threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:49:07]
Syrian Arab 100 - - - 100
TAP Air
 Portugal
66 SR 34 - - 100
TAROM - - - 100 100
Thai Airways
 Int’l
93 - - 7 100
United - - 50 50 100
Virgin Atlantic - SQ 49 - 51 100
 
 
 
*Presently 25.99%-
 to be increased to
 40% over two year
 period.
 Source:   Alliance Survey 2000 Published in July 2000 issue of Airline Business.
 Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
                                            E-Mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in     