 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
330
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fifteenth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Culture 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fifteenth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Culture 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-30 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   31-33 
6. ANNEXURE        34-42 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
43-45

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Thirtieth Report on the Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations/ observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fifteenth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Culture. 
2. The Three Hundred  Fifteenth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  14th March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 13th June, 
2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th 
November, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
November 25, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 4, 1944 (Saka)                              Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AD Anno Domini 
AKAM Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav 
AMASR Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BE Budget Estimates 
BHS Built Heritage and Sites 
BTI Buddhist Tibetan Institutions 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CFPG Cultural Function and Production Grant 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committees 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EZCC Eastern Zonal Cultural Centre 
FIR First Information Report 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
HBL Heritage Bye-Laws 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
IGRMS Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya 
IIH Indian Institute of Heritage 
KSVY Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojna 
LDC Lower Division Clerk 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MTS Multi-Tasking Staff 
NAI National Archives of India 
NCSM National Council of Science Museums 
NCZCC North-Central Zone Cultural Centre 
NER North-Eastern Region 
NFDC National Film Development Corporation 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NMA National Monuments Authority 
NMMA National Mission of Monument & Antiquities 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NSD National School of Drama 
NSS National Service Scheme 
NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
PAO Pay and Account Office 
PM Prime Minister 
RE Revised Estimate 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RR Recruitment Rule 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
TLF Tribal Literature Festival 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
ZCC Zonal Cultural Centre 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on 
the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fifteenth Report on  
„Demands for Grants (202 2-23) of Ministry of Culture‟ which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 14th March, 2022.   
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 13th June, 202 2 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommen dations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 18, 20, 21, 25, 27, 50, 61, 63, 66, 70, 75, 82, 88 
Total: 14 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 12, 16, 22, 28, 33, 45, 52, 53, 55, 60, 69, 74, 76, 78, 80, 84, 86, 
89, 90 
Total: 20 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 9, 15, 17, 31, 35, 36, 37, 44, 57, 65, 71 
Total: 11 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
Total: Nil 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make concerted efforts to 
achieve the optimum utilization of the allowed expenditure. 
(Para 7) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 It has always been the Ministries earnest endeavor to optimally utilize allocated 
budget. Even though the expenditure was comparatively at a slower pace in the first two 
quarters, spending had picked up in the second half of the financial year 2021 -22. An 
expenditure of 95.10% over approved outlay was booked in the preceding financial year. The 
Ministry will continue its efforts to maintain an optimum utilization of the approved budget.   
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.  In it s Two Hundred Eighty Ninth (289 th) Report, the Committee recommended that 
ASI  should develop a smart phone application for the benefit of users to know about the 
monuments. The Committee reiterates its recommendations contained in the 289th Report and 
would like to know the status of implementation of the said recommendation. 
(Para 18) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 The beta version of the Heritage Atlas mobile application has already been launched 
by ASI for internal circulation and verification. Th e data correction is in advance stage and 
likely to be completed by the end of this year, enabling ASI to go ahead for launch of the 
application to the public. 
 
CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES, CELEBRATIONS AND SCHEMES 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is constrained to note that under Centenaries and Anniversaries 
Celebrations Schemes head, an allocation of Rs. 110 crores has been made in BE 2022 - 23, 
which is less than the allocation made in BE 2021 -22 (Rs. 144.64 crores) and RE 2021 -22 of 
Rs. 135.18 crores. The Committee feels that programmes aimed at generating awareness 
among the masses about events, personalities, etc. play a vital role in educating the large 
populace of our country as well as international people. 
(Para 20) 
 
 

3 
 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The Ministry agrees with the Committee's view that the programs planned under 
Centenaries and Anniversaries Celebrations Schemes play a vital role in educating the large 
populace of our country as well as international people on eminent personali ties and events 
of historical importance. The less allocation of budget under the Centenary and Anniversary 
celebration scheme will certainly affect the programmes/activities to be held under various 
approved commemorations including “Azadi Ka Amrit Mahots av”. There are 14 ongoing 
commemorations for the year 2022 -23 besides 630 Programmes/Activities scheduled under 
“Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav” for the year 2022 -23. Hence more funds will be required at RE 
Stage.  
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee finds that with Coronavirus likely to witness an ebb in 2022 -23, more 
and more celebrations of such events need to be organised. The decreased allocation will   
have an adverse impact and will not meet the desired results. The Committee hopes that the 
shortfall in allocation will be met in the RE 2022-23 to make up for any loss on this account. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 The approved outlay of Rs. 110 crores in BE 2022 -23 is far less than the EFC 
approved figure of Rs 390 crore for the scheme Centenary and Anniversary celebration in FY 
2022-23.  Hence, the shortfall in funds will be communicated with the Ministry of Finance at 
RE 2022 -23 stage to avoid any adverse effect on the programmed celebrations during the 
year. 
 
KALA SANSKRITI VIKAS YOJANA 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is pleased to know about the increase in BE 2022-23 to Kala Sanskriti 
Vikas Yojana as compared to BE allocation of 2021 -22 under the head. The increase in 
beneficiaries will help promote various schemes under the  Performing Arts and give a fillip 
to various activities of Arts and Culture in the country. The Committee would, however, like 
to put in a word of caution that both revenue and capital allocation should be utilized 
properly, and targets set should be achieved optimum to the extent possible. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 The advice of the Committee has been noted for necessary action. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yoja na is one of the most important 
schemes of the Ministry. This needs to be given special impetus in view of the size of the 

4 
 
country and the number of artists in the field of performing arts and reach out to the 
artists/performers in small cities and rural areas. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 The advice of the Committee has been noted for necessary action.   
 
 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee observes that main roadblocks in speedy preparation of HBLs are 
lack of qualified staff in the offices of the Regional Directors of ASI, less number of Heritage 
Bodies for heritage consultation and the quantum of fees payable to these notified bodies for 
heritage consultation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that urgent s teps should be 
taken to remove all the bottlenecks being faced in the preparation of HBLs, such as meeting 
the staff requirements of Regional Director Offices of ASI, enlarging the list of notified 
expert heritage bodies and recruitment of Hindi Translator s, in order to prevent further 
damage to invaluable national heritage due to lack of heritage bye-laws. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 ln order to remove the roadblocks for speedy preparation of HBLs, the Ministry has 
taken the following steps: 
 
● Additional number of appropriate agencies/ institutions empaneled for 
preparation and vetting of Heritage bye -laws: The Ministry of Culture in exercise 
of the powers vested under Section 20E(1) of Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 (as amended in 2010), has 
notified an additional 30 (thirty) expert heritage bodies vide Gazette of lndia 
notification dated 09.02.2022, for fast tracking the process of framing of heritage bye -
laws.  
● Preparation of Heritage Bye -Laws: lt has been decided that the draft heritage bye -
laws will henceforth be prepared by these notified heritage bodies and the role of 
Regional Directors of ASI will be of vetting such HBLs and then forwarding them to 
the NMA. The Ministry of Culture is in the process of finalizing a standard Request 
for Proposal (RFP) document to be used by the Regional Directors of ASI for 
obtaining proposals from notified expert heritage bodies in their jurisdiction for 
awarding work of preparation of Heritage bye-laws on least cost method. This revised 
strategy is expected to expedite the process of preparation of HBLs. 
● Regional Directors are to be empowered with sufficient Manpower : Since HBLs 
are now to be prepared by the notified heritage bodies, the estimated costs to be 
incurred for hiring of qualified staff (viz Conservation Architects, Surveyors etc.) in 
the offices of the Regional Directors will decrease since their role is now limited to 
supervising and vetting the draft HBLs. Revised staff requirements for the office of 
Regional Directors are being examined by the Ministry of Culture. 

5 
 
● Creation of posts of in -house Hindi Translators in National Monuments 
Authority: A proposal for creation of one post of in -house Hindi Translator in 
National Monuments Authority for streamlining the work relating lo Hindi translation 
of Heritage byelaws for the purpose of laying them in both houses of Parliament, is 
being examined by the Ministry of Culture in accordance with guidelines of 
Department of Expenditure on the subject. Simultaneously, th e proposal for engaging 
2 (two) consultants for handling the work of Hindi translation of Heritage bye -laws, 
as an interim arrangement, is being considered. 
 
SUPPORT TO ACADEMIES, MUSEUMS, LIBRARIES, BUDDHIST TIBETAN 
INSTITUTIONS AND MEMORIALS 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee hopes and urges the Ministry of Culture to ensure that allocations are 
fully spent and not surrendered at the last moment. 
(Para 61) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 The recommendation is fully complied to in FY 2021 -22 and noted for future 
financial years. 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates that the pension amount needs to be 
reviewed without further delay and it should be made respectable for a person w ho has 
contributed to the society and country in continuing the various art forms. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 The recommendation is noted. The monthly pension has been revised to Rs.6,000/ - 
from Rs.4,000/ - for the Artistes of 60 years of age and above  under the Artist Pension 
Scheme. The order in this regard will be issued soon. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee is not satisfied with the reason advanced by the Ministry and 
recommends that the Ministry should be rather proactive in such difficult circumstances in 
providing financial and medical support to artists who might be struggling for their survival. 
The Ministry should take help from its Zonal Cultural Centers or the bankers of the 
pensioners, besides reaching to the beneficiaries directly for providing them with the 
financial support. 
(Para 66) 

6 
 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 The advice of the Committee has been noted for necessary action. 
 
SCHEME FOR THE AWARD OF SENIOR/JUNIOR FELLOWSHIPS TO 
OUTSTANDING PERSONS IN THE FIELDS OF CULTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. As these fellows are basically full time researchers in the field of art and music, the 
Committee feels that they should be supported by the Ministry in their endeavor to preserve 
and continue our cultural heritage in a bett er and respectable manner. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that in view of the rising inflation, the fellowship amount should also 
be reviewed from Rs. 10,000 and Rs. 20,000 per month, respectively, to Junior and Senior 
fellows, which was fixed a long time back. 
(Para 70) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 The recommendations of the Committee to raise the existing fellowship amount of 
Rs.10,000/- and Rs.20,000/ - in respect of Junior and Senior Fellowship will be taken up 
during the next EFC proposal. 
 
 
CULTURAL FUNCTION AND PRODUCTION GRANT (CFPG) AND REPERTORY 
GRANT 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 64 of this Report that 
since the beneficiaries of this scheme are the people involved in preserving the intangible 
cultural heritage of the country while devoting their life to the art forms and propagating it 
further, they should be honored in a respectable manner. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should review the amount of CFPG and Repertory Gra nt as well as keep 
increasing the number of grantees, so that more and more people in the country, especially 
from rural background, have the opportunity to perform and enrich our culture, while 
earning a respectable livelihood by showcasing their artistic skills. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 The advice of the committee has been noted for necessary action. Further, it has been 
decided to increase the amount of grant payable to Guru & Shishyas from the existing 
Rs.10,000/- p.m. and Rs.6,000/ - p.m to Rs.1 5,000/- p.m. and Rs.10,000/ - p.m. respectively 
under Repertory Grant Scheme. 
 
 
 

7 
 
UTILIZATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED FOR LIBRARIES BY STATE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 42 of its 310 th Report, 
which is as follows: 
'The State Governments may be guided to frame rules/recommendations in the Act in 
a manner that money collected for the purpose is utilized properly and spent only for 
the libraries. It should not go to the other State account s and be used for other 
purposes.' 
(Para 82) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 Instructions have been issued on 13.04.2022  to all State/UT Authorities to take 
necessary action for compliance in respect of para 42 of 310th Report.   
 
 
VISION OF THE MINISTRY FOR INDIA@2047 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee appreciates the long -term vision of the Ministry of Culture to move 
towards a holistic model of cultural governance that goes beyond the Ministry itself. The 
Committee feels that a significant part of  the cultural heritage of the country is intangible, 
and as such, promotion and preservation of the same for years to come can only be made 
possible when the policies of the Ministry work in tandem with the policies of other Central 
Ministries , State Government Departments, Local Bodies, Societies and NGOs, International 
Organizations etc. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry may start working 
on bringing this envisioned holistic model of cultural governance to reality, in a gradual 
manner, since doing so would not only promote and preserve our cultural heritage, but also 
increase the cultural influence of the country and further its tourism prospects as well. 
(Para 88) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Advice of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that the Ministry should identify a core set of priorities so 
that the budgeted allocations are not divided with a very thin spread in numerous areas and 
become less impactful. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to review its 
priorities and concentrate on schemes/programmes which are absolutely essential so tha t 
scarce resources could be optimally utilized for achieving the desired results in focused 
areas. 
(Para 11) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 While formulating the budget for the Ministry all programme divisions are requested 
to intimate the programme/activities which are absolutely essential so that appropriate 
provisions could be made accordingly in the budget for those activities. The priorit ies of the 
program and activities are finalized after due consultations with the organizations / 
institutions by the Programme Divisions handling various schemes of the Ministry. The 
autonomous Bodies of the Ministry also signs MOU for activities to be und ertaken during a 
year. Generally in all large scale events, the Ministry ensures that there is participation from 
all Autonomous Bodies to have a meaningful impact on society. Further in order to utilize 
the allotted budget optimally, each organization kee ps reviewing their priorities and 
accordingly concentrates on the scheme / programmes / activities.  
 
Actual expenditure in 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that the allocation of Rs 2687.99 crore in B.E. 2021 -22 got 
slightly decreased in R.E. 2021 -22 to Rs 2665.00 crore, the actual expenditure reported till 
31.1.22 is Rs 1842.05 crore, i.e., only 70% of the RE allocation. The Committee desires to 
know the reasons for this slow pace of utilisation. The Committee hopes that the ba lance 
30% of allocated funds would be fully spent in the balance 2 months of FY 21 -22. The 
Ministry should take steps to spread the expenses more evenly in future and avoid rush of 
expenditure in the last quarter. 
(Para 12) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 The average annual expenditure of the Ministry hovers around 95% of the RE every 
year. During 2021-22 also the overall expenditure of the Ministry has been Rs. 2556.39 crore 
against the RE 2665.00 crore i.e. 95.92% of the RE 2021 -22. The slow pace of expenditure 

9 
 
till 31.01.2021 was mainly attributed to the effect of the second wave of Covid -19 due to 
which the various cultural activities which were slated for first two quarters were either 
abandoned or were deferred resulting in the deferred and low expenditure. In a ddition, the 
regular pattern of the Ministry is such that the pace of expenditure accelerates after the 
monsoon season as the various field activities of the ASI which could not be undertaken in 
the first two quarters are taken up during third and fourth quarter of the year. Thus an uneven 
expenditure pattern is observed year on year as a result of ASI being a large entity of the 
Ministry.  However, all possible steps would be taken to expedite the spending as per the 
quarterly expenditure plan set for the ministry. The Committee's observation in this regard is 
noted for compliance. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that in the wake of the Coronavirus pandemic, ASI monuments 
and sites received lesser footfall in 2019 -20 and 2020 -21. The Committee would like to 
observe that as the spread of Corona Virus is likely to see a decrease in 2022 -23, ASI should 
chalk out plans for accelerating ongoing programmes for conservation and preservation of 
monuments. The Commit tee hopes that 2022 -23 augurs well for ASI and also the tourists 
visiting the monuments. The Committee hopes that more and more tourists are likely to visit 
monuments and this would help in generating more revenue during this year and tourists 
with logistic support are facilitated. 
 
(Para 16) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 An amount of Rs 370 Crores in ASI B.E. 2022 -23 is allocated to ASI in HoA 
2205.00.106 14.01.27 Minor Works (Conservation). The budget has been sub -allocated to 
Circles and instructions have been g iven to all subordinate offices and Regional Directors to 
expedite approval of both Estimates and tendering pertaining to Annual Maintenance and 
Upkeep of Monuments. In addition, ASI is planning to undertake works for provision of 
additional public amenities, horticultural aspects and other development work as per specific 
need/ requirement of a particular Monument with a view to have better visual presentation 
and provide memorable experience to tourists and visitors.  
 
CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES, CELEBRATIONS AND SCHEMES 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Ministry has stated that under Centenaries and Anniversaries, Celebrations and 
Schemes, there is provision for celebration of the 150 th birth anniversary of Mahatma 
Gandhi. The Committee would like  to know the schedule of celebration of such an important 
event. 
(Para 22) 

10 
 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 The 150th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi was celebrated during 2 nd October, 
2019- 2nd October, 2020. Glimpses of some activities/ events  during the anniversary are as 
below;  
● Videos of 'Vaishnav Jan' sung by artists from 124 countries made. 
● An anthology  'what Gandhi means to us' comprising 134 articles of famous persons 
from 124 countries compiled and released by PM on 19.12.2019. 
● 108 Gandhi Katha organised in 32 countries. Gandhi themed art exhibition was 
organised at Venice Biennale from May-Nov 2019 where 1.93 lakh people visited. 
● Vegetarian food festivals organised in 87 countries. Mot or car rally for peace 
organised through 3 countries - India, Bangladesh and Myanmar. 
● 30675 pr ogrammes on cleanliness, sanitation and hygiene with 460367 youths and 
81294 health camps organised. 
● 21502 activities by NYKS districts organised. 
● NSS activities with more than 1 lakh youth from 3147 schools, 5630 colleges and 278 
universities organised. 
● Museum for digital exhibitions being steup by Vigyan Prasar and NCSM at 16 places. 
● Gandhi play organized at 17 locations by Rajchandra Mission, Dharampur, Gujarat. 
● Gandhi padyatra under taken in various parts of country. 
● Digital Dome set up at Gandhi Darshan for showing film on Gandhi ji. 
● Gandhi Pavilion setup at Milan, Italy for exhibition on Mahatma Gandhi. 
● Documentary film made by NFDC.  
● Gandhipedia project is still under implementation. Project of Digital Exhibitions at 17 
locations completed. Gandhi play organized  in different parts of country. 
● Gandhi padyatra under taken in various parts of country. 
● Digital Dome set up at Gandhi Darshan for showing film on Gandhi Ji. Gandhi 
Pavilion setup at Milan, Italy for exhibition on Mahatma Gandhi.  
 
KALA SANSKRITI VIKAS YOJANA 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should give more attention to this 
Yojana and provide more budgetary support to it. This can help in achieving the objectives of 
the Yojana like organizing more cultural festivals, creation of better cultural infrastructure, 
providing more scholarships and fellowships  for artists and financial assistance to 
society/NGOs and Trusts for promotion of art and culture. 
(Para 28) 

11 
 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 Budgetary provisions among the schemes are made in accordance to the proposals 
received for undertaking activities / programm es within the various schemes  of KSVY. 
However, the Ministry would aspire to restore the budget allocation to the EFC approved 
outlay of Rs. 215 crore at RE stage and also to accelerate the expenditure to achieve the 
objectives of the scheme to the maximal.   
 
 
LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee finds that budget allocation under development of Libraries and 
Archives has been increased from Rs. 100.07 crores in BE 2021 -22 to Rs. 127.76 crores in 
BE 2022 -23. While the Committee appreciates the near 28 percent increase in allocation 
under this head, it feels that the allocation is not sufficient and needs to be enhanced 
comprehensively, considering the importance of Libraries Sector in disseminating 
information and the v ast scope that lies in developing it rapidly. Facility of Libraries needs 
to be expanded to the village level to educate the masses. Therefore, every village needs to be 
facilitated with Library facilities for generations to reap its benefits from year to year. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that more funds should be allocated to promote this 
sector. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 This sector comprises of the organizations i.e. National Archives of India, National 
Library, and Central Reference Library of the Ministry. While National Archives of India is 
an attached office, the other two are subordinate offices of the Ministry. Though the provision 
of funds was augmented to Rs. 112.01 crore at RE stage of 2021 -22, the expenditure of Rs. 
95.52 crore could only be utilized during the year. Hence, it may be noted that fund provision 
for 2022 -23 has already been enhanced substantially. However, the extra fund demand, if 
any, for the envisioned activities by these organizations would be met by the Mini stry on 
requisition basis from these organizations.    
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee is pleased to note that ASI has created a new North Eastern Region 
Division and that a Joint Director General has been posted there. This was long overdue 
given the rich and varied heritage of the region and would certainly add fresh impetus to the 
conservation and development of archaeological sites and monuments in the region. It 
recommends that the Ministry and ASI may ensure that th e North Eastern Region is not 
neglected in terms of budgetary allocation for preservation and development of tangible 
heritage in the region. The Committee desired to be apprised about the sites/monuments in 
the North Eastern Region that are being considered for inclusion under the list of monuments 
under the protection of ASI. 
(Para 45) 

12 
 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 There are total 19 numbers of monuments/ sites pan India identified to be declared as 
of national Importance i.e. being considered for protection proposal. Out of these 19, 
following three monuments are in North Eastern Region:- 
 
a) Ancient Menhirs and settlement, Dungtlong  Mizoram 
b) Ancient Menhirs and rock engraving at Farkawn, Mizoram 
c) Ancient Menhirs at Lungphunlian, Mizoram 
 
7.2 Recommendations are noted for compliance. 
 
 
GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee observes that out of total allocation of Rs. 10.50 crores in R.E. 2021 -
22 actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 5.76 crores which works out to  a little more than 
50% only. The Committee further finds that out of the total allocation of Rs. 13.57 crore 
made in BE 2022 -23 for the head ‘Global Engagement and International Cooperation’, an 
allocation of Rs. 11.38 crores has been made for the Scheme for Promotion of  International 
Cultural Relations, Rs. 69 lakhs for Project Mausam and Rs. 1.5 crores for contribution to 
international organizations. The Committee recommends that maximum utilization of funds 
should be achieved for cultural festivals to be held abroad in order to promote and 
strengthen Indian culture abroad by sanctioning grant -in-aid to Indo -foreign friendship 
cultural societies for achieving the desired results. 
(Para 52) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 It is kindly brought to the notice of the committee that the actual expenditure incurred 
under GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION Scheme as 
on date is Rs 7.85 crore out of the RE allocation of Rs 10.50 crore. Majority of the allocation 
under this scheme is spent through authorizations issued by PAO, M/o Culture to the PAO, 
M/o External Affairs. Since authorisation has been issued for the total amount allocated 
thereof final expenditure figures are further plausible to changes due to delays in updation of 
authorized figures. It is assure d that the Ministry spares no efforts or opportunity when it 
comes to promoting and strengthening Indian culture abroad through Indo -foreign friendship 
cultural society. The committee's recommendation in this regard is well taken for further 
compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes that as against the BE 2021 -22 allocation of Rs 9.90 crores, the 
RE allocation has been increased to Rs. 10.50 crores in RE 21-22. But the actual expenditure 
till 31.01.2022 is only Rs 5.11 crores, i.e., less than 50%. The Committee des ires to be 

13 
 
apprised of the reasons for less than 50% utilization under this head and the basis on which 
the budget allocation is being increased. The Committee also requests that the Ministry 
should also ensure that the balance 50% of funds are spent fully . The Ministry also must 
ensure that in future, funds are spent evenly throughout the year. 
(Para 53) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 As intimated in the previous para, the expenditure involved in the Global Engagement 
Scheme is done through authorization by PAO, M/o Culture to the PAO, M/o External 
Affairs. Subsequently MEA authorizes Indian Missions abroad to release the funds to Indo 
Foreign Friendship Cultural Societies.  Hence, actual expenditure through authorization is a 
time taking process thereby leading to a slow pace of actual realization of expenditure. At 
present 75% of the allocation is reported to be utilized and this figure  is possible to increase 
further as allocated funds under Grant in aid have been fully authorized in the last FY. 
Recommendation for full and even utilization of funds are noted for compliance.  
 
 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR PRESERVATION OF MANUSCRIPTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes that Rs. 3.28 crores was allocated in B.E. 2021 -22 but it is 
surprised to note that there is no allocation in R.E. 2021-22 and BE 2022-23. The Committee 
fails to understand the reasons for the same. The Co mmittee recommends that proper 
allocation be made in future for such an important area so that a national resource base for 
manuscripts can be preserved and created. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 National Mission for Preservation of Manuscript being a separate entity was allocated 
the funds at BE 2021-22 stage. However, now it has been decided that Mission‟s activities be 
merged with Indira Gandhi National Center for Arts (IGNCA) and thus the funds for the 
mission is combined with IGNCA budgetary allocation in RE 2021-22 & BE 2022-23.  
 
 
SUPPORT TO ACADEMIES, MUSEUMS, LIBRARIES, BUDDHIST TIBETAN 
INSTITUTIONS AND MEMORIALS 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes that the BE 2022 -23 allocation to these Akademies, Museums, 
Libraries, BTI and Memorials is more or less the same as in BE 21 -22 with slight increase/ 
slight decrease. But the actual expenditure in 21 -22 till 31.1.22 in respect of Akademies, 
Libraries and BTI Memorials is quite low as compared to BE allocation. It  is especially very 
low in case of Akademies while the RE allocation for 2021 -22 is Rs. 8 crores higher than BE 
allocation, the actual expenditure is only Rs. 239.45 (till 31.1.22) i.e. only 68.5% of the RE 
allocation. The Committee notes that even when the actual  expenditure in these and some 
other cases are low, the allocations have been increased significantly in RE. 

14 
 
(Para 60) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 The RE 2021 -22 for Akademies, Museums, Libraries, BTI and Memorials was 
Rs.865.32 crore in comparison to Rs 862.63 crore in B E for FY 2021 -22. The overall 
expenditure for the Autonomous Bodies was Rs. 884.88 crore i.e. 102% of the BE 2021 -22 
by the end of the year. The excess expenditure over and above BE was augmented through 
supplementary grants obtained for the organizations.  
11.2 Due to availability of Unspent balance of FY 2020 -21 expenditure in the initial 
quarter of FY 2021 -22 was slow in case of these Autonomous bodies under Support to 
Akademies, Museums, Libraries, BTI and Memorials. However, expenditure pace picked up 
in the second half of the financial year and even requests for excess demand were paced by 
these organizations which was later fulfilled though re -appropriations on approval of 
supplementary grants from parliament. 
 
SCHEME FOR THE AWARD OF SENIOR/JUNIOR FE LLOWSHIPS TO 
OUTSTANDING PERSONS IN THE FIELDS OF CULTURE 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee is shocked to find the inordinate delay in release of payments to the 
junior and senior fellows under the scheme. It is pained to know that despite stro ng 
recommendations made on the subject, the Ministry is not able to release the pending 
fellowships to all the fellows of the scheme in the last one year. 
(Para 69) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1  It is submitted that the Expert Committee Meeting of Senior Junior  Fellowship 
Scheme could not be conducted by CCRT after its last meeting in December -January 2019 
due to various administrative reasons and budgetary constraints. Further, due to the pandemic 
situation in the country, the Meeting could not be conducted in 2020. Later, after due 
consideration of the matter, approval of the Ministry was conveyed for the conduct of the 
Expert Committee Meeting in virtual mode/online mode. The CCRT placed all the project 
reports of batch years before the Expert Committee and fo rwarded the list of approved cases 
for processing the releases to the Ministry. The Ministry has processed the release of due 
installments and it is informed that as on 31.3.2022 (for FY 2021 -22) 996 Jr . /Sr. Fellows 
have been released their pending installments amounting to Rs.16.28 crore. 
 
CULTURAL FUNCTION AND PRODUCTION GRANT (CFPG) AND REPERTORY 
GRANT 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should prepare a mechanism to 
individually intimate about the sanction of the grant to the organizations through their 

15 
 
emails and requirement of any document should also be communicated. A nodal officer 
should be nominated to coordinate with these organizations to resolve any query on 
documentation. 
(Para 74) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 It is submitted that the results of selection of each Meeting of CFPG and Repertory 
Grant are duly uploaded on the website of the Ministry after due approvals. Further, in case 
of any requirement of document  etc., the concerned Sections contact the respective 
organizations by email/telephone etc. to convey the messages and provide desired 
information. The Section Officer of the concerned Section is the designated Officer who 
coordinates and communicates with the Grantees for resolving any query or required 
documents and contact number of Section Officer is also available in the website. Further, 
the concerned nodal Institutions for the Schemes i.e. NSD (for Repertory Grant) and 
NCZCC, Prayagraj (For CFPG) are regularly coordinating with the selected organizations for 
answering their queries and collection of documents through telephone as well as email. 
 
 
INCLUSION OF MONUMENTS IN THE LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED 
MOVEMENTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Com mittee reiterates the recommendation it made in its 289 th Report that 
important historical monuments and sites such as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalem Village, 
Adoni Taluka, Kethavaram Rock arts, and Belum caves in Kurnool be included in the list of 
Centrally Protected Monuments in Consultation with State Governments. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process of identifying the important 
historical sites/monuments for requiring protection on priority, adding to the list of  the 1.84 
lakh Built Heritage and Sites (BHS) that have already been documented by National Mission 
of Monument and Antiquities (NMMA) in the last 15 years. 
(Para 76) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 The issue of protection of (i) Kethavaram Rock Art; (ii) Rama Temple at 
Peddathumbalam; and (iii) Belum Caves in Kurnool were examined by ASI through its field 
Office and found that these three monuments/sites are already declared protected by the State 
Government. Therefore, their Central protection is not required  
 
14.2 Observation with regard to protection of monuments documented by NMMA is  noted 
for further action. 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee further recommends that the list of stolen properties of the 
monuments/historical sites also be prepared and the cases filed in these respects should be 
vigorously pursued, if it has not been filed then the Ministry should take steps to file cases for 
stolen properties and recover them. 
(Para 78) 
Reply of Ministry 
15.1 Archaeological Survey of India is committed towards the protection of monuments, 
sites and antiquities under its jurisdiction. Besides regular watch and ward staff of 
Archaeological Survey of India, Private Security Guards, State Police Armed Guards, and 
Central Industrial Security Force have been deployed as per requirement. Whenever any theft 
of antiquity is reported, FIR is lodged in the concerned police station and „Look Out Notice‟ 
is issued to law enforcing agencies (like CBI, police, etc.) including Custom Exit Channels to 
keep vigil to trace stolen antiquity and prevent its illegal export.  
 
15.2 Theft report from 2010 till 2021 is enclosed in Annexure “A”. 
 
INCLUSION OF MONUMENTS IN THE LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED 
MOVEMENTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter of exploration 
of Ram Setu in the right earnest with priority instead of waiting for the prop osal from the 
National Institute of Oceanography for exploration. The Committee also wants to be updated 
about the progress in the matter as well as the project of ASI on underwater exploration in 
Dwarka. 
(Para 80) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is reviving its Underwater Archaeology Wing 
to undertake systematic onshore and offshore investigations in Indian Waters – the Arabian 
Sea as well as Bay of Bengal. To make it functional and effective, young archaeologists are 
to be t rained in underwater operations. A training programme in this field is starting from 
May 2022. 
 
AZADI KA AMRIT MAHOTSAV 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee appreciates the celebration and commemoration of the 75 years of 
progressive India and its glorious history. The use of low cost initiatives and social media 
with a view to involve one and all is an excellent approach towards this celebration of 

17 
 
AKAM, which will maximize the outreach of the programme among the general public 
without straining the limited budgetary resources available with the Ministry. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure high levels of coordination with other Ministries 
and help them come up with innovative ways to celebrate the AKAM. Efforts may also be 
made to  rope in State Government Departments to ensure even higher outreach of the 
celebrations. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 The Committee‟s recommendations are duly noted for compliance. However, the 
Ministry of Culture being the nodal agency, is ensuring maximum participation from 
Central/State/UT government departments as well as private agencies and people from all 
walks of life across the country.   
 
VISION OF THE MINISTRY FOR INDIA@2047 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee is of the considered view that the Vision 2047 of the Ministry is very 
encouraging, however to achieve those, the Ministry needs to intensify its  efforts from the 
beginning itself. In this direction, the Ministry needs to optimize the utilization of funds and 
plan more proposals with demand for more funds at the RE stage. 
(Para 86) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 The suggestion of the Committee will be taken into consideration while 
finalizing/planning the proposals so that maximum and optimum utilization of funds are 
made and thereby more funds could be demanded from the Ministry of Finance at RE 2022 -
23 stage. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Co-ordination with State Governments 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee reiterates the recommendations made in para 116 of its 289 th Report 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry, which is as follows: 
  
‘The Committee feels that many of the State Governments often do not lo ok after their 
protected monuments. The apathy of the State Governments towards the cultural 
heritage falling under their jurisdiction, sometimes causes irreparable damage to the 
same. The Committee desires the Ministry to look into cases of neglect of his torical 
monuments and sites by the State Governments, take it up with the concerned State 
Department, provide technical assistance to them and if needed, consider taking over 

18 
 
the responsibility of development and upkeep of select State -protected monuments in 
cases of extreme neglect.’ 
(Para 89) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 In this connection, it is intimated that an amount of Rs 3.33 Crore is allotted to ASI in 
B.E. 2022 -23 towards Conservation and Preservation of Unprotected monuments and ASI 
will be making full  efforts for conservation and preservation of historical sites and 
monuments of State Governments as per available resources and capacity of ASI. 
 
 
Conservation of Regional Cultures, Languages, Traditions, Art and Dance forms 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee is concerned to note that although India is home to a plethora of rich 
and distinct regional cultures, languages, traditions, art and dance forms, many of these are 
getting lost under modern influence, without being recorded or preserved. Th e Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take all possible steps to protect and preserve the 
intangible culture, languages, dialects, traditions, art and dance forms of regional/local 
communities and tribes, including those in North -Eastern Areas an d other parts of the 
country, so that the unique richness of these cultures can be passed onto future generations. 
(Para 90) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 Various steps are being taken by the Ministry through its organizations /programmes 
for protection and pres ervation of intangible culture, languages, dialects, traditions, art and 
dance forms of regional/local communities and tribes, including those in North -Eastern Areas 
and other parts of the country as illustrated below; 
20.2 During the last five years (2016 -17 to 2020 -21): Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav 
Sangrahalaya (IGRMS ) has made acquisition of rare and unique exhibits from different 
regions and communities of the country for its open air exhibitions such as (a) Panthong -
Yaam : A traditional house type of Sherdukpen tribe of Arunachal Pradesh (April, 2016), (b) 
Kholi: A traditional house type of Rajput community from Uttarakhand (September, 2016), 
(c) Kohiyar Pera Shall: Traditional Sugarcane Crusher 'Kohiyar Pera Shall' from Assam 
(March, 2017) etc. 
● During the period, the organization has organized 29 „Do and Learn‟ Museum 
Education Programmes on different topics like Warli painting of Maharashtra, 
Zardozi art, traditional Gond painting, traditional paddy craft, handmade pottery, Doll 
making art etc. 
● It organized 32 Artists Workshops in various parts of the country to document various 
art traditions, artisans, enrich museum's collection and to provide an opportunity of 
direct interaction between artists and visitors at the same place.  

19 
 
● Live presentation o f folk, tribal and classical music, theatrical performance etc.  were 
organized through 41 programmes at different places of the country  
● IGRMS collected 2050 specimens for its reserve collection under “Operation 
Salvage”, which is aimed at salvaging the vanishing aspects of tangible and intangible 
cultures. 
● Tribal Literature Festival (TLF):  This programme was initiated from the year 2017 in 
which events like reading/reciting poetry, short story, traditional storytelling, seminar 
on tribal literature and la nguages, ethnic cuisine, exhibition and workshop on tribal 
painting/artifacts are organized.  
● Tribal Healers Workshop: Since 1999, this programme has been organized for Tribal 
Healers of the country with an aim to promote the medicinal knowledge of Tribal 
Healers. 
20.3 Indian Museum, Kolkata - Organized panel discussion, talks, workshops and multi -
cultural activities focusing on art and culture of North Eastern and Eastern region of India, 
which duly aid in projecting and promoting the same to the public.  Indian Museum, Kolkata 
also represents rich heritage of Textile and clothing of Bengal, East & North East India and 
Pan India Diasporas of traditions and culture of wearing clothes, timelessness of Indian 
Fashion.  
20.4 During the lockdown period, Professor Mani Babu, Head of the Department, 
Anthropology, University of Manipur delivered a lecture on Indigenous people. 
20.5 In the recent past, a workshop named Nagaland tattooed head -hunter and Manipuri 
dance along -with poubi lai (exhibition) was conducted by t he Museum. The Museum 
organizes such programs on a frequent/regular basis to make visitors more aware of the North 
Eastern region of India. 
20.6 Zonal Cultural Centers (ZCCs) -  One of the mandates of the ZCCs is to preserve the 
vanishing folk art form. As per the Vision Document, 2020-24, all the ZCCs have to preserve 
14 vanishing artforms per year (2 art forms every year by each of the seven ZCCs). During 
2020-21 and 2021 -22, 156 and 78 vanishing artforms respectively have been preserved and 
promoted by the ZCCs against the target of 14 vanishing artforms. 
20.7 Under the 'Global Engagement Scheme', festivals of India are organized to promote 
Indian Culture abroad, strengthen bonds of foreign countries with India, promote bilateral 
cultural contracts, and project India‟s cultural image abroad.  
 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is concerned to note that the allocation to the Ministry of Rs 3009.05 
crore in BE 2022-23 is 11% lower than the projected demand at Rs 3357.45 crores made by 
the Ministry. There is a shortfall of Rs 348.40 crore in budgetary provisions for FY 2022 -23 
vis-à-vis the projected demand of 3357.45 cro re by the Ministry. The Committee also fails to 
understand the reason for lower projection of Rs 3357.45 crore in BE 2022 -23 as compared 
to the projection of Rs 3843.68 crore in BE 2021 -22 by the Ministry. The Committee 
observes that Culture is integral to  the development of the country because it promotes 
economic growth providing employment to a large section of population and spurs other 
economic sectors thereby, contributing to the GDP of the country as also plays an important 
role in uniting the countr y. Further it is instrumental in sustenance of our rich and diverse 
cultural heritage. Since the Ministry of Culture has the onerous responsibility of the 
preservation, development and promotion of the country's tangible and intangible heritage, 
the Commit tee is convinced that the BE allocation of 3009.05 crore for 2022 -23 is not 
commensurate with the fund requirements of the Ministry. It may impact the vital activities of 
promotion and preservation of our cultural heritage. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends 
that the Ministry should be provided with the projected financial outlay at RE 2022 -23 stage 
so that the Ministry can achieve its targets/plans for preservation and conservation of our 
cultural heritage and promotion of art and culture. 
(Para 9) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount of Rs. 3009.05 crore for 2022 -23 to the 
Ministry which is a reduced amount in comparison to the projected demand of Rs 3357.45 
crore by the Ministry. Cultural Ministry unreservedly agrees and acknowledges the 
formidable responsibility of preservation, development and promotion of the country's 
tangible and intangible heritage. Hence it would be ascertained that a well enhanced demand 
would be projected at RE 2022 -23 so that vital activities of promotion and preser vation of 
our cultural heritage are not impacted.   
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2 The Committee does not find the reply given by the Ministry to be satisfactory. 
The Committee notes that given the considerable gap between its projected demand 
and actual allocation made at BE 2022 -23, the Ministry will project a well enhanced 
demand at RE 2022 -23. However, the Ministry has not furnished any information 
regarding the reasons for projecting a significantly lower demand of Rs. 3357.45 crores 

21 
 
in BE 2022-23 as compared to the projection of Rs. 3843.68 crore in BE 2021 -22 by the 
Ministry. The Committee may be apprised of the specific reasons which led to a 
substantial decrease in  the projected demand of the Ministry at BE 2022 -23 as 
compared to its demand at BE 2021-22. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is pleased to note that the budgetary allocation of ASI has been 
increased from RE 2021 -22 allocation of Rs. 915.43 crores to Rs. 1080.34 crores in BE 
2022-23. The Committee observes that India is a country with obvious constraints in 
resources. Hence in order to obtain the best possible outcomes, it is imperative that 
allocation of resources is prioritized across competing ends and the available funds are 
deployed in a more efficient and productive manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should make efforts to make optimum utilisation of funds available in an 
efficient manner so that conservation, development and maintenance of the pr otected 
monuments of ASI are carried out and the best results are achieved. With the gradual 
removal of COVID -19 restrictions, more and more tourism activities are going to increase. 
ASI should make fresh endeavors to make use of this opportunity to genera te more revenue 
through e-ticketing and other means available to it. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 Consequent upon unlocking COVID –19 pandemic restrictions, Archaeological 
Survey of India (ASI) has opened all the e -ticketed 143 monuments/sites, 30 site museums 
across the country for the general public to increase visitor‟s footfall. In addition to this, both 
online and counter based offline e-ticket counters have also been made fully operational. 
2.2 Besides, ASI have also removed capping on crews while issuing film shooting 
permissions and number of audiences, organizing cultural programmes at monuments/sites 
providing scope for more sustained revenue to Govt. of India. 
2.3 Further, filming activities are also being allowed which support revenue generation. 
Further recommendation/observation 
2.4 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not make 
any mention of the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI to ensure optimal utilization of 
funds available with ASI and proper allocation of fund s across competing ends. The 
Committee desires to be apprised in this regard, in light of the substantial increase in 
the budgetary allocation available with ASI for the FY 2022-23. 
 
 
 

22 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee further recommends that since influx of tourists provides livelihood to 
significant sections of the population, there is ample scope for growth and employment 
generation in this sector as Covid restrictions are being relaxed. The Ministry should 
harness the huge potential of cultural heritage for this purpose. 
(Para 17) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 In this connection, it is intimated that ASI is committed to carry out the mandate 
given by the Government, of conserving monuments of national importance, preservation of 
epigraphic records, exploration and excavation of sites of historical importance and other 
roles. During the execution of these activities, substantial indirect employment is generated.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Ministry does not mention target of employment generation in its reply. The 
Ministry should set the goal for employment generation in the aftermath of the 
Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture and 
ASI should work in close coordination with the Ministry of Tourism and ensure that 
besides carrying out its mandate , one of the primary goals of the activities/schemes 
planned by the Ministry of Culture/ASI  should be to bolster the tourism prospects of a 
region wherein such monuments exist. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF MUSEUMS 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that there has been significant growth in the number and types 
of museums in India. The Committee is happy to note that considering the growing number of 
museums in the country, and increase in demand for quality museum professionals, the 
Ministry has set up Indian Institute of Heritage (IIH) which will be a deemed-to-be university 
which will offer degrees in Art, Conservation, Museology, Archeology, Epigraphy, etc. Given 
the crucial role that this upcoming Institute will play in tackling the dearth of human 
resources in the Indian Museum and Heritage Conservation sectors, the Committee 
reiterates the recommendation made in Para 4.11.10 of its 29 4th Report on ‘Development 
and Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites - Challenges and Opportunities’ 
that the Ministry may formulate in advance, its document indicating the present as well as 
future human resource needs of the Indian Museums sector for consideration of the IIH. 
Doing so, would permit the Ministry as well as the Institute to frame long -term policies 
regarding recruitment, courses to be offered, curriculum etc. In the long -term plan of action, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry  may also look into the feasibility of opening 
regional centers of IIH in various regions of the country. 
(Para 31) 
 

23 
 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 Recommendations of the committee are noted for further compliance. Human 
resource needs for the Indian museum sector would be analyzed as recommended by the 
Committee.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee had originally recommended that the Ministry should formulate 
a document indicating the present as well as future human resource needs of the Ind ian 
Museums sector for consideration of the Indian Institute of Heritage, in its 294 th Report 
which was presented to the Parliament on 26 th July, 2021. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry till now for the formulation of this 
document, which would be of critical importance to ensure that the upcoming Indian  
Institute of Heritage is well-equipped to adequately meet the human resource needs of 
the Indian Museums sector in the future. 
 
 
VACANCIES IN VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Ministry in its written reply has furnished the details of the vacancies and the 
steps taken to fill them in ASI and other organizations of the Ministry. The Committee feels 
that the vacancy details reflect a very pathetic state of affairs in all the o rganizations of the 
Ministry. In the Archaeology Cadre of ASI, against the total sanctioned strength of 420, the 
vacant positions are 166, similarly in the Conservation Cadre, against the total strength of 
918 there is a mammoth vacancy of 452 positions. T he situation is not any better in other 
Cadres of ASI or other organizations of the Ministry. The Committee thus finds it difficult to 
understand how the Ministry can ensure the efficiency of its organizations and manage to 
meet the present human resource needs of the respective organizations, leave alone there 
being any scope for new initiatives by the organizations. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Ministry may set up a foolproof mechanism in place to ensure that the 
staffing requirements of all  its organizations are met at all times, so as to enable them to 
carry out their mandate in letter and spirit. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 Earnest effort has been made to fill up the vacant posts in various cadres of the 
Archaeological Survey of India. The majority of the vacancies falling under promotional 
quota have been filled up. The vacant posts referred to in the Committee‟s Report belo ng to 
direct recruitment. For example, 166 posts have been shown as vacant in the Archaeology 
cadre.  Out of the total 166 vacant posts more than 100 posts are to be filled up through direct 
recruitment. Likewise in the conservation cadre 452 vacancies hav e been indicated.  It is 
submitted that 430 of these vacant posts are to be filled up through direct recruitment.   
Process to fill up these posts has been initiated but it is a time consuming process which has 

24 
 
been the case with all direct recruitment pro cesses.  NOC is awaited from the surplus cell of 
DoPT for the proposal to fill up the vacant posts as mentioned below in the table. 
 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Name of the post No. of 
Posts 
Reference No.  
1. Deputy Superintending 
Archaeologist 
50 Letter No. A-12025/1/2022-Admin-I 
 dated 22/02/2022 
2. Assistant Archaeological Chemist 33 Letter No. A-12011/1/2021-Admin-I 
 dated 09/09/2021 
3. Assistant Archaeologist 50 Letter No. A-12020/4/2022-Admin-I 
 dated 15/02/2022 
4. Sr. Conservation Assistant 58 Letter No. A-12025/2/2022-Admin-I  
dated 19/01/2022 
5. Conservation Assistant 342 Letter No. A-12025/3/2022-Admin-I  
dated 19/01/2022 
 
5.2 Likewise, all possible efforts are taken by different divisions of the ministry to fill up 
the vacant post. Committee‟s recommendations are duly noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.3 The Committee is not satisfied by the explanation furnished by the Ministry with 
regard to the vacancies existing in ASI. The Committee appreciates that filling up of 
posts through direct recruitment is a time consuming process . However, this delay can 
be anticipated well in advance  by ASI, given most vacancies arise out of retirement of 
employees. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI must execute its 
recruitment process sufficiently in advance keeping in mind the retirement schedule of 
its existing employees, as well as the average time it takes to fill vacancies through direct 
recruitment, so as to ensure that it is adequately staffed at al l points of time, which, in 
turn, will ensure that ASI can carry out its mandate in an effective manner. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is anguished to note the large scale vacancies in all the organizations 
of the Ministry for years together  and shocked to find that in some cadres the vacancies  are 
more than 50% of the sanctioned strength. It fails to understand how the Ministry  will 
achieve the task of conserving the culture and heritage of such a vast country with  less than 
50% of the sanctioned strength. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 Filling up of vacancies is a regular and continuous process and necessary steps are 
taken by different divisions as per their RRs. As the appointments are done through 
promotions and direct recruitment, organ izations are advised to take necessary action in 

25 
 
advance to fill up the post by conducting timely DPCs for promotions and sending the 
proposals to the recruiting agencies UPSC/SSC in case of direct recruitments. Recruitments 
get hampered sometimes due to n on availability of the candidates with the desired 
qualifications/experience in case of direct recruitments.   In a number of cases appointments 
are also held up due to ongoing amendments in the RRs. However, all possible efforts are 
being made to streamlin e the process of timely filling up of the vacant positions in various 
organizations of the Ministry.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in par a 5.3 of this Report, 
for all organizations under the Ministry of Culture so as to ensure adequate staffing at 
all times. 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes with concern that a large number of vacancies in important 
organizations like ASI, National Archives, Anthropological Survey of India etc. are vacant 
for a considerable period of time. The Committee, therefore, strongly comments that 
concerted efforts be taken to fill up the vacancies at a fast pace to improve the organizational 
functioning. It is observed that due to not filling up the vacancies regularly the organizations 
are facing deemed abolition of several posts which have many oth er ramifications. The 
Committee feels that most of the organizations in the Ministry require specialized 
qualifications and the students/candidates who study these subjects do not have many other 
opportunities and if the posts are not filled timely, many q ualified and talented candidates 
would be age barred, thus causing loss to the Government by spending in their education and 
not availing the benefits of their knowledge/expertise as well as career of the candidates. 
Similarly delayed promotions also play a negative role in the morale of the officials. The 
Committee is, therefore, of the considered opinion that all the vacancies to be filled by 
promotions must be filled, at the earliest within a span of six months and the Direct 
Recruitment vacancies be fil led up within a year. The Committee also recommends that the 
organisations should identify the anticipated vacancies of Direct Recruitment and request 
UPSC/SSC in advance to initiate action to fill up the vacancies which will enable the 
organisations to serve better for the purpose for which they have been established. 
(Para 37) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 It is kindly reiterated that filling up of vacancies is a regular and continuous process 
and necessary steps are taken by different organizations as per their  RRs. The following 
initiatives are recently undertaken by NAI,ASI and AnSI for filling up of the vacant posts:- 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
Organization Efforts taken to fill up vacant posts 
NAI ● Proposal for filling up of 13 posts of Archivist (General) and 1 
post of Archivist (Oriental Records) is being sent to UPSC. 
● Request for filling up of 20 posts of Asstt. Archivist (G) and 5 
posts of Asstt. Archivist (OR) has been sent to SSC. 
● Process for filling up 3 vacancies of LDC has been initiated. 
● Requisition for 8 vacancies of Binder has been sent to SSC. 
● Requisition for 3 posts of Library and Information Assistant 
submitted to SSC 
● Proposal for 9 vacancies of Preservation Assistant and 31 posts of 
MTS sent to SSC 
● Efforts to fill up the remaining posts  as per RRs and holding of 
DPCs, wherever required, are underway 
AnSI ● Additional charge for the post of Director, AnSI has been 
entrusted to Ms. Gouri Basu, Director, EZCC, Kolkata. Cabinet 
Secretariat has recently advised this Ministry to re -advertise the 
post of Director, AnSI. The process for re -advertisement of the 
post is underway. 
● Requisition for filling up of 6 posts for Direct Recruitment sent to 
UPSC 
● Requisition for filling up of  78  posts  for Direct Recruitment sent 
to SSC 
● Proposal for  filling up of 9 posts through DPC  mode is under 
process 
● Proposal for filling up of 12 posts under deputation mode is under 
process 
● Revival for 16 posts is under process in consultation with DoE. 
ASI  ● NOC is awaited from the surplus cell of DoPT for the proposal to 
fill up the vacant posts of 50 nos. of “Deputy Superintending 
Archaeologist”, 33 posts of Assistant Archaeological Chemist, 50 
posts of Assistant Archaeologist, 58 posts of Sr. Conservation 
Assistant and 342 posts of Conservation Assistant. 
 
● More than 2000 vacant posts of MTS have been reported to SSC 
for direct recruitment. Efforts are also being made to increase 
promotional prospects in this cadre since the attrition rate is high 
due to lack of promotional avenues.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.2 The Committee would like to know the present status of the above vacancies  and 
revival of posts. 
 
 

27 
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee would like to know about the expenditure pattern under the head 
‘North-Eastern Areas’ for the last 5 years and how the same compares with the expenditure 
pattern of the overall allocation made to the Ministry during the same period. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 As mandated, the Ministry allocates 10% towards NER of the total scheme allocation. 
A comparative table of overall allocation and expenditure vis -a-vis NER allocation and 
expenditure is depicted below.     
 
(Rs. In crore) 
Years Overall allocation  NER Exp 
 BE RE Actual BE RE Actual 
2017-18 2738.47 2666.94 2530.50 73.20 46.53 24.93 
2018-19 2843.32 2800.00 2602.19 65.07 67.79 32.60 
2019-20 3042.35 2547.00 2500.40 52.03 28.37 26.23 
2020-21 3149.86 2211.85 2143.65 57.80 39.28 22.16 
2021-22 2687.99 2665.00 2640.30 45.52 48.73 38.86 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.2 The Committee is surprised to note that whereas the overall expenditure 
incurred by the Ministry in the past 5 years depicts a satisfactory pattern of utilization 
of the funds allocated to the Ministry,  the expenditure made by the Ministry against the 
total allocation for the North -East Region shows a consistent pattern of 
underutilization. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a serious look 
into the possible reasons behind this pattern of underutilization  and take urgent action 
to rectify the same in the coming years so as to ensure that the funds available for 
preservation and conservation of the rich tangible and intangible cultural heritage of 
the North-Eastern Region, are optimally utilized. 
 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON CULTURAL MAPPING AND ROADMAP 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee is pleased to note that an allocation of Rs. 19.13 crore on account of 
National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap has been made in BE 2022 -23. This 
will go a long way  in achieving its aims. The Committee hopes the fund allocated for the 
same will be utilised in the most prudent, planned and beneficial manner and would like to 
be apprised of the actual spendings under this head in the last few years. 
(Para 57) 

28 
 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 The status of the funds spent during the last 3 years under the Mission is given as 
under: 
                                                                                (Rs. in lakh) 
Year Amount allocated at RE 
Stage 
Expenditure 
2019-20 160.00 101.56 
2020-21 267.50 209.06 
2021-22 412.00 97.35 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2 The Committee is concerned to note a consistent pattern of underutilization of 
funds under the head „National Mission of Cultural Mapping and Roadmap ‟, under 
which data mapping, demography building, formalizing the processes and bringing all 
cultural activities under one umbrella for better results , etc. is done . The Committee is 
of the view that the clear pattern of underutilization under this head, espe cially during 
the year 2021 -22, hints at the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the 
important activities envisaged to be carried out under this head. Effective measures 
may be taken to ensure that the activities planned for each year under this  head are 
carried out as per schedule and optimal utilization of funds is achieved. 
 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. It is very saddening that instead of intensifying the efforts in recognizing the artists in 
the 75th year of Independence, the Ministry of Culture is reducing the number of beneficiaries 
of this scheme since 2018 -19, when it reached the highest level of 4120 beneficiaries. The 
Ministry has informed that due to COVID -19, the beneficiaries have not been a ble to submit 
the desired documents, hence the disbursements have been delayed. 
(Para 65) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 Due to the hardship met by the beneficiaries in submitting the documents during the 
pandemic period, one-time exemption from submitting Annual  Income Certificate was given 
by the Ministry. Consequently, during the year 2021 -22, grants  amounting to Rs.15.42 
crores benefiting 3029 artists could be released compared to the release of only Rs. 8.71 
crores during the year 2020-21. 
 

29 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2 The Committee appreciates the grant of one -time exemption from the 
submission of Annual Income Certificate given to beneficiaries of the Artists Pension 
Scheme. The Committee is, however, still concerned to note that the Ministry could 
provide grant to only 3029 artists during the year 2021 -22, which is a substantially 
lower coverage than the 4120 artistes covered in 2018 -19. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may look into the reasons behind the decrease in the number of 
beneficiaries covered under  the scheme since it is quite likely that many artistes 
deserving of the benefits of the Artists Pension Scheme of the Ministry are presently not 
covered under the scheme.  Sincere efforts may be made to ensure that more deserving 
artistes across the countr y are able to take benefit of this important scheme of the 
Ministry. 
 
SCHEME FOR THE AWARD OF SENIOR/JUNIOR FELLOWSHIPS TO 
OUTSTANDING PERSONS IN THE FIELDS OF CULTURE 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee also feels that centralizing the disburseme nt of the fellowship has also 
affected the timely disbursement of the fellowship. It should be disbursed by the CCRT as was 
done a few years back. The Committee also recommends that the Research papers of their 
scheme should be sent to art colleges/schools  on rotation basis so that they are utilized by 
future generations. 
(Para 71) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 It has been the practice to release the Fellowship Installments under the Scheme by 
the Ministry itself since the necessary fund is allotted under the relevant budget head for the 
said purpose. After the transfer of implementation of the Scheme, the installments are 
released by the Ministry as per budget allotment for release under Budget head of 
„Scholarship/stipends‟ for the Scheme. The recommendation of the Committee has also been 
noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.2 The Committee is not happy with the delay in disbursement of fellowship 
installments by the Ministry . Given the delays witnessed in the disbursement of the 
fellowship installments which negatively affect the Junior and Senior Fellows, the 
Committee feels that there is a n urgent need to figure out the reasons for these delays   
and necessary action may be taken to resolve the same.  Further possible avenues may 
be explored to speed up the disbursement process. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
-NIL- 
 
***** 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee does not find the reply given by the Ministry to be satisfactory. 
The Committee notes that given the considerable gap between its projected demand 
and actual allocation  made at BE 2022 -23, the Ministry will project a well enhanced 
demand at RE 2022 -23. However, the Ministry has not furnished any information 
regarding the reasons for projecting a significantly lower demand of Rs. 3357.45 crores 
in BE 2022-23 as compared to the projection of Rs. 3843.68 crore in BE 2021 -22 by the 
Ministry. The Committee may be apprised of the specific reasons which led to a 
substantial decrease in the projected demand of the Ministry at BE 2022 -23 as 
compared to its demand at BE 2021-22. 
(Para 1.2) 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
 
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not make 
any mention of the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI to ensure optimal utilization of 
funds available with ASI and proper allocation of funds across competing ends. The 
Committee desires to be apprised in this regard, in light of the substantial increase in 
the budgetary allocation available with ASI for the FY 2022-23. 
 
(Para 2.4) 
 
The Ministry does not mention target of employment generation in its reply. The 
Ministry should set the goal for employment generation in the aftermath of the 
Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture and 
ASI should work in close coordination with the Ministry of Tourism and ensure th at 
besides carrying out its mandate, one of the primary goals of the activities/schemes 
planned by the Ministry of Culture/ASI should be to bolster the tourism prospects of a 
region wherein such monuments exist. 
(Para 3.2) 
DEVELOPMENT OF MUSEUMS 
 
The Committee had originally recommended that the Ministry should formulate 
a document indicating the present as well as future human resource needs of the Indian 
Museums sector for consideration of the Indian Institute of Heritage, in its 294 th Report 
which was presented to the Parliament on 26 th July, 2021. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry till now for the formulation of this 
document, which would be of critical importance to ensure that the upcoming Indian 
Institute of Heritage is well -equipped to adequately meet the human resource needs of 
the Indian Museums sector in the future. 
(Para 4.2) 

32 
 
VACANCIES IN VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
The Committee is not satisfied by the explanation furnished by the Mi nistry with 
regard to the vacancies existing in ASI. The Committee appreciates that filling up of 
posts through direct recruitment is a time consuming process. However, this delay can 
be anticipated well in advance by ASI, given most vacancies arise out of  retirement of 
employees. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI must execute its 
recruitment process sufficiently in advance keeping in mind the retirement schedule of 
its existing employees, as well as the average time it takes to fill vacancies through direct 
recruitment, so as to ensure that it is adequately staffed at all points of time, which, in 
turn, will ensure that ASI can carry out its mandate in an effective manner.   
(Para 5.3) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 5.3  of this Report, 
for all organizations under the Ministry of Culture so as to ensure adequate staffing at 
all times.                                                                                                          (Para 6.2) 
 
The Committee would like to know the present status of the above vacancies and 
revival of posts. 
(Para 7.2) 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
 
The Committee is surprised to note that whereas the overall expenditure 
incurred by the Ministry in the past 5 years depicts a satisfactory pattern  of utilization 
of the funds allocated to the Ministry, the expenditure made by the Ministry against the 
total allocation for the North -East Region shows a consistent pattern of 
underutilization. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a serious look 
into the possible reasons behind this pattern of underutilization and take urgent action 
to rectify the same in the coming years so as to ensure that the funds available for 
preservation and conservation of the rich tangible and intangible cultural heritage of 
the North-Eastern Region, are optimally utilized. 
(Para 8.2) 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON CULTURAL MAPPING AND ROADMAP 
 
The Committee is concerned to note a consistent pattern of underutilization of 
funds under the head „National Mission of Cultural Ma pping and Roadmap‟, under 
which data mapping, demography building, formalizing the processes and bringing all 
cultural activities under one umbrella for better results, etc. is done. The Committee is 
of the view that the clear pattern of underutilization u nder this head, especially during 
the year 2021 -22, hints at the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the 
important activities envisaged to be carried out under this head. Effective measures 
may be taken to ensure that the activities planned for each year under this head are 
carried out as per schedule and optimal utilization of funds is achieved. 
(Para 9.2) 
 

33 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 
The Committee appreciates the grant of one -time exemption from the 
submission of Annual Income Certificate given to beneficiaries of the Artists Pension 
Scheme. The Committee is, however, still concerned to note that the Ministry could 
provide grant to only 3029 artists during the year 2021 -22, which is a substantially 
lower coverage than the 4120 a rtistes covered in 2018 -19. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may look into the reasons behind the decrease in the number of 
beneficiaries covered under the scheme since it is quite likely that many artistes 
deserving of the benefits of the Artists Pension Scheme of the Ministry are presently not 
covered under the scheme. Sincere efforts may be made to ensure that more deserving 
artistes across the country are able to take benefit of this important scheme of the 
Ministry. 
(Para 10.2) 
SCHEME FOR THE  AWARD OF SENIOR/JUNIOR FELLOWSHIPS TO 
OUTSTANDING PERSONS IN THE FIELDS OF CULTURE 
 
The Committee is not happy with the delay in disbursement of fellowship 
installments by the Ministry. Given the delays witnessed in the disbursement of the 
fellowship inst allments which negatively affect the Junior and Senior Fellows, the 
Committee feels that there is an urgent need to figure out the reasons for these delays  
and necessary action may be taken to resolve the same. Further possible avenues may 
be explored to speed up the disbursement process. 
(Para 11.2) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE- A 
 
Updated theft list from 2010 to 2021 
Sl. 
No. 
State  Name of 
Monument/Sites 
& District  
Description of 
object 
 
Date of 
theft 
Action 
taken  
Status 
01 West 
Bengal 
Hazarduari Palace 
Museum, 
Murshidabad 
3 nos. valuable 
Silver antiquities 
objects namely 
“Alam Panja ” 
from Religious  
gallery of 
Hazarduari 
Palace Museum. 
11.08.2010 F.I.R 
lodged 
Not recovered. 
02 Rajasthan Kaner-Ki-Putli 
Temple, Distt. 
Bhilwara 
Four armed 
seated female 
deity 
26 & 
27.08.2010 
F.I.R 
lodged 
Not recovered. 
03 Rajasthan Kaner-Ki-Putli 
Temple, Distt. 
Bhilwara 
A stone 
sculpture 
alongwith two 
small sculpture 
3rd& 4th 
.11.2010 
F.I.R 
lodged 
Not recovered. 
04 Karnataka Old Shiva 
Temple, 
Thimmalapura, 
takuk Hospet, 
Distt. Bellary 
One granite 
stone Shivalinga 
shaft 
7th -8th 
November, 
2010 
F.I.R 
lodged 
Recovered as informed 
by S.A. Bangalore  
dated 13.4.2011 
05 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Sivalayam temple 
of Old Vishnu 
and Mukteswara 
Swamy temple 
comlex, 
Peddamudiyam, 
YSR Kadapa 
district 
A nandi 
sculpture 
17th -18th 
May, 2011 
Photograph 
is not 
available     
Sl.No.  1 
F.I.R 
lodged 
Not recovered. 
06 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Mahamantapa in 
Soumyanatha 
Swamy Temple, 
Nandaluru, YSR 
Kadapa district 
Stone bud 
portion (flower 
decoration) 
3.6.2011 
Photograph 
is available 
Sl. No. 2 
F.I.R 
lodged 
Not recovered. 

36 
 
07 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Dharmrajeshwar 
Temple and 
Buddhist Caves 
Village 
Chandwasa tehsil 
Garoth Distt. 
Mandsour 
The sculptural 
panel termed as 
Dashayatara 
contains 9 
avataras and one 
figure of Vishnu 
(1.56x0.74cm 
x0.21 cm in 
dimensions) 
Sand stone 
6th-7th 
September, 
2011 
Photograph 
is available 
Sl. No. 3  
F.I.R. 
lodged 
Recovered in two parts. 
But central portions of 
the panel showing the 
standing figure of 
Vishnu     
08 Assam Centrally 
protected site 
Figures of 
Ganesa, Siva -
Lingas, Four -
handed Bhairabi, 
Miniature Sikhara 
Shrines, Figures 
of „Narakasur‟, 
Two-handed 
„Bhairabi‟, Stone 
gateway, Dancing 
Bhairava (locally 
known as Bala -
bhairava) 
engraved on rock 
at Kamakhya Hil, 
Guwahati Dist. 
Kamrup, Assam 
Fragment of an 
architectural 
member appears 
to be a miniature 
sikhara part 
measuring 
approximately 
42cm in length, 
27.5 c m in 
breadth & 19 cm 
in height is 
crowned by an 
amlaka with a 
socket. Lower 
part has two 
circular 
mouldings 
whicha re 
damaged 
partially  
 
 
13-6-2012 
F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
09 Tamil 
Nadu 
Teppakulam 
urani, 
Madarapatti, 
Kulathur Taluk, 
District 
pudukottai 
stone idols of 
Brahma and 
Ambal from the 
centrally 
protected 
monuments at 
idls in the 
southern bund of 
Teppakulam 
urani 
28.6.2012 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
10 Chhattisga
rh 
Mahadev Temple 
Pali, District, 
Korba 
Stone Idoles of 
Brahma 
&Shiva(Natraja)  
01.9.2012 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
11 Rajasthan Temple near 
Chandrabhaga 
Jhalrapatan, 
District Jhalawad 
Stone sculpture 
of Shiva And 
Parvati 
26-27-11-
2012 
F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 

37 
 
12 Delhi Indian War 
Memorial 
Museum, Red 
Fort ,Delhi 
A Dagger with 
Ivory handle  
21-12-2012 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
13 Karnataka Fortress & 
Renuka Devi 
Temple, 
Chandragutti 
Soraba Taluk, 
District Shimoga, 
Karnataka 
The stone 
sculpture of 
eight handed 
Mahisasuramard
ini made of 
chloritic schist, 
standing in 
tribhanga 
posture. 
12.01.2013 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
14 Karnataka Sri Vaidyeshwara 
Temple, Talakad 
District, Mysore 
The Sculpture of 
four handed 
Dakshinamoorty 
made of granite 
with Prabhavali, 
seated upon a 
lotus throne in 
ardhparyanka 
mudra. 
03.2.2013 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
15 Chhattisga
rh 
Excavated 
Tivardev Buddha 
Monastery, 
Sirpur, District 
Mahasmunda, 
Chhattisgarh 
It is seated 
image in 
lalitasan posture 
built on the soft 
stone. The left 
hand of the 
image is 
straightly kept 
on the left knee 
whereas right 
hand is holding a 
bowl. 
17.3.2013 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
16 Karnataka Mallikarjuna 
Temple, Basaral, 
District Mandya. 
 Shivlinga  13.5.2013 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 

38 
 
17 Karnataka Bucheswara 
Temple, 
Koravangala, 
Hassan Taluk, 
Hassan District. 
Seated 
Chaturbhuja 
Ganesha in 
Hoysala style of 
art datable to late 
12th century AD. 
Ganesha is in 
Ardha lalitasana, 
four armed 
bearing danta, 
ankusha, pushpa 
and modaka 
patra . The 
sculpture is 
exuberantly 
decorated with 
jewellery.  
 
11-12-10-
2013 
F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
18 Karnataka Theft of one 
Durga Sculpture 
from the premises 
of 
Panchalingeswara 
Temple, 
Govindanahalli, 
K.R.Pete Taluk, 
Mandya district, 
Karnataka.  
 
The stone 
sculpture of 
eight armed 
Mahishamardini  
(Durga). The 
deity bears 
trident, sword, 
chakra, arrow, 
bell, shield and 
bow as weapons. 
She is shown 
pushing the 
human form of 
demon in her 
lower left hand. 
The sculpture is 
made of grey 
soap stone. 
07.03.2014 F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 
19 Karnataka Theft of one 
broken granite 
Shivalinga from 
Shiva temple, 
Thimmalapur, 
Hospet taluk, 
Bellary Dist, 
Karnataka, a 
centrally 
protected 
monument- reg. 
Broken Stone 
(granite) 
Shivalinga  
18th-19th 
.06.2014 
F.I.R. 
lodged 
Not recovered 

39 
 
20 Gujarat  Theft of two 
wooden carved 
Brackets from 
Vitthalbhai 
Haveli at Vso, 
Dist. Kheda 
 
Two wooden 
carved Brackets 
23.6.2014 F.I.R. 
lodged 
No look 
out 
notice s 
were 
issued 
Recovered back by 
police authorities 
21 Karnataka Theft of one black 
granite stone 
Nandi fixed to the 
Bharateswara 
subshrine of 
Ramalingaeswara 
temple complex 
Avani, Mulbangal 
taluk, Kolar 
district, 
Karnataka, a 
Centrally 
Protected 
Monument 
one black granite 
stone Nandi  
18-
19.07.2014 
F.I.R. 
lodged 
 
Not traceable yet. 
 
22 Bihar Theft of one 
sculpture of Jain 
Tirthanker 
(Mahavira)made 
of stone (granite) 
from the premises 
of Jain Shrine 
Temple Rajgir a 
centrally 
protected 
monument 
sculpture of Jain 
Tirthanker 
(Mahavira) 
30-
31.07.2014 
F.I.R. 
lodged 
 
Not recovered 
23 Karnataka Theft of Two 
Schist Stone 
Sculptures from 
Nageswar temple, 
Mosale, Hassan 
taluk, Hassan 
district 
Karnataka, 
centrally 
protected 
monument. 
Two Schist 
Stone Sculptures 
of 
Mahisasuramard
ini and 
Sarasawati 
13-
14.09.2014 
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
24 Karnataka Theft of one 
schist stone 
Yaksha sculpture 
from 
Bhimesheshwara 
temple at 
Neelgunda, 
Harappanahalli 
Taluk, Davangere 
district, 
Karnataka a 
centrally 
protected 
monument. 
Schist stone 
Yaksha sculpture 
26 April 
2015 
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered 
25 Orissa Theft of one 
sculpture of 
Trivikrama 
(Locally called 
Bali Vamana) 
from the premises 
of Varahanatha 
temple, Jajpur, 
Orrisa, a centrally 
protected 
monument. 
Sculpture of 
Trivikrama 
(Locally called 
Bali 
18 May 
2015 
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered 
26 Karnataka  Bhoganandiswara 
temple at Nand, 
Chikkaballapur 
Talkuk 
Chikkaballapur 
District, 
Karanatak  
Black stone 
kalsha 
16,Sep,2015 F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered  
27 Maharasht
ra (M.H.)  
Sculpture Shed 
near Aam Khas 
Gate, Daulatabad 
Fort, District -
Aurangabad  
 11 
Antiquities  from 
Sculpture Shed  
16,Sep, 
2015 
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered  
28 Bihar  The theft of one 
black stone 
sculpture form 
Jain Temple, 
Vaibhar, Rajgir, 
Patna.     
Sculpture  22 & 
23.11.2015 
F.I.R 
Lodged  
Not recovered 
29 Rajasthan  Theft to three 
document 
sculpture from the 
Ancient Ruins 
Kalyanpur, Distt. 
Udaipur  
Stone  3rd& 4th 
Feb. 2016.  
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered  

41 
 
30 Andhra 
Pradesh  
Theft of a Nandi 
idol Sri 
Kumaraarama 
Bhimeswara 
Swamy temple, 
Samalkot Mandal 
of East Godavari  
District 
Stone  24th& 25th 
November 
2016 
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered  
31 Karnataka  Theft of one stone 
Ganesha fixed on 
the open mandapa 
of Vigneswara 
Shrine of 
Ramalingeswara 
temple complex 
Avani, Mulbagali 
taluk, Kolar 
district, 
Karnataka 
Stone  26th& 27th 
November 
2016 
F.I.R. 
Lodged 
Not recovered  
32 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Theft of a Nandi 
idol from Sri 
Anadavalli 
Ammavaru 
Temple, 
Parasurameshwar
a Swamy 
Complex, 
Gudimallam, 
Chitoor district  
Stone 5-10-2017 F.I.R 
Lodged 
Not recovered 
33 Karnataka Theft of Kalasa 
fixed to the 
shikhara of 
Sadashiva 
Temple, 
Nuggehalli, Taluk 
Chennarayapatna, 
District Hassan, 
Karnataka  
Copper 25-02-2020 F.I.R 
Lodged 
Not recovered 
34 Uttarakha
nd 
Theft of Shiva 
Linga from 
Bhairav Temple, 
Mrityunjay 
Temple Complex, 
Dwarahat, 
District Almora 
Stone 10.02.2021 F.I.R 
Lodged 
Police has caught the 
thief and the stone 
Shiva linga has been 
Recovered. 

42 
 
35 Jharkhand Theft of two 
sculptures of 
Buddha in 
bhumisparsha 
Mudra 
Sitagarha, Village 
Bahoranpur,Distri
ct- 
Hazaribagh,Jhark
hand 
Stone 21.03.2021 F.I.R 
Lodged 
Police has confiscated 
the sculptures on the 
night of 24.03.2021  
***** 

91 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
43

92 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES:  xxx xxx xxx 
  
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
  
44

93 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
five draft Reports on Action Taken by the government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its various Reports; and 
 (ii)  xxx  xxx xxx 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration 
of the five draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i)   xxx xxx xxx 
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx 
(iii) 315th Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Culture; 
(iv)  xxx xxx xxx 
(v)  xxx xxx xxx 
  
4. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
all the five draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.  
  
5 to 35.The Committee also authorized Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak, M.P. and in her absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha on 13 th 
December, 2022 and Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Chhedi Paswan, M.P. to 
lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. xxx xxx xxx 
  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
36. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
37. The meeting adjourned at 5:04 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,       Swarabji B. 
25th November, 2022     Director 
 
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
45