 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
365
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fiftieth Report on the subject“Development of Greenfield and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in 
Defence Airports” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTHREPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
FiftiethReport on the subject“Development of Greenfield and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in 
Defence Airports” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS        iii-iv 
4. REPORT         1-52 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   53-56 
    6. ANNEXURES                 57-69 
7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
70-72

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
 Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26th September, 2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Sixty Fifth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Fiftieth Report on the subject “Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports 
and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports” 
2. The Three Hundred Fiftieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the24thJuly, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fiftieth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation  on 8th 
November, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
February, 2024.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
February 06, 2024                                               Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Magha 17, 1945 (Saka)                                  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
AFA Advanced Fighter Aircraft 
APAO Airport Planners and Operators 
ASG Aviation Security Group 
ASQ Airport Service Quality 
ATCO Air Traffic Control Officer 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BEMS Building Energy Management System 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CAT-1 ILS Category 1 Instrument Landing System 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DHS Department of Homeland Security 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DSF Defence Security Force 
DSM Departure Slot Management 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FTO Flying Training Organization 
GFA Greenfield Airport 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
IAF Indian Air Force 
LA Land Acquisition 
LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
MAFI Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure 
MOC Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MPA Million Passengers Per Annum 
MRO Maintenance, Repair, and Overhaul 
NASFT National Aviation Security Fee Trust 
NMP National Master Plan 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NSC National Security Council 
PDC Project Development Certificate 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
QCW Quality Control Wing 

iv 
 
QRF Quick Reaction Force 
QRH Quick Reference Handbook 
RNAs Radio Navigational Aids 
R&R Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
RCS-
UDAN 
Regional Connectivity Scheme - Ude Desh Ka Aam 
Nagrik 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SHA Security Hold Area 
SN Serial Number 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
TDSAT Telecom Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
UT Union Territory 
VDGS Visual Docking Guidance System 
 
 
 

1 
 
  
REPORT 
  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fiftieth 
Report on “Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to 
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports” which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament 
on 24th July, 2023.  
  
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 8 th 
November, 2023 in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. 
The replies have been categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 28, 51, 66, 71, 82, 86, 105, 106, 115, 135, 137, 1 41, 158, 168, 
186, 187, 188, 195 and 221. 
Total: 20 
  
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 14, 17, 18, 23, 26, 27, 29, 36, 41, 42, 43, 47, 57, 59 , 67, 69, 70, 
73, 74, 79, 84, 93, 94, 101, 111, 113, 114, 119, 120, 124, 127, 129, 133, 147, 148, 
151, 155, 156, 164, 166, 189, 190, 194, 200, 208, 214, 215, 216, 227, 229, 234, 238, 
241, 250, 252, 253, 255 and 257. 
Total: 59 
  
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 52, 55, 61, 96, 109, 123, 131, 160, 167, 180, 181, 182, 183, 
193, 203, 218, 220, 225 and 243 
Total: 20 
  
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil                                                                                              
Total: Nil 
  

2 
 
  
CHAPTER-I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and the Challenges thereof 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee notes that the Airports Authority of India (AAI) has emb arked upon a 
capital expenditure plan of Rs. 25,000 crores during the period 2019 -2024 for the 
development/ upgradation/ modernization of various airports in the country. This is a 
welcome move to improve the existing airport infrastructure in order to cat er to the ever - 
growing air traffic demand. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/AAI may ensure 
that traffic projections of the long -term future are factored in the planning and execution of 
these projects.  
 (Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      Noted. 
  
Challenges Faced in Co-ordination between different Agencies and Departments  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may work with all the 
stakeholders to prescribe target deadlines, where possible,  which may be scrupulously 
followed to ensure smooth progress of airport projects.  
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      Noted. Projects are already being monitored at the highest level in the Ministry as also 
through various forums/portals such as Pro ject Monitoring Group (PMG), PRAGATI, and 
National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP), OCMS (Online Computerised Monitoring System) 
etc.  
  
Financing of Airport Projects and Foreign Direct Investment in Civil Aviation Sector  
Recommendation/Observation 

3 
 
3.        The Committee is aware that as per the Consolidated Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
Policy, 2020 issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), 
Ministry of Commerce, the Government has permitted FDI in the Civil Aviation. 
 (Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      Matter of Fact. 
  
Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) scheme  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee notes the details of the planned or proposed projects under the MAFI 
project of the IAF at 20 Civil Enclaves in the country. It notes that as per the details of Radio 
Navigational Aids (RNAs) which have been replaced or planned to be replaced under project 
MAFI at the Civil Enclaves as on 1st October, 2022, are as follows:- 
• RNAs replaced: 26  
• RNAs planned to be replaced: 23  
• RNAs for which no replacement plan has been received: 22 
 (Para 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Matter of record. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee notes the challenges faced by the MoCA during construction and 
operations of Civil Enclaves at Defence Airports. Besides, the main challenges relate to 
airports catering to fast growing civilian traffic hubs. The Committee appreciat es that both 
the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Defence have developed mechanism such as the „Land 
Barter Matrix‟ formula to resolve issues. The Committee also appreciates that meetings are 
held at the highest levels involving concerned Cabinet Ministrie s and Secretaries, to remove 
the stumbling blocks in operations of Civil Enclaves.  
(Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      Appreciation of the Committee is humbly acknowledged. 
  
Security at airports  
Recommendation/Observation 

4 
 
6.        The Committee notes that the CISF plays a pivotal role in providing security at 
airports, which is brought out by the fact that out of a total of 353 units deployed by CISF, 66 
units or 18.7 % is deployed at the airports only. The Committee also notes that the 
responsibility of the CISF to provide security is spread across a wide spectrum of 
establishments, as it provides security to 353 installations across the country including 
airports. It is also aware that the Civil Aviation Sector has seen an exponential growth and  is 
expected to grow at a faster pace in near future, which will enhance the need for manpower 
engaged in providing security for airports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation may examine the feasibility of setting up a specialized security 
agency for airports only, in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 (Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      At present ASG/ CISF is deployed at 66 airports in the country. Recommendations of 
the Committee are noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the suggestions made by 
APAO and ensure that latest technologies are employed at all airports for security as well as 
convenience of air passengers.  
(Para 86) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  
Public Private Partnership in construction and expansion of airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The Committee acknowledges the Ministry's efforts to privatize 25 airports b etween 
2022 and 2025, in line with the global trend of privatization in the aviation sector. The 
revenue generated through Tier -I PPP airports will permit the Ministry to make investments 
for the development of airports in Tier -II and Tier -III cities, wher e capital investment is the 
need of the hour. The Committee believes that such a plan will ultimately lead to much -
improved air connectivity across the country and contribute to more evenly distributed 
regional economic growth.  
 (Para 105) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      The views of the Committee are taken note of. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 

5 
 
9.        The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may continue to seek Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) to achieve the goal of rapid development of the Indian civil 
aviation sector and to make air travel accessible for all.  
(Para 106) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  
Accommodating future growth  
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the various other 
suggestions made by APAO such as creation of skill development centres for aviation, 
periodic audits, strengthening AERA and so on. The Ministry may ensure that the feedback 
received from APAO and other stakeholders, both public and private, are duly heard and 
acted upon to ensure fast-paced growth of the Indian aviation sector.  
 (Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1    The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  
Challenges faced by Private Airports Operators in the operation of airports across the 
country and possible solutions thereto  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee suggests that the issue of ITC on GST paid on works contract services 
for setting up / expansion activity at airport;and inclusion of all ancillary airport services for 
enhanced amounts under the ECLGS may be examined in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance, and a mechanism may be worked out so as to benefit the passengers in the long 
term.  
 (Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for taking up the ma tter with 
Ministry of Finance. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee is of the opinion that all out efforts are required to formulate policies 
and legislations, which encourage and attract private investments in Airport projects. In this 
regard, the Committee notes that SEZ Act, 2005, has been success ful in setting up SEZs 

6 
 
across the country, which have business -friendly trade laws and have increased investments, 
trade and generated employment. The Committee notes the suggestion of the Private Airport 
Operator (PAO) and recommends that the feasibility of having a separate law PPP law to 
attract PPP investments in airports may be examined in consultation with the Ministry of 
Law & Justice.  
 (Para 137) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee notes the suggestions of the Private Airport Operators (PAO) 
regarding amendments/enactments of legal provisions for calling upon financial bids for 
airport projects only upon completion of LA and R&R processes, enhancement of baggage 
allowance and legal provisions for handling of stray dogs. The Committee recommends that 
the suggestions may be examined by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in consultation with the 
concerned Ministries, so as to expedite the process of development of airports and also to 
benefit the nation at large. 
 (Para 141) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    Noted. 
  
Global Scenario of Air Transport/ Freight  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee notes that India grew at a good pace till 2018, in terms of freight 
transported via air. However, air cargo operations in India have been hit very badly by the 
Coronavirus pandemic as compared to many other major economies. The Commi ttee 
recommends that the Ministry may take suitable remedial measures to ensure that India is 
back on track for a rapid growth trajectory in the air cargo sector in the coming years.  
 (Para 158) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1    The recommendation of the Comm ittee is noted. As submitted in the replies to Paras 
155 and 156 above, adequate air cargo facilities have been put in place by various PPP and 
AAI/AAICLAS airports. 
  
Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves  
Recommendation/Observation 

7 
 
15.      The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should incentivise the use of 
electric vehicles at airports for ground transportation. The Ministry should also work with 
industry associations and other stakeholders to develop infrastructur e for charging electric 
vehicles at airports. 
 (Para 168) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
  
Ease of doing business in the aviation sector  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee commends the various steps being taken by the Ministry to improve 
ease of business in the aviation sector in India and hopes that concerted efforts would be 
made in this direction in future as well. 
 (Para 186) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry should examine streamlining the 
regulatory procedures related to aviation, making them more transparent and efficient. The 
Ministry may work on simplifying  the process of obtaining financing to boost private 
investment in the aviation sector. 
 (Para 187) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee recommends that the Minist ry may hold periodic consultations with 
industry players and investors to understand the regulatory challenges faced by them. The 
eGovernance initiative of DGCA should be expanded to cover more stakeholder interactions 
and internal processes.  
 (Para 188) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
  

8 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the various regulatory 
challenges listed by APAO and work on resolving the same so as  to boost Public Private 
Partnership in the country.  
 (Para 195) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    Recommendation of the Committee is Noted. 
  
Gaya Airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee further recommends that AAI may undertake a fresh assessment of the 
requirement of land for expansion of the Gaya Airport keeping future air traffic estimates of 
several decades in mind, given the original assessment was made in 2009.  
 (Para 221) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    Recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

9 
 
 CHAPTER-II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
  
Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and the Challenges thereof 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that the Government has granted in-principle approval for 21 
Greenfield Airport projects since 2008, which is a crucial step towards meeting the growing 
air traffic demand in the country. However, more Greenfield airports need to be developed to 
cater to the increasing demand and to achieve the vision laid out in the National Civil 
Aviation Policy, 2016 to enab le 30 crore domestic ticketing by 2022 and 50 crore by 2027. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should encourage more State 
Governments and private airport developers to propose Greenfield airport projects and to 
streamline its approval process to expedite the development of airports. 
 (Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      Government of India (GoI) has formulated a Greenfield Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008 
for development of Greenfield airports in the country. As per the policy, if any d eveloper 
including the State Government desires to develop an airport, they are required to identify a 
suitable site and get the Pre-feasibility Study conducted for construction of airport and submit 
a proposal to the Central Government for 'Site Clearance' followed by 'In-Principle' approval.  
1.2      As per the request of Project Proponent(s), Airports Authority of India also assists and 
prepares Pre-feasibility Report, OLS Report, DPR etc. relating to development of Greenfield 
Airport. 
1.3      As on da te, under GFA Policy, 2008, 12 Greenfield airports viz. Durgapur in West 
Bengal, Shirdi and Sindhudurg in Maharashtra, Kannur in Kerala, Pakyong in Sikkim, 
Kalaburagi and Shivamogga in Karnataka, Orvakal (Kurnool) in Andhra Pradesh, Kushinagar 
in Uttar Pra desh, Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh, Mopa in Goa and Rajkot in Gujarat have 
been operationalized. Further, Six more Greenfield Airports, viz. Noida(Jewar) in Uttar 
Pradesh, Navi Mumbai in Maharashtra, Vijayapura and Hassan in Karnataka, Dholera in 
Gujarat and Bhogapuram in Andhra Pradesh are under various stages of development.  
1.4      Further, Site Clearance for setting up Greenfield Airports at Mandi, Kottayam and Puri 
have recently been accorded. Moreover, applications for setting up Greenfield airport s at 
Doloo(Silchar), Kota and Raichur are under examination. 
  
  
  

10 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee observes that the list of airports under planning or expansion includes 
several airports that are being developed under PPP mode. PPPs can  bring in private sector 
expertise and investment, which can help in accelerating the airport development process 
and improving operational efficiency. Therefore, the government should encourage more 
PPPs for airport development, especially for Greenfield airports. 
 (Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      The Ministry agrees with the recommendations of the Committee and has encouraged 
development of new Airports by State Governments and Private partners. It can be seen that 
out of 21 'in principle'  approval granted by MoCA for setting up of 21 Greenfield airports 
across the country, Projects like Durgapur, Sindhudurg, Kannur, Mopa have been 
operationalized with Private investment or under PPP. Other Greenfield airports under 
development viz., Navi Mumbai, Noida (Jewar), Bhogapuram are also being executed under 
PPP mode. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee desires to know the number of airports with throughput above 1.5 
mppa which have an ASQ rating of less than 4.5 and number of airports with throughput less 
than 1.5 mppa which have an ASQ rating of less than 4.0 as on date. The Committee may be 
apprised of the steps being taken by AAI to upgrade the quality of services provided at each 
such airport with low ASQ ratings.  
(Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      The ASQ survey is conducted exclusively for Major airports. In India, the airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) designates major airports based on their passenger 
footfall. Previously, major airports were classified as those with an annual  passenger count of 
1.5 million. However, this threshold has now been raised to 3.5 million passengers annually. 
Consequently, the ASQ survey is carried out for airports with a footfall exceeding 3.5 million 
passengers per annum. Airport Operators are comm itted to provide high -quality services to 
passengers and continuously improving their airport experiences.At present, the ASQ survey 
has been conducted at 13 AAI airports with a throughput of 3.5 million passengers per annum 
or more. All of these airports,  except Srinagar, received ASQ ratings above 4.5. Srinagar 
airport received a rating of 4.3. 
3.2      The primary issue leading to a lower rating at Srinagar airport was the long waiting 
time at the Drop Gate due to limited X -ray machines and check points by CRPF. To address 
this, AAI has taken the following steps:- 
 Installed additional 4 X-BIS machines for security screening. 
 Widened the road at the Drop Gate to reduce check-in times. 

11 
 
 Introduced 14 E -carts for passenger transportation between the Drop Gate  and the 
airport, significantly enhancing convenience.  
3.3      These measures have reduced waiting times and improved passenger comfort at 
Srinagar airport. 
  
Observations of the Committee  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee notes that the following issues need wider consultations and deeper 
analysis:- iii) Various issues relating to Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008 and National Civil 
Aviation Policy, 2016 such as review of the said Policies, grant of „ In-Principle Approval‟ 
and „Site Clearance‟ for new Greenfield projects; and iv) Development of Greenfield 
Airports under the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008, across the country especially in the 
States where there are no Greenfield Airports, presently.  
(Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      With regards to Review of the GFA Policy, 2008 and NCAP, 2016 suggestion of the 
Committee has been noted.  
4.2      With regards to development of Greenfield airports in the States where there are no 
Greenfield airports it is informed that as per GFA Policy 2008, if any developer including the 
State Government desires to develop an airport, they are required to identify a suitable site 
and get the Pre -feasibility Study conducted for construction of airport and submit  a proposal 
to the Central Government for 'Site Clearance' followed by 'In-Principle' approval.  
4.3      Therefore, the respective State Government/ developer have the freedom to initiate the 
proposal for development of greenfield airport in their State, which is considered by MoCA 
as per GFA Policy. MoCA and its organisations provide requisite support and facilitate the 
project proponents in development of Greenfield Airports.  
  
Need for a comprehensive policy on brownfield airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee notes that the NCAP, 2016 gives the guiding principles for the 
upgradation and expansion of existing airports. The Committee feels that the Ministry may 
come up with a clear policy as regards the criteria to be followed in te rms of the decision to 
be made regarding the type of airport project to be taken up i.e., the parameters that should 
decide whether the Ministry/ AAI should opt for a greenfield project instead of a brownfield 
or civil enclave project. The Committee feels that this clarity would permit AAI to work 
towards improving air connectivity and result in economic growth.  
 (Para 23) 
  

12 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      Brownfield airport development projects face many constraints in terms of land 
availability, design li mitations etc. At the same time, Brownfield airport projects are 
necessary to revamp, expand and modernise existing airports. With more tier 2 city airports 
expected to become major airports, the number of brownfield airport development projects is 
likely to grow.  
5.2      Greenfield Airports are developed as per the provisions of  Greenfield Airports Policy 
read with National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP), 2016. 
5.3      Wherever State Government is able to provide the desired land and there are no air 
space issues with Defence, Greenfield Airports are developed on need basis, such as 
Bhogapuram in Visakhapatnam, Mopa in Goa, Noida (Jewar) in Uttar Pradesh, Navi Mumbai 
in Maharashtra. 
5.4      However, where State Govt. is unable to provide adequate land  for Greenfield airport 
free of cost and encumbrances and if a Defence Airfield is available nearby then AAI can 
take up development of a Civil Enclave can be developed so as to provide additional capacity 
to the already saturated existing airport. 
  
Challenges Faced in Co-ordination between different Agencies and Departments  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee notes the issues being faced by the Ministry in coordinating with the 
State Governments/ Airport Operators and other stakeholders fo r setting up and 
operationalisation of airports in the country. The Committee feels that having a robust 
mechanism for coordination between the multitude of stakeholders involved in this process is 
crucial in order to avoid cost and time overruns in airpor t projects. The Ministry should 
evolve a mechanism to coordinate with the stakeholders at the highest level to tackle 
bottlenecks and enable the timely completion of projects.  
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      The Ministry conducts regular review meeting with all the concerned stakeholders 
including State Governments, Airport Operators/Developers, DGCA, BCAS, AAI to address 
bottlenecks in the project implementation at the level of Hon‟ble Minister of Civil aviation 
and Secretary, Civil Aviation, to  ensure timely and speedy completion of ongoing projects. 
With the regular monitoring at the highest levels, most of the bottlenecks have been 
addressed and resolved expeditiously to insure timely completion of the projects. 
  
  
  
  

13 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee feels that land acquisition is a prominent issue that needs consistent 
oversight of the Ministry/ AAI as well as the State Government. Hence, a mechanism should 
be evolved to track the progress and delays in the process of land acquisition of airports.  
 (Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Land being a State subject, the respective State Governments have the sole 
responsibility for land acquisition and each State has its own specific policy to deal wit h the 
issues related to its disposal and usage. Notwithstanding this, MoCA, AAI/Airport developer 
concerned constantly follow up with the related State/ UT Governments for speedy 
acquisition of land. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The Committee opines that strong road, rail and metro connectivity to various airports 
is essential for the efficient operation of any airport, both for passenger as well as cargo 
operations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with the 
Ministries/ Departments/ State Governments concerned to work towards improving 
connectivity to the airports. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      MoCA utilizes the PM Gati Shakti platform to coordinate with other infrastructure 
Ministries/ Departments an d to ensure excellent connectivity to all airports across the 
country.  
8.2      MoCA works with the relevant Ministries/ Departments towards rapid development of 
the necessary supporting infrastructure in the vicinity of airports and improving connectivit y 
to the airports. 
  
Delayed Greenfield and Brownfield Projects  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee notes the various factors such as land acquisitions, availability of 
clearances, financial closure and so on, on which the progress of an airport project depends. 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry which enabled the 
operationalisation of the Mopa airport and good progress in other projects like Navi Mumbai 
and Jewar. On -time completion of airport projects has a multip lier effect on the regional 
economy and directly contributes to the fast -paced growth of the nation, besides helping 
avoid huge cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may try to 
emulate its achievements at the Mopa, Navi Mumb ai and Jewar airports, in case of airport 
projects for which in-principle approval had been granted many years ago. 

14 
 
 (Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      MoCA has granted  „In-Principle approval to  21 Greenfield Airports namely, Mopa in 
Goa, Navi Mumb ai, Shirdi and Sindhudurg in Maharashtra, Kalaburagi, Vijayapura, Hassan 
and Shivamogga in Karnataka, Dabra (Gwalior) in Madhya Pradesh, Kushinagar and Noida 
(Jewar) in Uttar Pradesh, Dholera and Hirasar in Gujarat, Karaikal in Puducherry, 
Dagadarthi, Bhog apuram and Oravakal (Kurnool) in Andhra Pradesh, Durgapur in West 
Bengal, Pakyong in Sikkim, Kannur in Kerala and Donyi Polo, Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh 
across the country. 
9.2      Out of these, as on date, 12 Greenfield airports viz. Durgapur in West Bengal, Shirdi 
and Sindhudurg in Maharashtra, Kannur in Kerala, Pakyong in Sikkim, Kalaburagi and 
Shivamogga in Karnataka, Orvakal (Kurnool) in Andhra Pradesh, Kushinagar in Uttar 
Pradesh, Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh, Mopa in Goa and Rajkot in Gujarat ha ve been 
operationalized. 06 More Greenfield Airports viz. Jewar, Navi Mumbai, Dholera, Vijayapura, 
Hassan and Bhogapuram are under different stages of development. MoCA regularly reviews 
these projects in consultation with stakeholders concerned for their speedy and timely 
completion. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee agrees with the observation of the Ministry that legal issues become 
inevitable as it may involve stakeholder conflicts. The Committee, however, notes that the 
timely completion of airport projects is of acute importance to the regio n in question, as well 
as the nation as a whole. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
evolve a suitable mechanism in co -ordination with all stakeholders to remove such 
bottlenecks.  
 (Para 41) 
11.      The Committee observes that s takeholder conflicts and legal disputes can cause 
significant delays in the completion of greenfield airport projects. Therefore, it is important 
for the Ministry to take proactive steps to address stakeholder grievances in a timely and 
adequate manner to prevent disputes from escalating to legal disputes. 
 (Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    The Ministry conducts regular review meeting with all the concerned stakeholders 
including State Governments, Airport Operators/Developers, DGCA, BCAS, AAI to addr ess 
bottlenecks in the project implementation at the level of Hon‟ble Minister of Civil aviation 
and Secretary, Civil Aviation, to ensure timely and speedy completion of ongoing projects. 
With the regular monitoring at the highest levels, most of the bottl enecks have been 
addressed and resolved expeditiously to insure timely completion of the projects. 
  

15 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee may be apprised of the status of Greenfield/ Brownfield/ Civil Enclave 
Airports at Bihta, Darbhanga, Than javur, Sabarimala, Calicut, Nagpur, Kannur, Parandur, 
Kotkasim, Navi Mumbai, Jhalawar, Neemuch, Gaucher, Dehradun, Pantnagar, Dimapur, 
Mopa, Kadapa and Begumpet.  
 (Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    Status in respect of Airports is attached as Annexure-I. 
             
Improving connectivity to airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee is of the view that provision for multi -modal connectivity should be 
made at the proposal stage itself for greenfield airports, in consultation w ith the airport 
developer and State Government. This will ensure that the necessary infrastructure is in 
place before the airport becomes operational. The Ministry should coordinate with the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Railways and  State Government 
Departments concerned to request them to come up with robust connectivity to the airports 
under development, to enable good access from the date of their operationalisation.  
 (Para 47) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    MoCA utilizes the PM Gati Shakti platform to coordinate with other infrastructure 
Ministries/ Departments and to ensure excellent connectivity to all airports across the 
country.  
13.2    MoCA works with the relevant Ministries/ Departments towards  rapid development of 
the necessary supporting infrastructure in the vicinity of airports and improving connectivity 
to the airports. 
  
Implementation of PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan for Multi-modal Connectivity  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee takes note of the plans and programmes made by the Ministry for 
implementation of the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may utilise the PM Gati Shakti platform to coordinate with other 
infrastructure Ministries/ Departments and to ensure excellent connectivity to all airports 
across the country. The Ministry may work with the relevant Ministries/ Departments 
towards rapid development of the necessary supporting infrastructure in the vicinity of 
airports, especially greenfield airport projects. 
 (Para 57) 

16 
 
15.      The Committee appreciates the initiation of creation of a Data Analytics Platform by 
AAI to identify infrastructure requirements around airports. The Committee recommends that 
AAI may explore the possibility of feeding the data pertaining to other  infrastructure 
Ministries/ Departments available through the Gati Shakti National Master Plan, to its 
upcoming Data Analytics Platform for better outputs.  
(Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has updated the details o f all assets under the 
preview of MoCA on PM Gati Shakti NMP portal. 
15.2    The data pertaining to MoCA has been updated in 09 data layers as below: 
i. Existing Airport: This layer contains the details of all the existing International, 
Domestic, Custom and Civil Enclave Airports with their licensing details and details 
of Operations such as Scheduled & Non -Schedule Operations along with other 
attributes such as Runway Length, Critical Aircraft, Terminal Capacity, Cargo 
handling capacity etc. 
ii. Existing Heliports: This layer contains the details of all the existing Heliports with 
their licensing details along with their attributes. 
iii. Existing Water Aerodromes: This layer contains the details of all the existing Water 
Aerodromes with their licensing details along with their attributes. 
iv. Proposed Airport: This layer contains the details of all the Proposed Airports which 
are either in Construction stage or in Planning stage in India. 
v. Proposed Heliport: This layer contains the details of all the Proposed Heliports whic h 
are either in Construction stage or in Planning stage in India. 
vi. Proposed Water Aerodromes: This layer contains the details of all the Proposed Water 
Aerodrome which are either in Construction stage or in Planning stage in India. 
vii. Flying training organizat ion (FTO): This layer contains the details of all the Flight 
Training Organization along with their attributes. 
viii. Remote Pilot Training Organization (RPTO): This layer contains the details of all the 
Remote Pilot Training organization (RPTO) along with their attributes. 
ix. GAP Projects: This layer contains the details of all the Airports which require last 
mile connectivity through Highway, Railway or Metro Rail and require intervention 
of other Ministries and State Govt. 
15.3    In order to utilize the PM Gati Shakti platform to coordinate with other infrastructure 
ministries the attributes of each and every asset has been updated on the portal. For example, 
for Airports Runway Length, Critical Aircraft, Terminal Capacity, Cargo handling capacity 
etc. has been updated on the portal, in order to enable other Ministries to plan the multimodal 
connectivity in a holistic manner using this data.  
  

17 
 
15.4    The layer of GAP Projects at PM Gati Shakti portal has also been created, wherein the 
details of the supporting i nfrastructure requirement in the vicinity of Airports through 
Highway, Railway or Metro Rail, which requires the intervention of other Ministries in order 
to provide last mile connectivity for rapid development.             
  
Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) scheme  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee appreciates the timely replacement of RNAs at various Civil Enclaves. 
However, it also observes that due to various operational and administrative rea sons, PDCs 
given earlier could not be adhered to and wherever PDCs have elapsed, IAF has been 
approached to get revised PDC. The Committee notes that unlike Greenfield/ Brownfield 
airports which are managed by a single operator, the Civil Enclave Airports are managed by 
two operators, i.e., the AAI/ State Government/ Private enterprises and the IAF. Hence, the 
Committee feels that there has to be perfect coordination between both the aforesaid 
agencies for smooth functioning of Civil Enclaves. It hopes that  the operational/ 
administrative reasons for lapse of PDCs, if any, may be examined and sorted out with IAF in 
future, so as to avoid delays. The Committee recommends that the proposed installation of 
navigational aids at various Civil Enclaves may be expe dited to facilitate air operations of 
civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, enhancing safety of 
air travel.  
 (Para 67) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    Replacement of Radio Navigational aids at civil enclaves under MAFI project is sole 
decision of Indian Air Force/Indian Navy. AAI constantly coordinates and extends help in 
early commissioning of the facilities. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee notes the advantages, the disadvantages and the challenges faced for 
the Civil Enclaves at Defence airports. While the Committee fully understands the 
requirement of these Enclaves for Defence needs, it is however of the opinion that  the 
requirements of the commercial aircraft operations has to be addressed as well. Keeping in 
view the development of the region and increased business and employment potential, 
feasibility of development of full-fledged airport may be considered on a case-to-case basis to 
avoid the tough balance between defence and commercial operations at Civil Enclaves. The 
Committee therefore recommends that issues such as expediting swapping of land under land 
Barter Matrix formula, delinking of working permissions for lease rentals, extension of watch 
hours for civilian/ commercial flights, restrictions/ constraints for round the clock 
operations, expansion of existing airport, and duality of security agencies for providing 
security, are areas which can be jointly ad dressed by the Ministries of Civil Aviation and 

18 
 
Defence. A mechanism beneficial for both commercial and defence operations should be 
evolved therefor.  
 (Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    There are 29 Civil Enclaves being operated by AAI. There is an existing mechanism at 
different levels to resolve the issues between AAI and IAF/MoD related to land requirement, 
air space requirement, operational watch hours for civil flights etc.  
17.2    When a Civil Enclave reaches saturation level or based on the r equirement, new 
Greenfield airport is also planned/ implemented such as Bhogapuram in Vishakhapatnam, 
Mopa in Goa, Doloo in Silchar. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee is aware that „Land Barter Matrix‟ formula was used to solve the 
issues between the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Defence at the Bagdogra Airport, which is 
a Civil Enclave in Defence Airport. The Committee desires to know from the Ministry, 
whether it is being used to sort out issues at other Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports also.  
 (Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    As per approved Barter Matrix, in addition to Bagdogra, Defence land has been 
handed over to AAI at Darbhanga, Thanjavur, Srinagar and Pune. While at Thoise and 
Vadodara, the modalities of handing over of land to AAI is in progress. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee notes that it takes around two years for the construction of Civil 
Enclave after permission is granted by Defence Authority. The committee recommends that 
the feasibility of  reducing the time frame may be considered, keeping in view the cost 
escalation of construction of airports.  
 (Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    The timeframe for execution of work depends upon volume of work to be undertaken 
for taking over of land and then creation of airport infrastructure.  
19.2    Even subsequent to the issuance of permission by the Ministry of Defence, the 
following activities are required before physical handing over of land by IAF / Navy:- 
i. Surveys of the area and assets undertaken jointly by Board of Officers (BoO). 
ii. Execution of MoU. 

19 
 
iii. Creation of assets falling in defence land which sometimes include building of new 
offices and hangars and takes around 12 to 18 months. For example, in case of 
Jodhpur airport, IAF assets wo rth Rs. 25 crore were created before handing over of 
site. For Pune, relocation of existing infrastructure in proposed land is being done at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 30 crore, which will take around 18 months‟ time. 
 19.3    In view of the above, 2 years‟ time for construction of civil enclave is reasonable. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee also notes that the Air Traffic Controllers are overworked, handling 
both fighter and civilian aircrafts at Civil Enclaves   to ensure proper workload for ATCs and 
also increase the number of ATCs at such Civil Enclaves.  
 (Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    The provisions of DGCA CAR are not applicable at Civil Enclaves. In Civil Enclaves, 
the Air Traffic Services are being provided by Defence Personnel (Indian Air Force or Indian 
Navy) as per the applicable rules/provisions of Defence authorities.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee observes that the adoption of the FUA policy has led to substantial fuel 
savings for the airlines and also a consequent reduction of carbon footprint. The Committee 
is of the opinion that this environment friendly initiative should be fully encouraged as it 
would decrease the impact on the environment and also ensure savings for the Airlines on 
account of fuel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministries of Civil Aviation 
and Defence should proactively co-ordinate among themselves, to ensure success of the FUA 
policy. 
 (Para 79) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1    Pro-active coordination between AAI and Defence agencies viz IAF, India Navy, 
Indian Army and Indian Coast Guard, is effected through the mechanism of NAMAC 
(National Airspace Management Advisory Committee), which meets on a quarterly basis for 
effective implementation of FUA policy. 
  
Security at airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
22.      The Committee notes that the total outstanding dues of COD for CISF from the NASFT 
is more than Rs. 4707 crores. Further, the 16 JV airports account for more than 64% of the 
total outstanding COD dues. The Committee notes the huge amount of outsta nding dues 

20 
 
which are payable to CISF by the NASFT, especially the dues of the 16 JV airports and 
desires to know the reasons for the same. The Committee hopes that the dues will be cleared 
at the earliest by NASFT to enable the CISF to provide foolproof se curity at airports through 
deployment of enough manpower and the latest security gadgets at airports.  
 (Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    NASFT central manage Aviation Security Fee and release for COD accordingly. 
Hence, outstanding COD is not agains t the airport but against NASFT. During Covid -19 
pandemic in 2020 -21 due to adverse impact of Aviation Sector, there was very poor ASF 
collection. Hence, with approval of MoF, the COD for 2020 -21 has got deferred. As position 
is improving, the deferred payment will be released in due course. 
  
Increasing airport density and availability in the country  
Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee appreciates the various measures being undertaken by the Ministry to 
improve air connectivity across the country. The Committee notes that to make air travel 
accessible to more people across the country, it is necessary to have opera tional airports in 
more cities. Providing air connectivity to more cities in an aspirational developing country 
like India stimulates economic growth by creation of new opportunities in terms of trade & 
tourism. It also facilitates access to better healthc are, education and other services for 
people across the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
ensure that a robust mechanism is in place to achieve the operationalization of the airports/ 
heliports/ water aerodromes targeted during the years 2022-23 and 2023-24.  
 (Para 93) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1    Mechanism to achieve the operationalisation of aerodromes under the UDAN scheme, 
is as under:- 
 The Project Evaluation Committee (“PEC”) has been constituted to review the 
progress of the aerodromes and the allocation of funds. The progress of 
development/upgradation of Airports/Heliports/WA is reviewed from time to time.  
 Moreover, MoCA in consultat ion with State Government/Pawan Hans Ltd., Ministry 
of Ports, shipping & Waterways, BCAS, DGCA also review the status to achieve the 
timely operationalization of the airports/ heliports/ water aerodromes. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
24.      The Committee notes that India's ranking has decreased from 118 in 2009 to 121 in 
2019, in 'Air Connectivity / GDP score' as per IATA's 2020 'Air Connectivity' Report. This 
could indicate that India's air connectivity gains have not been able to keep up with its GDP 

21 
 
growth. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that effective measures are 
taken to strengthen air connectivity at a rapid pace to further push India on its path of 
economic growth. 
 (Para 94) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1    Development of new A irports and augmentation of capacities of existing airports by 
their modernisation/upgradation is happening at a rapid pace throughout the country. Under 
Greenfield Airports Policy, 12 Greenfield airports have been operationalized and 06 
Greenfield airports are under different stages of development.  
24.2    Further, Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has launched Regional Connectivity 
Scheme (RCS) - UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) on 21 -10-2016 to enhance regional air 
connectivity from unserved and underserve d airports in the country and making air travel 
affordable to the masses. Till 31.10.2023,75 aerodromes (including airports, heliports and 
water aerodromes) have been operationalised across the country under UDAN  providing 
connectivity on 509 routes cateri ng to more than 131 Lakh Passengers since inception of the 
Scheme in 2016. 
24.3    The Government has set a target to operationalise 1000 UDAN routes during the 
currency of the scheme and to revive/develop 100 unserved & underserved 
airports/heliports/water aerodromes in the country by 2024 for operation of UDAN flights. 
All these capacity augmentation measures would give a boost to air connectivity across the 
country. 
  
Increasing the number of international airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
25.      The Committee observes that international air connectivity in tier 2 cities can help 
improve trade, increase tourism and attract foreign investment in the region. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may actively analyse the pote ntial for international 
traffic at the presently operational non -international airports as well as upcoming greenfield 
airports.  
(Para 101) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1    Upgradation of infrastructure at airports is a continuous process and is undertaken b y 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) and other Airport Developers from time to time depending 
on the availability of land, traffic demand etc. Further, declaration of an airport as 
International Airport depends upon traffic potential, demand from airlines f or operation of 
international flights and bilateral Air Services Agreement. It also includes provision of 
Ground Lighting facilities, Instrument Landing System, runway length, Immigration, Health 
and Animal & Plant Quarantine services etc. 

22 
 
25.2    Moreover, in accordance with Air Services Agreements, Indian designated carriers are 
free to mount operations to/from any international airport to foreign destinations as per 
mutually agreed capacity limits. However, start of international flight from any point in  India 
is purely a commercial decision of the airlines on the basis of economic viability of the route 
and other associated factors. 
25.3    The most recent airport to be designated as an international airport is Kushinagar 
Airport, located in a tier III city. Besides, under GFA Policy, 2008 new International 
Greenfield airports at Jewar, Navi Mumbai, Dholera, and Bhogapuram are being developed.  
  
Accommodating future growth  
Recommendation/Observation 
26.      The Committee observes that brownfield airports have a limited scope for expansion 
which results in high costs of land acquisition for expansion and rehabilitation. Civil 
enclaves, on the other hand, face constraints in terms of accessibility of a ir space, land and 
operational watch hours. The Committee feels that greenfield airports, despite the initial 
requirement of huge capital, are best suited to meet the demands of air traffic growth in the 
nearby region for several coming decades. It is ofte n noted that airport infrastructure 
projects run into delays, sometimes for several years. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry/ AAI may consider alternate greenfield options in the vicinity of a 
brownfield/ civil enclave project before g ranting permission for the development/ expansion 
of the same. Extensive cost -benefit analysis may be done on a case - to-case basis in terms of 
long-term costs to the Government and benefits accrued to the public at large over several 
coming decades.  
(Para 111) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1    Brownfield airport development projects face many constraints in terms of land 
availability, design limitations etc. At the same time, Brownfield airport projects are 
necessary to revamp, expand and modernise existing a irports. With more tier 2 city airports 
expected to become major airports, the number of brownfield airport development projects is 
likely to grow.  
26.2    Greenfield Airports are developed as per the provisions of  Greenfield Airports Policy 
read with National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP), 2016. Wherever State Government is able 
to provide the desired land and there are no air space issues with Defence, Greenfield 
Airports are developed on need basis, such as Bhogapuram in Visakhapatnam, Mopa in Goa, 
Noida(Jewar) in Uttar Pradesh, Navi Mumbai in Maharashtra. 
26.3    However, where State Govt. is unable to provide adequate land for Greenfield airport 
free of cost and encumbrances and if a Defence Airfield is available nearby then AAI can 
take up development of a Civil Enclave can be developed so as to provide additional capacity 
to the already saturated existing airport.  

23 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27.      The Committee takes note of the extensive list of challenges to be faced by the aviation 
sector in the next 20 years, as per APAO. The Committee agrees with the observation that 
land acquisition delays often cause time and cost overruns. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may look into such issues before awarding a project.  
(Para 113) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1    Land being a State subject, the respective State Governments have the sole 
responsibility for land acquisition and each State has its own specific policy to deal with the 
issues related to its disposal and usage. Notwithstanding this, MoCA , AAI/Airport developer 
concerned constantly follow up with the related State / UT Governments for speedy 
acquisition of land. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
28.      The Committee desires that the Ministry may work towards creation of a single 
window clearance system for all statutory compliances to minimise delays in the execution of 
airport projects.  
(Para 114) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1    The Greenfield A irport (GFA) Policy, 2008 outlines a comprehensive framework for 
the development of new airports in the country. Under this policy, the approval process is 
structured in two distinct stages: "Site-Clearance" followed by "In-Principle" approval. 
28.2    The Project Proponent is also required to obtain other statutory approvals from 
agencies concerned. MoCA facilitates them, whenever they face any difficulty in obtaining 
these approvals/clearances. 
  
Establishing global transit hubs for international flights  
Recommendation/Observation 
29.      The Committee notes that the erstwhile bilateral policy resulted in a serious imbalance 
in the number of points of call in favour of foreign carriers. The Committee may be apprised 
of the steps being taken by the Minist ry in order to correct this imbalance and to develop its 
major airports as a global transit hub for international flights.  
(Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1    The operations of foreign airlines are governed by bilateral Air Services Agreement 
(ASA) between India and the respective country (which has designated the airline). The 
Government of India follows a policy of promoting more international operations by Indian 

24 
 
carriers from non -metro points either directly or through their own domestic operatio ns. 
Currently, due to significant imbalance in the number of points of call infavor of foreign 
carriers, the Government of India does not grant any non -metro city as a new point of call to 
any foreign carrier. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is continuously engaging with the Airlines 
and Airports in order to further the creation of international hub airports in India. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
30.      The Committee acknowledges the various challenges being faced in establishing a 
global transit hub for international flights. The Committee feels that the Ministry should work 
on obtaining points of call for Indian carriers in more countries. Effective steps may be taken 
to address the slot constraints at major airports like Delhi and Mumbai. Potential of ai rports 
close to Delhi and Mumbai i.e., Jewar Airport and Navi Mumbai Airport, may be explored 
for their development as a global transit hub.  
(Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1    The Ministry of Civil Aviation notes the point of the Committee regarding  obtaining 
points of call for Indian Carriers in more countries. Till date India has signed ASA's with 116 
countries and the decision for new points of call and destinations are negotiated based on the 
inputs received from the MEA and the Airlines. 
30.2    As far as airports in India are concerned the Airlines of India are free to 
operate international flights from any point in India .They however do so based on 
commercial considerations. As such development of any Airport as a hub is dependent on the 
arrangement between the Airports and Airlines. The Ministry has been proactively and 
continuously engaging with the Airlines and Airports in order to further the  creation of 
international hub airports in India. 
  
Profitability of airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
31.      The Committee further recommends that the Airports Authority of India may focus on 
improving the operational efficiency of all its airports. This can be done by streamlining the 
processes involved in airport operations, such as passenger che ck-in, baggage handling, 
security and ground handling services. Efforts may also be made to implement cost -cutting 
measures such as optimizing energy consumption and outsourcing non -core functions of the 
airport.  
(Para 124) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1    AAI is undertaking various measures to improve operational efficiency and optimize 
energy consumption at airports. The details enclosed at Annexure -II. 

25 
 
Challenges faced by Private Airports Operators in the operation of airports across the 
country and possible solutions thereto  
Recommendation/Observation 
32.      The Committee takes note of the unduly long time of 3 to 6 years taken in the dispute 
resolution process for the airport sector matters, whereas AERA Act, 2008 stipulates a time 
period of 90 days only. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may seek the comments 
of the Ministry of Law & Justice, as regards formation of airport sector specific appellate 
tribunal or a dedicated bench under TDSAT, to expedite dispute resolution process. 
(Para 127) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1    Telecom Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) has been made the 
Appellate Tribunal for AERA related matters and Appeal through Finance Act 2017 and now 
TDSAT exercises jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred o n the Appellate Tribunal 
under the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA) Act, 2008.  
32.2    MoCA had requested Ministry of Finance for revival of AERAAT, to expedite dispute 
resolution process. However, MoF stated that it may not be prope r to revive AERAAT as 
rationalization of Tribunals is one of the important policy initiatives taken. TDSAT is 
regularly hearing and disposing off the cases under AERA Act. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
33.      The Committee is aware that construction of airport projects are highly capital 
intensive and therefore recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of funding 
by Insurance Companies, Development Financial Institutions etc., in consult ation with the 
Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 129) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1    Responsibility of funding the airport project lies with the concerned airport developer 
including the State Government (in case State Government is the project proponent). Based 
on their commercial decision, funding pattern and sources of funding is decided by airport 
developers. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
34.      The Committee is of the opinion that to develop India, as a trans -shipment hub for 
cargo, seamless trans -shipment, which will reduce time and costs is imperative . It therefore 
recommends that the need for re -screening of cargo may be examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, to reduce the timelines for trans-shipment.  
(Para 133) 

26 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1    The process is followed as per the requirement of security. The action as 
recommended, will be taken up with BCAS in consultation with Ministry of Home Affairs. 
  
Feasibility of creating multiple entry routes to tackle congestion in major airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
35.      The Committee recommends that AAI should conduct feasibility studies to assess 
whether creating an arm on the right side of Terminal -3 of the Indira Gandhi International 
Airport, Delhi would help tackle the congestion issues being faced by passeng ers. If found 
feasible, the same principle may be followed at other airports across the country to ensure 
minimal waiting time for passengers. Airport terminals should prioritise passenger 
accessibility to boarding gates. Multiple entry gates should be des igned and built to ensure 
optimal throughput at airports.  
(Para 147) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1    Airport Operator DIAL has assessed the feasibility of creating arms on both side and 
also opening multiple entry gates as suggested. However, to maintain in ternational standards, 
follow safety and security norms and other practical aspects, opening of both sides southern 
domestic or northern international and opening multiple gates is not feasible/practical. 
35.2    DIAL has however taken following steps to take care of congestion issues:- 
a)  Shifting staff entry thereby making two additional entry points available to 
passengers. 
b)  Making all the entry gates at Terminal 2 & Terminal 3 Digi Yatra enabled which   
reduces the processing time. 
c)  2-D barcode scanner deployed at each entry point to ensure faster processing. 
d)  Extra manpower deployed at the forecourt to direct people to less utilized gates. 
e)  Addition of more security screening machines  and enhancement of PESC area 
f)  Display screens have been installed at entry gates to inform passengers on real time 
waiting at respective gates to balance the crowd at gates. 
g)  DIAL is also in the process of creating new zone / installation of additional 
processing areas in the international side – both immigration and security. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
36.      The Committee recommends that future planning at major airports should include 
capacity planning for passengers, in addition to peak hour capacities of domestic as well as 
international passengers. This would ensure that airports are equipped to handle increased 

27 
 
passenger traffic and avoid congestion. The Ministry should ensure that future projections of 
the number of passengers to be serviced, are duly factored at the planning stage of the 
airport development/ expansion projects in the country.  
(Para 148) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1    The Airport Terminal, Apron and associated infrastructures are planned and developed 
with future growth projections. The expansion of the terminal building is taken up in modular 
manner in phases based on the growth of Passengers movements during Peak Hour. 
  
Night landing facilities at Airports and Civil Enclaves  
Recommendation/Observation 
37.      The Committee notes that 23 airports in the country have scheduled flight operations 
but do not have night landing facility. The Committee feels that night landing facility is a 
basic prerequisite to permitting an airport to operate at its full ca pacity. Besides, having 
night landing facilities at airports can also help authorities in the speedy deployment of 
emergency response teams and evacuations in case of emergency situations in nearby 
regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Min istry may thoroughly consider 
the benefits of installation/ upgradation of night landing facilities at all its airports/ heliports 
to make sure that the huge capital invested in the development of airports is optimally 
utilized.  
(Para 151) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1    The list  of AAI Airports with all -weather operation facility including night landing 
and without night landing facility is attached as Annexure - III.  
37.2    The provision of night landing facility, which is purely based on the demand and 
operational requirements of the airlines, is a continuous process and is undertaken by Airports 
Authority of India (AAI) and other airport operators from time to time depending on the 
availability of land, commercial viability, traffic demand / willingness  of airlines to operate 
to/from such airports etc. 
  
Cargo facilities at airports and civil enclaves  
Recommendation/Observation 
38.      The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that greenfield 
and brownfield airports are equipped with specialised infrastructure to handle time-sensitive, 
perishables, high-value cargos and regional express facilities. The Committee feels that the 
aviation sector will play a defining role in increasing India‟s cargo capacity to bring it at par 
with other top performing countries. The Ministry should ensure that its rules and guidelines 
enable a conducive environment for major growth in air cargo operations in India. AAI 

28 
 
should ensure that all its airports increase their air cargo capacities in line with the demands 
of the air cargo sector.  
(Para 155) 
39.      The Committee notes that it is the vision of the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 
that cargo volumes should increase to 10 million tonnes by 2027. The Committee notes that 
the Coronavirus -pandemic affected years showed a considerable decline in timers of air 
cargo handled in India. From the data available for the Financial Year 2021 -22, it is evident 
that both domestic and international air cargo figures are nearing the pre - pandemic levels. 
To meet the target of 10 million tonnes air cargo volume envisaged in NCAP, 2016, the cargo 
volume would have to increase at a compounded annual growth rate of well over 20 percent. 
The Ministry should ensure well -equipped infrastructure across crucial greenfield and 
brownfield airports to capitalize on the expanding global air freight market and meet its 
revised targets.  
 (Para 156) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1    AAI Cargo Logistics &  Allied Services Co. Ltd. (AAICLAS), a 100% wholly owned 
subsidiary of Airports Authority of India (AAI) is creating air cargo facilities based on 
market need and demand.  
39.2    Air cargo infrastructural capacity of 10.7 million Metric Tonnes (MT) as of Q1 of 
2023-24 has been put in place in the country. The airport -wise details listed in Annexure – 
IV. 
  
Global Scenario of Air Transport/ Freight  
Recommendation/Observation 
40.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyse the various challe nges 
listed and suggestions made by APAO regarding operating cargo facilities, and take suitable 
action to ensure that the air cargo capacity of our country is boosted. The Ministry may 
ensure proper infrastructure across crucial greenfield and brownfield airports so that India 
can capitalise on the expansion of the global air freight market.  
(Para 164) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1    The available air cargo infrastructural capacity is already 10.7 Million MT as of Q1 of 
2023-24. The airport-wise available capacity is listed in Annexure -IV. The current annual air 
cargo volume is 3.16 Million MT which leaves sufficient headroom to cater to the expansion 
of global air freight market. The upcoming greenfield airports shall further enhance this 
capacity making it  sufficient in terms of air cargo infrastructure. Based on the demand of 
airlines, additional infrastructural facilities shall be planned and created based on feasibility 
and volume. 

29 
 
Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves  
Recommendation/Observation 
41.      The Committee appreciates the multitude of steps being taken by the Ministry/AAI to 
promote the use of green energy in Indian airports. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should continue to incentivize airports to adopt  green and sustainable models. This 
can be done by offering tax breaks and other incentives to airports that achieve carbon 
neutrality and net-zero emissions.  
(Para 166) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1    MoCA has sensitized all Brownfield Airport operators to  adopt green energy, Carbon 
Mitigation Measures as well as Carbon Management plans. To encourage the Airport 
Operators for adopting Green and sustainable initiatives at airports, MoCA has advised 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) for inclusion of Carbon Neutrality & Net 
Zero as one the parameters for monitoring performance standards of major /designated 
airports and their tariff determination. 
  
Ease of doing business in the aviation sector  
Recommendation/Observation 
42.      The Committee takes note of the National Mission on Design & Development of 
Regional Transport Aircraft being undertaken by CSIR. The Committee feels that the design 
and development of indigenous regional transport aircraft would be in line with t he vision of 
Atmanirbhar Bharat and would contribute towards improving air connectivity while creating 
employment opportunities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
sufficient budgetary allocation is provided for this effort.  
(Para 189) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1    CSIR is under the purview of Ministry of Science and Technology 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
43.      The Committee observes that the Ministry is responsible for the administration of the 
Aircraft Act, 1934, Aircraft Rule s, 1937 and various other legislations pertaining to the 
aviation sector in the country. While the Ministry has made amendments to the Aircraft Act 
and Aircraft Rules from time to time, the mother legislation/ rules are about 90 years old as 
on date. The C ommittee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of 
undertaking a thorough review of the existing legislations/ rules that better reflect the 
modern day realities and requirements of the Indian aviation sector.  
(Para 190) 

30 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
43.1    The Aircraft Act, 1934 has been reviewed and a Bill titled "The Aircraft Bill, 2023" 
providing for regulating provisions in a simplified manner, identifying existing redundancies 
and to provide for provisions to meet current needs of regulation of civil aviation has been 
drafted. The bill is at Inter-Ministerial Consultation (IMC) Stage. 
43.2    Amendment to Aircraft (Demolition of Obstructions caused by Buildings and Trees 
etc.) Rules 1994 published in April 2023 to bring clarity in t he Rules to ensure safety of air 
operations in/ around the airports. 
43.3    Amendment to Aircraft Rules 1937 has been finalized which aims to enhance ease of 
doing business while strengthening the existing regulatory (safety and security) framework 
consistent with the ICAO SARPs and international best practices. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
44.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into possible delays in security 
clearance from BCAS for concessionaires in the aviation sector. If p ossible, fixed timelines 
may be prescribed for such clearances.  
(Para 194) 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1    BCAS processes all security clearances applications including that of concessionaires 
in a time bound manner. As per the existing guidelines, all secu rity clearances are accorded 
after background check of the applicant entity on report of Central Security Agencies (CSA). 
Delay, over and above timeline may be due to the time taken by CSA. 
  
Facilities for passengers  
Recommendation/Observation 
45.      The Committee notes that sufficient passenger facilities have been provided at major 
airports across the country. The Committee, however, notes that no mention has been made 
regarding the facilities provided at non-major airports. The Committee recommends that AAI 
may come up with guidelines to prescribe a certain minimum set of passenger facilities to be 
provided at all airports across the country. This may include facilities for drinking water, 
toilets, „May I Help You‟ counters, and so on.  
(Para 200) 
Reply of the Ministry 
45.1    Mandatory facilities such as Drinking Water, Toilets, Retail Concessionaires, 
sufficient chairs, Mobile Charging points, Baggage Trolleys, facilities for persons with 
reduced mobility are being provided at all Airports. 
  

31 
 
45.2    However, for major Airports additional facilities such as Airport Lounges, Food courts 
etc, are also provided based on the availability of terminal space and the demand. 
  
Greenfield Airport in Bihar  
Recommendation/Observation 
46.      The Committee recommends that all efforts should be made to iron out the difficulties 
faced in the development of a Greenfield airport in Bihar with close cooperation of the State 
Government, which will help create optimum results for the public.Further, the Committee 
recommends that in the meanwhile, various options may be explored for modernization of the 
existing Patna Airport to cater to the growing demand for aviation in the State. 
(Para 208) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1    MoCA vide letter dated 18.04.2023 conveyed to St ate Government of Bihar that 
development of Greenfield Airport in Bihar can be considered, provided the State 
Government of Bihar agrees to provide 2300 acres of land free of cost and free from all 
encumbrances to AAI. In response to the same, the State Go vernment, has stated that among 
various options for airport development Bihta airport has been found most suitable.  
46.2    Meanwhile, the development works are being undertaken by AAI at Patna airport to 
enhance its capacity from 2.3 MPPA to 10 MPPA. 
  
Bihta, Darbhanga and Sitamarhi Airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
47.      The Committee may be apprised of the present status of land acquisition by the State 
Government for the Bihta Airport along with reasons for delay, if any. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the investment envisaged for the  Bihta Civil 
Enclave is utilised in an optimum manner to ensure decongestion of the Patna airport. The 
Ministry may examine the avenues for future expansion of the Bihta airport and to ensure 
that the best possible site is chosen to share the load of the Patna airport in the future.  
(Para 214) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1    The State Government of Bihar has provided 108 acres of land for development of a 
New Civil Enclave at Bihta and following persistent efforts, the State Government has agreed 
to provide the additional 8 acres of land also.  
47.2    AAI has now submitted a revised PIB Memo to MoCA for the development of a New 
Civil Enclave at Bihta, with a cost estimate of Rs. 1453 crore for appraisal by PIB and further 
seeking the approval by CCEA. The same is under consideration. 
  

32 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
48.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the State Government to 
take up the land acquisition for the Darbhanga Airport on priority so as to enable AAI to 
develop a permanent Civil Enclave there at. The Committee further recommends t hat the 
Ministry may ensure necessary infrastructure for comfortable seating of passengers at the 
Darbhanga airport.  
(Para 215) 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1    52.65 acres of land has been handed over to AAI by the State Government of Bihar for 
development of a New Civil Enclave at Darbhanga airport in Bihar. 
48.2    AAI has recently submitted a proposal to MoCA for development of new terminal 
building and allied works at an estimated cost of Rs.911.66 crore. A PIB memorandum has 
been prepared along with the  DPR and same has been circulated to various departments for 
Inter-Ministerial consultation. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
49.      Proactive efforts should be made by AAI to ensure that all States reap benefits of 
enhanced regional air connectivity under t he RCS UDAN Scheme. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may seek the willingness of the State Government of Bihar for 
inclusion of the Sitamarhi airstrip under the UDAN scheme.  
(Para 216) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.1    Sitamarhi is not listed in the  list of unserved airports in UDAN document.   For the 
forthcoming round of bidding under UDAN, if the State Government of Bihar mentions the 
existence of the airstrip at Sitamarhi and requests to include the same under UDAN, it shall 
be included in the RCS  Document for the next round of bidding.    Upon receiving the valid 
bids, the same shall be considered as per the provisions of UDAN Scheme. 
  
Calicut Airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
50.      The Committee notes that AAI has agreed to share the cost of  levelling and stabilizing 
the land up to Rs. 100 crores with a condition that any cost beyond Rs. 100 crores should be 
borne by the State Government of Kerala. The Committee recommends that AAI may consider 
meeting the entire cost of land acquisition for the expansion of the Calicut airport. 
(Para 227) 

33 
 
  
  
Reply of the Ministry 
50.1    AAI has agreed to meet the entire cost of construction which is Rs. 484.57 Crores, 
while the State Government has agreed to provide the necessary land free of cost to AAI. 
  
Bhiwadi Airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
51.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter with DMICDC 
to know the reasons behind not seeking “In -Principle” approval for the Greenfield Airport 
near Bhiwadi, Alwar, Rajasthan despite receiving site clearance for the same.  
(Para 229) 
Reply of the Ministry 
51.1    Government of India has granted the site clearance to M/s. Delhi Mumbai Industrial 
Corridor Development Corporation Limited (DMICDC) for setting up of a Greenfield Airport 
for public use near Bhiwadi, District Alwar, Rajasthan subject to some conditions 
on 18.11.2015. Further development would depend on preparation of DPR, its economic 
viability and financial closure subject to the „in-principle‟ approval. 
51.2    As per the decision taken in the meeting held on 03.02.2020, under the chairmanship 
of Secretary (CA), State Government and DMICDC have been requested to firm up their 
position on the Greenfield Airport project at Alwar. Application for In -Principle approval is 
yet to be received. 
51.3    As more than 8 years have passed since grant of Site Clearance, State Government of 
Rajasthan and the Project Proponent have been requested to convey the decision with regard 
to development of Greenfield airport at Bhiwadi in Alwa r District. Further, if a Greenfield 
airport is not considered feasible/ required to be developed at the site for which 'Site 
Clearance was granted earlier, State Government / Project Proponent have also been 
requested to convey the same to MoCA for furthe r necessary action in the matter. Response 
of State Govt. and Project Proponent is awaited. 
  
Bhogapuram Airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
52.      The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for the long delay in signing the 
MoU between AAI and Government of Andhra Pradesh, after grant of in -principle approval 
to the project by the Government of India in 2016. The Committee may also be briefed about 
how the existing infrastructure for civil flight operations at the Visakhapatnam airport will be 
utilised and maintained during the closure of scheduled commercial operations for 30 years 
thereat.  

34 
 
(Para 234) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
52.1    An MoU  was executed between AAI and GoAP on 12.09.2022. As per MoU signed, 
the Civil Enclave at Vishakhapatnam (INS Dega) will be closed for scheduled commercial 
operations by the Airports Authority of India for a period of 30 (thirty) years from the da te of 
commencement of operations of Bhogapuram airport. 
52.2    During the closure of scheduled commercial operations for 30 years, non -schedule 
operations may take place from the existing  Visakhapatnam airport  
  
Chandigarh Airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
53.      The Committee notes that the Automatic-Visual Docking Guidance System is presently 
installed at 5 parking stands of the New Civil Enclave at Chandigarh airport and provision 
for VDGS is planned for 10 more parking stands . As of now, Marshalls are being used for 
other parking stands. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may plan the installation 
of VDGS on the remaining parking stands in a time-bound manner to permit efficient parking 
of aircrafts on the parking stands. 
(Para 238) 
Reply of the Ministry 
53.1    AAI will float combined tender for VDGS along with other Airports including 
CHIAL. 
  
Shortage of ATCOs  
Recommendation/Observation 
54.      The Committee notes that the Government has approved creation of addition 340 posts 
of ATCOs in AAI in May, 2022. The Committee recommends that AAI may ensure that 
sufficient ATCOs are posted at all times to ensure smooth functioning of airports a cross the 
country. AAI may analyse the demand for ATCOs keeping in mind the projected growth of the 
Indian aviation sector and take proactive action for timely recruitment of ATCOs based on 
the same.  
(Para 241) 
Reply of the Ministry 
54.1    The manpower r equirements of ATCOs are reviewed periodically and recruitment is 
done as per the calendar drawn. Once recruited, the ATCOs are sent for training. AAI 
regularly gathers information related to existing and future development projects, traffic 
movements, etc . and after successful training, they are posted based at the functional 

35 
 
operational unit(s) at the airport(s), thereby optimizing the demand & available manpower. 
The calculation of required licensed ATCO manpower at an airport is based on the regulatory 
requirements issued by Director General Civil Aviation (DGCA). 
54.2    So far as the future growth in aviation sector is concerned, AAI is adopting proactive 
approach and accordingly submitting proposals to DPE in advance for creation of more 
ATCOs posts. The recruitment of ATCOs is a continuous process based on accruing 
vacancies and training capacities at Air Traffic Service Training Organization (ATSTO). 
  
Increasing incidents of in-flight altercations  
Recommendation/Observation 
55.      The Committee a ppreciates that DGCA has issued CAR, Section 3 - Air Transport, 
Series M, and Part VI titled “Handling of unruly / disruptive passengers”, specifying detailed 
procedures for the airlines to follow in case of incidents of unruly behavior by passengers 
during flights. The Committee recommends that DGCA may enforce a zero tolerance policy 
for incidents of unruly behaviour by passengers and strict implementation of the No -Fly List 
may be ensured. DGCA may periodically review the SOPs and Emergency Procedures 
Manuals framed by the airline companies in this regard, to ensure the compliance of DGCA 
norms.  
(Para 250) 
Reply of the Ministry 
55.1    DGCA has issued Civil Aviation Requirements Section – 3, Series –M, Part VI titled 
“Handling of unruly passengers to address the issue of Unlawful/disruptive behavior on board 
the aircraft”. 
55.2    Under the provision of the said CAR, airline shall establish Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) including the role of  ground staff, flight crew, airline airport manager and 
airline central operational control to deal with unruly passengers while at airport or on -board 
the aircraft.  
55.3    Further, each airline prepares Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) and Standard 
operating Procedure (SOP) for disruptive and unruly passenger i n safety emergency 
procedure manual in line with the current regulations and accepted by DGCA. All airlines are 
required to deal such situations as per published procedure and airline specific manual. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
56.      The Committee recommends that a special Airline Wing should be formed for dealing 
with police and courts in cases of unruly passengers since at present, the pilot and crew 
members have to attend the court and visit police stations for prosecuting the unruly 
passenger. The Ministry may also coordinate with the concerned Departments to ensure that 
any victims of unruly passengers are not required to physically visit distant police stations 
and courts in pursuance of legal remedy in such cases. 

36 
 
(Para 252) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
56.1    Under the provision of the CAR, Section – 3, Series –M, Part VI, all airlines shall 
establish mechanism to detect and report unruly passenger behaviour at check -in, in the 
lounges, at the boarding gate or any other place in the terminal build ing in order to prevent 
such passengers from boarding. In case of occurrence of an act of unruly behaviour while the 
aircraft is on ground, such cases shall be reported immediately in writing and First 
Information Report (FIR) may be lodged with security agency at the aerodrome. 
56.2    Further, whenever an airline receives a complaint of unruly behaviour from the pilot -
in-command, the incident may be referred by the airlines to an Internal Committee. This 
Internal Committee shall be constituted by the airline and consists of the following:- 
a)  Retired District & Session Judge as Chairman.  
b)  A representative from a different scheduled Airline as Member.  
c)  Representative from a passengers association or consumer association or retired 
officer of Consumer Dispute Redressal Forum as Member. 
56.3    The Internal Committee shall decide the matter within a period of 30 days along with 
category level of the unruly passenger and duration for which the unruly passenger will be 
banned from flying. In view of abo ve, the recommendation for formation Special Airline 
Wing may be dropped. 
  
Capacity Constraints at Airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
57.      The Committee is aware that there are various capacity constraints at the existing 
airports/ terminals. For instance, a fourth runway (29 „right‟) at Terminal -1 of the Indira 
Gandhi International Airport, Delhi has not been operationalized due to some administrative 
reasons and also due to some obstacles such as buildings in the flight path. The delay in 
operationalization of this runway is hampering the capacity of a critical airport as flights are 
being delayed affecting the operational cost of a irlines. The Committee had taken up this 
issue during the examination of the Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation (MoCA) and the Secretary, MoCA had assured that action has been initiated for 
demolishing a particular building whic h was creating hindrance and this will pave the way 
for operationalization of the said runway. The Committee would like to know the present 
status of the action taken in this regard. 
(Para 253) 
Reply of the Ministry 
57.1    The 4th runway at IGI Airport, Delhi  has been operationalized on 14th July 2023. 
  

37 
 
  
  
CAG Observations  
Recommendation/Observation 
58.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that replies in respect of 
observations made in CAG Reports are furnished in a time -bound manner without fail. The 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for not furnishing reply to the Para No. 3.1 of 
CAG'S Report No. 13 of 2013 (Commercial) even after a decade has passed since the Report 
came out.  
(Para 255) 
Reply of the Ministry 
58.1    The C&AG para relates to land issues across the country and involves various aviation 
stakeholders. It may kindly be noted that replies to the observations of Audit have already 
been furnished twice. However, Audit has again made further observation on the issue for 
which replies are being prepared. 
58.2    As of May, 2023, 74.59% of the land owned by the A irports Authority of India (AAI) 
had undergone mutation as of March 31, 2020. The encroachment as on 31.03.2020 is 
999.823 acres. As on 28.02.2023 74.96 of land owned by AAI stands mutated. The balance 
mutation work is in progress. Further land record data , its mutation, handing over / taking 
over of land, maps of the airport showing the revenue area of the airport duly authenticated 
by the revenue authorities and other relevant revenue documents is being collected for 
updating the status However, AAI is ta king all steps for removal of encroachment in 
coordination with local revenue authorities, hon'ble courts and State Police Department. As 
regards recovery of dues from defaulters timely action is being taken by AAI. 
58.3    Further, with approval of AAI Bo ard a three Member settlement advisory committee 
has been set up for resolution of the long pending issues. After decision of the committee the 
cases are put up to AAI Board for consideration to approve the one time settlement. 
  
Issues pertaining to Digi Yatra  
Recommendation/Observation 
59.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the technical issues 
faced by the users of the Digi Yatra app are ironed out at the earliest. The reviews of the 
users may be duly looked into and issues highlighted thereat may also be resolved.  
(Para 257) 
Reply of the Ministry 
59.1    The recommendation of the committee is noted. Technical issues faced by the users 
are resolved from time to time by the technical team and with regular updates of the Digi 
Yatra app. 

38 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and the Challenges thereof 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The list of airports for which new terminal buildings are under planning or in 
progress includes several airports in Tier II and III cities. This is a positive move towards 
improving regional connectivity and providing access to air travel to a wider population. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that these airports are well - 
connected to major nearby cities and have adequate transportation infrastructure to facilitate 
passenger traffic. 
 (Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      National Highways Authority of India(NHAI) or the respective State Government 
provides approach road connectivity to the airport. Under the PM Gati Shakti initiative, 
continuous coordination is done with NHAI and the State Go vernment to ensure the seamless 
connectivity of the airport with the city and the nearby State or National highways that 
connect to other towns and cities. 
1.2      Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) -UDAN, launched on 21.10.2016, seeks to 
provide connectiv ity to unserved and underserved airports which are normally located in 
Tier-II and Tier -III cities. As of 31.10.2023, 75 RCS Aerodromes, including Airports, 
Heliports and Water Aerodromes, have been operationalized providing connectivity on 509 
routes catering to more than 131 Lakh Passengers.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.3      The Committee is of the opinion that though the main responsibility of providing 
road connectivity lies with the State Government, the Ministry should also make 
proactive efforts and follow -up with the concerned agencies, to expedite the process of 
providing road connectivity, in co-ordination with the NHAI and State Government.  
  
Financing of Airport Projects and Foreign Direct Investment in Civil Aviation Sector  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee notes the changes in FDI Policy, 2020 and would like to know the 
improvements that had happened as a result of the changes in the FDI Policy since 2020. It 
also feels that the changes in the FDI Policy wou ld help drive the level of investment needed 

39 
 
in order to achieve the desired growth rate in the aviation sector in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to attract more 
foreign investment in the Indian avia tion sector, which can lead to the development of better 
infrastructure, more job opportunities, and improved economic growth.  
 (Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      Government of India has permitted 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in 
Greenfield and Brownfield airport projects under the FDI Policy. Further, Government of 
India has made several efforts in the form of policy decisions which inter -alia include 
adopting Per Passenger Fee (PPF) as bidding parameter instead of earlier revenue share 
system and doing away with the prior experience of operating of airport as a prerequisite for 
bidding. These initiatives have created an enabling environment for attracting private 
investors, including foreign investors, to take up airport projects in the coun try. Besides, AAI 
sensitizes the prospective bidders by way of various activities such as one to one dialogue 
with the investors, roadshows, advertisements giving wider publicity etc. Moreover, State 
Governments also play a major role in attracting investm ent from the private sector by 
providing various incentives such as leasing of land at concessional rate, connectivity to 
airport, fiscal incentives by way of exemption from State taxes, real estate development 
rights, availability of uninterrupted water & electricity supply, security around airport etc. As 
a result, a number of airports in the country are run by the private airport operators, including 
foreign players. These include airports at Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Bengaluru, 
Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Manga luru, Jaipur, Guwahati, Thiruvananthapuram, Cochin, 
Durgapur, Sindhudurg and Kannur. In addition, construction of new Greenfield airports at 
Jewar (Noida), Mopa (Goa) and Navi Mumbai (Mumbai) has been undertaken by the private 
developers to usher in privat e investment into civil aviation sector in the country. Jewar 
Airport Project has been awarded to a foreign company namely M/s Zurich Airport 
International AG which has formed a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) -Yamuna International 
Airport Private Limited (YIAPL) for the airport development. 
2.2      FDI Cell has been constituted in the Ministry to consider the FDI Proposals in 
Aviation Sector. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3      The Committee desires to know how the new system will attract more pr ivate 
sector investment and the details of private sector investments in the Civil Aviation 
Sector till date. The details of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) proposals considered 
and finally approved by FDI Cell may also be stated. 
  
  
  

40 
 
Land Value Capture Mechanism  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee notes that land acquisition is one of the biggest expenditures incurred 
on the development of an airport. Given the consistently rising land acquisition costs for 
public infrastructure projects,  the present sources for financing of the same i.e., budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry, Public -Private-Partnership and AAI revenue, might not be 
sufficient. The Committee feels that the Value Capture Mechanism can augment the financial 
requirements of t he airport sector in the country. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may conduct a detailed analysis of the possible implementation of the Value Capture 
Mechanism to generate revenue for investment in further development, maintenance and 
expansion of airports across the country.  
 (Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      As per the provisions of National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP 2016), State Govt. are 
required to provide the requisite land for airport development and expansion on free of cost 
basis to AAI. The State gets benefitted by the economic development i n the area of influence 
of airport project and increase in value of land.  
3.2      Land being State subject, the benefits are transferred to State Govt. for increase in 
circle rates, stamp duty and other economic activities in surrounding areas. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.3      The Committee desires to know the comments of the Ministry on the ‘Land Value 
Capture Mechanism’ to augment the financial requirements of airport sector in the 
country and reiterates that the Ministry may conduct a det ailed analysis of the possible 
implementation of the Value Capture Mechanism to generate revenue for investment in 
further development, maintenance and expansion of airports across the country.   
  
Manohar International Airport (MIA), Mopa, Goa  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee notes the various steps taken by the Ministry to develop the Manohar 
International Airport at Mopa, Goa as one of the 11 Greenfield airports which have been 
operationalized since 2008. The Committee appreciates that the airport has been planned 
and constructed after diligent planning and taking various aspects into consideration. The 
configuration of the airport as regards the Passenger Terminal Building; Runways; Taxiway; 
Passenger Boarding Bridges; Air Traffic Control Tower; and Mu lti-Modal Connectivity has 
been developed keeping in mind the present and future requirements. Further, the Committee 
notes that sustainability initiatives and technological advancements implemented in the 
development of Mopa International airport can be a pplied to future Greenfield projects. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt the best practices which have 

41 
 
been followed at Mopa and if found feasible, it may be implemented at other ongoing/future 
Greenfield projects after due conside ration, to ensure that both environmental and 
commercial aspects of development are catered to. 
 (Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Suggestions of the Committee have been noted. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2      The Committee desires to know whether there are any plans to adopt the best 
practices which have been followed at Mopa airport at other airports and if so, details 
thereof.   
  
Increasing airport density and availability in the country  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Com mittee opines that the development of airports/ heliports is a capital - 
intensive process involving funds to the tune of hundreds of crore rupees. It is essential to 
ensure that the capacities of already developed airports are optimally utilised to enable a 
good return on the invested capital as well as to stimulate regional economic growth. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry should devise an effective strategy to start scheduled 
operations at these airports to ensure that their capacities are optimally utilised. The 
Ministry may explore the feasibility of viability gap funding to help fuel the demand needed to 
support scheduled operations at these airports. The Ministry may also consider incentivising 
the airlines for a limited period of time to help sustain scheduled commercial operations. 
 (Para 96) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      The Ministry has recently concluded UDAN round 5.0, where the developed airports 
were put under a priority list for the award of routes to the airlines with Viability Gap 
Funding support for a period of 3 years in order to optimally utilize the ca pacities of such 
airports.  
5.2      A total of 148 routes have been awarded connecting such airports in the above 
mentioned round. The Ministry may conduct more such biddings in case it is felt that 
additional such airports require support. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.3      The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the status of the 
actual number of routes which have been operationalised out of the 148 awarded routes.  

42 
 
  
Accommodating future growth  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee notes that Site Clearance has been granted for Singrauli and Kotkasim 
Greenfield airports in 2017 and 2022 respectively. The Committee may be apprised of the 
present status of these airports, along with reasons for delays, if any. 
 (Para 109) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      As per GFA Policy, 2008 after the grant of 'Site -Clearance', project proponent is 
required to submit an application for 'In -Principle' approval. In both the cases of Singrauli 
and Kotkasim, application for 'In-Principle' approval has not been submitted to MoCA by the 
respective Project Proponents. The matter has been taken up with them including the 
concerned State Governments to expedite the same. However, MoCA is yet to receive 
application for 'In-Principle' approval. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2      The Committee desires to know the present status as regards the ‘in -principle’ 
approval by State Governments for Singrauli and Kotkasim airports and the reasons 
for the delay on the part of project proponents.   
  
Profitability of airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee agrees with the fact that an airport in general becomes profitable 
when adequate traffic flows from the airport. The Committee feels that the Ministry sho uld 
work towards increasing the share of air transport for cargo movement as the same would 
help generate revenue for the airports. AAI should also work with airlines to attract new 
routes and increase frequency on existing routes to attract maximum passen gers. More stress 
should be laid on non -aeronautical revenue sources such as lounges, shopping areas etc. 
within the airports which would also provide a rich experience to the passengers.  
 (Para 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Airports Authority of India is continuously working with all stakeholders and regularly 
interacting with airlines for enhancing connectivity and increasing air traffic at its Airports.   
7.2      AAI has been focusing on increasing the non -aeronautical revenue through 
commercialization of the available space at the airports while at the same time providing rich 
experience to the passengers.  

43 
 
7.3      Presently, the non -aeronautical revenue is approximately 30% for FY 2022 -23 which 
is comparable to private airports considering that  AAI is mostly operating at smaller airports 
where potential for non-aeronautical revenue is comparatively less.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.4      The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply as regards the increase of air traffic 
and non-aeronautical revenue at airports. The Committee urges the Ministry to make 
all-out efforts to increase the cargo movement at the airports and focus on enhancing 
the non-aeronautical revenue at smaller airports as well. 
  
Challenges faced by Private Airports Operators in the operation of airports across the 
country and possible solutions thereto  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The Committee notes the suggestions of the GMR representative regarding a Common 
Security Hold Area (SHA) and recommends that the suggestion may be discussed with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and other security agencies involved, and if feasible, a plan may be 
worked out to benefit the passengers. It also recommends that the support infrastructur e 
constructed and maintained by Government agencies should be planned well in advance at 
the planning stage and periodically reviewed to ensure smooth operation at the airports. 
 (Para 131) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      No proposal has been received from GMR for a Common Security Hold Area (SHA). 
The matter may be taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs, after receipt of such a proposal. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.2      The Committee notes the reply and desires that the suggestions of the GMR on 
the Common Security Hold Area (SHA) may be sought from the GMR and if possible a 
dialogue with the Ministry of Home Affairs may be initiated for establishing a common 
SHA. 
  
Global Scenario of Air Transport/ Freight  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee is of the view that air cargo operations provide an economic boost to 
the regional economy, by permitting quick transport of perishable items such as fruits and 
vegetables. The Committee therefore recommends that AAI Cargo Logistics  and Allied 
Services Company Ltd. (AAICLAS) should consider investing capital in the airports where 
cargo operations have discontinued for lack of compliance with the BCAS requirements so as 

44 
 
to permit the operationalisation of air cargo operations thereat.  The Committee further 
recommends that BCAS may grant some more time to AAICLAS to meet its requirements and 
enable the airports to immediately resume the air cargo operations thereat. 
 (Para 160) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      The inbound air cargo moveme nt is uninterrupted in all the airports. However, 
outbound operations were temporarily halted due to the BCAS order. Currently, out of the 20 
airports, at 6 airports AAICLAS has commenced Regulated Agent (RA) operations. 
Additionally, 7 airports are operat ionalized as self -handling by airlines, and 2 are 
operationalized by PPP. At the remaining 5 airports, airlines are yet to commence operations 
due to low volume. AAICLAS is actively working towards re -operationalizing cargo at such 
airports shortly. The detailed status of the airports is attached in Annexure-V. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.2      The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry and urges to 
expedite the air cargo movement at remaining airports as well. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to make concentrated efforts to increase traffic and cargo 
connectivity especially in the North -Eastern Region, Hilly Areas and Islands including 
Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands, which will help in the growt h in 
economy of these remote regions. 
  
Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves  
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee recommends that the Airports Authority of India may closely monitor 
the progress made by different a irports regarding their target for achieving 100% use of 
green energy by 2024. AAI may take necessary measures to help the airports lagging behind 
in the achievement of these targets.  
 (Para 167) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1    As of October 2023, 68 airpor ts including AAI airports are running on 100% Green 
Energy  and action plan is to increase the number of airports using 100% Green Energy to 
106 Airports by 2024. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.2    The Committee desires to know the names of 68 a irports which are presently 
running on 100% green energy. Further, the Ministry may also inform the probable 
timeline as regards the remaining airports including PPP mode and airports under the 
control of Ministry of Defence which are using 100% green energy.   

45 
 
  
Development of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Facilities  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee notes that MRO demand in India is also anticipated to grow, thereby 
entailing attractive investment opportunities for domestic as we ll as foreign investors, OEMs 
and leading MROs across the world. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
make all out efforts through changes in regulations, to create a conducive ecosystem for 
foreign aircraft manufactures like Boeing, Airbus an d other OEMs to establish their MRO in 
India.  
 (Para 180) 
12.      The Committee commends the policy initiatives such as the MRO Policy 2021, 
National Civil Aviation Policy 2016, and fiscal policies such as rationalisation of GST, which 
reflect the vision  of the Government to develop India as a global MRO hub. The Committee 
also notes that presently only repairs of noncore activities other than engine repairs etc. are 
being carried out in India. It hopes that the aforesaid policy would enable the India MRO  to 
take up major technical repairs as well. Aircraft manufacturers (OEMs) may be encouraged 
to open MRO facilities in India.  
 (Para 181) 
13.      The Committee also observes that most of the foreign Aircraft Manufacturers & OEMs 
prefer to utilize their own MROs established abroad despite reduced labour, shipping, 
Turnaround Time and finance cost of replacements & inventory in India. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may focus on highlighting these aspects to prospec tive MROs 
who want to set up establishments in the country. The Committee is of the view that the 
growth of the MRO sector will also depend on how efficiently it can address and remove the 
key challenges faced by MRO players in India. It hopes that the Min istry will make all out 
efforts to implement the various fiscal measures at the ground level and also ensure proactive 
interaction with MRO industry to remove any bottlenecks that may arise.  
 (Para 182) 
14.      The Committee is of the opinion that since MRO services constitute a significant 
portion of overall expenditure of any airlines operator, setting up MRO services in the 
country would reduce the expenditure on MRO services and subsequently reduce the airfares 
in the domestic routes, which will conse quently reduce the cost of air travel and benefit the 
passengers.  
 (Para 183) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1    There are 150 (Operator + Standalone) AMOs/Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul 
MROs approved in India for Line/Base maintenance. Out of which 49 standal one MROs 
approved for base maintenance and 07 are capable to carrying out the maintenance and 
overhaul of aircraft and components. 

46 
 
14.2    Government seeks to facilitate setting up of aircraft MRO services in India through 
various policy, regulatory and ot her incentives and the Government has taken various 
measures to create a conducive environment for the development of Aircraft Maintenance, 
Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services. 
14.3    With a view to incentivise the growth of MROs in the country and also co ntribute to 
the ease of doing business, MoCA has brought out the new MRO Guidelines in Sept. 2021 
with a view to create a congenial atmosphere in the country for the development of the MRO 
industry for aircraft/ helicopter/ drones and their engines and oth er parts. These guidelines 
inter-alia provide for transparency in the allotment of land doing away with levy of any 
royalty or cess of whatsoever nature on MRO operators and at AAI airports through call of 
open tenders. 
14.4    Further on 9th June 2023, AA I has issued Land Management Circular through which 
allotment of land/ space for setting up MROs (for self/3rd party) at AAI Airports to willing 
agencies on card rate basis for a period of 25 years. No royalty/ concession fee shall be 
payable/ applicable for self and 3rd party MRO services. 
14.5    The other key measures taken by the Government to incentivise MROs in the country 
are:- 
i. GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax Credit from 1st 
April, 2020. 
ii. Transactions sub -contracted by f oreign original equipment manufacturers (OEMs)/ 
MRO to domestic MRO are treated as 'exports' with zero -rated GST from 1st April, 
2020 
iii. Exempted Customs Duty on tools and tool kits 
iv. Reduced Goods and Services Tax rates on various spare parts, accessories, and  
consumables 
v. Simplified clearance processing of parts 
vi. Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years 
vii. Extended stay in India of foreign aircraft for entire duration of MRO work or 6 
months, whichever is lesser 
viii. Revised the Notification to enable export of serviceable parts 
ix. 100% Foreign Direct Investment permitted via automatic route for MRO 
x. Liberalized policy for borrowing and lending in Foreign Currency and Rupees on 
competitive terms for MROs 
xi. Modalities prescribed for con cessional temporary imports of spare parts by foreign 
airlines for repair of their aircraft in transit. 
14.6    The taxation issues pertaining to MRO sector have also been taken up with Ministry of 
Finance in the meetings held between M/o Civil Aviation an d M/o Finance, as well as vide 
follow-up letters. Most recently, a meeting was held between Hon'ble Minister of Civil 

47 
 
Aviation and Hon'ble Finance Minister on 26/06/2023 wherein the taxation issues pertaining 
to civil aviation sector, including MRO sector, were reiterated. 
14.7    Some of the positive developments in the MRO sector to promote investment and tie -
ups regarding airframe, engine and component in the  country  are as follows: 
 Airbus and Boeing have signed collaboration agreements with GMR and Ai r Works 
respectively in February 2021 
 Pratt & Whitney has started aircraft engine repairs in association with Air India 
Engineering Services Limited (AIESL). 
 General electric (GE) established an engine / overhaul repair facility at Nagpur, the 
first phase of engine MRO is operational and till date quick turn repairs of engines has 
been carried at Nagpur engine test cell preparatory area. 
 Several rounds of discussions have been held with the representatives of Safran at 
various levels regarding the proposed MRO facilities in India. Safran has committed 
to invest USD 150 million for setting up an aircraft engine MRO at Hyderabad. The 
proposed timeline is 31st December, 2024. 
 M/s Boeing have: (a) Constructed a state-of-the-art C-17 facility, which could be used 
for civil MRO as well, (b) Operationalized P -8I defence MRO in India, (c) 
Announced with Spirit a component parts MRO in February 2023, (d) Announced a 
737-cargo conversion line in March 2023 and (e) Partnering with Safran on the engine 
MRO it is building for the 737 by 2025. 
 PHL is already in talks with Russian OEMs to jointly set up MRO facilities in India 
for Russian origin Helicopters in Civil/Defence market. 
 HAL has aligned itself to achieve objectives of MoCA to make India a Global MRO 
hub. Various M RO services are planned at HAL Nasik for narrow body and general 
aviation aircraft.  In this regard HAL is collaborating with OEMs as well as Global 
MRO players. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.8    The Committee commends the Ministry for taking necessary actions for 
development of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) facilities in the Country. 
The Committee would like to know the details and break -up of 150 (Operator and 
Standalone) AMOs/ MROs approved in India and out of these how many are Ind ian 
operators. 
14.9    The Committee may also be apprised of the actual requirement of MROs and 
Ministry’s plans as regards the growth of the civil aviation market in the country. The 
Ministry may also explore the possibilities of MRO development in the co untry with 
foreign collaborations so as to reduce the cost of airlines which will lead to reduction in 
airfares as well.    
  

48 
 
Ease of doing business in the aviation sector  
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      Given the important role played by AERA in the Indian aviation sector, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure that AERA is staffed with personnel with suitable 
domain expertise. 
 (Para 193) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Recently, 10 additional posts, including technical posts have been c reated in the year 
2022 for AERA. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.2    The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the details of the 10 
additional posts which have been created for AERA. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the actual sanc tioned and in -position strength of AERA including the ones 
at technical positions. 
  
Facilities for passengers  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee appreciates the finalisation of the „Accessibility Standards and 
Guidelines for Civil Aviation‟ and believes that the implementation of these standards and 
guidelines would help all passengers have a safe and convenient air travel ex perience. The 
Committee hopes that these accessibility standards and guidelines are up to international 
standards to ensure a world -class experience for domestic and international passengers 
alike. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may put a mecha nism in place to ensure 
that these standards and guidelines are strictly followed across all airports in the country.  
 (Para 203) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    Accessibility Standards and Guidelines for Civil Aviation are being implemented at all 
AAI Airports. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.3    The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that the Ministry has reported about 
the accessibility standards and guidelines only as regards the AAI airports. In this 
regard, the Committee may also like to know the status of other (non -AAI) airports and 
urges the Ministry to issue necessary guidelines to ensure that these standards and 
guidelines are strictly followed across all airports in the country.  

49 
 
Purnea Civil Enclave  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee notes that the 52 -acre land acquired by the State Government for 
development of a new Civil Enclave at Purnea, is not as per AAI's proposal in terms of 
location and shape as required. It also notes that this land which was not as per proposal 
was handed over by the State after more than 6 years of approval from the Ministry of 
Defence. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons behind this 
lapse and ensure that incidents like these do not recur to avoid huge delays in the project.  
 (Para 218) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed on 05.06.2023 between the 
AAI and the State Government to develop Purnea Airport on 52.18 acres of land acquired. 
Bihar government has also  agreed to provide 15 acres of additional land for development of 
Civil Enclave. AAI Board has approved proposal for construction of New Civil Enclave 
having Terminal building of 20,250 sq.m. area at a cost of Rs. 424 cr. The process of 
appointing a consultant for design and DPR has been initiated by AAI. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
17.2    The Committee notes the reply and may be informed whether the land offered by 
the Government of Bihar to develop Purnea airport is suitable and meets the techn ical 
requirements. The Committee may also be apprised of the expected timeline for 
completion and operationalisation of the said airport.   
  
Gaya Airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee notes that AAI has been handed over only 23.84 acr e of land out of its 
requirement of more than 200 acres of land for expansion of the Gaya Airport. The 
Committee feels that Gaya airport is one of the most important airports in Bihar. The 
Committee recommends that the matter may be taken up with the State  Government of Bihar 
at the highest level to facilitate handing over of the remaining part of the required land.  
 (Para 220) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    Correspondence have been made for handing over of remaining land, with the State 
Government of Bihar  vide letter dated 12.12.2018 to the Principal Secretary, Govt. of Bihar 
and to the Director cum Special Secretary, Civil Aviation Dept., Govt. of Bihar, on 
13.05.2016 & 30.07.2019. 
  

50 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
18.2    The Committee notes the repl y and would like to know the present status of the development of 
Gaya Airport and the expected timeline for completion of the project, keeping in view the fact that the 
airport can facilitate an increase in Religious Tourism already existing at Gaya and s urrounding areas.  
Sabarimala airport  
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee is of the view that the Sabarimala airport will be a major boon to the 
visitors of the Sabarimala Temple and give a boost to the regional economy. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the Sabarimala airport proj ect stays on track 
and any bottlenecks causing delays in its completion are proactively tackled.  
 (Para 225) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    MoCA has granted „Site -Clearance‟ for the Sabrimala airport project on 13.04.2023 
and has requested project proponent KSIDC to submit the application for „In -Principle‟ 
approval as per GFA Policy. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
19.2    The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and may be apprised of the 
current status of development of an airport at  near Sabarimala, which sees an influx of 
both domestic and foreign tourists every year.    
  
Training of pilots  
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee notes that the Government has allowed for the opening of ATOs to 
provide simulator training within the country. The Committee may be apprised as to whether 
the capacity of the ATOs presently functioning in the country, suffice the requirements for 
pilots in the Indian aviation sector.  
 (Para 243) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    There are 07 Approv ed Training Organizations (ATO) which provide type specific 
aircraft training to Pilots. While there is no shortage of pilots in India, establishment of 
Approved Training Organizations is a commercial decision undertaken by the private entities 
based on their judgment of the market dynamics with demand and supply of trained personnel 
in the aviation sector. 
20.2    The ATO capacity in the country is inadequate to support the current rate of growth of 
the aviation sector. Most major operators, i.e. Air India (holdings), Indigo, Akasa etc, to meet 
training requirements send pilots abroad to various EASA and FAA approved simulators 

51 
 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
20.3    The Committee notes that the capacity of Approved Training Organisations (ATO) is ina dequate 
to support the current rate of growth of the aviation sector. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
increase the number of ATOs equipped with the state -of-the-art simulators, to meet the increasing 
requirements by taking concentrated efforts inc luding introduction of liberalised policies to encourage 
private participation.   
  

52 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
   
-Nil- 
  
***** 
  

53 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and the Challenges thereof 
The Committee is of the opinion that though the main responsibility of providing road 
connectivity lies with the State Government, the Ministry should also make proactive 
efforts and follow -up with the concerned agencies, to expedite the process of providi ng 
road connectivity, in co-ordination with the NHAI and State Government.                 
(Para 1.3) 
  
Financing of Airport Projects and Foreign Direct Investment in Civil Aviation Sector  
The Committee desires to know how the new system will attract more  private sector 
investment and the details of private sector investments in the Civil Aviation Sector till 
date. The details of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) proposals considered and finally 
approved by FDI Cell may also be stated.                                                                   
  (Para 2.3) 
Land Value Capture Mechanism  
The Committee desires to know the comments of the Ministry on the ‘Land Value 
Capture Mechanism’ to augment the financial requirements of airport sector in the 
country and reiterates that the Ministry may conduct a detailed analysis of the possible 
implementation of the Value Capture Mechanism to generate revenue for investment in 
further development, maintenance and expansion of airports across the country.    
  (Para 3.3) 
Manohar International Airport (MIA), Mopa, Goa  
The Committee desires to know whether there are any plans to adopt the best practices 
which have been followed at Mopa airport at other airports and if so, details thereof. 
              (Para 4.2) 
 
Increasing airport density and availability in the country  
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the status of the actual 
number of routes which have been operationalised out of the 148 awarded routes.  
    (Para 5.3) 

54 
 
Accommodating future growth  
 
 The Committee desires to know the present status as regards the ‘in -principle’ 
approval by State Governments for Singrauli and Kotkasim airports and the reasons 
for the delay on the part of project proponents.                   
   
(Para 6.2) 
Profitability of airports  
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply as regards the increase of air traffic and non -
aeronautical revenue at airports. The Committee urges the Ministry to make all -out 
efforts to increase the cargo movement at the airports and  focus on enhancing the non -
aeronautical revenue at smaller airports as well.                                                     
(Para 7.4) 
Challenges faced by Private Airports Operators in the operation of airports across the 
country and possible solutions thereto  
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the suggestions of the GMR on the 
Common Security Hold Area (SHA) may be sought fr om the GMR and if possible a 
dialogue with the Ministry of Home Affairs may be initiated for establishing a common 
SHA.                                                                                                                               
(Para 8.2) 
Global Scenario of Air Transport/ Freight  
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry and urges to expedite 
the air cargo movement at remaining airports as well. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to make concentrated efforts to increase traffic and cargo connectivity 
especially in the North-Eastern Region, Hilly Areas and Islands including Lakshadweep 
and Andaman & Nicobar Islands, which will help in the growth in economy of these 
remote regions.        
                                                                                                                   (Para 9.2) 
 
Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves  
The Committee desires to know the names of 68 airports which are presently running 
on 100% green energy. Further, the Ministry may also inform the probable timeline as 
regards the remaining airports including PPP mode and airports under the control of 
Ministry of Defence which are using 100% green energy.                               
  (Para 10.2) 
 

55 
 
Development of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Facilities  
The Committee commends the Ministry for taking necessary actions for development of 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) facilities in the Country. The Committee 
would like to know the details and break -up of 150 (Operator and Standalone) AMOs/ 
MROs approved in India and out of these how many are Indian operators.   
             (Para 14.8) 
 
The Committee may also be apprised of the actual requirement of MROs and 
Ministry’s plans as regards the growth of the civil aviation market in the country. The 
Ministry may also explore the possibilities of MRO development in the country with 
foreign collaborations so as to reduce the cost of airlines which will lead to reduction in 
airfares as well. 
                                                                                                                       (Para 14.9) 
Ease of doing business in the aviation sector  
The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the details of the 10 additional posts 
which have been created for AERA. The Committee may also be apprised of the actual 
sanctioned and in-position strength of AERA including the ones at technical positions. 
(Para 15.2) 
Facilities for passengers  
 
The Committee takes co gnizance of the fact that the Ministry has reported about the 
accessibility standards and guidelines only as regards the AAI airports. In this regard, 
the Committee may also like to know the status of other (non -AAI) airports and urges 
the Ministry to issu e necessary guidelines to ensure that these standards and guidelines 
are strictly followed across all airports in the country.                                               
  (Para 16.3) 
 
Purnea Civil Enclave  
The Committee notes the reply and may be infor med whether the land offered by the 
Government of Bihar to develop Purnea airport is suitable and meets the technical 
requirements. The Committee may also be apprised of the expected timeline for 
completion and operationalisation of the said airport.                     
    (Para 17.2)  
Gaya Airport  
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the present status of the 
development of Gaya Airport and the expected timeline for completion of the project, 

56 
 
keeping in view the fact that the airport can facilitate an increase in Religious Tourism 
already existing at Gaya and surrounding areas.                                          
(Para 18.2) 
 
 
Sabarimala airport  
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s r eply and may be apprised of the current 
status of development of an airport at near Sabarimala, which sees an influx of both 
domestic and foreign tourists every year.           
 (Para 19.2) 
 
Training of pilots  
The Committee notes that the capacity of Approved Training Organisations (ATO) is 
inadequate to support the current rate of growth of the aviation sector. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to increase the number of ATOs equipped with the state -of-
the-art simulators, to meet the increasing req uirements by taking concentrated efforts 
including introduction of liberalised policies to encourage private participation.   
(Para 20.3) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  

57 
 
  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
Annexure-I 
  
STATUS OF AIRPORTS 
  
Thanjavur Airport 
Thanjavur Airport belongs to IAF.   It has a primary runway dimension of 2864m x 
45m. It also has a secondary runway having dimension of 1463m x 45m.   
As per Barter Matrix 56.16 Acres of Defence Land has been handed over to AAI and 
the development of Thanj avur Civil Enclave is currently in the planning phase. AAI 
has requested State Govt. of Tamil Nadu vide Letter dated 12.12.2022 and 29.08.2023 
to provide straight and direct approach road from NH-36 to Thanjavur Civil Enclave.  
  
Sabrimala Airport  
  
MoCA has granted „Site -Clearance‟ for the Kottayam (Sabrimala) airport project on 
13.04.2023 and has requested project proponent- KSIDC to submit the application for 
„In-Principle‟ approval as per GFA Policy. 
  
Calicut Airport  
Calicut Airport has a runway dimension of 2700m x 45m suitable for Code -C type of 
Aircraft. The existing International Terminal Building has an area of 39920 sqm and 
domestic terminal building has an area of 12000 sqm with total annual handling 
capacity of  6.6 MPPA. The existing apron has 12 nos. of Code C parking stands. 
Calicut International Airport is connected internationally with 13 International 
destinations (Al Ain, Abu -Dhabi, Dammam, Dubai International, Doha, Jeddah, 
Muscat, Riyadh, Sharjah, Salalah, Manama, Kuwait City, Sheikhdom) with7 domestic 
destinations (Bengaluru, Mumbai, Delhi, Shamshabad, Chennai, cochin, 
Thiruvananthapuram) and has 460 (116 Doms. +344 Int‟l) movements per week.  
  
The following development works are in progress: 
 State Government has agreed to provide 14.5 Acres of land to AAI for RESA work at 
both ends of the Runway. AAI will complete the work in 13-month time from the date 
of getting the possession at its own cost of 484.57 Crores. 
 Runway Re-Carpeting and strengthening and Fixing Central Line Lights & Touch 
Down Zone Lights including Allied Civil and Electrical Works at Calicut Airport is 
going on and expected to be completed by Nov 2023. 
  
Kannur Airport  
Kannur airport is a Greenfield airport developed under PPP by Govt. of Kerala. 
AIRSIDE FACILITIES 
 Airport Code: 4E 
 Runway dimension: 3050 m length and 45 m wide 
 Full length parallel taxiway 
 CAT-1 ILS on RWY 25 and RNP-Y approach on RWY 07 
 20 code-C aircraft stands 
 6 code-E aircraft stands 

59 
 
 Firefighting Category: CAT-9 
TERMINAL FACILITIES  
 The airport has a 97,000 sq.m integrated terminal building with LEED Gold rating 
 Annual capacity of 9 Million pax per annum 
 24 Check-in counters 
 Immigration counters: 12 in departures & 12 in arrivals + 2 e-visa counters 
 Self-baggage drop and Self check-in counters 
 6 Aerobridges 
  
Kadapa Airport  
Kadapa Airport is having a runway dimension of 2515m x 45m suitable for A -320 
type of aircraft. The existing Terminal Building has an area of 948sqm having annual 
handling capacity of 0.10 MPPA.The existing apron has 7 nos. (A -321) of parking 
stands. Kadapa Airport is connected with 5 cities namely Bengaluru, Visakhapatnam, 
Vijayawada, Shamshabad, Chennai and has 42 movements per week.   
  
The following development works are in progress: 
  
 To accommodate larger aircraft construction of New Domestic Terminal Building for 
handling 1800 passengers (900 Arrivals & 900 Departures) is planned amounting to 
Rs. 266 Cr.Approval has been accorded by AAI Board, Tender action for construction 
of New Domestic Terminal Building is in progress. 
  
Begumpet 
  
Begumpet Airpor t, Hyderabad is a commercially closed airport and it is used for 
VIP's, Airforce, non -schedule and training flights. Total area of land is 743.92 Acres 
and encroached land area 107.87 Acres, Runway length of 3230 Mtrs. Re-carpeting of 
runway, apron and associated works at a cost of Rs. 42 Cr. is in award Stage.  
  
Dehradun: 
Dehradun Airport is having a Runway of 2140m x 45m suitable for operation of A -
320 type of aircraft, Terminal Building of an area of 28730 Sqm. Having annual 
handling capacity of   3.65 MPPA, Apron to park 04 Code „C‟ and 04 Code „B‟ type 
of aircraft. It is Connected to 12 cities namely, Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Delhi, Goa, 
Jaipur, Jammu, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Prayagraj, Pune, Hyderabadand has 272 
aircraft movements per week. 
  
The following development works are in progress: 
1. Expansion of existing Terminal Building for total Area 42776 sqm i/c basement at 
a cost of Rs. 457 cr. Phase-I – completed and Phase-II PDC-Sep 2023 
  
2. Construction of Apron for 10 Code C + 10 Code B at awarded cost of Rs. 14.76 cr. 
work completed. 
  

60 
 
Pantnagar:  
  
Existing facilities include a Runway of 1372m x 30m suitable for ATR -72 type of 
aircraft,Terminal Building of an area of 530 Sqm having annual handling capacity of 
0.04 MPPA , Apron to park 02 Code „C‟ type of aircraft and is Connected to2 cities 
namely Delhi and Jaipurand has  42 aircraft movements per week 
  
A team of AAI officials conducted a pre -feasibility study for expansion of the Airport 
to Aerodrome Category 4C. Report has been submitted to State Govt. on 30.12.2022. 
  
Gauchar, Jhalawar and Neemuch: 
Airports/Airfields at Gauchar in Uttarakhand, at Neemuch in Madhya Pradeshand  at 
Jhalawarin Rajasthan belong to concerned State Governments. These Airports/Airfields 
are available in the list of unse rved airports in Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) -
UDAN documents. No airline has submitted valid bids for operation of flights under 
UDAN from these Airports. 
  
Bihta:  
  
Bihta Airport belongs to IAF. It has a runway length of 2500m suitable for A -320 
type of aircraft. AAI is developing a New Civil Enclave for 5 million annual handling 
capacity. AAI Board has recommended the proposal for an estimated Cost of Rs. 
1453 Cr. for PIB approval. Proposal for approval of PIB is under consideration in 
consultation with various stake holder departments. 
  
Darbhanga: 
  
Darbhanga Airport belongs to IAF. It has a runway length of 2743m. AAI operates an 
Interim Civil Enclave having a terminal building of 1400 sqm. Area with 0.15 million 
annual handling capacity and an apron to park 2nos of Code C Aircraft (A 320/B737). 
Darbhanga Airport is connected with 5 cities namely Bengaluru, Delhi, Kolkata, 
Mumbai and Hyderabad and has 76 movements per week.  
  
The following development works are in progress. 
i. Expansion of the existing terminal building by 1900 sqm and is likely to be completed 
by September 2023.   
ii. Construction of New Civil Enclave, consisting of Newterminal building of area48,000 
sq.m and 7 Apron stands for A321 type of aircrafts and associated infrastructure.AAI 
Board has approved proposal for an estimated cost of Rs. 965 cr. Proposal for 
approval of PIB is in process.  
  
Dimapur:  
  
Dimapur Airport has a runway of length 2290m suitable for A -320 type of aircraft, 
Terminal building of area 7200 sq. m,annual handling capacity of 0.5 million and 
apron to park 4 nos. Code C aircrafts. The airport is connected to 5 cities namely with 
Delhi, Dibrugarh, Guwahati, Imphal, Kolkata and Shillong and has   58 movements 
per week.  

61 
 
  
The following development works are in progress. 
i. Modification and Expansion of existing terminal building is in progress for Capacity 
Enhancement of Terminal Building from 390 PHP to 680 PHP. Award of work is in 
process.  
  
Kotkasim (Bhiwadi): 
Government of India has granted the site clearance to M/s. Delhi Mumbai Industrial 
Corridor Development Corporation Limited (DMICDC) for setting up of a Greenfield 
Airport for public use near Bhiwadi, District Alwar, Rajasthan subject to some 
conditions on 18.11.2015. Further development would depend on preparation of DPR, 
its economic viability and financial closure subject to the „in-principle‟ approval. 
  
As per the decision taken in the meeting held on 03.02.2020, under the chairmanship 
of Secretary (CA), State Government and DMICDC have been requested to firm up 
their position on the Greenfield Airport p roject at Alwar. Application for In -Principle 
approval yet to be received. 
  
As more than 8 years have passed since grant of Site Clearance, State Government 
and the Project Proponent has been requested to convey the decision with regard to 
development of Greenfield airport at Bhiwadi in Alwar District. Further, if a 
Greenfield airport is not considered feasible/ required to be developed at the site for 
which 'Site Clearance was granted earlier, State Government / Project Proponent has 
also been requested to convey the same to Ministry for further necessary action in the 
matter. Response in this regard is awaited. 
  
  
Nagpur: 
Nagpur Airport is jointly owned by the Airports Authority of India (AAI) and 
Maharashtra Airport Development Corporation (MADC), a Sta te Govt. entity in the 
ratio of 49:51. 
  
Mopa: 
Mopa airport is in the northern part of Goa, approximately 35km away from Panaji, 
the capital city of Goa. Dabolim Airport was the only airport in the state and operates 
as a civil enclave in the military airb ase. Due to space constraint, 24x7 operations 
were not possible at Dabolim Airport and to serve the tourism and business markets, 
operationalization of full time Airport at Goa was a necessity. 
New Greenfield Airport at Mopa, Goa has been developed by the State 
Government of Goa under Public Private Partnership (PPP) at a project cost of Rs. 
3400 Crore in partnership with GMR Goa International Airport Limited (GGIAL).  
            The airport is being developed in four phases, with the first phase 
(operational) designed to accommodate approximately 4.4 million passengers a year 
and has further capacity to scale-up as per market demands up to 40 MPPA traffic. 
  
The airport has been inaugurated in December, 2022 and has started its 
operations from 05.01.2023. 
  

62 
 
Parandur: 
In August‟2022, Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corporation Limited (TIDCO) 
submitted a proposal for grant of Site Clearance to MoCA for the development of 
Greenfield airport at Parandur (near Chennai), Kancheepuram District, Tamil Nadu.  
The same is being considered in consultation with AAI, DGCA and MoD. 
   
Navi Mumbai: 
GoI granted “In-Principle” approval to Government of Maharashtra (GoM) for setting 
up of Greenfield airport at Navi Mumbai. The airport has been awarded by the State 
Government to M/s Navi Mumbai International Airport Private Limited (NMIAL)  for 
development and operation under PPP basis. Letter of Award was issued in October, 
2017 and Concession Agreement was signed in January, 2018. 
 The airport facility will be capable of handling twenty million passengers a year upon 
completion of the first phase (I & II) (20 MPPA) and ultimately 60 million passengers 
a year in the subsequent phases respectively.  
Target date of completion      31-12-2024 
Expected cost                        Rs. 19,646 crore 
Physical Progress              50.73 % (till August, 2023) 
Financial Progress            42.87 % (till August, 2023) 
  
 
  
 
 
  

63 
 
Annexure-II 
  
INITIATIVES BY AAI FOR OPTIMIZATION OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION & 
OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCY AND OUT SOURCING NON- CORE FUNCTIONS 
  
  
AAI has taken /planned the following major initiatives to improve & optimize the energy 
efficiency &improve operational efficiency and out sourcing non-core functions of airport: 
  
A. Energy Efficiency 
  
1. Energy Conservation Initiatives:To optimize energy consumption, AAI has 
replaced conventional light fixtures with energy-efficient LED fittings, old equipment 
with star rated energy efficient equipments, installed occupancy/motion sensors, 
adopted highest GRIHA-rated standards for construction of new terminals, use of 
automatic sliding doors and air-curtains to minimise air-conditioning losses and 
implementation of Building Energy Management System (BEMS) for optimum use of 
air-conditioning and other electrical systems. 
  
  
B. Operational Efficiency  
  
1. Implementation of Airport Collaborative Decision Making (A-CDM) has resulted 
in enhancement of ground operational efficiency by encouraging intersection 
departures. 
2. Implementation of Departure Slot Management (DSM): Employment of DSM in 
operations has resulted in improvement of on-time performance of airlines, thereby 
reducing departure congestion and queuing of aircrafts. 
3. No of boarding gates, X-ray machines and Check-in counters are being augmented to 
improve the operational efficiency of airports.  
  
  
C. Out Sourcing Non-Core Functions 
  
The facilities like „May I Help You‟ & „Private Security Agency‟ are being deployed for non-
core functions of the airport. 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

64 
 
Annexure-III 
  
List of AAI Licensed Airports with all weather operation 
facility (including Night landing) 
List of AAI 
Licensed Airports without 
night landing facility 
Sl.No Airport Name Sl.No Airport Name Sl.No Airport Name 
1 Agartala Airport 25 Kalaburagi Airport 1 Agatti Airport 
2 Aurangabad Airport 26 Kandla Airport 2 Cooch Behar 
Airport 
3 Barapani (Shillong) 
Airport 
27 Khajuraho Airport 3 Deoghar 
Airport@ 
4 Bhavnagar Airport 28 Kishangarh Airport 4 Gondia Airport 
5 Biju Patnaik 
Airport 
Bhubneswar 
29 Kolhapur Airport 5 Hollongi 
Airport (Doni 
Polo)@ 
6 Birsa Munda 
Airport Ranchi 
30 Lal Bahadur Shastri 
Airport Varanasi 
6 Juhu Airport 
7 Calicut 
International 
Airport 
31 Lilabari Airport 7 Kangra Airport 
8 Chennai 
International 
Airport 
32 Madurai Airport 8 Keshod Airport 
9 Belagavi Airport 33 Maharana Pratap 
Airport Udaipur 
9 Kullu Manali 
Airport 
10 Rajkot Airport* 34 Mysore Airport 10 Kushinagar 
Airport@ 
11 Rajkot International 
Airport* 
35 Netaji Subhash 
Chandra Bose 
International Airport 
Kolkata 
11 Ludhiana 
Airport 
12 Coimbatore Airport 36 Porbandar Airport 12 Pakyong 
Airport 
13 Devi Ahilya Bai 
Holkar Airport 
Indore 
37 Raja Bhoj Airport 
Bhopal 
13 Pantnagar 
Airport 
14 Dibrugarh Airport 38 Rajahmundry Airport 14 Puducherry 
Airport 
15 Dimapur Airport 39 Sri Guru Ram Das Jee 
International Airport 
Amritsar 
15 Rupsi Airport 
16 Gaya Airport 40 Surat Airport 16 Salem Airport 
17 Hubballi Airport 41 Swami Vivekananda 
Airport Raipur 
17 Shimla Airport 

65 
 
18 Hyderabad 
International 
Airport Begumpet 
42 Tiruchirappalli Airport 18 Tezu Airport 
19 Imphal Airport 43 Tirupati Airport   
20 Jabalpur Airport 44 Tuticorin Airport 
21 Jai Prakash 
Narayan 
International 
Airport Patna 
45 Vadodara Airport 
22 Jalgaon Airport 46 Veer Surendra Sai 
Airport Jharsuguda 
23 Jolly Grant Airport 
Dehradun 
47 Vijayawada Airport 
24 Kadapa Airport   
* Rajkot Airport has been closed after operationalisation 
of  
Rajkot International Airport 
@ Soon Will be converted 
into all weather operations 
facility (including Night 
Landing) 
  
  
  
  

66 
 
Annexure-IV 
  
A)    Airport-wise Available Air Cargo Annual Handling Capacity (Thousand MT) 
  
Airport Annual Handling Capacity (Thousand MT) 
Agartala 34 
Ahmedabad 395 
Amritsar 34 
Aurangabad 31 
Bagdogra 32 
Bengaluru 1,712 
Bhopal 29 
Bhubaneswar 26 
Chandigarh 53 
Chennai 1,826 
Coimbatore 84 
Dehradun 10 
Delhi 2,573 
Goa 24 
Goa-Mopa 66 
Guwahati 84 
Hubballi 18 
Hyderabad 236 
Indore 84 
Jaipur 100 
Jammu 3 
Kannur 16 
Kochi 245 
Kolkata 663 
Kozhikode 40 
Leh 22 
Lucknow 43 
Madurai 9 
Mangaluru 43 
Mumbai 1,600 
Nagpur 26 
Nashik 19 
Patna 13 
Port Blair 29 
Pune 72 
Raipur 15 
Rajahmundry 17 
Ranchi 35 
Srinagar 50 
Surat 34 
Thiruvananthapuram 115 

67 
 
Tiruchirappalli 38 
Tirupati 24 
Vadodara 3 
Varanasi 17 
Vijayawada 7 
Visakhapatnam 21 
Total 10,670 
  
List of AAICLAS terminals estimated as Not Profitable 
  
  
(I)                AAICLAS Operated International Air Cargo Terminals 
SN Station Avg. Yearly Tonnage 
Last 3 FY (MT) 
Avg. Monthly Tonnage 
(MT)*  
1 Amritsar 770 64 
2 Aurangabad 0 0 
3 Bhubaneswar 16 1 
4 Goa 1,138 95 
5 Guwahati 21 2 
6 Indore 63 5 
7 Jaipur 545 45 
8 Madurai 500 42 
9 Mangaluru 1,214 101 
10 Srinagar 4 0 
11 Tiruchirappalli 4,771 398 
12 Varanasi 238 20 
13 Coimbatore 748 62 
14 Pune 20 2 
15 Visakhapatnam 19 2 
  
(II)            AAICLAS Managed Domestic Air cargo terminals 
SN Station Avg. Monthly Tonnage (MT)* 
1 Agartala 343 
2 Amritsar 95 
3 Aurangabad 95 
4 Bhopal 254 
5 Dehradun 128 
6 Goa 323 
7 Hubballi 4 
8 Jammu 122 
9 Leh 162 
10 Madurai 150 
11 Rajahmundry 2 
12 Surat 415 
13 Tirupati 8 

68 
 
14 Vadodara 192 
15 Varanasi 347 
16 Vijayawada 106 
17 Visakhapatnam 369 
*Based on tonnage for FY 2022-23 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

69 
 
 
 Annexure-V 
 
  
 
  
***** 
 


70 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

71 
 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Wednesday, the 6th February, 2024 in 
Committee Room -2, First F loor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider a nd adopt 
the following draft Reports of the Committee: - 

72 
 
1) ***1 
2) Act ion Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fiftieth Report on the subject 
'Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil 
Enclaves in Defence Airports' 
3) *** 
4) *** 
5) *** 
6) *** 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a 
brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid six draft Reports and authorized the 
Chairman to carry out minor modifications o f typographical and factual errors and 
formatting, if needed in all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A. A. 
Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. 
Muraleedharan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                      
New Delhi,                                                                                      D. S. Prasanna Kumar 
6th February, 2024                                                                                    Joint Secretary 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 