 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
322 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-25 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   26-32 
    6. MINUTES         33-38 
 7. ANNEXURES        39-40 
 
         
        
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat 
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on 
its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty Second Report on ‘Issues 
related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry  of Civil Aviation; 
Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security; and Additional Director General 
(Airport Sector), Central Industrial Security Force on the subject on 21 st December, 
2021. 
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Central Industrial Security  Force for placing  before the Committee, the 
material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the 
points raised by the Members. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 30th 
March, 2022. 
 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;              Chairman, 
March 30, 2022                                            Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Chaitra 9, 1944 (Saka)                           Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
      Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
ACCAS Advisory Committee for Civil Aviation Security 
AEP Aerodrome Entry Permit 
AHCP Contingency Plan to deal with Hijacking 
APAC Asia-Pacific 
APSU Airport Security Unit  
ASG Aviation Security Group 
ASTI Aviation Security Training Institute 
ATC Air Traffic Control 
ATRS Automated Tray Retrieval System 
AVSEC Aviation Security 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BDDS Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad 
BIS Baggage Inspection System 
BTCP Bomb Threat Contingency Programme 
CA Civil Aviation 
CACS Centralized Access Control System 
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security 
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CIW Crime and Intelligence Wing 
COS Committee of Secretaries 
COSAH Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force 
CT Computed Tomography 
CTCP Counter Terrorism Contingency Plan 
DFMD Door Frame Metal Detector 
DG Director General 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DIsG Deputy Inspectors General 
DO Demi Official 
ETD Explosive Traces Detection 
FBS Full Body Scanner 
GHA Ground Handing Agent/Agency 
HHMD Hand Held Metal Detector 
IB Intelligence Bureau 
IC Flight Code of Indian Airlines 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICTS International Consultants on Targeted Security 
IGI Indira Gandhi International 

iv 
 
IsG Inspectors General 
JV Joint Venture 
LWE Left-Wing Extremism 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
NCAP National Civil Aviation Policy 
NCASP National Civil Aviation Security Programme 
NCASQCP National Civil Aviation Security Quality Control Programme 
NCASTP National Civil Aviation Security Training Programme 
NISA National Industrial Security Academy 
NSG National Security Guard 
PESC Pre-Embarkation Security Checks 
PIDS Perimeter Intrusion Detection System 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
QR Quick Response 
QRT Quick Reaction Team 
RA Regulated Agent 
RCS-UDAN Regional Connectivity Scheme – Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
RDE Radiological Detection Equipment 
RPAS Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems 
SHA Security Hold Area 
SOCC Security Operation Control Centre 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TOT Training of Trainers 
TSA Transportation Security Administration 
UA Unmanned Aircraft 
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
USAP-CMA Universal Security Audit Programme-Continuous Monitoring Approach 
UT Union Territory 
X-BIS X-ray Baggage Inspection System 
 

 
1  
REPORT 
 
 
The Indian Civil Aviation industry has seen an exponential growth in passenger traffic 
over the past few years and a corresponding increase in the numbers of Airports, Aircrafts and 
flight routes. Many new domestic airports and air travel routes have also been initiated, with the 
launch of Regional Connectivity Scheme – Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik (RCS -UDAN). Civil 
Aviation Sector is set to grow at a fast pace in the next few years, since it is an area of focus for 
the government. The Niti Aayog in its policy do cument titled ‘Strategy for New India @75’ has 
inter-alia envisaged to expand airport capacity by more than five times, to handle one billion 
trips a year. This unprecedented growth has increased the security needs of the civil aviation 
sector as well. Airport security is also a great concern for domestic and international travellers in 
the wake of threats of terrorism. It is therefore imperative for the Government to ensure the 
security of airport as per international standards, with zero tolerance against any loopholes. 
2. In view of the significance of the subject, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Issues related to 
Security in Civil Aviation Sector’ for examination and R eport. The Committee heard the views  
of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security; 
Director General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation; Additional Director General (Airport 
Sector), Central Industrial Security Force; and other representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
on the subject on 21 st December, 2021, wherein the Committee was apprised of the following 
details: 
 
 
Security Issues in Civil Aviation Sector 
 
3. The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) is the regulatory body in India governing 
security aspects of civil aviation in India. The aim of BCAS is to safeguard civil aviation 
operations against acts of unlawful interference. The Bureau is responsible for laying down the 
standards for security in respect of civil flights operating to/from India and ensuring their 
compliance through regular inspections and security audits. 
3.1. The main responsibilities of BCAS are as under: 
 
a) To formulate policies to develop, implement and maintain National Civil Aviation 
Security Programme (NCASP - a State’s Aviation Security Policy), National Civil 

 
2  
Aviation Security Training Programme (NCASTP), National Civil Aviation Security 
Quality Control Programme (NCASQCP) and associated regulations, standards, 
measures, practices and procedures to be followed by all stakeholders; 
b) Issuance of Technical Guidelines and Technical Specifications for security equipments  
and gadgets; 
c) Aviation Security T raining including Certification Courses for the security personnel of 
various entities; and 
d) Quality control activities, through conduct of audits, inspections, test and surveys. 
 
3.2. The Security of civil aviation operations and infrastructures is carried out by Aviation 
Security Group (ASG)/State Police (where ASG is not deployed) and includes: 
a) safeguarding of passengers, crew, ground personnel and other aerodrome users, aircraft, 
aerodrome and related facilities including vital installations; 
b) enforcement of access control measures into the restricted area of the aerodrome; 
c) Security of perimeter; 
d) Screening of passengers and their hand baggage; 
e) Surveillance within and around aerodrome area; 
f) Enforcement of security measures including car parks, viewing gallery, aerodrome 
restaurant and areas close to movement area; 
g) Enforcement of security measures; 
h) Maintenance of order and discipline in the aerodrome premises; 
i) Supervise the movement of persons in the restricted areas; 
j) Maintenance of liaison with local police and intelligence agencies; and 
k) Any other duty assigned by the Director General (DG), BCAS. 
 
3.3. The details of Security measures at Aerodromes carried out by Airport Operators are as  
follows: 
a) Establish security restricted area at aerodrome serving civil aviation; 
b) Aerodrome design and alterations to existing design and facilities at aerodromes; 
c) Construction of a perimeter wall; 
d) Security arrangements at aerodrome, namely; provision of lighting for perimeter and any 
other sensitive area, all -weather road for patrolling by the security personnel and 
observation or command posts for security personnel; and 
e) To provide security related technical infrastructure viz. technical equipment, Closed -

 
3  
Circuit Television (CCTV), etc. 
3.4. The Security of Aerodrome Access Control  is carried out by ASG/ Aerodrome Operator, 
which involves: 
a) Entry into aerodrome; 
b) Issuance of aerodrome entry permit; 
c) entry into security restricted area; 
d) Prohibition to carry weapons or explosive; and 
e) Operation of vehicle in the movement area. 
 
3.5. The Pre-Embarkation Security Checks (PESC) are carried out by ASG/State Police 
(where ASG is not deployed), which involves: 
a) Security check before embarkation; and 
b) Screening of every originating passenger and transfer passenger boarding an aircraft and 
his hand baggage. 
4. As a sequel to examination of the subject, the Committee called for a background note on 
the subject from the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Ministry made the following submissions in 
the Background Note: 
 
 
Policy on Security in Civil Aviation Sector 
 
5. The Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) is designated by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) as the Appropriate Authority for development, 
implementation and maintenance of National Civil Aviation Security Programme of India, in line 
with Annex 17 of Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation. Director General (DG), 
BCAS has been empowered to issue directions u/s 5A of Aircraft Act, 1934 with respect to civil 
aviation security matters and also exercise all powers and duties conferred under the Aircraft 
(Security) Rules, 2011. As per the Gazette of India dated 22.10.2021, Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security has been notified as a body co nstituted in terms of sub -section (1) of section 4B of the 
Aircraft Act, 1934 (XXII of 1934). 
5.1. The Consultative Committee for Civil Aviation is comprising Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviation which inter-alia 
considers issues relating to security in Civil Aviation. 

 
4  
5.2. The Advisory Committee for Civil Aviation Security (ACCAS) is headed by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation which meets every year. This Committee advises 
Government on matters relating t o Civil Aviation Security, recommends and reviews the 
effectiveness of security measures and procedures, and suggests enactment of such legislation as 
is found necessary and provides for coordination, at the national level, of all matters relating to 
security. 
5.3. With a view to strengthen Aviation Security and to ensure coordination amongst all 
stakeholders, following mechanism is provided: 
 Level I: Monthly meetings under the chairmanship of the DG BCAS. 
 Level II: Quarterly meetings under the chairmanship of the Secretary (CA). 
 Level III: Yearly meeting under the chairmanship of the Home Secretary. 
5.4. The BCAS lays down Aviation Security (AVSEC) norms in accordance with 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Annex -17 for Airport Operators, Aircraft 
operators, Regulated Agents, Caterers, Ground Handling Agents, Central Industrial Security 
Force (CISF)/Aviation Security Group (ASG) and Airport Security Unit (APSU)/ State/UT 
Police personnel. 
5.5. Implementation of security rules and regulations is monitored by BCAS through Quality 
Control activities which include security audits and inspections, security surveys and security 
tests to check professional efficiency and alertness of security staff and mock exercises to test 
efficacy of contingency plan and operatio nal preparedness. AVSEC training is imparted to 
security personnel of all agencies concerned with civil aviation. BCAS is also responsible for 
Planning and Coordination of AVSEC matters. 
5.6. The aviation security policy is codified through three national level documents: 
i. National Civil Aviation Security Programme (NCASP) 
ii. National Civil Aviation Security Training Programme (NCASTP) 
iii. National Civil Aviation Security Quality Control Programme (NCASQCP) 
 
5.7. The following are contingency plans which have been institutionalized to meet various  
unforeseen situations: 
i. Bomb Threat Contingency Programme (BTCP) 
ii. Contingency Plan to deal with Hijacking (AHCP) 
iii. Counter Terrorism Contingency Plan (CTCP) 

 
5  
 
 
Present Status of Security at Airports 
6. The Committee was informed that major threats or acts of unlawful interference are 
hijacking – unlawful seizure of aircraft; hostage taking on board aircraft/aerodromes; forcible 
intrusion on board aircraft/aerodrome/ aeronautical facility; sabotage of airport/aircrafts and 
terrorist attack on airport. Recently, threats from Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)  like 
drones, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) etc. and Cyber -attack have also recently assumed 
importance. Latest threat inputs include improvised explosive devices for unlawful interference 
in civil aviation operations. 
6.1. Keeping in view the present security scenario in the immediate neighbourhood, the 
Competent Authority has directed to strengthen aviation security in Airlines operating flights to 
and from Kabul, Afghanistan. 
6.2. India has been rated highly in terms of aviation security in the last ICAO audit in 2018. 
Average Effective Implementation of aviation security stands at 73.86% and compliance with 
ICAO standards stands at 84.98% after this audit. 
 
Security Arrangements at Airports 
7. The Ministry apprised the Committee that Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have 
been issued by BCAS in the form of AVSEC Orders/ Circulars regarding some important issues 
like procedure of passenger and carry -on baggage screening, items banned for carriage on -board 
the aircraft, dealing with cases of detection of arms and ammunition during screening of 
passengers or baggage, screening of hold baggage, security of cargo, courier and mail, access of 
vehicles up to the aircraft, and list of persons exempted from pre-embarkation security checks. 
7.1. The categorization of airports, on the basis of intelligence inputs as well as threat and risk 
assessment, has been made for 118 airports (Hyper-sensitive–28, Sensitive–62 and Normal–28). 
A Committee for assessing security and risk vulnerability assessment of airports has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary (Internal Security), 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). This committee will categorize airports for deployment of 
appropriate security measures based on available inputs. 
 
7.2. The CISF has been deployed on airport security since 03.02.2000 and as on date CISF 
/ASG (Aviation Security Group) has taken over the security of 55 airports of Airports Authority 

 
6  
of India (AAI) and 09 Joint Venture (JV) airports. The rest of the airports are manned by APSU 
(Airport Security Unit)/State Police. 
7.3. In view of potential security threats and current aviation security scenario, State/UT 
Police have been requested to ensure that all operational airstrips/aerodromes in their jurisdiction 
including those belonging to flying clubs are properly guarded and all necessary measures are 
taken to ensure that no unlawful interference takes place with civil aviation operations, especially 
with regard to hijacking and operation of rogue aircrafts which may be used as weapons. 
7.4. While the security infrastructure is provided by the Airport Operators, ASG is primarily 
responsible for providing security at airports. Some security functions are  allocated to Airport 
Operators (in-line hold baggage screening), Aircraft Operators (screening of registered baggage, 
cargo, mail, catering, company stores and security of aircraft) and Regulated Agents (screening 
of cargo/courier/mail). 
7.5. All authorized pe rsons, employees, casual labor, passengers and vehicles while gaining 
entry into Airside from any gate(s) are subject to security  checks/frisking, baggage search, if any 
by the ASG/APSU manning those gates. 
7.6. The screening of passengers, staff and visitors a t the entry gates of the airport through 
Door Frame Metal Detector (DFMD)/ Hand Held Metal Detector (HHMD) and physical frisking 
on random basis are carried out depending on local situation and inputs received from the 
intelligence agencies. In case of sus pected baggage, additional measures like screening through 
X-ray Baggage Inspection System (X -BIS) and Explosive Traces Detection (ETD) may also be 
taken. 
7.7. Installation of CCTV is mandatory at all operational airports and monitoring of CCTV is 
to be done by  all agencies concerned at unified CCTV Control Room. It is the responsibility of 
Airport Security Unit of State Police and ASG (CISF) to monitor CCTV covering all areas of the 
airport. Other agencies like AAI, Customs, Immigration and Airline operators are authorized to 
depute their representatives in the Control Room for monitoring activities in their respective 
areas. The recorded CCTV footages are retained for a period of one month to allow any 
concerned agencies to review later. 
7.8. A perimeter wall of 8 ’ with 1½’ over -hang fencing has been prescribed around the 
airports. Watch towers are to be installed at distance of every one km or as per the local survey 
keeping in view the threat to a particular airport.  Similarly, perimeter lighting and perimeter 
roads are prescribed for mobile and foot patrolling to prevent any unauthorized entry/intrusion 

 
7  
into the airports. Perimeter intrusion detection system is also prescribed for installation. 
7.9. The manpower for surveillance in and around the airports is also prov ided on the basis of 
requirements assessed by joint security survey team. 
7.10. All authorized personnel working with Ground Handing Agents (GHAs) while leaving 
airport from any gate(s) are subject to security checks (frisking/baggage search) by the airport 
security personnel manning those gates.  Similarly, all staff when exiting the security restricted 
area of airports are to be frisked on the random basis so that any element of preparation of an 
unlawful act can be detected. 
7.11. The Airport Operators, Airline Operators, Regulated Agents (RAs), Ground Handling 
Agencies (GHAs) and other entities are required to have security clearance and approved  
security programme before commencement of operation. 
7.12. Quality Control is maintained by NCASQCP by conducting Audit/Inspection/Security 
test (dummy) to monitor the implementation of directives issued by DG, BCAS. Annual 
programme of audit/inspection/security test is conducted according to category of Airports, 
which is divided into Normal/Sensitive/Hyper sensitive categories. 
7.13. Security vetting is carried out at airports before operations are started, in which a detailed 
report is prepared regarding Structural/Technical equipment required for security of airports and 
structural or technical enhancement/alterations are recommended accordingly. 
7.14. A manpower survey is conducted before operationalization of airports, mandating the 
requirement of manpower to be deployed at airports for security. 
7.15. All persons operating in the aviation environment need to undergo AVSEC awarenes s 
training. Security related personnel need to qualify AVSEC Basic Training.  Screeners are 
mandated to qualify screener training course. Refresher courses are prescribed for various 
training programme as per prescribed standards of National Civil Aviation Security Training 
Programme (NCASTP). 
 
7.16. Mechanism to deal with hijacking situations: 
i. Aerodrome Committee at airport level. 
ii. Central Committee at National level (ATC Complex, IGI Airport) under the 
Chairmanship of DG, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) whereas DG, BCAS 
is the Convener. 
iii. Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack (COSAH) (Committee Room Cabinet 
Secretariat) under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. 

 
8  
iv. Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) is the Apex Body on such matters. 
7.17. The Quick Reaction Team (QRT) of State Police/CISF/Central Reserve Police Force 
(CRPF) is responsible for cordoning of hijacked aircraft till the arrival of National Security 
Guard (NSG), strengthening of perimeter and crowd management. 
7.18. The Counter Terrorism Conting ency Plan including various agencies i.e. CISF, NSG, 
Local Police, etc. are in place at Delhi and Mumbai Airports. 
 
 
8. Acts/Rules/Conventions/Protocols related to AVSEC 
 
The following Acts/Rules/Protocols related to Aviation Security are being followed: 
 
 The Aircraft Act, 1934. 
 The Tokyo Convention Act, 1975. 
 The Anti-Hijacking Act, 2016. 
 The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 
 The Aircraft Security Rules, 2011. 
 The National Civil Aviation Security Documents: NCASP, NCASTP, NCASQCP. 
 The Contingency Plans – Anti Hijacking, CTCP and Bomb threat. 
 The Conventions-Chicago, Montreal, Hague; Protocols-Tokyo, Montreal, Beijing. 
 The SOP for the functioning of CISF at airports notified on 6th March, 2002. 
 
 
Role of Various Agencies in Aviation Security 
 
9. BCAS is the Civil Aviation Security  Regulator and the designated Appropriate Authority 
under ICAO Annex 17; responsible for regulation, oversight, training and quality control. 
9.1. Aviation Security Groups (ASGs) like CISF, Air Port Securit y Units/State Police are 
responsible for access control, perimeter security, pre -embarkation security checks and apron 
guarding. 
9.2. The various Airlines are responsible for screening of registered baggage, cargo and mail, 
catering and security of aircraft. 
9.3. The Airport Operator is responsible for provision of security infrastructure, in -line with 
BIS wherever applicable and coordination. 
9.4. The State Police has been assigned the duty of law and order maintenance, traffic and 

 
9  
crime prevention and is also the primary security agency at airports where CISF is not deployed. 
9.5. The NSG is the main Anti Hijacking Force which also provides “Sky Marshals” on select 
identified routes and also provide specially trained Counter Hijacking Group personnel. 
10. The Committee during its meeting held on 21 st December, 2021 was informed that in the 
backdrop of the hijacking of Indian Airlines flight IC -814 in December 1999, airport security 
matters were reviewed by the Government and it was decided that airports security should be 
entrusted to a single dedicated force instead of different State Police forces with divergent work 
culture and practices. The Committee of Secretaries (COS) in its meeting on 7 th January, 2000 
recommended that in the long -term there was a need for a professiona l force for civil aviation. 
The Commissioner of Security (CA) further recommended that Central Industrial Security Force 
(CISF) should be inducted at all airports in India to ensure uniform standardization of security 
procedures. The dedicated CISF conting ent earmarked for aviation security functions at airports 
in India has been notified as Aviation Security Group (ASG). Accordingly, on 3 rd February, 
2000, CISF took over the security of Jaipur Airport, which was the first airport to be taken over 
by CISF. Since then, the Force has progressively been inducted in 64 Airports with a total 
strength of 30,003. 
11. The Committee notes that presently, there is a multiplicity of agencies involved in 
providing security at airports viz., the CISF, Airlines Operators, Air port Operators, State 
Police and NSG. The Committee also notes that all the aforesaid individual agencies are 
looking after the airport security functions in addition to their other roles and 
responsibilities. For example, CISF which plays a prime role in airport security presently 
provides security cover to 353 critical infrastructure facilities like nuclear installations, 
space establishments, seaports, power plants, important Government buildings, iconic 
heritage monuments, Delhi metro, besides security cover to some private corporate 
establishments also. The other entities such as airlines operators, airport operators, State 
police and NSG are engaged in their role of airport security in addition to their main 
responsibilities, which is completely differ ent from their role as airport security providers. 
The Committee recommends that the airport operators/ management should take the 
opinion of Ministry of Home Affairs, before purchasing security equipment at airports and 
also ensure that they should conform to the best standards of security worldwide. 
 
12. Initiatives by BCAS in Civil Aviation Security 

 
10  
 Security Help Desks set up at airports. 
 Mock Counter Terrorism Contingency exercises at major airports. 
 SOP for screening of persons with disability. 
 Three National Civil Aviation Security Documents have been reviewed and updated. 
 
i. National Civil Aviation Security Programme (NCASP) 
ii. National Civil Aviation Security Training Programme (NCASTP) 
iii. National Civil Aviation Security Quality Control Programme (NCASQCP) 
 
 Contingency Plan – Anti hijacking is under review. 
 CTCP (Counter Terrorism Contingency Plans) for all major airports. 
 CTCPs in respect of 6 airports have been approved by the competent authority and 59 
such proposals are under process. 
 Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE) has been installed at 14 major airports in first 
phase. During second phase, installation of RDE at 10 Airports is proposed. 
 Strengthening of Security of Cargo Area under constant review. 
 CCTV is mandatory for all areas of all operational airports. 
 After getting accreditation of ICAO, Aviation Training Academy conducts international 
AVSEC training programs. 
 Restructuring of BCAS. 
 Installation of Whole Body Scanners at all airports in a phased manner. 
 Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) is under trials for operationalization at 10 
Airports. 
 Online testing and evaluation of training. 
 Anti-Drone specifications have been issued. 
 
13. The Committee notes the various initiatives taken by the BCAS, which is the main 
regulator for governing security in the Civil Aviation Sector in the country. It also notes the 
responsibilities and initiatives taken by various Aviation Security Groups (ASGs) like  
CISF, Airport Security Units/State Police, besides the role played by the various airlines 
and ai rport operators in maintaining security at Airports. The Committee also notes the 
significance, the Government attributes to the Civil Aviation Sector, which is brought out  
in the policy document titled ‘Strategy for New India @75’, which has envisaged to expand 

 
11  
airport capacity by more than five times the present capacity to handle one billion trips a 
year. The Committee feels that this fast tracked and unprecedented growth in the Civil 
Aviation Sector would require parallel enhancement of security infrast ructure in this  
sector as well. 
14. The exponential growth in the sector would be a challenge for the agencies involved 
in providing security, since trained security personnel, security infrastructure and related 
security protocols, needs to keep pace with gro wth. A need for close cooperation and 
coordination with all the agencies, namely Government, State Police and Private agencies 
and other stakeholders involved in providing security, would also be required.  Hence, the 
Committee recommends that the world’s best security practices should be followed to cater 
to the increased security requirements. 
15. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should set up dedicated 
Institutions across the country to cater to needs for increased manpower in all the security  
aspects of the aviation sector. 
16. The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), which is the main paramilitary force, 
entrusted with the Security of airports was also heard by the Committee in its meeting held on 
21st December, 2021. The CISF informed the Committee of the following details:- 
 
Airport Security by CISF at Airports 
 
17. The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has been inducted at all airports in India to 
ensure uniform standardization of security procedures as per the recommendations of the 
Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation). The dedicated CISF contingent earmarked for 
aviation security functions at airports in India has been notified as Aviation Security Group 
(ASG). Since its induction on 3 rd February, 2000, for airport security tasks,  the CISF has 
progressively been inducted in 64 Airports, with a total personnel strength of 30,003 at present. 
 
 
 
Categorization of airports in India 
 
18. Based on the inputs received from the intelligence agencies regarding threat perception, 
the airports are categorised into Hypersensitive, Sensitive and Normal. 
 

 
12  
Category Operational 
Airports 
Under CISF security 
cover 
Not under CISF security 
cover 
Hyper-sensitive 28 21 7 
Sensitive 62 39 23 
Normal 28 04 24 
Total 118 64 54 
 
18.1. The CISF also provided a list/categorization of airports which are under the CISF  
security cover at Annexure-I. 
19. The Committee notes that out of 118 operational airports, only 64 airports are  
under CISF cover, while 54 airports have no such cover. Further, out of the 28 hyper -
sensitive airports, 21 have CISF cover; while for the 62 sensitive airports, only 39 have  
been given CISF cover. The Committee recommends that the Government should strive to 
bring all the operational airports under the ambit of CISF security cover. 
 
 
Vacancy position of CISF at airports 
 
20. During its deliberations with the Committee on 21 st December, 2021, the Ministry 
informed that CISF is to be deployed at all civil operational airports under ASG. As on date 64 
airports are under CISF security cover out of 118 operational airports. Details are as follows: 
 Released strength - 30,003 
 Posted strength - 29,399 
 
21. The Committee was also informed that CISF has been advised by the Ministry to fill the 
vacant posts at the concerned airports immediately. Further, deployment of security personnel is 
a dynamic process and in consultation with Ministry  of Home Affairs (MHA), steps are taken on 
need basis. 
22. The Committee notes that though the vacancy position of CISF at airports, as 
compared to the total sanctioned strength is satisfactory, yet there is a vacancy of 1166 
security personnel. The Committee is  of the opinion that in view of the high -tech methods 
of intrusion used by the subversive elements at airports, atleast the full sanctioned strength 
of CISF should be provided at airports in the country. The Committee also recommends 
that periodic surveys should be carried out to assess the changing threat perception at all 

 
13  
airports in the country and accordingly, trained security personnel should be provided at 
airports in a time -bound manner. Continuous monitoring should also be done as regards 
the implementation of various security rules and regulations and surprise checks should be 
carried out to test professional efficiency and alertness of the security staff and the 
operational preparedness of various agencies. 
 
 
Role of CISF at Airports 
 
23. The Aviation Security Group of CISF is responsible for all areas of airport security 
including Perimeter Security, Access Control, Terminal Building Security, Apron Security, 
Surveillance, anti-hijacking pre-embarkation checks, Passenger Handling etc. 
24.  The role of CISF is categorized in the following three operational units:-
Anti-hijacking Unit 
i. Pre-embarkation security check of passengers & cabin baggage; and 
ii. Access control of passengers, visitors, staff of various agencies, catering personnel, 
cargo and courier into the airport. 
Protection Unit 
 
i. Protection of airport & perimeter; 
ii. Quick Reaction Team; and 
iii. Cordoning of aircraft during contingencies (except civil enclaves). 
 
Intelligence & Surveillance Unit 
 
i. Surveillance at airports for security. 
 
 
Security Scheme for CISF at Airports 
 
Terminal Building Security 
 
25. As per the present rules, no person other than a passenger and persons having legitimate 
function at an airport or who is directly connected with operation of flights or with the safety and 
security of civil aviation operations is allowed to enter the airport premises. In order to regulate 
the entry of persons into the airports, BCAS issues passes for the staff/visitors and vehicles.  
CISF ensures security of terminal buildings and implements the following secu rity measures to 

 
14  
ensure strict access control at the terminal building:- 
 Entry is given to passenger/staff/visitors only on valid printed or soft copy of air ticket or 
Airport Entry Pass, which are checked by CISF; 
 Behaviour detection and Random Physical Checking of Passenger/Staff at the departure 
entry gates are done by CISF; 
 CISF conducts Random Checking of Baggage with X-BIS and Explosive detectors; 
 Deployment of Dog Squad; 
 Deployment of armed Terminal Marshals in buddy pairs in the terminal building to 
counter any attack; 
 Screening of material at Loading Docks/goods gate by CISF; 
 Deployment of trained CIW team (Crime and Intelligence Wing) for unobtrusive watch; 
and 
 CCTV Surveillance. 
 
Pre-embarkation security checks 
 
26. CISF carries out pre -embarkation security check duties under anti -hijacking function of 
ASGs in the Security Hold Area. At this stage, checks of passengers and staff are done during 
their transition from non -sterile to sterile zone. There are different layers and processes for pre -
embarkation security checks which are as under:- 
 Physical Screening of Passenger (Frisking); 
 Hand Baggage Screening (X-Ray and Explosive Trace Detectors); 
 Physical Checking of baggage, referred by screeners having Security Restricted items or 
doubtful baggage; 
 CCTV monitoring and Surveillance; and 
 Behaviour detection of passengers. 
 
27. Surveillance and Intelligence 
 
Electronic Surveillance:- 
 
 CCTV system is an integral part of the security apparatus at the airports, installed to 
ensure effective surveillance of an area as well as to create a record for post event 
analysis/ investigation purpose. 

 
15  
 Security Operation Control Centre (SOCC) is the Nerve center to monitor CCTV 
coverage and receive and disseminate information. It is manned round the clock by 
suitably trained officers. 
 There is a strong communication network (Intercom/mobile phone and walkie -talkie) 
with all duty posts and control room (mobile phone for perimeter as alternate system of 
communication for emergency purpose). 
 Digital Video Recording facility is  available for duration of 30 days for post incident 
analysis or forensic analysis. 
Crime and Intelligence Wing:- 
 
 The Intelligence and Surveillance wing of the CISF maintains close liaison with sister  
agencies, local intelligence agencies including Intelligence Bureau (IB), local police 
and contacts for sharing and collection of latest information to strengthen the security 
arrangements in the airports; 
 Surveillance staff of CISF deployed at airports in plain clothes to keep a hawk eye on the 
happening at in and around airport premises; and 
 Behaviour Detection of passengers, staff and visitors is a part of their job. 
 
 
Security of Airport perimeter 
 
28. CISF ensures that there is no intrusion from the perimeter to the airside. Manpower is 
deployed at static watch points and also on mobile patrolling along the perimeter. 
 
Quick Reaction Team (QRT) to tackle terror attacks 
 
29. Trained QRT team of CISF is deployed at all the airports to respond and neutralize any 
armed attack on the airport. They will be the first responders in case of any contingency and will 
act in coordination with the ‘Naka’, alighting point personnel and the security marshals inside  
the terminal. These Units coordinate responses with local police and cordon off affected aircraft 
during any situation of emergency.  They also assist in search and evacuation in case of bomb 
threat in any airport facility. 
30. Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) 
 

 
16  
 At present BDDS is operationalised at 20 airports and non-operationalised at 44 airports. 
 At the airports where CISF is not having BDDS, assistance of local police/NSG is taken 
for attending such threats. In case of threat calls, action is taken as per BCAS SOP. Bomb 
Threat Assessment Committee at airport level assesses the threat and takes action  
accordingly. 
31. The Committee notes that presently BDDS is operationalised at 20 airports and non-
operationalised at 44 remaining airports and assistance of local police/ NSG is being sought 
for attending to such threats. The Committee notes that only 20 airports have BDDS cover 
till date. It is also observed that at some places where CISF does not have BDDS support, 
support of local police is being sought. The Committee is of the opinion that local police 
may not have the technical competence or the desir ed high -tech equipment to dispose of 
bomb threats. The Committee, therefore, recommends that BDDS should be engaged at the 
earliest at all the remaining 44 airports as well to counter bomb threats in consultation and 
coordination with the MHA. The Committee also recommends that the BDDS squad should 
have the best international pedigree dogs which can be engaged for security at airports. 
 
 
Counter Terrorist Contingency Plan (CTCP) 
 
32. As part of the Counter-Terrorist Contingency Plan, CISF has been entrusted with security 
of the city side area. The elements of the security system include ‘Nakas’ on approach roads; 
‘Morchas’ in front of terminal building; Patrolling; Alighting Point; and the Parking Area. 
33. The CTCP proposal based on revised template issued by MH A, in respect of 60 airports 
have been submitted to BCAS. The CTCP proposals for 02 airports i.e. Srinagar and Leh are 
under process. 
Security of Cargo Complex 
 
34. Cargo Complex is available at 33 major airports. CISF has been deployed as armed 
support from the landside and doing the access control in cargo sterile hold area and at airside 
barriers. 
 
 
Measures to Improve Airport Security by CISF 
 
Training 

 
17  
 
35. The CISF t rains its personnel deployed for airport security duties in tune with the 
National Civil Aviation Security Training Programme. The personnel are also trained specially 
for counter -terrorism, surveillance, QRT, Courtesy and Behaviour, Dog Handling, Bomb 
Detection and Disposal etc. 
36. The CISF personnel undergo Basic Aviation Security Course with 22 varied training 
modules as per International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards to inculcate the 
required professionalism for airport security duties. Basi c AVSEC courses are organized at  
Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, National Industrial Security Academy (NISA), Hyderabad  
and Recruit Training Centre, Arakkonam. All CISF personnel performing pre-embarkation check 
duties at airports are certified screeners whose Certification is done by the BCAS. 
37. Soft Skills Training 
 
 To improve upon conduct of CISF personnel deployed for aviation security functions, 
training on soft skills is being conducted on large scale involving best professionals. 
 CISF conducts in-house training course for CISF personnel on monthly basis by the 
identified instructors/ Supervisory officers. 
 Training includes appropriate behaviour patterns, language & accent, body language, 
service orientation, presentability & dressing sense etc. 
 Number of personnel trained in last 3 years:- 
 
Year Total personnel attended 
2018 38,474 
2019 34,950 
2020 8,174* 
2021 (till date) 18,581 
*Not conducted after March, 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
Re-commenced w.e.f 24.08.2021 
 
38. Behaviour Detection Training 
 
 ASG personnel have been trained on a TOT (Training of Trainers) basis from ICTS, 
Europe. Besides, BCAS with the help of Transportation Security Administration (TSA) 
and Intelligence Bureau has also conducted training. 

 
18  
 These TOT trained personnel are imparting in -house training to ASG personnel on a 
regular basis. 
 The 5 ASGs at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Ahmadabad have been identified 
for imparting Behaviour Detection Training to ASG Personnel. 
 Number of personnel trained in last 3 years:- 
 
Year Total personnel attended 
2018 3,124 
2019 3,231 
2020 450* 
2021 (till date) 708 
*Not conducted after March, 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
Re-commenced w.e.f 24.08.2021 
 
 
Operational Conference for Security Officers 
 
39. The Operational conference of Chief Airport Security Officers is being held regularly to 
discuss the problems being faced by them on field and to bring uniformity in implementation of 
rule and regulations unequivocally at all airports. 
CCTV Feed Analysis 
 
40. The CISF is using CCTV foot age to check and control breaches on the spot in 
coordination with field surveillance staff and also to analyse any  possible link between incidents 
that had happened at one airport and similar incident at other airport after a span of some days. 
Regular Mock Drills at Airports 
 
41. The CISF ensured regular mock drills at all the airports to check the response time and to 
fine tune the efficiency of the personnel to meet any sudden eventuality. 
Conduct of Security Audit at Airports 
 
42. The Sector Inspectors General  (IGs) and Zonal Deputy Inspectors General (DIGs) are 
regularly conducting Security Audits to thoroughly assess all aspects of security arrangements 
including gadgetry, perimeter etc. 
CISF Help Desks at Airports 

 
19  
 
43. CISF Help desk counters have been establish ed at all the airports to facilitate senior 
citizens and other needy passengers who are ignorant about the procedure at the airports. The 
Help desk counters are manned round the clock/during operation of the airports. 
44. During the course of deliberations, th e Committee enquired as to whether BCAS has 
undertaken any research in consultation with MHA as regards the behavioural aspect of CISF 
personnel posted for airport security duties. In reply, the Ministry has stated that BCAS is yet to 
undertake any such re search work on the subject matter, however, considering the sensitivity of 
the matter, as CISF has a direct public interface with the passengers/staff, CISF has been 
sensitized to impart soft skills to screeners for dealing with delicate issues, keeping in  mind the 
dignity and privacy of the passengers without diluting the security checking process and 
procedures. 
45. As regards taking care of person with disabilities, the Ministry informed that BCAS has 
issued AVSEC circular 04/2014 for screening of persons wi th special needs. Based on 
International best practices, the same keeps on evolving. At present, Standard Operating 
Procedure for screening of persons with special needs - Divyaangjan and/or individual with 
reduced mobility has been drafted by BCAS and has been circulated for comments of general 
public/stakeholders and accordingly, the same will be finalized soon. 
46. The Committee notes the various roles of CISF and the various initiatives taken by 
CISF to ensure security at airports in coordination with BCAS. The Committee notes that 
in addition to imparting training on various aspects of its core duty of security at airports, 
the CISF also imparts training for soft skills to improve upon the conduct of CISF 
personnel involved in various security functions viz., appropriate behaviour patterns, 
language & accent, body language, service orientation, presentability and dressing sense 
etc. The Committee during the course of its deliberations with the Ministry, have  
repeatedly pointed out the quality of the security staff at airports and is of the view that the 
security personnel are the first point of contact for any airline passenger after embarking 
from an aircraft, be it domestic or international passenger. As such, the security personnel 
sets the first impression  on the passenger, about the city or the country. It is especially 
important in case of a foreign traveller and leaves a lasting impression on the mind of the 
tourist about the country or the behavioural aspects of its people. Hence, imparting  
training in soft skills to the passenger frisking security personnel, assumes great 

 
20  
significance, especially their behaviour, proper and presentable uniform or body language 
towards the passenger. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry in 
coordination with the MHA should ensure that CISF and other security staff at airports 
may be sensitized adequately in soft skills, so that they perform their security duties 
efficiently without diluting the security activities/responsibilities. The Committee notes that 
SOP for persons with special needs or ‘Divyaangjan’ has been drafted by BCAS and same 
will be finalized after receipt of comments of general public/ stakeholders. The Committee 
is of the opinion that special care should be taken to deal with passengers with  special 
needs or ‘Divyaangjan’ and therefore, recommends that the SOP may be expeditiously 
finalized. 
 
 
State-of-the-Art Technological Solutions for Security at Airports 
 
47. The Committee was also apprised that the BCAS, the Aviation Security regulator, has 
already prescribed and adopted the following steps for strengthening of Security through 
introduction of state of the art technology solutions at airports:- 
48. Centralized Access Control System (CACS) 
 
(i) BCAS and MoCA initiated the project for Biometric Access control system for issuance 
of biometric enabled smart card based Aerodrome entry permit for secured and regulated 
access of employee/staff to restricted areas at all aerodromes across the country. Before 
launching and implementing this project, around two  lakh employees of all stakeholders 
on Indian Airports were issued with laminated paper -based Aerodrome Entry Permit 
(AEP) annually. To streamline and regulate the process of the employee’s movement at 
the airports, this initiative has been undertaken for implementing “Aadhaar based 
Biometric enabled Centralized Access Control System for chip -embedded smartcard 
AEPs”. The CACS project has been launched to cover 43 Airport of AAI  and JV Airport, 
making it a total of 48 airports in Phase-I. 
(ii) The objective of this project is to digitize the entry process at the airports, fast processing 
of AEP requests, enhanced security to detect unauthorized entry, alert authorities to 
attempted intrusions or irregularities for immediate response. After implementation of  
this project, the entire system of making Aerodrome Entry Permit (AEP) with regard to 
Airports security will be streamlined. The formal launch of this project was done on 30 th 

 
21  
December, 2019. 
 
Deployment of Full Body Scanners at Airports 
49. The BCAS has initiated the proposal for installation of Full Body Scanners (FBS) for 
reducing the long passenger queue and enhancing the technology at airports for frisking the 
passenger and to ensure zero error for security. After deployment of FBS, Indian airports will 
have a more secure system to find objectionable items during the Pre -Embarkation Security 
Check. At present the long queues at metro Airports will be reduced, as the body scanners  
display the results with voice output which increase the passenger throughput per h our. 
However, the FBS shall be installed at all airports at Pre -Embarkation Security Check (PESC) in 
a phased manner. The Committee was also informed that in addition to FBS, number of flights 
are also being increased to decrease overcrowding. 
50. The Committee, during its deliberations, had taken up the issue of installation of high -
tech Full Body Scanners (FBS) at airports instead of the Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMD), 
which are considered to be less sophisticated technically and whether Government is considering 
retinal scans for passengers and linking it with Aadhaar cards. The BCAS in reply stated that  
vide its AvSec Circular No. 05/2019 dated 08.04.2019, have circulated the minimum standards 
for Civil Aviation Security Equipment – Full Body Scanner and a Standard Operating procedure 
for deployment of Body Scanners for screening of persons including passengers at Indian 
airports. Further, an addendum to AvSec Circular no. 05/2019 has been issued with the direction 
that “The Full Body Scanner shall be installed at all airports at Pre-Embarkation Security Checks 
(PESC) in a phased manner. Airport operators of all Hypersensitive and Sensitive airports shall 
install Full Body Scanners replacing all DFMD. At least one set of DFMD shall be maintained 
for screening of passengers/persons with medical conditions. However, the date of 
implementation of full body scanner will depend on the COVID-19 pandemic scenario. 
51. The BCAS presently prescribes and issues minimum technical specifications/standards 
for security equipments, which are to be deployed for aviation security related responsibilities at 
the airport. Consequent to that, airport operators are obliged to procure and provide only those 
security equipment that meet or exceed the minimum technical specific ations issued by the 
BCAS. BCAS also informed that presently, no proposal for linking retina through Aadhaar Card 
is under consideration in this Ministry. 
52. The Committee during its deliberations with the Ministry has often pointed out that 

 
22  
at few of the airports, there are long passenger queues during peak hours. In view of the 
Government guidelines for avoiding public gatherings in the context of the prevalence of 
Covid-19 pandemic, more steps may be taken to resolve the issue. The Committee also  
notes that the Ministry proposes to increase the number of flights. The Committee observes 
that at most of the airports in the country, Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMDs), Hand 
Held Metal Detectors (HHMDs) and physical frisking is done on random basis. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the present system of DFMD/HHMD, besides being 
obsolete technology, is intrusive on the privacy of passengers. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that in addition to steps taken to ease queues, the Ministry may 
also expedite its proposal for installation of Full Body Scanners at airports, which would 
enhance the technology of frisking of passengers and lead to faster clearance of queues at 
frisking points. Besides, the number of frisking counters may also be increased at airpo rts 
and adequate trained personnel should be posted to man these counters effectively. 
53. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, wherein it has been stated that FBS 
shall be installed at all airports at pre -embarkation security checks in a phased mann er 
and the airport operators have also been directed to install FBS replacing the DFMD. The 
Committee notes that airport operators are obliged to procure and provide only those 
security equipment that meet BCAS specifications. The Committee is of the opini on that 
such an important issue, which has security implications, should not be left to the airport 
operators only as BCAS is more competent in technical matters regarding security as 
compared to airport operators. Hence, the BCAS should not only specify t he security 
equipment to be installed at airports, but also engage itself proactively with the airport 
operators to train personnel to use it and also maintain them. 
54. The Committee is also of the opinion that the Ministry should explore the feasibility 
of B iometric screening of passengers at airports, using tools such as facial recognition, 
fingerprint and retinal scans which is presently being used at many airports worldwide. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of retinal sca ns for 
frisking passengers, as the retinal scan data of most of the domestic passengers are  
available in the Aadhaar database. It would also like to point out that biometric security is 
non-intrusive and faster than conven tional screening, which leads to f aster screening of 
passengers and leads to less crowding at airports and is therefore being introduced in many 
airports abroad. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the global best practices for 

 
23  
biometric scanning and screening of passengers should be introduced in the country. 
 
 
Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE) 
55. In order to prevent entry/exit of Radioactive material which may be used to commit an  
act of unlawful interference in to airport/ on to an aircraft engaged in the civil aviation and to 
eliminate the hazard generated due to unauthorized carriage of radioactive material substances by 
passenger, cargo and staff, BCAS has issued an AVSEC Circular No. 01/2020 on Standard 
Operating Procedure for Operationalization of RDE at Indian Airports to prevent the 
Radiological Emergencies. The installation and operationalization work on 14 airports is 
complete in Phase -1 of RDE project. Now, another 10 Airports has been identified which shall  
be covered in Phase-2 of the project. 
56. The Committee notes the progress of installation and operationalization of RDE 
projects and recommends that the work may be completed as per the set deadline. The 
Committee may also be informed whether RDE projects would be implemented at 
remaining airports, besides the 24 airports in Phase 1 and 2. 
 
57. Counter-Drone Technology Solution 
(i) Unmanned Aircraft (UA) or Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS), commonly known 
as Drone is considered to be a game changer technology. Drones are being extensively used 
for various applications. However, drones may also be used for destructive purposes such as 
delivering explosives and harmful cargo for creating havoc etc. 
(ii) BCAS has issued AVSEC Circular No 02/2020 dated 11/02/2020 regarding Basic 
requirements and Technical Specifications/QRs for Counter Drone technology/solutions for 
Surveillance, Detection and Neutralization of drones/ UAVs for Airports. 
(iii) BCAS issued Addendum to AVSEC Circular No 02/ 2020 dated 02/02/2021 regarding 
Counter Drone shall be implemented at 06 JV airports (Delhi, Mumbai,  Hyderabad, 
Bengaluru, Nagpur & Cochin) and 02 AAI controlled airports (Kolkata & Chennai). 
 
Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) 
58. Perimeter Intrusion Detection system has been introduced as a role model at Delhi, 
Hyderabad Airports and Partially at Bengaluru Airports to enhance the security apparatus in 
Aviation Security along with the physical security. In this regard, BCAS has issued AVSEC 

 
24  
Circular 05/2017 dated 05/04/2017 in which Minimum Technical specification for PIDS has  
been promulgated. 
 
Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) 
59. To reduce the need for human intervention to return the trays to the starting point and for 
freeing up Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) personnel to frisk more passengers, the 
concept of Automatic Tray Retrieval Systems (ATRS), a roller -based set -up that will return 
luggage trays to the starting point after passengers collect their belongings from it, is being 
introduced at major airports. The ATRS will also end passenger’s hassle of looki ng around for 
trays and waiting for others to finish using them, as the system will continuously circulate the 
available trays. The Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) has been installed and trials for 
operationalization are undergoing at Delhi and few more airports. 
60. The Committee, during the course of its deliberations with the Ministry, had 
stressed upon the need for installation of sophisticated and State -of-the-Art security 
equipment and best security practices used globally, at all the Indian airpor ts, to ensure 
foolproof security. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the BCAS to install 
the latest security gadgets at airports viz., Centralized Access Control System (CACS); Full 
Body Scanners; Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE); Per imeter Intrusion Detection 
System (PIDS; and Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS). The Committee notes that 
installation of most of the aforesaid security systems have been recently initiated or at 
planning stage only and that too, only at the major airports only. The Committee notes that 
there are a total of 118 operational airports out of which 28 are hyper -sensitive; 62 are 
sensitive; and 28 normal airports. The Committee notes that out of these 118 airports, a 
miniscule number of airports are proposed  to have the security cover of aforesaid  
advanced security apparatus or gadgets. The Committee stresses upon the need for 
foolproof security cover at all the Indian airports and atleast at all the 28 hyper -sensitive 
and 62 sensitive airports in the near fu ture, especially in North-Eastern Region; Jammu & 
Kashmir; and Left -Wing Extremism (LWE) Regions, keeping in view the increase in 
security threats due to use of high -tech gadgets even by the terrorists/ extremists, to evade 
the security apparatus at the ai rports and create terror at airports/ airplanes and disrupt 
peace and progress of the country. In the above context, the Committee desires to know the 
details of the plans for installation of the aforesaid security apparatus at airports and the 

 
25  
number of airports included, the stages of implementation and percentage of ground work 
completed so far, the timeline which has been prescribed for the various airports, airport -
wise and whether the Ministry has been successful in achieving the said timelines. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the deadlines, if any, by which all the airports in the 
country would get the aforesaid security apparatus. 
 
 
ICAO Aviation Security (AvSec) Rating Procedure 
 
61. The Committee was informed that rating is given by ICAO on the basis of Universal 
Security Audit Programme - Continuous Monitoring Approach (USAP -CMA) as per a MoU 
between India and ICAO. It is based on evidence gathered on key parameters under USAP -
CMA. The findings of Audit are based on Risk Assessment and its impact on Aviation Security. 
62. The Committee was also informed of the following AVSEC rating of India vis -à-vis 
Global/Asia Pacific (APAC) Standard: 
 
Parameters Rating of India after 
2018 Audit 
Global Standard Asia Pacific (APAC) 
Standard 
Oversight Indicator 73.68 % 70.90 % 65.79 % 
Compliance Indicator 63.81 % 64.13 % 50.10 % 
 
63. The Committee appreciates the high security rating of India  vis-à-vis Global/ APAC 
Standards. It is of the opinion that BCAS  should make it a constant endeavour to make the 
security architecture and procedures dynamic by incorporating new technological 
advancements and best practices from  across the globe. It is further recommended that all 
the Aviation Security processes shoul d be streamlined in consultation with the  
stakeholders. 
 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
64. The Committee also feels that the Ministry should consider a policy to provide a 
small complimentary water bottle to the passengers in the aircraft, keeping in view the 
tradition of the country to give highest regard to guests and offer water on arrival. 
* * * * 

 
26  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
Role of Various Agencies in Aviation Security 
 
The Committee notes that presently, there is a multiplicity of agencies involved in  
providing security at airports viz., the CISF, Airlines Operators, Airport Operators, State 
Police and NSG. The Committee also notes that all the aforesaid individual agencies are 
looking after the airport security functions in additio n to their other roles and 
responsibilities. For example, CISF which plays a prime role in airport security presently 
provides security cover to 353 critical infrastructure facilities like nuclear installations, 
space establishments, seaports, power plants , important Government buildings, iconic 
heritage monuments, Delhi metro, besides security cover to some private corporate 
establishments also. The other entities such as airlines operators, airport operators, State 
police and NSG are engaged in their role  of airport security in addition to their main 
responsibilities, which is completely different from their role as airport security providers. 
The Committee recommends that the airport operators/ management should take the 
opinion of Ministry of Home Affairs, before purchasing security equipment at airports and 
also ensure that they should conform to the best standards of security worldwide. 
(Para 11) 
 
 
Initiatives by BCAS in Civil Aviation Security 
The Committee notes the various initiatives taken by the BC AS, which is the main 
regulator for governing security in the Civil Aviation Sector in the country. It also notes the 
responsibilities and initiatives taken by various Aviation Security Groups (ASGs) like  
CISF, Airport Security Units/State Police, besides the role played by the various airlines 
and airport operators in maintaining security at Airports. The Committee also notes the 
significance, the Government attributes to the Civil Aviation Sector, which is brought out  
in the policy document titled ‘Strategy for New India @75’, which has envisaged to expand 
airport capacity by more than five times the present capacity to handle one billion trips a 
year. The Committee feels that this fast tracked and unprecedented growth in the Civil 
Aviation Sector would re quire parallel enhancement of security infrastructure in this  
sector as well. 
(Para 13) 

 
27  
The exponential growth in the sector would be a challenge for the agencies involved in 
providing security, since trained security personnel, security infrastructure and related 
security protocols, needs to keep pace with growth.  A need for close cooperation and 
coordination with all the agencies, namely Government, State Police and Private agencies 
and other stakeholders involved in providing security, would also be required.  Hence, the 
Committee recommends that the world’s best security practices should be followed to cater 
to the increased security requirements. 
(Para 14) 
 
 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should set up dedicated Institu tions 
across the country to cater to needs for increased manpower in all the security aspects of 
the aviation sector. 
(Para 15) 
 
 
Categorization of airports in India 
 
The Committee notes that out of 118 operational airports, only 64 airports are under CISF  
cover, while 54 airports have no such cover. Further, out of the 28 hyper -sensitive airports, 
21 have CISF cover; while for the 62 sensitive airports, only 39 have been given CISF  
cover. The Committee recommends that the Government should strive to bring all the 
operational airports under the ambit of CISF security cover. 
(Para 19) 
 
 
Vacancy position of CISF at airports 
 
The Committee notes that though the vacancy position of CISF at airports, as compared to 
the total sanctioned strength is satisfactory, y et there is a vacancy of 1166 security 
personnel. The Committee is of the opinion that in view of the high -tech methods of 
intrusion used by the subversive elements at airports, atleast the full sanctioned strength of 
CISF should be provided at airports in  the country. The Committee also recommends that 
periodic surveys should be carried out to assess the changing threat perception at all 
airports in the country and accordingly, trained security personnel should be provided at 
airports in a time -bound manner. Continuous monitoring should also be done as regards 

 
28  
the implementation of various security rules and regulations and surprise checks should be 
carried out to test professional efficiency and alertness of the security staff and the 
operational preparedness of various agencies. 
(Para 22) 
 
 
Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) 
 
The Committee notes that presently BDDS is operationalised at 20 airports and non -
operationalised at 44 remaining airports and assistance of local police/ NSG is being sought 
for attending to such threats. The Committee notes that only 20 airports have BDDS cover 
till date. It is also observed that at some places where CISF does not have BDDS support, 
support of local police is being sought. The Committee is of the opini on that local police 
may not have the technical competence or the desired high -tech equipment to dispose of 
bomb threats. The Committee, therefore, recommends that BDDS should be engaged at the 
earliest at all the remaining 44 airports as well to counter b omb threats in consultation and 
coordination with the MHA. The Committee also recommends that the BDDS squad should 
have the best international pedigree dogs which can be engaged for security at airports. 
(Para 31) 
 
 
Measures to Improve Airport Security by CISF 
 
The Committee notes the various roles of CISF and the various initiatives taken by CISF to 
ensure security at airports in coordination with BCAS. The Committee notes that in 
addition to imparting training on various aspects of its core duty of security at airports, the 
CISF also imparts training for soft skills to improve upon the conduct of CISF personnel 
involved in various security functions viz., appropriate behaviour patterns, language & 
accent, body language, service orientation, presentab ility and dressing sense etc. The 
Committee during the course of its deliberations with the Ministry, have repeatedly  
pointed out the quality of the security staff at airports and is of the view that the security 
personnel are the first point of contact fo r any airline passenger after embarking from an 
aircraft, be it domestic or international passenger. As such, the security personnel sets the 
first impression on the passenger, about the city or the country. It is especially important in 
case of a foreign traveller and leaves a lasting impression on the mind of the tourist about 

 
29  
the country or the behavioural aspects of its people. Hence, imparting training in soft skills 
to the passenger frisking security personnel, assumes great significance, especially their 
behaviour, proper and presentable uniform or body language towards the passenger. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry in coordination with the MHA should 
ensure that CISF and other security staff at airports may be sensitized adequate ly in soft 
skills, so that they perform their security duties efficiently without diluting the security 
activities/responsibilities. The Committee notes that SOP for persons with special needs or 
‘Divyaangjan’ has been drafted by BCAS and same will be fina lized after receipt of 
comments of general public/ stakeholders. The Committee is of the opinion that special  
care should be taken to deal with passengers with special needs or ‘Divyaangjan’ and 
therefore, recommends that the SOP may be expeditiously finalized. 
(Para 46) 
 
 
State-of-the-Art Technological Solutions for Security at Airports 
 
The Committee during its deliberations with the Ministry has often pointed out that at few 
of the airports, there are long passenger queues during peak hours. In view of t he 
Government guidelines for avoiding public gatherings in the context of the prevalence of 
Covid-19 pandemic, more steps may be taken to resolve the issue. The Committee also  
notes that the Ministry proposes to increase the number of flights. The Committee observes 
that at most of the airports in the country, Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMDs), Hand 
Held Metal Detectors (HHMDs) and physical frisking is done on random basis. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the present system of DFMD/HHMD, besid es being 
obsolete technology, is intrusive on the privacy of passengers. In this context, the 
Committee recommends that in addition to steps taken to ease queues, the Ministry may 
also expedite its proposal for installation of Full Body Scanners at airport s, which would 
enhance the technology of frisking of passengers and lead to faster clearance of queues at 
frisking points. Besides, the number of frisking counters may also be increased at airports 
and adequate trained personnel should be posted to man these counters effectively. 
(Para 52) 
 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, wherein it has been stated that FBS shall be 

 
30  
installed at all airports at pre -embarkation security checks in a phased manner and the 
airport operators have also been directed to install FBS replacing the DFMD. The 
Committee notes that airport operators are obliged to procure and provide only those 
security equipment that meet BCAS specifications. The Committee is of the opinion that 
such an important issue, which has security implications, should not be left to the airport 
operators only as BCAS is more competent in technical matters regarding security as 
compared to airport operators. Hence, the BCAS should not only specify the security 
equipment to be installed at ai rports, but also engage itself proactively with the airport 
operators to train personnel to use it and also maintain them. 
(Para 53) 
 
 
The Committee is also of the opinion that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of 
Biometric screening of passenger s at airports, using tools such as facial recognition, 
fingerprint and retinal scans which is presently being used at many airports worldwide. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of retinal scans for 
frisking passengers, as the retinal scan data of most of the domestic passengers are  
available in the Aadhaar database. It would also like to point out that biometric security is 
non-intrusive and faster than conventional screening, which leads to faster screening of 
passengers and leads to less crowding at airports and is therefore being introduced in many 
airports abroad. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the global best practices for 
biometric scanning and screening of passengers should be introduced in the country. 
(Para 54) 
 
 
Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE) 
The Committee notes the progress of installation and operationalization of RDE projects 
and recommends that the work may be completed as per the set deadline. The Committee 
may also be informed whether RDE  projects would be implemented at remaining airports, 
besides the 24 airports in Phase 1 and 2. 
(Para 56) 
 
 
Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) 
 

 
31  
The Committee, during the course of its deliberations with the Ministry, had stressed upon 
the need for installation of sophisticated and State -of-the-Art security equipment and best 
security practices used globally, at all the Indian airports, to ensure f oolproof security. The 
Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the BCAS to install the latest security 
gadgets at airports viz., Centralized Access Control System (CACS); Full Body Scanners; 
Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE); Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS; 
and Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS). The Committee notes that installation of 
most of the aforesaid security systems have been recently initiated or at planning stage only 
and that too, only at the major airports on ly. The Committee notes that there are a total of 
118 operational airports out of which 28 are hyper -sensitive; 62 are sensitive; and 28 
normal airports. The Committee notes that out of these 118 airports, a miniscule number of 
airports are proposed to hav e the security cover of aforesaid advanced security apparatus 
or gadgets. The Committee stresses upon the need for foolproof security cover at all the 
Indian airports and atleast at all the 28 hyper-sensitive and 62 sensitive airports in the near 
future, especially in North-Eastern Region; Jammu & Kashmir; and Left-Wing Extremism 
(LWE) Regions, keeping in view the increase in security threats due to use of high -tech 
gadgets even by the terrorists/ extremists, to evade the security apparatus at the airports  
and create terror at airports/ airplanes and disrupt peace and progress of the country. In 
the above context, the Committee desires to know the details of the plans for installation of 
the aforesaid security apparatus at airports and the number of airports included, the stages 
of implementation and percentage of ground work completed so far, the  timeline which has 
been prescribed for the various airports, airport -wise and whether the Ministry has been 
successful in achieving the said timelines. The Committ ee may also be apprised of the 
deadlines, if any, by which all the airports in the country would get the aforesaid security 
apparatus. 
(Para 60) 
 
 
ICAO Aviation Security (AvSec) Rating Procedure 
 
The Committee appreciates the high security rating of India vis-à-vis Global/ APAC 
Standards. It is of the opinion that BCAS should make it a constant endeavour to make the 
security architecture and procedures dynamic by incorporating new technological 
advancements and best practices from across the globe. It is further recommended that all 

 
32  
the Aviation Security processes should be streamlined in consultation with the  
stakeholders. 
(Para 63) 
 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
The Committee also feels that the Ministry should consider a policy to provide a small 
complimentary water bottle to the passengers in the aircraft, keeping in view the tradition 
of the country to give highest regard to guests and offer water on arrival. 
(Para 64) 
 
 
 
 
* * * * 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
33  
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Prince Raj 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses: - 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(i) Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary 
(iii) Ms. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary 
(iv) Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
(v) Shri Amber Dubey, Joint Secretary 
(vi) Shri Arun Kumar, Director General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
(vii) Shri Nasir Kamal, Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 

 
34  
(viii) Shri S.K. Pathak, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, Commission of Railway 
Safety (CCS) 
(ix) Shri Rajmal Khoiwal, Chief Signal & Telecom Engineer, Commission of Railway 
Safety 
(x) Shri Rajiv Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Railway Safety, (General), Commission 
of Railway Safety. 
(xi) Shri B.S. Bhullar, Chairperson, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
(AERA) 
(xii) Shri Sanjeev Razdan, Chairman and Managing Director, Pawan Hans Limited 
(xiii) Shri Aurobindo Handa, Director General, Aircraft Accident Information Bureau 
(AAIB) 
(xiv) Shri Shri M. Suresh, Member (ANS), Airport Authority of India (AAI) 
(xv) Shri Sunil Dutt, Executive Director (Security), Airport Authority of India (AAI) 
 
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) 
(i) Shri Pramod Shripad Phalnikar, IPS/ Additional Director General, Airport Sector 
 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Central 
Industrial Security Force, and others to the meeting and informed them of the agenda for the 
meetings i.e. *     *        *     and Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector. 
2. Thereafter, the Chairman emphasized on Security aspect of Civil Aviation Sector, and 
queried the Ministry about implementation of best security features in Indian Aviation Sector  
as compared to the global security standards and whether the security measures adopted in 
the country have progressed to the global level. Expressing serious concern over selection/ 
purchase and installation of cheaper security equipments available in the  market by airport 
operators, the Chairman suggested the Ministry to look into the aspect of equipment selection 
and also identify and regulate the process of employing best practices of the world -class 
airports to develop Indian airports in a better way. He also asked the Ministry to inform the 
Committee about the time required to fill the identified gaps in implementing selected best 
practices to the Indian airports. 
 
_____________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

 
35  
3. The Members raised several issues and queries regarding the  Security issues viz. 
simplifying security procedures at the airports, easy handling of flyers carrying useless 
ammunition(s), operationalization of old planes which pose a threat to passenger -security, 
linking Aadhaar Card and retina of passengers in context of counter -insurgency operations, 
involvement of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Intelligence Units (FIUs) 
to combat of chemical water/gas weapons threat, doing case histories of people travelling 
through air, preparation of reports on the basis of COSCA research on passenger frisking 
points, involvement of COSCA with CISF, APSUs and BCAS to operate Flying Training 
Schools and deployment of staff, SOP mechanism for mandatory screening practices at the 
State- owned airports, upgrading the role of CISF -COSCA in terms  of securing the airports, 
installing biometric facial identification at the airports, creation of voice -activated self -
service booths, recordkeeping of flight operations and building mechanisms to track potential 
hazards at non -sterile and sterile airport s; Aviation Staff issues viz.  giving choice of 
postings/ hometown postings to Security Personnel, incentives to female CISF staff and 
granting off-days in order to improve their living standards, tackling shortage of  CISF staff 
at the airport, creating a  master plan to fill-up vacancies; and Passenger issues viz. educating 
passengers on luggage rules for hassle -free boarding, student -baggage entitlements, checked 
and unchecked baggage, provision of full -body scanning facility to eliminate risk of 
spreading Coronavirus , proper positioning of efficient Immigration Bureau officials at the 
airport immigration desks , lack of sensitivity during screening on part of security personnel 
with Persons with Disabilities, civilized treatment of passengers, streamlining  the process 
between boarding and gate closing time, security and baggage fees for non -baggage flyers, 
streamlining AEP (Airport Entry Passes) issuance process etc. 
4. *   *   *  The Members also asked 
the Ministry and COSCA to provide reports to the Committee on the number of PWDs 
travelling by air and whether any of them have been declared a security hazard and the best 
practices employed to take care of PWDs like free -moving space a nd sensitization towards 
autistic children. Members also queried the Ministry regarding core and non -core security 
activities handled by the CISF, NSG and other security agencies at the airports, etc. 
5. Members then suggested that private airport operators s hould also be called to the 
future meeting of the Committee to give their inputs on security activities and overall 
operations at the airports. The Ministry was asked to apprise the Committee of report made 
 
_____________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

 
36  
on advantages/ disadvantages of Greenfield and Br ownfield projects in order to create 
awareness among the Committee Members regarding the same. 
6. The Chairman of the Committee observed that India can position itself at the top 
through upgradation of security scan equipments, use of courteous language & ges tures by 
the security personnel with the passengers, permitting belts through airport security checks, 
upgrading security check counters and runways with the cooperation of State Governments 
etc.  
7. *  *  *  * The witnesses responded to some 
of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman 
directed them to furnish written replies to queries/points/issues raised by him and the 
Members of the Committee. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 4:45 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

 
37  
 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 30th March, 2022 in Committee 
Room – ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shrimati Mala Roy 
14. Shri Dushyant singh 
15. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider an d adopt 
the following Draft Reports on:- 

 
38  
 
(i) *  *  *; and 
(ii) Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector. 
 
2. The Committee suggested some minor changes in the abovementioned draft Reports. 
The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out the changes. The Committee, thereafter, 
adopted the draft Reports alongwith some minor modifications/additions. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports to the Rajya Sabha in Parliament 
on 31st March, 2022. The Committee also authorized the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri 
Prasanna Acharya, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Dushyant Singh, M.P. 
and i n his absence, Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi, M.P. was authorized to lay the 
abovementioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2022. 
4.         The meeting adjourned at 11:00 A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

 
39  
ANNEXURE - I 
List/ Categorization of Airports under CISF cover 
 
Hyper-Sensitive  Sensitive  Normal 
S. 
No. 
Airport S. 
No. 
Airport S. 
No. 
Airport S. 
No. 
Airport 
1. Amritsar 1. Agra 22. Goa 1. Gwalior 
2. IGI Delhi 2. Chandigarh 23. Nagpur 2. Rajkot 
3. Jaipur 3. Indore 24. Vadodara 3. Bhavnagar 
4. Varanasi 4. Bhuntar 25. Calicut 4. Shirdi 
5. Lucknow 5. Kanpur 26. Cochin   
6. Agartala 6. Shimla 27. Coimbatore   
7. Bagdogra 7. Udaipur 28. Mangalore   
8. Guwahati 8. Dehradun 29. Tirupati   
9. Imphal 9. Khajuraho 30. Trichy   
10. Kolkata 10. Dibrugarh 31. Trivandrum   
11. Raipur 11. Dimapur 32. Vizag   
12. Bangalore 12. Gaya 33. Tezpur   
13. Chennai 13. Jorhat 34. Shillong   
14. Hyderabad 14. Lilabari 35. Bhubaneswar   
15. Mumbai 15. Patna 36. Diu   
16. Pune 16. Ranchi 37. Portblair   
17. Jodhpur 17. Silchar 38. Madurai   
18. Ahmedabad 18. Aurangabad 39. Kannur   
19. Srinagar 19. Porbandar     
20. Jammu 20. Bhopal     
21. Leh 21. Bhuj     
 
       
 
 
 
 
      
 

 
40  
ANNEXURE II 
21st December, 2021 
LIST OF WITNESS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
1 Shri Rajiv Bansal Secretary 
2 Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary 
3 Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
5 Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
6 Shri Arun Kumar Director General, DGCA 
7 Shri Nasir Kamal Director General, BCAS 
8 Shri S. K. Pathak Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, CRS 
9 Shri Rajmal Khoiwal CSTE, CRS 
10 Shri Rajiv Kumar Deputy CRS (G), CRS 
11 Shri B. S. Bhullar Chairperson, AERA 
12 Shri Sanjeev Razdan CMD, Pawan Hans Limited 
13 Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General, AAIB 
14 Shri M. Suresh Member (ANS), AAI 
15 Shri Sunil Dutt Executive Director (Security), AAI 
 
Central Industrial Security Force 
 
16. Shri Pramod Shripad Phalnikar, IPS Additional DG/ Airport Sector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* * * *  
 