• 
---
-
. . . 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96 
(DEMAND NOs. 76 77 & 78) 
MINISTRY F 
(PRESENTED ON THE 10TH MAY, 1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 1995/VAISAKHA, 1917 (SAKA) 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
(1995-96) 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96 
(DEMAND NOs. 76, 77 & 78) 
MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT 
(Presented on the 10th May, 1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka) 

CONTENT S 
I. CoMPOsmot-~ oF n1e CoMMITTE.£ ......... ....... ................................ .. ........ ....... . (i)·(i i) 
2. INTRODUCTION .......... . ...... ....... ...... ............... ............ .............. .... ... ... ....... . . (iii) 
3. R £.PORTOF-niECoMMJTTEE ················· h•O•••···········•··················· ······· ········ ··· 1-9 
4 . ANNEXURE .. . .. .. ... . .. . ·· •·· · •···· ., .... , ···•··· •·· ·• ··· • ··········· .. ...••.. .... .. .... ···· ···· ·· ······· 11- · 13 
S. Ml,.,t.JTES ........ ......... ..... ................ .... ........... ... .... ........ , ........ ... ...... ........... . 17-19 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1995-96) 
l. Shri Pramod Mahajan - Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Shri 
3. Shri 
4. Shri 
5. Shri 
6. Shri 
7. Shri 
8. Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
9. 
S. Austin 
Ghufran A2am 
Jagir Singh Dard 
John . F. Fernandes 
Bhadreswar Gohain 
Narain Prasad Gutpa 
Ram Jethmalani 
Satya Prakash Malaviya 
Raghavji 
Ratna Bahadur Rai 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
Shri Iqbal Singh 
Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
19. Shri A. Charles 
20. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
21. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
22. Shri K.M. Mathew 
23. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
24. Shri Swarup Upadbayay 
25. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
26. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
27. Shri lmchalemba 
28. Shri Manphool Singh 
29. Shri K.D . Sultanpuri 
30. Shri Jangbir Singh 
31. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
32. Prof. Prcm Dhumal 
33. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
34. Shri Kalka Das 
35. Shri Aivind Trivedi 
36. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
(i) 

37. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
38. Shri Sukhcndu Khan 
39. Shri Lokanat h Choudhury 
40. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
41. Shr i Ram Sunder Das 
42. Shr i Anadi Charan D~s 
43. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
44. Shri Krish na Mar a ndi 
45. Shri Uday Pra tr.p Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Raja Ram. Deputy Secretary 
(ii) 
Shri Sycd Ausaf Husain. Under Secretary 
Shri K.P . Singh. Comminec Officer 

L 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Stand ing Committee on Transport and Tourism having been authorised 
by the Committee to present on the ir behalf, present this 16th Report on the Demands for 
Grants 1995·96 of the Minisuy of Surface Transport. 
2. The Committee at its meeting held on 18th April , 1995 considered the Demands for 
Grants, 1995·96 of the Ministry of Surface T ransport (Demands No. 76. 77 and 78) and 
heard the Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport. 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Minis try for placing before 
the Committee the materia l and information desired in connection with the examination of 
the Demands for Gran ts of the Ministry for giving evidence before the Comm iuee . 
4. '!he Committee considered and adop'led the report at its meeting hdd on the 
4th May. 1995. 
New Delhi; 
May 4, 1995 
Vaisakha 14, 1917 (Saka) 
(iii) 
PRAMOD MAHAJAN 
Chairman. 
Commiuee on 
Tramporr and Tourism. 

Rl:.PORT 
~lm"try of ~urface Tran,pon ha' three Dcrn;~nds, viz .. Demand\ l"o .76, 77 ;ond 71S 
1 cl,tllllg tu roatl deve lopment indudmg cooruination of r oad tran ~port, tlcvd~)pment of 
Inland Water Transport; nwritimc 'hippmg and navigations. development of major pons. 
ligh thou'c' and lightships . ship -building a1H.I charterin g of ships. Barring a1r nnu r"i l 
Ll ilii' IHII"l. Ministry of Surface Transport wnt rc1l' the entire gamut of transport system tn the 
wun trv. T ltcrcforc, an integrated apJlltlac h to all modes of transpor t except ntil ~nd ai1 i> 
rcqlurcd. ll w~' in Llti' context that the Comm ittee in its Tenth Report. while considering 
the Demand' for G ran b. 1994-95 of the Ministry of Surface T ransport had rcconlmcndcd for 
appoinLtn<'rtl of ·· ..... a Comm illcc to go into all these aspects of integrated approach to 
Su1f01cc Tr;m,port. prepare an action ph111 tmplemem the same at the earl1c't " 
' !"he Mini,try of Surface "I rarhpon in thcrr Action Taken Report on the aoove 
rcnunmcndatron of rhe Commrne~ had \Hlled lhat a> recommended by lhc Cornminee on 
I r;m,pon anti Touri•m. a Commrncc tu go 11110 all the aspect of rntegratcd i!ppruach ICl 
~urf.1~c 1 r;tn,JX>rl had been appotnlcll unde • rhc Ch:tirmanship of Seet~tar) (SFT) , rhe 
~ltn.-try had abo provitled ~ copy of the Order No. CD-IW13/9 /'J4-Conrd (00) dated 
19th J1tl ). 1994. A copy of the ;t[or~said Order is allached as Annexure 
2. 1. From the perusa l of the Muustry ' s <tforcs<tid Order. it is ob•crvcd thlll Lhe 
uovcrnmcn t h;~d acce pted the recommendation of 1he Comm inet.: to go into all a'pcc t' of 
iul<'gratcd iipproac h to Surface T ranspon and had appointed a Com111 ili~C to give its report 
wrtltin u period or six month, . Furthe111lCITC, the composi tion or the Comm ittee included a 
n·prc,cnhilrvc of the Plan ning ComllHS\1011 . 
J When asked about the pre,cnt po,ilion of the report of Commillec. the Secret;try. 
t-.ltni,uy llf Surface Transport ~Wied a' under-
. as far a~ I he Integrated I ranspon rs concerned. the mancr i~ to be 
dealt wilh by an umbrella agency th:H oversees all 1he sector<. of tran•port like Civil 
Aviation. Railways etc. whrch we arc not looking into. Therefore. I have wnnen to 
the Member Secretary of the Plannrng Commis>ion that he will he the appropnatc 
peNm to chair such a group and 'imih.trly. the National Transport Poli(y Comm1ttcc 
1s to be consr irurcd. The mauer i> in ~ o rre>pondence with 1hc Pl:mning Cllmmi"ion. 
They are agreeable to lwvc the Commi ltc<' and we all would be u part of the 
Com mitt ee as mem bers to grvc Hssist:lllcc." 
.J. Th<: Commillee is al l os~ to understa nd the volte-face of the SccrcLHry, Su rface 
l"ranspon on this subjecl. The Order of July 19, 1994, of the Ministr y of Sur face Transport 
t.:onstituting the Com mitt ee to gl' into thi> wbjccL-rnaner was very clear . It <tlso included a 
representative of the Planning Commb,1on. The Commiuce, therefore. ha~ taken a serious 
view on the Ministry of Surface Tran~port going bac k on a commitment made 10 thrs 
Commiuee based on its recommendation to submit a repon on integrated approach . The 
Commiuce i' not convinced with the explanation given by the Secret:try or Surface 
rran,pon that the matter is to be de:rlt with by an umbrella agency that ovcn.cc; :rll the 
\ector' of transport like civil aviatiOn etc . The Committee. therefore. recommends that the 
Government should finalise an integrated surface transport policy without any further loss of 
tunc and expects that such a policy would be ready within a maximum period of s1x mnnlhs. 
5. Under Demand s No. 76 and 78 of the Ministry, less provisions have been mittie for 
the current financial year than wh~t were provided for the preced ing year s. Demand No. 76 
contains the Budget Es timate amoun ting to R!i. 87.45 crore for the current fin:111cial year as 
1 

, 
2 
against the Revised Estimate for 1994-95 which amounted to Rs. 90.67 crore. Budget 
Estimate for· the year 1993-94 under this Demand amounted to Rs. 92.53 crore which was 
later revised to 96.28 crore . Under Dema nd No.78, Budget Est imate amounting to 
Rs. 366.17 crore has been made for the current financial year as against the Revised 
Estimate for the year 1994-95 which amounted to Rs. 447.63 crore . Demand No.77 which 
relates to Roads is the only exception where Budget Estimate amounting to Rs. 1405.49 
crore has been mad~ for the curre nt financial year as against the Revised Estimate for 1994-
95 which amounted to Rs. 1349.23 crorc. 
6. The secretary, informed the Committee during his deposition that. his Ministry had 
proposed for higher outlays but the funds were allocated by the Planning Co!nmission and 
the Finance Ministry, on the basis of availabi lity of funds. It was also informed that if 
needed. Revised Estimate would be submitted to the Parliam ent for approval. The 
Commillet fails lo understand lhe logic behind keeping lower oullay in the beginning and 
going for Revised Estimate later, knowing fully well thai the recourse to Revised Estimate will 
have to be resorted to, unless there is strong possibility of a change in the trend of 
expenditure . 
7. The Committee real ises lhe problems of tile Ministry of Surface Transport. They will 
have to manage their affairs within the allocations made for them. The Committee, however, 
expresses its unhappiness over the criteria adop ted by the Planning Commission/Ministry of 
Finance in the mauer of allocation of funds. ll the cost escalation is taken into consideration, 
there is hardly any increase in the outlays which means standstill position of the 
developmental activities in the sector. It is true that for such activities, resources are required. 
But we have reached lhe stage where it is almost difrtcult to raise additional resources. The 
alternulive lo this unhappy situa tion is to eliminate wasteful upenditure of the Government. 
It Is imperative upon the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry of find out areas of 
wasteful expenditure and is.~ue necessar y directives for strict compliance to cut down such 
expenditure. The Committet is sure that huge amount would be saved as a result thereof 
which may be utilised for developmental activities. Additional funds so generated will 
cert:linly help reduce the gap between the Budget Estimates and the Revised Estimate. The 
Committee impre sses upon the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry to take up this 
task on priority basis. 
Demand No. 76-R{){Jd Transport 
8. Budget Est imate of Rs. 87.45 crore has been made for 1995-96 as agamst the RE of 
90.67 crore for 1994-95. Out of this. Road Transport Sector gets an outlay of Rs. 26.00 
crorc. 
9 In the road transpon sector. Rs. 14.00 crore has been provided for non-plan loan~ to 
DTC with a view to enable the Corporation to cover its cash losses. BE for 1994-95 also 
contained a provision of Rs. 14.00 crorc on this account which was enhanced tO Rs. 24.00 
crorc in the RE. The Ministry in their written reply has sta ted th~t udditiona~ fund of Rs. 10 
crorc was provided from the plan funds to meet DTC's committed liabilities. The losses of 
DTC for the year 1994-95 were assessed as Rs. 77.82 crores and against this only a provision 
of Rs. 14 crores for non -plan a~sistance to DTC was made since such a large sum of money 
could not be found from within the budget allocation and there was no oth~r recourse left 
but to diven Rs. 10 crore [rom the plan alloca tion to enable DTC to meet liabilities of it> 
daily requirements of diesel, oil and disbursement of salaries etc . 
10. Tbe Committee has been further informed that the un-bridged working losses for 
the years 1993-94 and 1994-95 have been assessed as Rs. 43 crore and Rs. 54 crorc 

3 
respect ively. 111e outstanding liabilities which are yet to be liquidated as on 31.3.1995 are 
estimated as Rs. 73 crore. Further DTC has not paid Rs. 10.19 crore against bank overdraft 
due to paucity of funds. The situation has become so critical that D'I;C has not been in a 
position to disburse its salary for the month of March, 1995. It is likely that necessary funlk 
may have tO be released this year also to DTC to tnable it to meet its outstanding liabilities. 
As regards remedial measures taken/being taken by the Ministry, the Committee has been 
apprised that a proposal for additional ways and means loan to DTC amounting to Rs. 86.00 
crore has been submitted for approval. If the proposal is approved, plan diversion may not 
be necessary. 
11. The Committee has noted that a sum of Rs. 10.00 crore was divened to meet the 
non-plan requirements of the D.T .C during 1994-95 for augmentation of its fleet. The 
amount was utilised to meet non-plan expenditure of daily requirement. This year too, same 
thing is likely to be repeated and the fu,nd would again be diverted at the revised estimate 
stage. The Committee feels that this a very unfortunate situation where money from plan 
funds is diverted to meet non-plan expenditure of daily requiremen ts. · 
12. The Committee in its lOth Report on Demands for Grants, 1994-95 has 
recommended for transfer of DTC to the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
and also for wiping out its cumulative losses. In their Action Taken Report , the Ministry of 
Surface Tran~port has stated that the matter is still under consideration . As regards running 
of DTC into losses, the rehabilitation package stated to have been prepared and entrusted, 
is yet to be accepted by the Cabinel. It has been said emphatically during the evidence that 
the DTC will be in a position to run itself without incurring any working losses, if the 
rehabi litation package is accepted . Restructuring of DTC would depend on the acceptance of 
rehabilitation package. 
13. The Committee reitera tes its earlier recommendation for the transfer of DTC to the 
Government of National Ca,pital Territory of lnlhi and for wiping out its cumulative losses. 
Tbe Commillee impresses upon the Government to taken an early decision so that the DTC 
could operate without any hindrance to the benefit of Delhi citizens. 
14. The attentio n of the Secretary (SIT) was also drawn to the pension scheme for the 
DTC employees which is pending with the Government of India . The Secretary then 
explained that the Ministry has actively 'taken up the maHer with the Life Insurance 
Corporation (LIC). The UC did not agree to the Government's proposal as it was not a one 
time pension and involved adequate corpus of funds. The Ministry are therefore, trying for 
adequate funds from the Government to be operated for the purpose. Approval of the 
Cabinet will be obtained only after the total requirement is worked out. The Committee is 
very much concerned on the delay or the grant of pension to DTC employees. The Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to expedite rmalisation of their decision as it Involves retired and 
poor people. 
15. A provision of Rs.6.00 crore has been made in the Budget Estimate for 1995·96 on 
account of capital contribution to State Road Transport Corporations (SRTC$). The Annual 
Plan of the Ministry of Surface Transport indicates that the outlay has been made to clear 
!he arrears for the year 1992-93 of the capital contributio n to SRTCs . It is, however, felt 
that this provision is grossly inadequate as it cannot meet the requirement of Gujarat State 
Road Transport Corporation (SRTC) and Maharashtra SRTC which amounted to Rs. 12.77 
crore and 0.38 crore respectively. 
16. The Committee in its Tenth Report on Demands for Grants 1994-95 bas considered 
the matter and expressed its surprise how th.e Central Government would dischar$e its 

liability for whidt there wa~ hardly any prov isaon in the outlay. The Conunnt~c h:a' 
recommended for necessary provasaon~ an the Budget E'tamate to dear the due' of State 
Road Transport Corporations which ;, a legal hind ing on the Government of India. The 
Committee has further recommended that grant\ should be given to those Co rpowtio n which 
c:tn amprove if rin3ncial 'uppon i' cxtcnd~d to them. The Commattce. h<t"cvca .:;autionc I 
the Government to look tnto the finam.:i<al implication o r any 'uch pohcy befor<· makan~ 
commitme nts to the public and the Parliament . 
17 The Mamstry of Surface Transport in their Action Taken Rcpon ha' stated th;ll the 
issue of delinking of gr:mt of capital c<.>ntributi ~ln to the profata\lility of SRTC, '"" hccn 
recommen ded by Transport Development Councal and a note aecortli ngly tan' hccn 
submattcd for C;abinet approval The C.aoinet ha' consid~red the note but the prnposal h." 
been deferred. 
1!!. The Commillet express~~ its onhappin~s~ on the Government's inability to come ton 
deci\ion on ~uch vital issues for th~ rea '>Oa\S be~t I.Jao" n to them. It appeare~ that Go•ernment 
does not want any chan,::c in it., existing policy. Government should re;alise that "''htam·e to 
State Road Transport Corporations !SRTCI is es~ntial in view of the ract llwt their "'rvi ccs 
are largely used by le<oS privilcdged cia~~. hence, Indispensable. It , therefor~. ,aJ" upon the 
Governmen t t o analyse the issue in the context in »hich th~ Committe~ has recommended for 
extenuin~t financial support to those corporation~ which cou ld improve instead or cxtenrlin~s 
financial support to tho!le "ho are alre01dy earn in~: profiLo;. 
l9. The Ce ntral Inland Water Tran,port Cnrpor<~llon (CJwrC) h;" been prtw~eh:d a 
budgeta ry ~ U)l[>Ort of 1{,. 12.55 'rnrc lor the vca r l \1\15-96 to hnance it' plua1 'ch~m~' 
rclatin~ to modcrni<at ion of RaJabagan Docky ard. acqui'ltion of vco;se"'· repuih uf ve,,ch 
etc. I has Corpo ratio n P ro vade, utbnd water tr;ul\port \CTVices for tht' tran'Jl<lrt;llaon of 
gootb in Cakt al(a, Ea ~ tern sector and on the 13r~hm;, putra and upt o Patna un the nv.;a 
Ganges. 
20. The prof it/1m,, :accounts or.thc Cl\\o'TC revealed that working los'c' mcurrcd hy th<: 
Corpor ation during 1992-93, 1993-94 aaad 1994 95 were of the order of Ih. (>.(!() cro re. Ro; 
li.OO crore and Rs. 1(),()() crorc rc.,pecuvcly. I lnwcvea. for the yc~r J99V.Io. a '"" uf R' 
2.0\1 cro re h"s bee n est am;Hed. 
21. '1bc C IWTC' i ~ a wmmcrdal orga nisation which is in opera taon sancc l%7. lt as le tt 
that by now, tt 'hould have been po~sihle for the Corporation ttl 'land nn a sound fooung. . 
Since it as a commercial organasation. financ aal >-upport to it at tha' "age as d reOcuion un ah 
work ing. The Committee impresses upon the Govern ment to look into the ufl'nirs of the 
Corpora tion and tak e ~uitahle action to make th~ organisation a profitable one. 
Demwul No. 77-Road s 
22. This Demand covers the cntirt~ a" ivitics relat ed to construction. deve lopment and 
maintenance of Nauon;al Highways. str;~tcgic border roa<ls. uan,actions rclaung to Central 
Road Fund s, Bridge Fee Fund etc. The Budget Estimate for 1995·96 under th as Dcrn:and 
prov ides for an outlay of Rs. 1405 .49 cro re a~ against the Revi ~ed Estimut~ 1994-95 which 
amounted to Rs. 1349.23 crore~. Out of the total allocatio n. the National llighway' get an 
allocation of Rs. 765.90 croreb includang Rs. 322 crorc from external aad. 
23. Out o f the total allocation of Rs. 7(,5.90 crore. tbe fund s allo c<atcd for Nation:1 l 
Highway Works arc as follows:-
(u) Externally aadcd projects 
(b) Normal NH 
(c) NH under DRDB 
Rs. 319.55 crore 
Rs. 366.34 crorc 
Rs. 052.00 crorc 
K~ . 737.!!9 crorc 
418.34 
crore 

5 
The Commillee has been told that the review of the on-going works has revealed that a sum 
of Rs. 737.00 ccores would alone be required during 1995-96 for the targetted completion of on­
going normal NH works excluding new works to be sanctioned for the year 1995-96. Against 
this, a total sum of Rs. 418.34 crores only has been made available for both on-going as well as 
new works. This constitutes 56.7 per cent of the total requirement of Rs. 737 crores. The 
shortage of funds, would result in slipp~ge in achieving the set targets. 
24. The Commi!lee has been apprised by the Ministry of Surface Transport of the following 
alternative courses of action being taken by the Ministry so as to augment the funds for National 
Highways: 
(a) Augmentatton of Central Road Fund (CRF) at the revised rates a• per Resolution o[ 
1988 passed by the Parliament; 
(b) Private Sector participation. The existing National Highways Act, 1956 is proposed to 
be amended to facilitate private sector participation; 
(c) Enhancement of vehicle registration fee, Funds accruing therefrom to be utilised for 
maintenance and development of roads including National Highways . 
25. As regards the implementation of Re!><>lution of 1988 passed by the Parliament, the 
Commntee has already considered the matter in tiS lOth Report on Demands for Grants, 1994-
95 of the Ministry of Surface Transport and 13th Report on National Highway System wherein 
the Committee had cxprc~scd its unhappines> on the delay being caused in the implementation 
of the Resolution passed by the Parliament in the year 1988. It has been informed that the 
matter is still under consideration of a Group of Ministers, incharge of Ministry of Petroleum 
and Chemicals, Finance and Surface Transport. 
26. The Committee expresses its dissathfaction on the working of the concerned Ministry. It 
has a reeling thai the Ministry functions without any perception and clear vision as is evident from 
the present case. U at all there was any need to consult other related Ministries, the exercise ought 
to have been completed either before introducing the resolution or immediately arter adoption or 
the resolution by Parliament in 1988. Consultation after 617 years indicates ca~ual approach and 
non-seriousness in the matter. Still, there is no evidence or any early decision. The Committee 
while reiterating its earlier recommendations in the matter impresses upon the conctrned 
Ministries to take an early decision in the matter so that the augmenbttion of finances of the 
Ministry or Surface Transport does not suffer and the life lines of our vast country are well 
maintained. 
27. With a view to overcome the resource con~traints the Government has lately thought of 
a plan to encourage participation of Private Sector both indigenous and foreign not only to 
finance, construct, maintain and operate identified highways and bridge~ from their own 
resources but also to introduce their managerial skill . The final policy of the Government is yet 
to take shape. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry of Surface Transport that the 
existing law i.e. the National Highways Act, 1956 needs to be amended so us to permit the 
private entrepreneul'\i to undertake the projects relating to construction and maintenance of 
National Highways and allow them to collect toll d ircctly from the users. A Bill tE> that effect is 
likely to be introduced in the Parliament in the current Budget Session. Governmcm's policy 
would be finalised only after the National Highway> Act, 1956 is amended. The Committee has 
been further informed that in the absence Government's policy, no investment has so far been 
made by the Private Sector on the National l l ighways. 
28. The Committee in its thirteenth Report on National Highway System has discussed in 
detail the scope of private investment on national highways. It has recommended for 
amendment of the National Highways Act, 1956 to facilitate private participation. 

28.1 The Committee feels that amendment or Nalional Highwa ys Act, 1956 "ill not 
automatically result in flow of funds from private sector. It may take some time. In view of 
lht. urgency of the funds needed for the maintenance of National Highways, the Committee is 
or the view that Government should double the allocation of funds for normal national 
highways works till the private sector participalion begins. 
28.2 The Committee at the same lime would also like the Government to take into 
account the observation of recent World llank s tudies and various ottrer reports which suggest 
that cost or transport would increase on the roads con.~tructed by the private secto r and tc,ll 
tax would be collected by them. The Comm ittee impresses upon the Government to e~arnine 
this &SJM!Ct. The Committee also desires to caution the Government that with liberalization in 
lhe sector, appropriate measures be taken to safegua rd countr y's security. 
28.3 The Committee is hopeful that a suitable policy would be finalised after amendment 
of the National Highways Act, 1956. 
29. The Secretary, (SIT) in the cour;e of hi• evidence informed the Commiuee that 
Government was considering a proposal to enhance the existing vehicle reg1\lration fee and 
funds accruing therefrom to be utilised for maintenance and developmem or road' includ10g 
the National Highways. He also informed the Commillee that expenditure of the order of 
Rs. 30,000 crores was incurred annually on sale and transfer of vehicles throoghout the 
country. The existing registration fee was very low. Sta te Governmcms had been con,ulled 
to enhance the fcc by 3% of the cost of vehicle. fhcrcby Governmem would collect R~. 900-
1000 crores as a registration fee. The proceeds of this fee would the n be distnhuted between 
the Cen tra l and State Government~ nnd the ent ire revenue so generated would be mad e 
available for the road sector. 
30. The Committee commends the innovative proposal prepared by the Gov~rnment and 
calls for an early action in the maller . 
31. The Committee in its 13th Report on N;ttional Highway~ System hns noted that 
Cent ral Government's share in the revenue ea rned hy way of road taxes in the year 1994-95 
works out to be Rs. 9000 crores wherea~ the allocation in that year for the road sector was 
about 10% thereof. To augment the resource' for the road sector, the Comm111ee h"d 
sugges ted in its lOth Repon on Demand' for Grant~. 1994-95 that 70% of revenue ~tenerated 
by the National Highway s should be reinvested in National Highways for infrastructure and 
expansion. Tht Committee reiterate Its r«<mmendationlobservations contained In its IOtb 
and J3th Reports and impress upon lht Mini stry of Finance to consider the maller 
ravourable. 
32. Government of India initiated a sche me m May, 1954 which seeks to promo te inter­
state road commun icat ion facilities and to help the States in their economic develo pment 
thro ugh construction of road/bridge s of inter-state or economic importance. Under this 
scheme states are provided 100% loun assistance in the case of inter·state roau and 50"/o in 
the ease of projects economic imponance. 
33. A provision o( Rs. 60 crores was made in the 8th Plan for the purpo~c. mduding 
carry-over schemes as against Rs. 41 7 crores prov1ded in 7th Plan. So far .. projects 1n the 
States of Andhra Pradesh, J&K, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Ori~~a have 
been approved under the aforesa1d scheme. A sum of Rs. 7.50 crores was released for the 
years 1992-93 to 1994-95 and Rs. 12.00 crores has been earmarked for the year 1995·96 
which includes an amount of Rs. 8.5 crores set apart for the construction of Mughal road in 
Jammu & Kashmir. 
34. The Committee notes with ~oncern that a meagre allocation or Rs. 7.50 has so far 
been made availabl e. It seems that adequate importance bas not been accorded to the scheme 
launched by lhe Central Government llself. The Commitlee considers this scheme very 

7 
imPQrtant and desires that higher allocation should be made so that proPQsnls, received from 
Stales and pending with the Ministry or Surface Transport for paucity of fund could be taken 
up. 
35. Ministry of Defence identifies strategic tpads having operational requircmenl under 
Strategic Roads Works Scheme. Following the external aggression in 1965, cemu n road~ m 
Gujarat and Rajasthan were approved under this ~theme. The entire expenditure is met hy 
Government of India through Ministry of Defence. Subsequently certain roach projected hy 
Ministry of Defence were approved for development in the States of A'"""· GuJarat. 
llimachal Pradesh, J & K. Meghalaya, Punjab. Rajasthan. Tripura, Uuar Pradesh and West 
Bengal under this programme. Ministry of Defence has identified " list of 38 'cheme' for 
consideratton tn the 8th Plan against an outlay of Rs. 30.00 crorc~ For the ye..rs 1992-93. 
1993-94 and 1994-95 outlays of Rs. 9.50 crores, Rs. 9.00 crorcs and R,. 7.1Xl crorc' 
respectively were made . The BE 1995-96 provtdes for Rs. 5.5 crores for the '11 atcgic road, . 
36. According to the Ministry of Surface Transpon. the co't of carry -over 'chcmc' 
alone to the 8th Plan is of the order of R~. 65.1Xl crore~ Out of tht' R\. 17.5 cror''' ht" hccn 
released 10 the first three years. 
37. The Committ ee notes lhlll in view or the fund s made available to complete the carry· 
over schemes, it seems that it would take nearly a decade to comp lete those projecl\. The 
Commillee rec:ommeds that strategic roads should be accorded higher pdorit) considering the 
fact that these roads are to secure the frontiers of the count ry. II, th erefore. recommends that 
adequate funds should he made available to complete the C3rry forward scheme and to 
achieve tbe targets set for the year 1995-96. 
Demand No 78-PortS, Light-houses and Shippmg 
38. Dem~nd No. 78 cove~ the activities or Pom. light·house~. ~hipping. shtp-buildtng 
and ship-repair. Budget Estimate for 1995-96 under thi> Demand provide~ for an outluy of 
Rs. 366.17 crores as against the Revised Estima te 1994-95 amount111g toR,. 447 .63 crorc' to 
meet the requirement of these acuvuie~ . Out of thts. an outlay of R,. 225.84 crore' ha\ been 
made to cover activities relatang to port development <tncl nuaintenan~c, dredgmg. 
development of minor ports etc. 'The BE for 1995-96 also provtdc~ lor a budgetary :.uppon 
of Rs. 123.65 crores tO six major ports for {i) financing the externally atdcd project) tn 
accordance wtth the loan agreements with foreign funding insututt on) like the World Bank. 
A.~ian Development Bank (ADB) etc; and (11) for assistmg the ~1111JOr pom 111 1mplemc:nung 
the m;1jor plan projects where the ports are not capable of generaung m.lequatc rcsouacc' tu 
meet the expenditure on their plan schemes 
39. It tS propose 10 create 67.86 milhon tonncs {MT) addtttonal handhng cupac11y of 
ports by making an investment of Rs. 32HI.OO crores in 8th Plan ( 1992-97) for port sector. 
With this addition the aggregate port capacity is expected to reach 10 the level of 237 M'l. 
·The aggregate capacity of Major Ports for handling traffic as on 31.3.92 wa ~ 169 MT which 
has increw.ed to 173 MT as on 31.3.94. 
40. In the course of his evidence, the Secretary. Ministry of Surface Tran,port informed 
the Commiltee that in 1993-94 ports had handled !79 MT of cargo and in 1994-95 11 hu' 
gone upto 197 MT thu.~. showing !Oo/o increase which i' higher than the de~tgned cap :tetty of 
the ports. He further informed that the income of the porb had InCreased m real term' and 
was likely to conrinue in the years to com~.>. The represent~t i vc admitted alsn thu t out port' 
lacked international standards. 
·11. T~e Committee is not satisfied with the rosy performance of the ports given by the 
Ministry or Surface Transport. Though there is an indication of improvement in capacity 

8 
utilisation of ports, It remains an admitted fad that capacity level of port to 237 million 
tonnes targelled for the 8th Plan Is yet to be achieved. The progress so far made is tardy. 
Unless concerted efforts are made, it would be difficult to reach the target of the 8th plan. 
The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to make all serious efforts to 
accelerate augmentation oC ports' capacity as set out for the 8th plan. India could then meet 
the growing demands as per the International standards. 
42. Outlays for the years 1992·93 and 1993-94 indicate that only half of the original 
oullay was actually spent by the Major Pon Trusts whereas in 1994-95, as against an outl;ty 
of Rs. 434.50 crores, the anticipated expenditure i~ like ly to be around Rs. 285 crores which 
~~ about 65 per cent of the outlay. The marginal increase from 50 per cent to 65 per cent i~ 
due to sancttomng of new projects . The Secretary explained to the Committee that all these 
projects were long gestauon prOJects and formaluie s of getting sancuons, tenders etc. were 
time-consuming. 
43. The Commillee suggests the Ministry to take correclive steps to reduce the time taken 
In completing the formalities and ensure that funds are utilised fully within the prescribed 
period. Underutillzatiou of funds hos an adverse effect on the completion or projeclS. It also 
affects other projects where runds may be genuinely required. 
44. Shtpptng Corporation of India has been provided with a budgetary support of . 
~- 27.00 crores for the year 1995·96. to meet the plan expenditure. The Committee wa~ 
informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Surface Transport that the SC! plans to 
spend Rs. 811 crores on ship acquisition . The Corporation proposes 10 finance Rs. 63 crore~ 
through internal resuum:s and Rs. 7.50 crores through commercial borrowing. But from the 
last year the Finance Ministry has put a cap on the borrowings even from commercial banks 
as that puts the corporation intG indebtedness . As per the policy announced in recent 
budget , the Government would be giving preference to the three core ~ectors viz., power, 
telecom and inlrastructure including ports and roads . A total ceiling of three billion dollar~ 
from external commercial borrowings for raising the resources has been fiXed. While 
Shipping industry's requirement i\ one billion dollars, the Committee was told that the 
corporation wou ld not be able to ntise the resources bccltuse of these restrictions. Nor can it 
go far raising equity. The Government do not allow foreign equity as the foreign banks insist 
that the SCI must have proper equity ratio. If the Corporation is not allowed to raise the 
resources. it will not be able to buy ~hips. The problem IS further aggravated by imposition 
of Ulterest tax which has been introduced recently . The SCI perforce has to borrow at a very 
high rate of interest and pay interest tax. The effective borrowing rate comes to 18-19 pcr 
cent, and on that basis it seems difficult for SCI and comi>ete with foreign shipping 
companies. In regard to acquisition of ship on lease basis, the Committee has been informed 
that there are certain technical difficulties because ships so leased would have foreign nags. 
Those ships would not have the same treatment for allotment of Government cargo. 
45. The Committee takes not of the constraints being faced by the Shipping Corporation 
of India. The Committee feels that Government should relax the ceiling to facilitate raising of 
resources from extra commercial borrowings. Like other sectors such as ports and telecom, 
shipping should also be given priority so as to enable it to compete with the internntional 
shipping companies. The Committee further suggest~ that Government should also withdraw 
interest tax which is an additional burden resulting in steep rise In the rates of borrowing. If 
these relaxations are extended, Lhe Committee hopes that in future there would be hardly any 
need for budgetary support to this sector. 
45.1 The Committee also observes that with the growing liberalisation and globalisation 
of economy, more foreign shipping companies are likely to emer the lndian waters. The 

l) 
Commrll<!c <'OIN J e r' i1 a wek(ome dcwlo prnc nl The C'ornnHilce al ihe same lunc tccb 1h:•1 
pre,e nl rallo between Indian and inrcrn<llion;li 'hopping companie> should be mainta ined . 
The Com mo11ec imp ress<" upo n th~ G nvernmcnl It> 1 ~1k c n cc~ss ary precaut ions in the mallco 
·~:i . 2 ,-\, rcg:mb the tcchical tlifficuhi c ' )n acgui,it ion of ship' regi>Jcrcd in ford~n 
coumnc' till l e ~>c ba"s. the Commillcc dcsorcs thai Govern men t should lake up 1he ' " I"' <•t 
:Jpprop11:..1le lnte l !ltllh1!'l;tl fora !\t) i:l:'o. lO rt..•move (ht:-. ob:.tade . 
..J6. The no dal responsib ility for ihe entire 'hip ·h uik ling a nd 'hip repai r mdu,lr) re' '' 
w1th 1he Min "try of Surfac.:c Tnmspon . 'l11e BE for 1995-9/i prOVide> fm an oull; " o l 
R\. 2:'-.IXI cm rc' forth" 'cctnr '" ;~g am s t 1hc p rovi ,ion of Rs . 1-1.02 crore' for 1he l'"" !IJ9..J 
95, 'I Ills provi sion h<ss been made 10 provide hudgcrary 'uppon for the p lan expcnduure c>l 
llinchJ>I<n1 Shrpyard Ltd. (HSL) Codun Shipyan..l Lttl. (CSL) and llooghly Dock ;uu l l'on 
Eng i n ~~ring Company Lid. (liDEP ). 1r <l l'l\ inc.:lutlc' the as;i~tance tll these Co mpani~' fnr 
Ill i li>:lliVn. 1'<.: nov arron / niod.:rni>a t inn anti augmen tation of the exis11 ng f;1cil i i ic'. 
47. The Com nu Ht-c has bc.:<:n informed by the represent<>tivcs of the Mnu,trv of ::.urf:Kc 
'I l".>n,pon thai 'lnp · hui ldmg 'ecnano ha' change d tluc Ill ~~onomtc libc rali,atu lll. After 
hberah,a lion . ~va 1 l~ b i lit y of foreig n exchange I"" cn<tbk tl rhe Sh tp-hmltling lntl uo.rry tn ., 
pt>Miion to compe te. Order b1lllk p11>ilion nf bnth ihe Sh ipyard n:vca l' :m tnnca>e and 
dfl>rl> arc hemg made to cui down rhc tune for cnn,lrucluln of 'h'Jh 
4a. In comioll( years, Ship-building lnduslry is expected not onl) to come out of lh• r•d, 
ir will achieve a brtakthrough provided our shiJ>yards are able to <·ul riiH>n ll1e time fuo· 
CllnSiruclion of ships . further, huge capital inHslmenr l~ required tll mak e rhc imlu s lr~· 
compelilive in tht> iniHn:llion:~l field. Additionnl resources are dirticull It) be geuernl•d. On l)' 
resource left 10 lhe shipyards is 10 generate own resources even by entering new areas of 
Opt'rarion with foreign technological collaboration. The Commillee is hopeful that the industry 
w HI gear up to iake a lead despite various challenges. 

ANNEXURE 

ANNEXURE 
(Vide para 2 of the Report) 
Copy of the Ministry of Surface Transp~rt Order No. CD·IlOJ J/99 4-Coord. (00) dat ed 
the 19th July, 1994 
The Parliamentary Comm illee on Transport and Tourism in its lOlh Report on Demands 
for Grants for 1994-95 in respect of Ministry of Surface Transport has recommended in para 
1.10 to appoint a Commillee to go into all aspects of integrated approach to surface 
transport, prepHre an Action Plan ;~nd implement the same at the ear licst. ·Thc Gove rnment 
hil S llCCepted this rccommendlltion of the Commillee. In pursuant to this recommendati on 
the following Commillee •s constitutcd: -
(i) Secretary (Surface Transport) 
(ii) Director Ge nera l (Road Developmen t) 
(iii) Joint Secretary (Shipping) 
(iv) Joint Secretary (Po rts) 
(v) Joint Secretary (Transport) 
(vi) Adviser (Transport) Planning Commission 
(vii) Deputy Secretary (Plann ing & Budget) 
- Chairman 
- Member 
- Member 
- Member 
- Member 
- Member 
- Convenor 
The above Commiuec will submit its report within a period of 6 months and will hold 
meetings periodically and at such intervals as it deems fit. 
13 

MINUTES 

) 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 18th April. 1995 m Committee 
Room A, Ground Floor , Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri John. F Fernandes 
3. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
4. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
6. Shri Raghavji 
7. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
8. Shri Iqbal Singh 
9. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
10. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
1-1. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
12. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
13. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
14. Shri A. Charles 
15. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
16. Shri Peter G . Marbaniang 
17. Slui Swarup Upadhayay 
18. Shri lmchalemba 
19. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
20. Shri Jangbir Singh 
21. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
22. Prof. Prem Ohuma l 
23. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
24. Shn Kalka Das 
25. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
26. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
27. Shri Sukhcndu Khan 
28. Shri Lokana th Choudhury 
29. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
30. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
31. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
32 Shri S.M . Lal Jan Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Raja Rum, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Syed Ausaf Husa in, Under Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
Ministry of Surface Transport 
I. Shri C. N. Ramdas, Secretary (SFT) 
2. Shri S. N. Kakar, Financial Adviser & AS 
3. Shri C. S. Kha irwal, Jt. Secrewry (RT) & (P) 
17 

18 
4. Shri Yinay Vasishtha, Jt. Secre1ary (S) 
5. Shri M.Y. Sastry, Director General (Roads) 
6. Shri R. R. Singh , Chairman & Managing Director. DTC 
7. Shri Y. Challappan, Member (Technical) IWAI 
8. Shri R. Yasudevan, Director General (Shipping) 
9. Shri D. K. Aftulpurkar, Chairman, Bombay Port Trust 
10., Dr. B. Sarkar, Chairman, Calcutta Port 
11. Shri O.K. Verma, Chairman & Managing Director, Hindustan Shipyard 
2. • • 
3 .• 
4 . • 
5 . • 
• 
• 
• 
Limited. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
6. The Commitlee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants 1995·96 of the 
Ministry of Surface Transport. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Surface 
Transpo rt, on various issues and sought clarification thereon. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeling was kept. 
The Committee then adjourned at 2.15 p.m. 
lelatc to maners not included in this Repon . 

n 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 4th May, !995 in Committee Room 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delh i. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
J. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri John. F. Fernandes 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
7. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
8. Shri Raghavji 
9. Shrimati Basanti Sanna 
10. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
11. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
12. Shri A , Charles 
13. Shri Chattrapa l Singh 
14. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
15. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
16. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Syed Ausaf Husain, Under Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Commill ee Officer 
Ke 2. The Committee considered and adopted ils 16th Reporl on Dem ands for Grants 
1995-96 of the Ministry of Surface Transport wtth slight modificatio ns. Titc Committee 
authorised its Chairman and in his absen ce Shri John. F. fernandes 10 present !he Repott to 
the Rajya Sabha, and Shri Sivaji Patnaik and in his absence Shri Chattrapal Singh to lay !he 
Report on the Tabl e of the Lok Sabha . 
3. • 
4. 
5. 
• 
The Commiltee then adjourned at 10.45 a.m. 
•Rehuc to rnnflers nol included In 1his Rcp<>rL 
1'1 
• 
• 
• 