 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
309
_ 
THREE HUNDRED NINTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundredth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Infrastructure 
in India's Maritime Sector’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED NINTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundredth 
Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Infrastructure in India's 
Maritime Sector’ 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-v 
 4. REPORT                                 1-38 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   39-43 
6.        
    7.  
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES 44-45
ANNEXURES 46-63

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on  the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundredth Report 
on the subject ‘Promotion of Infrastructure in India's Maritime Sector’. 
2. The Three Hundredth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  4th August, 2021 to the 
Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundredth Report were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
on 30th December, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
A & N Andaman Nicobar 
ACM Apex Committee for Monitoring  
AECOM  Architecture, Engineering, Construction, Operations &  Management 
ALHW  Andaman & Lakshadweep Harbour Works 
APR Annual Percentage Rate 
BIWTC Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Corporation 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCI Competition Commission of India 
CECRI Central Electro Chemical Research Institute 
CEUs Coastal Economic Units 
CEZs Coastal Economic Zones  
CFA Central Financial Assistance 
CICMT Centre for Inland and Coastal Maritime Technology 
CMD Chairman and Managing Director 
COD Commercial Operations Date 
COE Centre of Excellence 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CoPT Cochin Port Trust 
CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zone 
CSL Cochin Shipyard Limited 
DIB Delegated Investment Board 
DG  Director General 
DGFT  Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DGS Directorate General of Shipping 
DMG Directorate of Mines & Geology 
DPIIT The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DPT Deendayal Port Trust 
EC Environmental Clearance 
EFC  Expenditure Finance Committee 
EPC  Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
EXIM  Export Import 
FSRU Floating Storage Re-gasification Unit 
F.Y. Financial Year 
GOISD Government of India/ State Government Ministries/ Departments  
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HDC Haldia Dock Complex 
HO Head Office 
HPRCL Haridaspur Paradip Railway Company Limited  
I.T. Act Income Tax Act (1961) 
IBP  Indo-Bangladesh Protocol  

iv 
 
ICG Indian Coast Guard 
IEBR Internal and Extra-Budgetary Resources 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IIT  Indian Institute of Technology 
IMO International Maritime Organization 
IMT  Inter-Modal Terminal 
IMU  Indian Maritime University 
INR Indian Rupees 
IPGL Indian Ports Global Limited 
ISPS International Ship and Port Facility Security  
IWAI Inland Waterway Authority of India 
IWT Inland Water Transport 
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
JNPT JawaharLal Nehru Port Trust 
KDS Kolkata Dock System 
KRCL Krishnapatnam Port Rail Connectivity 
LOA Leave of Absence 
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas  
MARPOL International Convention for Prevention of Pollution from Ships (Marine 
Pollution) 
MbPT  Mumbai Port Trust 
MCA  Model Concession Agreement 
MDF  Maritime Development Fund 
MIS MIS Management Information System 
MIV Maritime India Vision 2030 
MMD Mercantile Marine Department  
MMT Multi-Modal Terminal 
MoEF Ministry of Environment & Forests (now MoEF&CC) 
MoEF&CC  Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change 
MoPT Mormugao Port Trust 
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPA Major Port Authorities 
MSDC Maritime State Development Council 
MTI Maritime Training Institutes  
MTPA  Million Tonnes Per Annum 
MTR Minimum Training Requirement 
MVIC Maritime Vision Implementation Committees 
MW Mega Watt 
NHAI National Highways, Authority of India 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NMPT New Mangalore Port Trust 
NPAs Non Performing Assets 

v 
 
NSDD Nuclear Smuggling Detection and Deterrence 
NW National Waterways 
OTSS One Time Settlement Scheme 
PIUs Project Inspection Units 
PLL Petronet LNG Limited 
PMU Project Management Unit  
PO Principal Officer 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PSFP Port Facility Security Plan  
PSU  Public Sector Undertaking 
PV Photovoltaic 
RMQC Rail Mounted Quay Crane 
RO Recognized Organizations  
ROB Road Over-Bridge 
RoFR  Right of First Refusal 
SDCL Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
SFC Smart Freight Centre 
SIPC Smart Industrial Port City 
SMPK  Shyama Prasad Mookerjee Port, Kolkata 
SMTU State Marine Technical University  
SoC Statement of Compliance 
SOLAS International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SoR Schedule of Rates 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
ST Service Tax 
SWOC Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities &Challenges 
TAMP Tariff Authority for Major Ports  
TMT Thermo Mechanical Treatment 
TRT Turn-Around Time 
USA United States of America 
VGF Viability Gap Funding  
VOCPT V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust 
VPT Vishakhapatnam Port Trust 
WG Working Group 
WQ West Quay 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundredth  Report on 
“Promotion of Infrastructure in India‟s Maritime Sector” of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 4th August, 2021. 
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 29 th December, 2021 
in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the R eport. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I:  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  16, 24, 28, 29, 37, 38, 59, 61, 66, 72, 79, 86, 90, 96, 108. 
Total: 15 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 23, 30, 36, 46, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 60, 62, 71, 80, 87, 91, 104, 105, 113, 114. 
Total: 19 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 11, 15, 22, 44, 45, 65, 97, 109. 
Total: 9 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil. 
Total:   Nil. 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
1 The Committee would like the Ministry to elaborate upon how the establishment of 
various Coastal Employment Units (CEUs) creation of Port -linked industrial clusters have 
resulted in reduced logistics cost for EXIM and domestic trade. The Committee would also 
like the Ministry to formulate policies for generation of employment opportuni ties with 
involvement of personnel in various activities of construction, operations and maintenance of 
projects in regard to creation of Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs), Coastal Economic Units 
(CEUs), Port-Linked Industrial & Maritime Clusters and Smart Industrial Port Cities. 
   
(Para: 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Government of India, under Sagarmala Programme, intends to develop Coastal 
Employment Unit in proximity to Major Ports. These industrial developments are envisaged 
to be large scale integrated multi -product industrial zone catering to both domestic and 
export-oriented manufacturing.  
1.2 The Coastal Economic Zone (CEZ) has been envisaged to facilitate p ort led 
industrialization and/or Export Import (EXIM)/coastal trade of goods & commodities. CEZ is 
a spatial economic region comprising a large area in a single district or in a group of coastal  
districts or in district(s) with strong linkage to ports in that region/vicinity with an intent to 
reduce the logistics costs from demand/supply center to port and vice versa. 
1.3 It has a dual focus – direct contribution of port traffic coupled with empl oyment 
generation and reduction of logistics costs. Such a zone is envisaged to comprise industrial 
areas / estates, housing & urban infrastructure, and logistics/ transport infrastructure within 
itself to be a self-contained region with a direct or a strong port linkage. 
1.4 The aim is to achieve the following objectives:  
a. Creating large scale employment opportunities in the coastal regions across identified 
sectors to promote development in coastal regions.  
b. Increasing competitiveness of India's EXIM trade  by reducing logistics costs through 
proximity and connectivity to ports.  

3 
 
c. Increasing freight traffic through the ports in proximity to the industries, on account 
of trade generated by these manufacturing capacities  
d. Provide an impetus to coastal shipping by creating supply and demand centers close 
to the coastline for domestic movement of goods and passengers  
1.5 As per the Minutes of Meeting of EFC held on 9 July 2019, it was recommended that 
MoPSW should explore possibility of Industrialization at land available with Ports. So far, 
more than 8000 Acres of land have been used for Industrialization by Major Ports which has 
generated more than 2 Lakh direct and indirect employment. The details of industrialization 
initiatives at major ports are attached in Annexure A. 
Recommendations/ Observations: 
2 The Committee would also like to recommend to the Ministry that a dedicated 
mechanism should be put in place for effective coordination and monitoring of PPP projects 
undertaken for development of Private Ports in the country. Further, ways should be chalked 
out to link Private Ports with the Major and Minor Ports of the country in order to cater to 
the growing requirement for import/ export of manufactured goods/ raw materials, 
immediately after the phase of Covid-19 pandemic is over.      
(Para: 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 There is a dedicated PPP Cell in place in the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways to effectively deal with all proposals related to Public Private Partnership 
projects.  The Cell processes all proposals received from major ports under the administrat ive 
control of the Ministry and accords approval to the ports for implementation of these projects.  
The Cell monitors the progress of these projects implemented by the ports which is also 
monitored by the NITI Aayog and Cabinet Secretariat from time to time.  
Recommendations/ Observations: 
3 The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that a large extent of land 
belonging to Major Ports is under lease with Departments of Government of India and the 
State Governments on which interest and penal inter est have been levied in cases of unpaid 
lease rentals. The Committee also takes note of the fact that “One Time Settlement Scheme” 
on 13th August, 2019 and desires to be apprised of the outcome of this Scheme.         
   (Para: 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Major Ports Wise information on „One Time Settlement Scheme‟ is at the Annexure-
B.         

4 
 
Recommendations/ Observations: 
4. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in coordination with the Ministry of 
Renewable Energy should also work towards es tablishment of solar power plants and wind 
power generation units on the unutilized land rather than on sea, wherever possible near the 
harbors to reduce the burden on non -renewable resources of energy and to increase the 
employment opportunities. 
(Para: 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Ministry of Ports Shipping and Waterways is under process of formulating a “Green 
Port Policy” document that would bring out a framework and guidelines for incorporation of 
green initiatives in the port sector. It would be app licable to all major ports and non -major 
ports of India. 
4.2 Major Ports currently have approx. -118 MW generation capacity through solar PV 
and 20.71 MW of wind power capacity has been installed using port premises and studies are 
to explore possibility of  utilizing suitable port spaces for installation of solar and wind 
energy. 
4.3 Recommendations/ Observations is noted. 
Recommendations/ Observations: 
5 The Committee would urge the Ministry to develop an efficient system which can 
support seamless movement of cargo across all modes. The Ministry should emphasize all the 
Major and Minor Ports to enhance the productivity and infrastructure to the level of best 
Ports in the world which will enable them to compete globally. In this regard, the Committee 
would l ike the Ministry to appoint consultants to suggest solutions to the logistical and 
infrastructural bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take both 
statutory as well as administrative measures, to ensure that the consultants of p roven track 
record are appointed who should be mandated to furnish their Report within a defined 
timeframe by assessing all the infrastructure/ performance parameters related to the Major 
and Minor Ports of the country. 
(Para: 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Recommendations/ Observations is noted please. 
 
 

5 
 
Recommendations/ Observations: 
6. The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that in order to develop Ports of 
global standard in India, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has identified 
Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030. The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the 
implementation strategy that has been envisaged for the same. The Committee should also be 
apprised whether the Ministry has issued guidelines for its implementation to various Port 
Authorities/ Major Ports or has given autonomy to them for formulation of t he strategy 
regarding the (MIV) 2030.           
(Para: 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPS &W) is closely monitoring the 
implementation of initiatives identified under MIV 2030 across all organizations. MoPSW 
has formed two committees viz. Apex Committee for Monitoring (ACM) under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (PS&W) and Maritime Vision Implement ation Committees 
(MVIC) under Chairmanship of the Head of the Organizations at each organization under the 
MoPSW. MVICs have been made responsible for implementing MIV 2030 initiatives in their 
respective organizations, while ACM will monitor and review th e progress of Maritime 
Vision Implementation Committee (MVIC) on quarterly basis.  
 
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS  
Recommendations/ Observations: 
7. The Committee note so that Shipping industry in India is subjected to multiple taxes 
as compared to leading maritime nations due to which shipping companies are not attracted 
to invest in India. The Committee observes that it is critical for the growth of Shipping in 
India that a level playing field is created as compared to other maritime nations in res pect of 
taxes. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should take effective steps 
to modify relevant policies with a view to formulate a new tax regime in line with other tax 
regimes of leading maritime nations.         
   (Para: 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 This Ministry has recommended the proposal of reducing of GST on bunkering fuel 
and GST on import of Government Cargo. Ministry of Finance has not yet taken any decision 
on deduction of GST. However, recently this Ministry impleme nted a new scheme for 
promotion of flagging of merchant ships in India by providing subsidy support to Indian 
shipping companies in global tenders floated by Ministries/Department/CPSEs. In order to 
promote the objective of „Atma-Nirbhar Bharat ‟, the Gover nment of India has approved a 

6 
 
scheme to provide Rs. 1624 cr. over five years as subsidy support to Indian shipping 
companies in global tenders floated by Ministries/Department/CPSEs. As an outcome of the 
scheme, Indian Shipping industry may be compared to the foreign flag vessels while 
importing government Cargo.  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
8 The Committee also desires that a specialized maritime fund for supporting PPP must 
be developed to enable raising long term funds in the domestic and international markets at 
competitive rates. The fund can be utilized for financing Inland Waterways operations & 
vessel financing; setting up and modernizing shipyards; setting up ship repair/ shipbuilding 
facilities; promoting cruise tourism; and setting up new Ports and jetties through PPP. The 
fund can further be utilized to promote innovation and support start -ups and technology 
companies in the shipping sector.         
(Para: 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The observation of the Committee on specialized  maritime fund for supporting PPP 
has been taken note of by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and appropriate 
decision is likely to be taken up accordingly in due course.  Under the Maritime India Vision 
(MIV) 2030 setting up of Maritime Develo pment Fund (MDF) for low cost long term 
financing support to maritime sector stakeholders is one of the identified initiatives.  
Recommendations/ Observations :- 
9. According to a study by Global Consultants McKinsey & Co and AECOM for the 
Union Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways  (MoPSW), optimizing the logistics flow for 
key commodities by 2025 could save Rs 30,000 - 40,000 cr. It further recommended for 
creation of more capacity at Major Ports and a logistics aggregator company to consolidate 
the Sh ipping supply chain. The Report further stated that coastal shipping capacity can 
handle 150 -250 million tonnes annually of cargo comprising coal, cement, iron and steel, 
food grain and fertilizer. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to 
study the Report and formulate appropriate policies/ schemes based on it to promote coastal 
shipping.           
 (Para: 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 To boost trade with up -gradation of port facilities to global standards and for making 
coastal shipping viable at many instances, the MoPSW is taking numerous steps towards ease 
of doing business. Some of the initiatives are as below: 
 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has notified licensing relaxation to foreign 
flag vessels for carrying trans -shipment containers, empty containers, fertilizers and 

7 
 
agricultural, fisheries, animal husbandry and horticultural commodities on coastal  
routes 
 Financial assistance up-to 50% of total project cost or maximum funding limit can be 
provided to the implementing agency for creation of infrastructure to promote 
movement of cargo/ passengers by sea/National Waterways 
 There are 17 projects worth Rs. 1815 Crore which focus on providing infrastructure 
for coastal handling of cargo. 5 projects worth Rs. 321 Crore have been completed, 4 
projects are currently under implementation and 8 more projects are under various 
stages of development. 5 projects are being implemented at major ports whereas 12 
projects are for improving coastal infrastructure at non-major ports. 
9.2 Other initiatives 
 Minimum 40% discount is offered by major ports on vessel and cargo related charges 
to coastal vessels 
 Priority berthing policy for coastal vessels has been notified to reduce turnaround time 
for coastal vessels and improve their utilization 
 GST Reduced on Bunker Fuel from 18% to 5% 
9.3 As a result of efforts, coastal cargo handling has increased from 83.2 MTPA in 2016 -
17 to 122 MTPA in 2020-21.  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
10. The Committee would like the Ministry to share the details of the upcoming projects 
in this regard. The Comm ittee desires to know whether the ongoing projects have witnessed 
any time escalation and cost overruns.        
(Para: 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The details of the upcoming projects are: 
1. JMVP-  
 Physical progress of Multimodal terminal at Haldia is 97.33%; and financial progress is 
Rs. 469.77 cr. EIC and TSSC-II have recommended time extension upto 24.12.2021. 
 Physical progress of the new navigation lock at Farakka is 90.50%; and financial 
progress is Rs. 308.32 cr. The work on this lock is expected to be completed in FY 21 -
22. 

8 
 
 Provision of least assured depth (LAD) of 3m and bottom channel width of 35/45 m on 
the Farakka -Kahalgaon stretch (146 Kms), Sultanganj -Mahendrapur stretch (74 kms) 
and Mahendrapur-Barh stretch (71 kms) through Performance Base d Assured Dredging  
contracts.Financial Progress: 
(a) Farakka-Kahalgaon stretch: ₹114.40 cr.; 
(b) Sultanganj-Mahendrapur stretch: ₹37.92 cr.; and 
(c) Mahendrapur-Barh stretch: ₹33.34 cr. 
 Construction of IMT – Terminal at Kalughat:  Notification of Award issued on 
10.09.2021. The contractor has submitted the contract performance guarantee and the 
contract has been signed on 26.11.2021. 
2. JMVP-II (Arth Ganga ): The program objectives of „Arth Ganga‟ have been aligned 
with the project development objectives of JMVP. Under the  program, it is proposed to 
develop floating community jetties, Ro -Ro and Ro -Pax jetties, modernization of existing 
navigation lock at Farakka, river cruise & passenger ferry ter minals including their road 
linkages along the NW-1 with a total estimated cost of Rs. 746 cr. 
 
3.  Development of NW-2, 16 and IBP route in NE Region:-  
(a) In the Dhubri - Sadia stretch on NW -2: The waterway is being developed with 
fairway of required depth and width, day and night navigation aids and terminals. The 
facilities created and planned for as per approved SFC of NW -2 at a cost of ₹461 cr. for 
duration of 5 years (2020 -2025). Works have been initiated and 14.21% progress 
achieved up to Nov., 2021. 
(b) National Waterway (NW) -16(River Barak; length 121 km) Bhanga -Lakhipur Stretch - 
It connects Silchar, Karimganj and Badarpur in Cachar valley of Assam with Haldia and 
Kolkata ports through Indo-Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) Route. The facilities create d and 
planned for as for SFC of NW -16 & IBP at a cost of ₹145 cr. for duration of 5 years 
(2020-2025). Work has been initiated and 2.27% progress achieved up to Nov, 2021. 
 
4. Development of 22 nosNWs : „Delegated Investment Board (DIB) Memo‟ for 
development of 22 NWs for the purpose of shipping and navigation for a period of 5 
year (FY-2021-22 to 2025-26) is under process for appraisal and approval.  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AT THE PORTS FOR CRUISE SHIPPING  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
11 Cruise tourism in India is still a nascent industry, though we have a huge opportunity 
to capture the market because geographically, India is strategically located between Western 
Europe and Asia and every ship to Europe has to pass through it. The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommends that in order to enable the cruise sector to reshape the Indian travel industry, 
the Government must revamp the country‟s current Port infrastructure, set up dedicated 
terminals to cater to the needs of tourists and undertake rive rfront development on a massive 

9 
 
scale. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should coordinate with the Ministry of 
Tourism in order to propose and develop more cruise tourism terminals in the country.  
(Para: 79) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Cruise vessels visits five major ports in India namely Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, 
New Mangalore Port, Cochin Port and Chennai Port.  
11.2 The Status of construction of terminals at these ports is given below:- 
a. Chennai Port Trust has developed Cruise Terminal Facilitation Centre at the existing 
WQ, till now 4 Passenger Terminal has been modernized at an overall cost of Rs. 
17.21 crores sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism, and the state of the art Cruise 
Terminal facility was inaugurated on 12.10.2018. 
b. Mormugao Port has constructed state of the art; three storied new cruise terminal 
building having the facility for Custom, immigration, Duty free shop for the 
passengers and it was inaugurated on 22.12.2016. 
c. Mormugao Port Trust also constructed immigration C enter with 24 counters which 
was inaugurated in February 2020. 
d. Mormugao Port Trust is planning for Creation of Facilities for International 
Domestic Cruise Vessels, RoPaxc, Ferry and other allied activities at MoPT, Goa. 
e. Mumbai Port has taken initiative to  built a new Cruise Terminal by demolishing the 
existing terminal to match the International standard and work has started which will 
cost Rs. 495.3 Cr. (EPC : 303.3 cr + PPP : 192 cr) Crores approximately and is likely 
to be operational by February 2024. Meanwhile a transit terminal is operational, 
which will continue to be used till the new terminal is fully functional. 
f. Cochin Port has two dedicated cruise terminals and has hosted among the largest and 
most luxurious of cruise ships. Cochin Port cruise terminal “Samudrika”, constructed 
with a financial assistance of the Ministry of Tourism (Rs. 27 Crores) was completed 
in the year 2015. This terminal has 1800 sq.m space and is fully equipped with all 
facilities required to handle large cruise ships carryin g around 2000 passenger per 
call. Mattancherry channel, where Samudrika Cruise Terminal is located had LOA 
restriction of 260 m for ships,and some of the most prestigious cruise ships calling at 
Cochin had the LOA of 320 m and above, and therefore, berthed  at Ernakulam 
Wharf without any facilities for passengers. Accordingly, a new international Cruise 
Terminal “Sagarika” with a facility of approximate area with the financial assistance 
of the Ministry of Tourism (Rs. 23.24 Cr.) to cater to the cruise passe ngers which 
was inaugurated on 14.02.2021 by the Hon‟ble Prime Minister of India. 
g. Foreseeing the growth in cruise traffic, NMPT has constructed a modern cruise 
passenger lounge near Berth No.4 with an area of 2150 sq. mtrs. and put it into 
operation during  2008 with facilities like money exchange, locker room, medical 
officer room duty free shops, cafeteria, conference hall etc. 
h. In addition, the work of providing concrete pavement for Cruise berth inside wharf 
area is under progress with an agreement cost of Rs. 1.85 Cr. 

10 
 
i. The proposal for Construction of Cruise Terminal Gate, Landscaping from cruise 
terminal gate to the gate along with new dedicated corridor for cruise passenger 
movement and taxi hub at Mallya gate is under preparation. 
11.3 Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways has provided 65 counters at five ports in the 
immigration halls of the ports to facilitate e -visa (15 each for Mumbai, Cochin and Goa and 
10 each for Mangalore and Chennai).  
 
COCHIN SHIPYARD  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
12 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for the construction of the New 
Dry Dock and „New Cruise Terminal -Sagarika‟ at Cochin Shipyard under the “Make in 
India” campaign. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry should effectively 
monitor the progress of such projects so that bottlenecks being faced can be addressed before 
implementation of more such projects at other Ports of the country. 
 (Para: 86) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 With respect to the dry -dock project, CSL along with th e Ministry is monitoring the 
progress of the New Dry Dock project with substantial importance. Regular review meetings 
and site evaluations are in place at the level of Directors and CMD. Board of Directors of 
CSL are being apprised regularly regarding the progress and relevant issues. 
 
MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
13 The Committee observes that the resources required to build the necessary Port 
infrastructure are huge and therefore, supplementation of public investment by private sector 
investment through PPP mode is inevitable. It is in this context that successful working of 
PPP model assumes added significance in realizing the targeted Port capacity augmentation. 
The Committee, therefore, welcomes th e changes ushered in by the MCA, 2018. While 
endorsing the revised MCA, 2018, the Committee desires to know as to what extent the Model 
Concession Agreement, 2018 (amended) has succeeded in obviating the problems faced in 
execution of PPP projects and make  the investment in Port sector attractive. Further, the 
Ministry should apprise the Committee of the provisions in MCA, 2018 which are proving to 
be impediments in the implementation and maintenance of PPP projects. 
 (Para: 90) 

11 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The Model Concession Agreement (MCA) governing the PPP Projects in the Ports 
Sector was first introduced in the year 2008 and was subsequently revised in 2018 based  on 
the stakeholders‟ feedback.  Recently, Government of India has enacted Major Port 
Authorities Act, 2021 that aims to reorient the governance model in Major ports to landlord 
port model in line with the successful global practice. Further, the Act empowers the Major 
Ports to perform with greater efficiency on account of increased autonomy in de cision 
making and it also aims to make the sector more responsive to dynamic market needs.  The 
existing MCA needs to be aligned with these developments to encourage participation of the 
private players and address the requirements of stakeholders (Private  terminal operators, Port 
Authorities, and lenders) to ensure that risks of each of the stakeholder are well balanced. 
Accordingly, The Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways (MoPSW), has revised the MCA, 
2018 for PPP Projects at Major Ports  and issued new MCA, 2021 on 12 November 2021.  
The new MCA will be applicable to all  the future PPP projects at Major Ports as well as 
projects which are already approved by the Government and are still under bidding stage. 
13.2 Some of the key changes ma de in the  new MCA, 2021 are as follows : - First, 
provision of Change in Cargo due to Change in Law or Unforeseen Events has been 
introduced. There have been cases in the past wherein due to external and unforeseen factors, 
traffic for a particular commodit y has dropped during the concession period thereby 
impacting the overall viability of the terminal. The concessionaire did not have flexibility to 
handle a different cargo and the asset constructed was not being utilized optimally. This 
provision gives the flexibility to undertake change in cargo in such situation and reduces risk 
for the concessionaire. Second, flexibility provided to the concessionaires to fix tariff based 
on market conditions which will allow level playing field for the private terminals  at Major 
Ports to compete with private ports for cargo. Further, to reduce risk to the lenders and make 
the project more bankable, provision of compensation for Concessionaire‟s event of default 
before Commercial Operations Date (COD) has been added. Anot her provision which lays 
out process for extension of concession period on the basis of performance and mutual 
agreement has been introduced. Overall, more clarity has been provided in terms of 
responsibilities of both public as well as private party while balancing the risks. 
13.3 With many other changes drawn from best practices from across the sectors and 
extensive stakeholder consultation, the MCA, 2021, will bring more confidence of 
developers, investors and lenders and other stakeholders in the Ports sector and catalyze the 
investment in the sector. 
 
MARITIME TRAINING IN INDIA  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
 

12 
 
14 The Committee observes that the Indian Port sector has undergone substantial 
technological developments during the last 10 years to match with world class standards. 
With the changes in the Port scenario and introduction of high capacity Port equipment, 
there is a need to redefine job description for each level as the strength of manpower has not 
changed much. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that IMU should collaborate with 
International Institutes to carry out a training need analysis for such segment of employees. 
(Para: 96) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 IMU has signed MoUs with foreign Universities among others - Erasmus UPT, Centre 
for Urban, Port and Transport Economics (of Erasmus University, Rotterdam); St. Petersburg 
State Marine Technical University (SMTU), Russia, Batangas University, Philippines. 
During the Working Group Action Plan formulation exercises, it was proposed that surve ys 
be carried out to identity SWOC (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Challenges) 
elements for raising Indian Maritime Universities to global standards. The scope of these 
surveys may be extended independently to assess the training need analyses for P ort sector 
employees. Efforts will be made to obtain tangible inputs from International Institutions 
engaged in Port sector training.  
 
MARINE SAFETY ISSUES 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
15 The Committee recommends that in order to ensure a comprehensive safety and 
security regime at Ports, the Ministry should find out the best practices being followed by the 
international Ports in developed countries and incorporate them while formulating an y 
policy for improvement of safety measures in India‟s maritime sector. Management of 
leadership, effective training, measurement of safety performances, continuous improvement 
in safety techniques, focus on learning and a visible commitment towards safety  are some of 
the guidelines that must be incorporated by the Ministry in its future policy formulation. 
(Para: 108) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15. ISPS in Ports: 
a. The Directorate General of Shipping, India deals with implementation of shipping 
policy and legislation so as to regulate the shipping activities and Management of 
Security of Ships and Ports as per ISPS Code in accordance with International 
Maritime Organization (IMO) Conventions / Codes. In wake of tragic events of 11 
September 2001 in the USA, a Diplomatic Conference was held at IMO from 9 to 13 
December 2002, where ISPS Code was adopted as an amendment to SOLAS 1974. 

13 
 
ISPS Code contains detailed security  related requirements for Government, port 
authorities and shipping companies to enhance security in ports and on the vessels. 
b. All port are required to maintain approved Port Facility Security Plan (PFSP), which 
included detailed security procedures to be followed by the Ports and Vessels therein 
during different security / threat scenarios. PFSP include procedures such as Security 
levels, security personnel and training required, actions required in case of breach in 
security, interface with vessels dur ing different security levels, measures for security 
of cargo and cargo handling equipment, procedures for security assessments, etc. 
c. DGS conducts ISPS Audits of Ports and issues „Statement of Compliance‟ (SoC) 
upon satisfactory completion of same. SoC issued is valid for 5 years. Ports are also 
required to be audited annually, and SoC is endorsed after each annual audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
1 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should assess the progress of its 
policies and strategies in order to keep pace with the growing EXIM Trade demand. The 
Ministry should equip the Ports with adequate capacity to handle various types of cargo.  
Port infrastructure development projects and introduction of modern technology should also 
be paid attention to for creation of additional capacity at Major Ports and modern cargo 
handling techniques should be introduced to improve Port performance in the  Major Ports. 
Policies and schemes must be formulated aiming at mechanization of operations and 
introduction of modern techniques particularly in dry bulk cargo to improve performance of 
the Major Ports and upcoming Ports.  
(Para: 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Modernization projects at the major ports are more specific with the commodities 
planned for handling in future. It includes installation of harbour cranes, RMQC cranes, 
required infrastructure like berths, storage, yard, equipment, etc . to handle spe cific 
commodities such as Containers, Coal, Iron Ore, LNG, etc.The recommendations of the 
Committee has been noted.  
1.2 As part of Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030, Major Ports need to undertake 423 
MTPA capacity additions to meet the EXIM trade projections. A total investment cost of over 
INR 33,400 crores has been envisaged for this capacity expansion. Out of this, approximately 
95% capacity expansion is likely to be planned under Public Private Partnership (PPP)/ 
Captive mode by Major Ports. Pr ivate participation is being encouraged so that global best 
practices in modern cargo handling techniques be introduced to improve Port performance. 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
2. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the bottlenecks being fa ced in the 
implementation of some of the provisions of Policy Guidelines for Land Management. 
Further, what is the current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification Units 
(FSRU) at Major Ports in order to meet the increasing demand for Liq uefied Natural Gas 
(LNG) in the country.          
(Para: 30) 

15 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Port-Wise information at Annexure –C. 
 
PERFORMANCE OF PORTS IN INDIA  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
3. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry has prepared an Action Plan 
for increasing the depth of the Major Ports and most of the Major Ports now have a minimum 
draft of 14 meters. The Committee observes that in order to meet the challenges em anating 
from intense global competition, Ports in India are required to gear themselves up by 
modernizing the Port infrastructure and enhancing their drafts so that their operational 
efficiency is at par with the global standards. Increased competition and  economy of scale 
have fuelled the development of even bigger ships and in order to accommodate such vessels, 
our Ports must have access channels of sufficient depth. Therefore, promotion of huge 
facilities capable of handling bigger ships is the need of t he hour. Since the investments 
requirements for the purpose would be huge, the Committee recommends that investments 
may be made in capital dredging in the form of Government Budgetary Support, equity 
participation and debt financing to Ports so that the e xisting drafts of 14 meters could be 
increased to receive bigger vessels and trans -shipment traffic from and to India could be 
improved .       
(Para: 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Major Ports based on the requirement of increasing the draft for receiving higher 
parcel vessels prepare the proposals for capital dredging projects. Based on the hydro graphic 
survey data, geo -technical survey data etc., a Techno -Economic Feasibility report would be 
prepared by the Major Ports. The pattern of finance and the sou rce of funding would also be 
included in the DPR. The projects for Berth Development and capital dredging are taken up 
through the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode wherever berth development is also part 
of the project. 
3.2 The Ministry of Ports, Ship ping and Waterways based on the Techno -Economic 
Feasibility report and approval of the Project for the capital dredging project would take up 
the funding through different modes of funding including PPP mode and Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF) wherever feasible. 
3.3 The Paradip Port has initiated development of western dock complex through PPP 
mode which includes capital dredging by the PPP operator. 
 

16 
 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
4. The Committee observes that environment is no longer a negotiable topic and it 
should therefore be ensured that economic development through the development of Ports is 
achieved through the cleaner and greener environment. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should formulate proper guidelines and conduct an 
environmental impact assessment before releasing funds for any sanctioned/ stalled/ ongoing 
connectivity project. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways should also work in close 
coordination with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI and MoEF&CC to 
address the delay in projects due to land acquisition and environmental clearances. 
(Para: 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Recommendations/ Observations  is noted. It is further informed that a request has 
already made by this Ministry to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to 
device mechanism to fast track environment and CRZ clearance procedures by avoiding 
unwanted hurdles in environm ental appraisal of the port expansion and modernization 
projects planned within existing port operational areas. Taking a positive view, the MoEFCC 
has constituted a committee to suggest possible steps to expedite environment and CRZ 
clearance process, without compromising on basic principles of sustainable development.  
4.2 It may be noted that all infrastructure projects have a long gestation period and are 
capital intensive. Also, it involves obtaining of various clearances and approvals such as 
environment/forest clearance, fund allocation etc. which majorly contributes to  the delay of 
such projects.  
4.3 MoPSW has been encouraging its stakeholders to obtain the environment related 
clearances in the initial developmental phase of the project. Further, MoPSW has been 
envisaging and encouraging the stakeholders to obtain umbr ella environment clearances 
wherever possible to address the inordinate delays caused in projects due to land acquisition 
and clearances.  
4.4 Responsibilities related to project development including preparation of DPRs, 
obtaining necessary clearances fro m MoEF, State Pollution Control Board (SPCB), CRZ 
clearance, etc. rests with the implementing agencies. Tracking and monitoring of all projects 
carried out through recording updates received from respective implementing agencies. 
4.5 MoPSW provides necessary support and assistance to the project proponents in 
obtaining of statutory clearances wherever needed in order to expedite the implementation of 
the projects.  
 
 

17 
 
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
5 The Committee finds that the shipbuilding industry is facing certain financial and 
infrastructural bottlenecks. The Committee notes from the  reply of the Ministry that the 
Union Cabinet has , on 9th December, 2015 , approved Shipbuilding Financial Assistance 
Policy for Indian shipyards for the period 2016 -26, CCEA has approved this Ministry‟s 
proposal regarding settlement of subsidy claims, providing of Right of First Refusal to Indian 
shipyards while procuring or repairing vessels meant for Governmental or own use till 2025 
and grant of  infrastructure status to Indian shipbuilding industry are some key initiatives 
taken by the Government of India to provide a boost to the shipbuilding industry of India. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must revisit its strategies an d revamp its 
policies in order to support the indigenous manufacturers of shipbuilding parts under the 
Make in India campaign. 
(Para: 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The following are the major steps taken for the development of Ship Building and 
flagging India; 
a. Revision of the criteria for Right of First refusal(ROFR): 
The criteria for granting the Right of First Refusal in chartering of vessels through 
tender process has been revised, for promoting tonnage under Indian fag and ship -
building in India, s o as to make India a Atma -Nirbhar/self-reliant Bharat, in terms of 
tonnage and Ship-Building in India. The following is the revised hierarchy of RoFR; 
(1) Indian built, Indian flagged (Indian owned); 
(2) Foreign built, Indian flagged (Indian owned); 
(3) Indian built, foreign flagged (foreign owned). 
5.2 This will promote demand of Indian built vessels as the Indian built vessels will have 
the priority in chartering and will also provide additional market access and business support 
to ships built in India. 
 In pursuance of the revised Make in India order issued by the DPIIT (it stipulates 
that for public procurement of all goods and services with estimated value of 
purchases less than Rs. 200 Crores, Global tender inquiries shall not be issued) 
this ministry has also issued notification in this regard and this can increase the 
demand for the complete ecosystem. 
 For acquisition of any type of vessel/repair of vessel by Government 
Department/Agencies including Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) through 

18 
 
global ten dering process, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways existing 
policy of RoFR would continue to be implemented. This again is a major policy to 
create demand. 
 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has finalized standard Designs for 
Tugs to support the indigenous manufactures of shipbuilding and related parts 
under the Make in India campaign. 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
6. The Committee would like the Ministry to assess the current financial status of the 
Financial Assistance Policy for Shipbuilding and would recommend the Ministry to take 
effective steps to resolve the frequent occurring of NPAs within a specified time frame in 
order to maintain revenues from the shipbuilding in the profitable column of the b alance 
sheet of the shipping industry.         
(Para: 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 This Ministry has released an amount of financial assistance on shipbuilding of Rs. 
29.02 Cr for 12 vessels in FY 2018 -19; Rs. 26.97 Cr for 7 vessels in FY 2019 -20, Rs. 58 Cr 
for 15 vessels in 2020-21 and Rs. 16 Cr for 4 vessels in 2021-22 till Date. 
6.2 Further, in order to strengthen Indian shipyards financially, the Cabinet Committee on 
Econnomic Affairs (CCEA) on 09.10.2019 approved this Ministry‟s proposal for release o f 
committed liability of shipbuilding subsidy through budgetary support of approx.. Rs. 153 
crores for a total number of 51 vessels, including retained subsidy for 47 vessels and full 
subsidy for 4 vessels. Retained subsidy claims for 46 cases out of 47 ca ses, have been settled. 
One case is not eligible. 4 full subsidy cases have been settled. This Ministry has released 
subsidy of about Rs. 16 Cr in FY 2019 -20; Rs. 92 Cr in FY 2020 -21 and Rs. 35.37 Cr in FY 
2021-22. 
 
SHIP-REPAIR INDUSTRY  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
7. The Committee takes note of the steps envisaged to be taken to tap the huge potential 
of Indian Ship repair market and observes that the Ministry of Finance should be approached 
to grant deemed export status to ship repair industry, keeping in view saving of foreign 
exchange. 
(Para: 51) 
 

19 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 M/o Finance and M/o Commerce were approached to grant deemed export status to 
ship repair industry. DGFT has apprised that Deemed Exports benefits are granted on the 
basis of Notification issued by the Department of Revenue and in view of Comments of the 
Department of Revenue, it is not feasible to extend the deemed export status for shipbuilding 
and ship repair. 
Recommendations/ Observations :- 
8. The Committee is of the view  that ship repair capacity essentially reflects capability 
in terms of the number of ships repaired and maximum size of ship that can be repaired in 
terms of DWT. According to a Report „Statistics of India‟s Shipbuilding and Ship repairing 
Industry‟ by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, in 2018 -19, a total of 706 ships 
were repaired out of which 341 ships were repaired by the private sector shipyards and 365 
ships were repaired by the public sector shipyards against 528 ships repaired in 2017 -18. 
However, the COVID -19 pandemic affected ship building and ship repair facilities globally 
to a great extent. The pandemic has disrupted almost every area of the shipping industry, 
after a promising 2019. All levels of operations were affected by yard clo sures, logistical 
challenges and delay in surveys. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry 
to revamp and revisit its policies/ strategies to give a boost to the ship repairing industry of 
India. Programmes should be implemented aiming tow ards the revenue and employment 
generation.         
(Para: 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Government is carrying out the following initiatives to enhance the ship repair 
industry in India : 
 GST on Ship Repair has been reduced from 18% to 5%. 
 Developing two ship repair clusters. 
 Deploy 2 used floating dry-docks through PSU shipyards. 
 Develop Centres of Excellence (CoE) for ship repair in India.   
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
9. The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the Port -wise details of the ship 
repairing facilities. Further, what are the reasons for no ship repairing facilities at many 
Major Ports of t he country and the steps taken/ being taken by the Ministry to address such 
issues. 
 (Para: 53) 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 CSL has commenced operation of the Ship repair facility in MbPT and investment of 
around INR 80 Cr. has been outlaid for development. In addition to the Dry dock, additional 
floating dock will be positioned which will for ship repair capacity in the area. CSL has a 
well established eco -system for ship repair in Kochi. CSL is setting up new ISRF facility. 
This will have a ship lift facility approx. 1500m jetties, full fledged Ship repair 
systems/infrastructure.  
9.2 Port-wise details of the Dry Dock & Ship R epairing facilities at Major Ports during 
2020-21 is given in the table at Annexure-D. 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
10. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and appreciates the initiatives taken by 
it to encourage private sector participation i n India‟s Maritime sector. The Committee also 
takes note of the fact that there are about 200 non -Major Ports along India‟s coastline which 
are under the overall jurisdiction of the respective State Governments. The Committee would, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should make more efforts to make financing available to 
private sector for development and modernization of non -Major Ports and investing in the 
maritime sector in the country. 
 (Para: 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Recommendations/ Observations is noted. 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
11. The Committee observes that currently the private sector is facing challenges related 
to vessel financing and this has restricted the supply side of vessels in shipping sector. 
Therefore, it is crucial that the benefits under the tonnage tax scheme should be extended to 
vessels registered under the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 which would serve as a strong incentive 
for the PPP. The Ministry should also normalize the tariff rates in order to attract private 
investment and to provide a level playing field for the Ports, whether Major, Minor or 
Private Ports of the country. 
(Para: 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Note on Tonnage Tax Scheme at Annexure- F. 
 
 

21 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF INLAND WATERWAYS  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
12. Inland Waterways is widely recognized as a fuel efficient, environment friendly and 
cost effective mode, especially for bulk goods but has largely remained underdeveloped. The 
Committee is of the view that the Indian Por ts are facing problem of connectivity through 
rail/ road and it is therefore necessary that Inland Waterways should be developed at an 
increased pace. The Committee appreciates the efforts of Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways in implementing JMVP for  capacity augmentation of navigation on NW -1. The 
Committee recommends that an effective, efficient and a dedicated monitoring mechanism 
must be developed by the Ministry to address the bottlenecks being faced in the 
implementation of Inland Waterway projects. 
(Para: 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 In line of view of the Committee to promote IWT mode and to increase port led 
connectivity through waterways, Government declared 111 (including 5 existing and 106 
new) National Waterways (NWs) spread over 24 states under the National Waterways Act, 
2016.Based on the outcome of techno -economic feasibility and Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) of NWs, action plan for mulated for 25 NWs which have been found to be viable for 
cargo movement/transportation and River Waterways tourism purpose.  
12.2 Further, Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) for capacity augmentation of NW -1, was 
approved by the Government at a revised cost of  Rs. 4633.81 cr. with technical and financial 
assistance by World Bank. The project is progressing for completion by December 2023 with 
the help of a monitoring mechanism like Project Management Unit (PMU) at HO and Project 
Inspection Units (PIUs) at field  level are in place for monitoring and supervision of the 
progress of implementation of the project. Such PMUs are also envisaged for the projects 
under JMVP-II (Arth Ganga) for timely implementation.   
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
13. The Committee would like the Ministry to explore the possibility of following the 
Maldivian model in places in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Islands 
and facilitating leasing of islands to local and foreign resort developers for tourism 
purposes. The Mi nistry should also take steps to set up tourist terminals for both domestic 
and foreign tourists at all the commercial Ports of the country. The Ministry should also 
chalk out plans/ policies to promote river cruise tourism also especially in the non - Coastal 
States of the country. The Committee should be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para: 80) 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Recognizing the potential of Cruise Tourism, Ministry of Tourism has identified 
Cruise Tourism as one of the Niche Tourism Products. Development and promotion of tourist 
destinations and products, including cruise tourism, is primarily the responsibility o f the 
respective State Government/Union Territory (UT) Administration. However, Ministry of 
Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the Central Government Agencies 
for development of tourism, including Cruise Tourism and Cruising along river s on receipt of 
complete proposals under the Scheme of „Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism 
Infrastructure Development‟.   
13.2 In addition, Ministry of Tourism has identified Coastal Circuit as one of the fifteen 
thematic circuits for development under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme and provides financial 
assistance to various State Governments/ Union Territory Administrations for various tourism 
projects, which may include components related to cruise tourism, prioritized in consultation 
with States/UTs every year subject to availability of funds, inter -se priority and adherence to 
the scheme guidelines.  
13.3 Apart from the above; Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has also 
implemented Sagarmala, which is a national programme aimed at accelerati ng economic 
development in the country by harnessing the potential of India‟s 7,500 km long coastline 
and 14,500 km of potentially navigable waterways. Under the coastal shipping and IWT 
pillar of Sagarmala programme, there are various projects which speci fically focus on 
promotion of cruise passenger transport.   
13.4 The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI), an autonomous organization under 
Ministry of Shipping  is mandated to develop and regulate national waterways for shipping & 
navigation. However, the infrastructure developed for transportation on national waterways 
by IWAI including fairway, terminals, jetties, navigation aids etc. are used by the river 
tourism operators also. IWAI plays the role of a facilitator for cruise/river tourism on national 
waterways. 
13.5 River cruise / tourism is prevalent on National Waterway (NW) -1(Ganga-Bhagirathi-
Hooghly river system) and NW -2 (river Brahmaputra), NW -3 (West Coast Canal) and River 
Godavari & Krishna (NW -4)  since last many years. Various cruise ope rators viz., M/s 
Heritage River Cruises Pvt. Ltd., M/s Vivada Inland Waterways and M/s Assam Bengal 
Navigation Company, M/s. Far Horizon Co. operate their cruise vessels on NW- 1, NW-2 and 
Sunderbans waterways. Backwaters in Kerala of NW -3 in the stretch K ochi – Alappuzha -
Kollam is destination for house boat tourist from India and abroad. Cruise vessel operation by 
numerous State Government licensed operators from Rajamundry to Papikondalu in river 
Godavari (NW -4) and local cruise operations at Vijayawada on river Krishna (NW -4) are 
existing. 
      

23 
 
13.6 IWAI has undertaken construction of 5 nos. passengers jetties on NW -1 through 
CPWD and 4 nos. passengers jetties on NW -2 through NHIDCL funded by Ministry of 
Tourism, Government of India under Central Financ ial Assistance (CFA) costing Rs. 28.93 
cr. IWAI also sanctioned Rs.2.7 cr. for development of passenger come tourist jetty on river 
Kali (NW-52) in Karnataka. 
13.7 In addition, Government has been laying emphasis on promotion of cruise tourism 
connecting religious places since 2014. Accordingly, IWAI organized meetings with Ministry 
of Tourism, GOI, established cruise operators and various recognized tour operators. The 
possibility of increasing the number and frequency of cruise operations and important pl aces 
en-route were identified in the process. A Working Group (WG) was constituted in 2014 with 
representative of cruise operators, domestic tour operators, IWAI, Ministry of Tourism and 
State Tourism departments to examine the modalities of cruise tours c onnecting places and to 
invite recommendations. The WG  has identified tourist circuits in NW -1, NW -2 and IBP 
route detailed at Annexure - E.  
13.8 Further, India and Bangladesh signed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on MoU 
on Passenger and Cruise services on the Coastal and Protocol routes between India and 
Bangladesh on 25.10.2018 which connects river Ganga (NW-1) to river Brahmaputra (NW-2) 
through Bangladesh. A Cruise vessel started its voyage on 29.04.2019 from Guwahati to 
Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh Protocol route.  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
14 The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that CSL is facing issues relating 
to return of migrant labour force, blockage of supply chains of construction materials like 
TMT bars, cements, machineries and equipment from other States. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend to the Ministry that CSL should launch adequate training prog rammes 
to address the shortage of manpower. The Ministry should further hire employees with 
quality industrial training and depute them at Major Ports of the country to tackle issues 
arising out of blockage of industrial supply chains.  
(Para: 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The issues related to the return of migrated labour force for the infrastructure projects, 
the matter was taken up with the top management of contractors. Accordingly they had 
arranged exclusive buses for bringing the migrant labour from  North states and made 
arrangements for quarantine in compliances with Government guidelines. CSL, as per the 
Atmanirbhar Bharath policy has taken step to compensate part of the additional expenditure 
pertinent to the supply of resources and ensuring all p ossible steps to alleviate various issues 
linked with regulations by taking up applicable cases with concerned Government 
Departments.      
 

24 
 
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
15 Since the order of private investment required to achieve the Port capacity 
augmentation and the number of PPP projects awarded are high, the Committee recommends 
that a “Single Window” approval system should be put in place so that the possibility of 
delays and cost escalation could be obviated. Though the Committee welcomes capa city 
augmentation in the Port sector by private sector investment, it would exhort the Ministry to 
ensure that such an arrangement does not lead to creation of private monopolies in the Port 
sector. The Committee desires to know whether the Port sector get s treatment on par with 
other infrastructure sector like roads and whether any proposal to treat the entire industry 
and ancillary activities for the purpose of tax concession is under consideration of the 
Government.  
(Para: 91) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 As per the present policy dispensation for private sector investment in Major Ports 
through PPP mode. The Port Authority endeavors to facilitate or make available the 
environment clearance for smooth implementation of the project. For preventing private 
monopoly, there exists a Competition Commission of India, any other policy dispensation in 
this regard may interfere with the provisions of Competition Commission of India. 
 
TARIFFS / PORT RELATED CHARGES AT INDIAN PORTS  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
16 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in 
coordination with the Ministry of Finance should formulate a „One Tariff Policy for all 
Ports‟ in order to provide a level playing field to all the Major and non -Major Ports of  the 
country. The Ministry should also apprise the Committee of the initiatives being taken/ taken 
to control Port-related charges of Private Ports.    
(Para: 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The MPA Act 2021 has been brought into effect from 03.11.2021. Ta riff Policy for 
Major Port Authorities 2021 for fixation of SoR for assets and services , along with Working 
Guidelines to operationalize the Tariff Policy, have been issued on 23.11.2021.  
The Major Port Authorities Act 2021 has come into force and the Tariff Authority for Major 
Ports (TAMP) is no longer empowered to fix tariff or assets and services of the major ports.  
The powers of tariff fixation has been given to the concessionaire in c ase of PPP projects  of 

25 
 
the Major Ports based on prevailing market conditions.  The Ministry has  already issued 
tariff guidelines in this regard on 21.12.2021.  
 (i).   Under the MPA Act, 2021 the tariff setting functions of Major Ports and PPP 
Concessionaires operating in Major Ports mandated on TAMP has been withdrawn. 
(ii).  The MPA Act, 2021 empowers the Board of Major Port Authority to frame their own 
Scale of Rates for services performed by Major Ports and for access to and usage of port 
assets. 
(iii).   The Tariff Policy 2021 issued by the Ministry recently  grants full flexibility to Major 
Ports to fix their tariff within the ceiling Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR) so as to react 
to the market forces and to fix tariff based on commercial judgment. T he Tariff Policy states 
that the port  may draw a comparison of the major tariff items for their ports and ascertain 
itself that the tariff is comparable and competitive with neighboring and competing ports. The 
Tariff Policy also requires ports to periodic ally review the SOR to respond effectively to 
dynamic market forces or to optimise asset utilization. The tariff of Major ports shall be 
notified in the State Gazette to bring in transparency. 
 (iv).   Further, the MPA Act 2021 prescribes that the tariff f ixation by Major Ports shall not 
be inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002.   Thus, apprehension of 
cartelization by port / operators will be taken care by this provision. 
 (v).  With the commencement of the MPA Act, 2021,  the Major P orts and PPP 
concessionaires now  shall have full flexibility to fix the tariff based on market conditions. 
This will bring in level playing field and healthy competition in the port sector.   
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
17. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should carry out financial 
assessments of the Port - fuel related policies of India and also draw conclusions from the 
policies being implemented in different countries such as United Kingdom, U.S.A., Singapore 
and Japan. A detailed Report must be prepared in this regard.     
(Para: 105) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 The Bunker policies devised is to ensure quality of fuel in accordance with Regulation 
18 of MARPOL Annex VI and meet the requirement maximum Sulphur Content as per 
Regulation 14 of MARPOL Annex VI and accordingly the Directorate is approving Bunker 
Suppliers at Indian Ports to ensure quality of Bunker Oil supplied by them meets the 
requirements. 
 
 

26 
 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON SHIPPING SECTOR  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
18 The Committee observes that the Shipping industry is emerging out from the impact of 
Covid-19 pandemic. With business coming almost to a standstill, the unprecedented crisis 
had impacted each and every segment of the shipping industry especially the EXIM trade, 
ship building, ship repairing and cruise shipping sector. The Shipping sector has the 
potential to stimulate other economy through its backward and forward linkages and 
contributes significantly towards generation of revenues as well as the creation of jobs in the 
country. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must monitor the 
status of implementation of the ongoing/ stalled projects which got impacted due the 
pandemic and should issue fresh  deadlines for their timely completion in order to avoid cost 
overruns.     
(Para: 113) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 With regard to Ship Building Financial Assistance policy, the Ministry has already 
incorporated adequate amendments to the guidelines to accommodate the shipbuilding project 
delay caused due to pandemic, up to a period of one year.     
 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS/ GUIDELINES  
Recommendations/ Observations:- 
19 The Committee impresses upon the Ministry, the imperative need to ensure that the 
recommendations made by the Committee are given serious thought and deliberation; and 
due consideration should be given to the facts and the issues involved therein. Therefor e, it is 
necessary that all possible steps are taken to ensure that they are implemented in letter and 
spirit, within a designated time frame. Further, the Committee recommends that the statutory 
provisions/ guidelines, wherever needed and necessary for th e implementation of the 
recommendations, should be formulated by the Ministry without any delay. The Committee 
desires that in case of any difficulty/ problems faced by the Ministry in the implementation of 
the recommendations, the Committee may be apprised thereof.  
(Para: 114) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Noted for Compliance. 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/ Observations 
1. The Committee is constrained to note the reply of the Ministry that despite the  
Sagarmala Programme being launched way back in the year 2015, only 172 projects out of 
the 802 sanctioned projects under the Sagarmala Programme have been completed and the 
remaining 632 projects are under the implementation stage, which is far from being 
satisfactory. The Committee recommends the Ministry that Sagarmala Programme being a 
crucial step in the progress of India‟s Shipping sector needs to be speeded up. The 
Committee, therefore, desires to know whether the projects under implementation have 
witnessed any time overrun and cost escalation as compared to the original cost and timeline 
of the projects. The Ministry should also mention the precise reasons for delay, if any, Port-
wise and steps being taken to address such delays. 
 (Para: 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.2 Initial list of project in Sagarmala was part of National Perspective Plan (NPP) 
prepared along with Master Planning of Major Ports. Additional project were derived from 
subsequent meetings of National and State Steering Committees of Sagarmala and in 
consultation with Major Ports and different State Agencies. Besides this, projects proposals 
were also received for funding from various implementing agencies an d accordingly project 
aligned with Sagarmala objectives were made part of the Sagarmala Programme. 
1.3 Up to March 2021, there were 505 projects at an investment of more than Rs. 3.59 lac 
crores, which were being monitored for implementation under Sagarmala Programme. 
Further, 294 projects worth Rs. 1,44,562 crores were identified for implementation by Major 
Port Trusts, CSL,  IWAI,  SDCL, ALHW (MoPSW agencies) & State Maritime Boards and 
the same were added to the Programme. 
1.4 Currently, as part of Sagarmala Programme, more than 800 projects at an estimated 
cost of around Rs. 5.5 lakh crore have been identified for implementation during 2015 to 
2035. Sagarmala projects includes projects from various categories such as modernization of 
existing ports and terminals,  new ports, terminals, RoRo & tourism jetties, enhancement of 
port connectivity, inland waterways, lighthouse tourism, industrialization around port, skill 
development, technology centers, etc. These projects are broadly classified into f ive pillars of 

28 
 
Sagarmala. Implementation of the projects under Sagarmala is to be done by the Central line 
Ministries, State Maritime Boards, Major Ports and SPV preferably through the private sector 
and through Public Private Partnership (PPP) wherever feasible. 
1.5 The delays can be attributed to many reasons such as acquisition of land, EC 
clearance, CRZ clearance, etc, Ministry from time to time assess the requirement of the 
Implementing Agency and accordingly take action for early implementation.  
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
1.6 The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has not provided the 
details of the projects w itnessing time overruns and cost escalations in comparison to 
the original costs of implementation. The details of the Projects completed on time may 
be furnished to the Committee.  
 
EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF RESOURCES 
Recommendations/ Observations 
2. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure effective coordination among the 
Central Line Ministries, State Governments/ State Maritime Boards and SPVs for 
implementation of projects earmarked under the Sagarmala Programme and constitute a 
Committee to encourage convergence at Central and State level and also to sort out various 
inter-Ministerial issues at the C entral level as well as the issues with the States and other 
stakeholders. Since there is a huge difference between the projected demand and allocated 
funds, the Committee would advise the Ministry to implement effective measures to optimally 
utilize the allocated resources instead of keeping a vast chunk of its resources locked up and 
surrender them towards the end of financial year.    
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Projects under Sagarmala are being implemented by Central Ministries, Major Ports, 
State Maritime Boards and other agencies. As mandated by Cabinet Note, all efforts would be 
made to implement the projects through the private sector and through Public Private 
Participation (PPP) wherever feasible. In case the project may not be implement ed on PPP 
mode, implementing agencies undertake the investment supported through appropriate 
business case. 
2.2 As of now, 25 PPP projects with estimated investment of Rs. 42,585 Crore have been 
completed since inception of Sagarmala Programme, thereby kee ping focus of implementing 
larger set of projects in PPP mode. Other projects are taken up by using Ports IEBR. 
Additional 33 PPP projects worth Rs. 50,755 Crore are currently under implementation. 

29 
 
2.3 Further, Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SDCL) was incorporated on 31 st 
August, 2016 and it will raise funds as debt/equity (as long term capital), as per the project 
requirement, by leveraging resources provided by the Government of India and form multi -
lateral and bilateral funding agencies. As per t he approved structure of Sagarmala 
Programme, the implementation of the projects shall be done by the line ministries, State 
Governments/State Maritime Boards (SMBs) and SPVs and the SDCL will provide a funding 
window and/or implement only those residual p rojects that cannot be funded by any other 
means/mode. 
2.4 Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SDCL) has invested an amount of INR 
542 crores in 5 projects through equity participation. SDCL has invested Rs.125 crore in 
SPVs for providing Rail connectiv ity to Krishnapatnam Port (KRCL), Rs. 337 Crore in 
Haridaspur Paradip Railway Company Limited (HPRCL), Rs. 10 crores for developing and 
operating Chhabhar Port in Iran after taking over from India Ports Global Limited (IPGL) in 
2018-19, Rs. 50 crores in SP V formed with NHAI for development of ROB at Haldia Port 
and Rs. 20 crores in a road connectivity project providing connectivity form Visakhapatnam 
Port to the National Highway. 
2.5 Projects having high social impact but with no return or low Internal Rate  of Return 
(IRR), are being provided funding under the Sagarmala. Ministry is funding projects through 
its budget where funding under PPP cannot be offered. Projects such as Yard upgradation, 
track upgradation, widening of road to remove congestion and ROR O / ROPAX projects are 
being undertaken. The aim is to develop the basic level of infrastructure which in turn helps 
in getting the private investments at ports and terminals. 
2.6 As of November 2021, Ministry has sanctioned 123 projects worth Rs. 7518 Cro re, 
sanctioned for funding under Sagarmala Programme for Rs. 2,995 Crore. Out of these 123, 41 
projects have been completed and 41 are currently under implementation state and remaining 
41 projects are at various stages of development. 
2.7 Responsibilities related to project development & implementation including 
preparation of DPRs, funding arrangements, execution as per timeline etc. rests with the 
implementing agencies. 
2.8 Tracking and monitoring of all projects is carried out through recorded update 
received from respective implementing agencies.  
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
2.9 The Committee desires to be apprised of the funding details of the remaining 41 
projects at various stages of development as well as the status of 41 projects under 
implementation out of the total 123 projects sanctioned for funding under ‘Sagarmala’. 
 

30 
 
2.10 The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the DPRs prepared with the 
implementing agencies as well as the funding arrangements made for successful 
implementation and timely execution of the remaining projects. 
Recommendations/ Observations 
3 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that Coastal Employment 
Units are planned to be developed to promote industrialization and to create social 
infrastructure within these CEUs and that VOCPT has identified 965 acres of land for 
promoting industries under CEUs.         
(Para: 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 At present, VoCPT has identified 965 Acres for promoting industries under Coastal 
Economic Units (CEUs); effective leasable land is 745 Acres. Port invited Phase -I tender for 
285 Acres in which an extent of 12.34 Acres has been allotted to M/s. Kaleesuwari Refinery 
Private Limited. Port invited Phase -II tender for 334 Acres and opened on 17.02.2021 and 
tendering process was completed. An extent of 36.72 Acres would be awarded to three 
agencies namely M/s. Kaleesuwari Refinery Private Limited, M/s. Naage Pvt . Ltd. & M/s. 
KSE Pvt. Ltd.  
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
3.2 Efficient utilization of land res ources holds  key to unlocking India’s economic 
growth. So, p romotion of coastal industries  through leasing of land around the port 
area to such industries and fixation of lease rent and sufficient reforms in the land 
administration is paramount. In order to  successfully expedite the tendering process of 
port area, t he Committee wants the  Ministry to speed up the tendering process and 
convey to the Committee, any lacunae on this part.  The Committee also desires the 
Ministry to provide status detai ls of the following land identified under the Coastal 
Economic Units (CEUs) in the format given below: -  
Phase Land 
identifie
d under 
CEUs 
(in 
Acres.) 
Land  Tender 
Invited for 
Land (in 
Acres.) 
Leased 
Land (in 
Acres.) 
Remaining 
Land not 
leased (in 
Acres.) 
Status 
Phase I  
965 
 
745 
285 12.34 272.66 To be provided 
by the Ministry 
Phase II 334 36.72 297.28 To be provided 
by the Ministry 

31 
 
PORT MODERNIZATION & DEVELOPMENT OF NEW PORTS  
Recommendations/ Observations 
4. The Committee notes that a roadmap has been prepared for increasing operational 
efficiency and capacity expansion of existing Ports and development of new Ports. The 
Committee observes that world-wide commercialization, liberalization and privatization have 
been used as strategies to deal with modernization of Ports. The Committee would, therefore 
like the Ministry to adopt an innovative approach and take radical measures to deal with the 
issues of modernization of existing Ports and development of new Port s as the Committee 
feels that a mere tinkering with procedures and occasional dents in structural rigidities will 
not suffice. Further, a Master Plan for completion of Port -road connectivity projects must be 
formulated by the Ministry and work relating to Port-road connectivity projects should be 
assigned to NHAI/ MoRTH who are specialist in their fields of operation. The Committee 
desires to be kept apprised of the measures taken in this regard.  
 (Para: 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Efforts would be made to implement proj ects through the private sector  and through 
Public Private Participation (PPP) wherever feasible. In case the project may not be 
implemented on PPP mode, implementing agencies would undertake the investment 
supported through appropriate business case. 
4.2 Around 25 PPP projects with est imated investment of Rs. 42,585 Crore have been 
completed since inception of Sagarmala Programme keeping focus of implementing larger set 
of projects in PPP mode. 33 PPP projects worth Rs. 50,755 Crore are currently under 
implementation. Overall, there are  241 projects undertaken for modernization of ports under 
Sagarmala Programme. Out of which, 107 projects have been envisaged for implementation 
in PPP mode. Other projects are being undertaken through IEBR or budgetary funds. 
4.3 The recommendations of the committee has been noted for compliance 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
4.4 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not prepared any Master Plan for the 
port-road connectivity which is one of the major bottlenecks in the shipping and 
highway se ctor. The Committee is concerned about the fact that the efforts of the 
Ministry to wards port-modernization and seamless cargo movement will be 
unattainable without proper port-road connectivity and hence, the EXIM business will 
greatly suffer. The Committee strongly desires the Ministry to devise a master -plan in 
order to build robust road connectivity to the ports  and make possible, the dreams of 
EXIM business through ports in India. 
 

32 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS  
Recommendations/ Observations 
5. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that lack of rail 
and road networks has emerged as a major constraint for most of the Major/ Minor Ports of 
the country. Since most Port Connectiv ity projects are highly capital -intensive, the 
Committee, would therefore, like to know the details of the funding pattern which has been 
adopted for implementation of the rail -road connectivity projects. The Committee 
recommends that a common rail yard should be developed at JNPT for faster evacuation of 
containers and for reducing the rake loading time in order to increase the efficiency of Port 
operations. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para: 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 There are 208 projects have been undertaken to improve rail and road connectivity of 
major and non -major ports. As on date, 56 projects have been completed and 70 additional 
projects are under implementation. These projects are mainly being implemented by Ministry 
of Road, Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and Ministry of Railways (MoR). Major ports 
undertake the projects focusing on improvement in internal road and rail networks. 
5.2 4 out of 5 projects wherein SDCL made equity investments in tune of Rs. 532 Crore 
are for improvement in port connectivity to Paradip, Krishnapatnam, Visakhapatnam and 
Haldia. 
5.3 MoPSW through Sagarmala Programme has provided Grant-in Aid assistance to 17 
projects worth Rs. 735 Crore for improving port connectivity with total ass istance of Rs. 257 
Crore. 
5.4 The Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
5.5 The Committee desires to be apprise d of the present progress  of the additional 
70 projects which are under implementation. 
5.6 The Committee desires that t he Ministry provide the outcome  of Equity 
investments made by the SDCL in 4 out of 5 projects  
5.7 The Committee also desires to be apprised of the outcome of Grant-in Aid 
Assistance provided to 17 projects by the Ministry through ‘Sagarmala Programme.’ 
 
 

33 
 
Recommendations/ Observations 
6 The Committee is dismayed to note that out of 98 road connectivity projects, only 13 
projects have been completed. Similarly, out of 91 rail connectivity projects, only 28 projects 
have been completed so far. This speaks of poor coordination between the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways and the implementing agencies. The Ministry is extending timelines 
for execution of these projects instead of emphasizing upon their timely and speedy 
completion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a dedicated monitoring mechanism 
be put in place to ensure completion of these projects within the approved cost and 
designated timeline. Further, a Master Plan for completion of Port-road connectivity projects 
must be formulated by the Ministry and work relating to Port -road connectivity projects 
should be assigned to NHAI/MoRTH who are specialist s in their fields of operation. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures taken in this regard    
(Para: 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 As of November 2021, out of 98 port road connectivity projects, 15 projects have 
been completed and similarly out of 91 port rail connectivity projects , 28 projects have been 
completed.  
6.2 Connectivity projects are capital intensive and involve obtaining of various clearances 
and approvals such as environment/forest clearance, right of way approval, land acquisition, 
addressing the R&R issues, fund allocation etc which majorly contributes to the delay of such 
projects.  
6.3 Ministry has been engaged in continuous follow -up and communications with 
MoRTH/NHAI and Indian Railways for prioritizing the port road / rail connectivity projects 
in order to ensure timely completion of the projects.  
6.4 MoPSW has identified and communicated 68 Port Road Connectivity priority projects 
to MoRTH/NHAI and in response they have prioritized 42 port road connectivity projects for 
implementation. Similarly, Indian Railways have identified 14 port rail connectivity projects. 
6.5 Ministry is in regular consultation with all the Major Ports, State Maritime Boards and 
Line Ministries through Maritime States Development Council (MSDC) meetings held 
periodically that is being chaired by the Hon‟ble Minister of Ports, Shipping &Waterways. 
During these meetings, MoPSW request all the Line Ministries and other stakeholders to raise 
any major policy related issues that needs intervention to expedite projects under Sagarmala.  
 
 
 

34 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
6.6 The Committee is saddened to note that the Ministry has not prepared a 
dedicated monitoring mechanism or a master plan for timely completion of connectivity 
projects. 
6.7 The Committee desires to be apprised of the outcomes of meetings and follow -
ups of  the Ministry with MoRTH and NHAI , for  implementation of connectivity 
projects. 
6.8 The Committee desires it may be apprised of the periodical meetings held 
between the Ministry through Maritime States Development Council (MSDC) and the 
outcome thereof.  
 
PROMOTION OF COASTAL SHIPPING  
Recommendations/ Observations 
7 The Committee is of the considered view that coastal shipping is a fuel efficient and 
an environment friendly mode that can ease traffic congestion. Despite having an extensive 
network of inland waterways in the form of rivers, canals, backwaters and creeks, freight 
transportation by waterways is highly under-utilized. Waterways currently contribute around 
6% to India's transportation modal mix, which is significantly less than that in deve loped 
economies and some of the developing economies as well. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that availability of dedicated infrastructure will go a long way in promoting 
coastal shipping as a mode of freight transportation. Hence infrastructure at P orts and 
supporting infrastructure using rail/road and waterways to facilitate coastal movement 
should be created which includes development of dedicated coastal berths, bunkering and 
storage at Ports and creation of supporting hinterland transport infrast ructure with last mile 
connectivity.            
(Para: 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 MoPSW acknowledges that availability of dedicated infrastructure will go a long way 
in promoting coastal shipping as a mode of freight transportation. Hence infrastructure  at 
ports and supporting infrastructure using rail/road and waterways to facilitate coastal 
movement are being created. These include development of dedicated coastal berths, 
bunkering and storage at ports and creation of supporting hinterland transport in frastructure 
with last mile connectivity. 
 7.2 To boost trade with up -gradation of port facilities to global standards and for making 
coastal shipping viable at many instances, there are 17 projects worth Rs. 1815 Crore which 
focus on providing infrastruct ure for coastal handling of cargo. 5 projects worth Rs. 321 

35 
 
Crore have been completed, 4 projects are currently under implementation and 8 more 
projects are under various stages of development. 5 projects are being implemented at major 
ports whereas 12 projects are for improving coastal infrastructure at non-major ports.  
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
7.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not mentioned any projects related to 
creation of supporting hinterland transport infrastructure with last mile connectivity. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry provide the details of funding and 
development time required by the  projects under implementation as well as projects 
under various stages of development. 
 
MARITIME TRAINING INSTITUTES 
Recommendations/ Observations 
8 The Committee would also recommend that the Ministry should conduct studies to 
work out annual manpower requirement and supply in the Indian Port sector and formulate 
suitable approach to augment the supply of required manpower to cater to India‟s needs 
being the 16th largest Maritime country. The Ministry should assess the performance of the 
maritime training institutes and take strict actions if any of the stipulated norms are being 
violated. The Committee would further recommend setting up of more CICMT in 
collaboration with IITs/ NITs/ IIMs to provide opportunities relating to applied research and 
development for the inland and coastal waterways sector along with  the knowledge of 
business management especially in the field of industrial block chain supply technology.  
(Para: 97) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The ports are re -evaluating the manpower requirement and after final round of 
discussion with the all Major Ports, the final recommendation of the manpower requirement 
in major Ports will be submitted shortly. 
8.2  Further, 
1. Maritime education and training in India is administrated by the Director General 
of Shipping, Gov. of India (DG Shipping), in accordance with the STCW 
Convention and Merchant Shipping (STCW) Rules, 2014 
2. India has 154 Maritime Training Institutes (MTIs) set up all over the country, 
offering Pre-sea and Post –sea maritime training in various streams / disciplines.  
3. In order to implement the applicable provisions of the international convention 
and to ensure the quality and uniformity of training among the growing number of 
such institutes, the DG Shipping has developed the Comprehensive Inspection 
Program (CIP) for the MTIs with grading mechanism. To achieve this objectives, 

36 
 
necessary guidelines and assessme nt checklists, identifying such structured and 
objective parameters against which every such institutes will be graded, on an 
annual basis, have been formalized. Authorized Classification Societies, as 
Recognized organizations (ROs) carries out such inspec tion, gradation and 
certification of MTIs.  
4. Any Classification Society authorized by the Government of India as Recognized 
Organisation (RO) vide Govt. of India, Ministry of Shipping Notification, S.O. 
2044 (E) dated 06.09.2011 having entered into agreemen t with DGS may offer 
their services for the inspection, gradation and certification of the institutes. 
5. Unscheduled inspections: The unscheduled inspection of any MTI may be carried 
out anytime. Unscheduled inspections may also be undertaken based on specif ic 
bona-fide complaints. The unscheduled inspections shall be carried out by the 
Directorate and/or MMDs. The inspection team shall be nominated by the 
Directorate or the Principal Officer (PO) and may comprise of officers from the 
Directorate and/or from any Mercantile Marine Department (MMD). The 
Directorate or the MMD may utilize the services of external assessors nominated 
by the Directorate. 
6. Suitable actions are initiated against the MTI in case major deficiencies are noted 
by the inspection team. The Directorate has taken strict action against MTI not 
meeting the DG Shipping Guidelines and having major deficiencies. In last five 
years the Directorate has closed down around 11 such MTIs.  
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
8.3 The Committee desires the Ministry to furnish information regarding total 
Maritime Training Institutes established and total closed down due to def icient 
guidelines. 
8.4 The Committee desires to know the total inspections carried out by the ROs/ 
Authorized Classification Societies at the MTIs with grading mechanisms as well as the 
time required by the Directorate/ MMDs in nomination and carrying out of 
unscheduled inspections at the MTIs. 
Recommendations/ Observations 
9. The Ministry should adopt technologies from the foreign na tions to address the 
incidents of oil spills. The Ministry should also take steps to ensure safety and security of 
seafarers. 
(Para: 109) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Recommendations/ Observations is noted.  
 

37 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
9.2 The Committee is constrained to note that no steps have been taken by the 
Ministry to counter the oil -spill hazards which pose an enormous threat to safety and 
security of seafarers as well as the marine species and the ecosystem. The Committee 
desires tha t the Ministry provide information on technology advancement done to 
counter maritime hazards and a special Act may be enacted for tackling such hazards.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendations/ Observations:  NIL 
 
Replies of the Ministry: NIL. 
 
* * *  
 

39 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
 
The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has not  provided details of any 
projects witnessing time overruns and cost escalations in comparison to original costs of 
implementation. The Committee desires to be apprised of the projects implemented out 
of the 800 projects identified and categorized into five  pillars under the ‘Sagarmala 
Scheme’ and their precise reasons for delay. 
(Para 1.6) 
 
EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF RESOURCES 
 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the funding details of the remaining 41 
projects at various stages of development as well as the status of 41 projects under 
implementation out of the total 123 projects sanctioned for funding under ‘Sagarmala’. 
(Para 2.9) 
The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the DPRs prepared with the implementing 
agencies as well as the funding arrangements  made for successful implementation and 
timely execution of the remaining projects. 
(Para 2.10) 

40 
 
Since the efficient utilization of land resources holds the key to unlocking the India’s 
economic growth. Promotion of coastal industries through leasing of lan d around the 
port area to such industries and fixation of lease rent and sufficient reforms in the land 
administration is important. In order to successfully expedite the tendering process of 
port area, the Committee wants the Ministry to speed up the tend ering process and 
convey to the Committee, any lacunae on this part. The Committee also desires the 
Ministry to provide status details of the following land identified under the Coastal 
Economic Units (CEUs) in the format given below: - 
 
Phase Land 
identifie
d under 
CEUs (in 
Acres.) 
Land Tender 
Invited for 
Land (in 
Acres.) 
Leased Land 
(in Acres.) 
Remaining 
Land not 
leased (in 
Acres.) 
Status 
Phase I  
965 
 
745 
285 12.34 272.66 To be provided 
by the Ministry 
Phase II 334 36.72 297.28 To be provided 
by the Ministry 
 
(Para 3.2) 
 
PORT MODERNIZATION & DEVELOPMENT OF NEW PORTS  
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not prepared any Master Plan for the port -
road connectivity which is one of the major bottlenecks in the shipping and highway 
sector. Th e Committee is concerned about the fact that the efforts of the Ministry 

41 
 
towards port-modernization and seamless cargo movement will be unattainable without 
the proper port-road connectivity and hence, the EXIM business will greatly suffer. The 
Committee strongly desires that the Ministry should devise a master -plan in order to 
build robust road connectivity to the ports and make possible, the dreams of EXIM 
business through ports in India. 
(Para 4.4) 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS  
 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the present progress status of the additional 70 
projects which are under implementation. 
(Para 5.5) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry provide the outcome of Equity investments 
made by the SDCL in 4 out of 5 projects. 
(Para 5.6) 
The Committee also desires to be apprised of the outcome of Grant -in Aid Assistance 
provided to 17 projects by the Ministry through ‘Sagarmala Programme.’ 
(Para 5.7) 
 
The Committee is saddened to note that the Ministry has not prepared a dedicated 
monitoring mechanism or a master plan for timely completion of connectivity projects. 

42 
 
(Para 6.6) 
The Committee is aware of the lacunae faced by the Ministry and desires to be apprised 
of the outcomes of meetings and follow-ups that the Ministry engaged in with MoRT&H 
and NHAI and whether any work -related to port -land connectivity projects has been 
assigned to them to get a professional consultation and implementation for connectivity 
projects. 
(Para 6.7) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the periodical meetings held between the 
Ministry through Maritime States Development Council (MSDC) and the outcome 
observed thereof. The information has to be provided in a tabular form given below for 
better understanding of the Committee: 
S.No. Date of 
the 
Meeting 
Participating 
agencies/ 
Ministries 
Subject of 
the Meeting 
Obser
vatio
ns 
Outcome (if 
any) 
Remarks 
       
(Para 6.8) 
 
PROMOTION OF COASTAL SHIPPING  
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not mentioned any projects related to 
creation of supporting hinterland transport infrastructure with last mile connectivity. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry provide itself with the details of funding and 
development time required by the projects under implementation as well as projects 
under various stages of development in separate tabular formats. 

43 
 
(Para 7.3) 
 
MARITIME TRAINING INSTITUTES 
 
The Committee desires the Ministry to furnish information regarding total Maritime 
Training Institutes established and total closed down due to deficient guidelines, in a 
tabular format. 
(Para 8.3) 
The Committee desires to know the total inspections carried out by the ROs/ 
Authorized Classification Societies at the MTIs with grading mechanisms as well as the 
time required by the Directorate/ MMDs in nomination and carrying out of 
unscheduled inspections at the MTIs. 
(Para 8.4) 
 
The Committee is constrained to note that no steps have been taken by the Ministry to 
counter the oil -spill hazards which pose an enormous threat to safety and security of 
seafarers as well as the marine spe cies and the ecosystem. The Committee desires that 
the Ministry provide information on technology advancement done to counter maritime 
hazards and whether any act has been enacted to tackle/prevent such hazards. 
(Para 9.2) 
 
* * * * * * * 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
 
  
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider  and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
44

 
 
(i) *   *   *   * 
(ii) *   *   *   * 
(iii) *   *   *   * 
(iv) *   *   *   * 
(v) *   *   *   * 
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
as contained  in its Three Hundredth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of 
Infrastructure in India's Maritime Sector’. 
B.        *   *   *   * 
(i)         *   *   *   * 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *i   *   *   * 
 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
 
                                                           
* Relates to other matters 
45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Annexure – A  
The details of industrialization initiatives at major ports: 
S. 
No. Port Name 
Total land 
available for 
Industrialization 
Industrilizat
ion done 
Employment 
generated 
1 Mormugao Port Trust Nil - - 
2 Kamarajar Port Limited Nil - - 
3 Vishakhapatnam Port Trust 3,359 Acres 3,256 Acres 
Direct: 13000 
Indirect: 26000 
4 Paradip Port Trust  769 Acres 769 Acres Direct: 3770, 
Indirect: 7540 
5 New Mangalore Port Trust  Nil - - 
6 Cochin Port Trust  786 Acres 154 Acres Direct: 240, 
Indirect: 1200 
7 V.O.Chidambaranar Port 
Trust  1521 Acres 776 Acres 12000 
8 
Syama 
Prasad 
Mookerjee 
Port Trust  
Kolkata Port 
Trust  180 Acres - Direct: 1433, 
Indirect: 5154 
Haldia Dock 
Complex  2374 Acres 1774 Acres Direct: 45000, 
Indirect: 90000 
9 Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust  1494 Acres 373 Acres - 
10 Chennai Port Trust  Nil - - 
11 Deendayal Port Trust   6973 Acres 1049 Acres Direct + 
Indirect: 50000 
12 Mumbai Port Trust  Nil - - 
 
 
 
 
 
46

 
Annexure – B  
 
1. Chennai Port Trust 
Ministry of Shipping vide Order no.PD-12/30/2018-PPP cell dt. 13.08.2019 communicated a 
scheme titled “One Time Settlement” (OTSS) for a period of 6 months from 1.9.2019 to 
28.02.2020, and then it was extended for another six months i.e., up to 31.08.2020 to 
facilitate and expedite the  recovery of pending dues of the Major Ports from the Government 
of India/ State Government Ministries / Departments (GOISGD). 
In respect of the GOISGD organizations which had dues, the concerned organizations were 
communicated about the OTSS and were  requested to remit the outstanding principal dues to 
avail waiver of penalty and interest under the scheme. 
In response, O/o. Assistant Conservator of Forest, A&N Administration and the Income Tax 
Department which were allotted spaces inside the custom bo und area and had rental dues, 
remitted the outstanding principal dues and were waived the penal charges with ST/GST of 
Rs. 3,51,711/- and Rs. 3,23,115/- respectively. 
 In outside custom bound area, out of 29 lessees, 11 Central/ State Govt., lessees were 
identified and were eligible under the OTS Scheme. Out of the 11 lessees 6 lessees, have 
utilized the OTS Scheme and paid the lease rent up to 30.09.2019, and requested  for 100% 
waiver of the penal interest/ penalty levied on them. Accordingly, from the 6 lessees an 
amount of Rs.1.46 crores was collected as lease rent and Rs. 5.03 crores being the penal 
interest/penalty component was waived off. 
The balance lessees were requested for further extension of time of the OTS Scheme, citing 
that they were unable get the lease rent amount from their headquarters in time. Hence, 
Chennai Port Trust has requested the Ministry to extend OTS Scheme, vide letter 
dt.17.10.2020 and reminder letter dated 21.01.2021 but the reply is still awaited.   
2. Cochin PortTrust 
 
In accordance with the One-Time Settlement Scheme (OTSS) dated 13.08.2019 issued by the 
MoPSW, Cochin Port Trust (CoPT) allowed 25% concession on the dues on the lease rent 
pending since 01.07.1960 for the 3.44 acre of land leased to Navy in Willingdon Island. As 
the Navy used to pay the lease rent at a low, historical rate, protracted correspondence has 
been going on between CoPT and the Navy for settling the arrears. The 25% concession 
allowed on the dues on the lease rent amounted to Rs.66,16,737/-. The Navy paid the pending 
dues and got the lease extended for another 30 years from 2019 on upfront payment basis, as 
approved by the Board of CoPT. 
 
 
3. Deendayal Port Trust  
There is no any case filed under the „One time Settlement Scheme‟, 2019. 
 
47

 
 
4. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
Port has received order File No. PD -13/30/2018-PPPCell dated 13.08.2019 for one time 
settlement scheme for settlement of outstanding interest levied by Major Ports to Government 
of India. No benefit have be availed by Government of India and state Government 
Ministries/Departments. 
 
5. Kamarajar Port Trust  
No allotments of lands on lease basis to the Departmentsof Govt. of India or the State 
Governments in Kamarajar Port. Therefore, the levy of interestand penal interest in cases of 
unpaid lease rentals and application of “One Time SettlementScheme” does not arise in 
Kamarajar Port. 
6. Mumbai Port Trust  
One Time Settlement Scheme (OTSS) declared by Ministry of  Shipping, Government of 
India, by their Notification was applicable to only Government departments under 
Government of India or under State Government pertaining to disputes with rentals and penal 
interests thereon. In compliance with the OTSS, 3 Nos. of Central Government departments 
occupying 11 Nos. of MbPT let out plots and 1 No. of State Government department 
occupying 9 No. of MbPT let out plots were informed. Statement showing the outstanding 
dues is at Annexure.  In response only one Government department responded by letter dated 
20.2.2020 and no other department replied or responded. All Government departments were 
requested to take advantage of this scheme offered by Ministry to settle their disputes of 
rental and penal interest charged by MbPT.  However, till date no response has been received 
from the said Government departments to the OTSS.  
 
7. Mormugao Port Trust 
In MoPT there are no cases pending due to levy of  interest /penal interest in cases of 
unpaid lease rentals for land leased to Depart ment of Government of India/State 
Government. 
One Time Settlement Scheme (OTSS) of Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
dated 13.08.2019 Ministry vide letter No. PD -13/30/2018-PPP Cell dated 13.08.2019 
approved OTSS for settlement of penal charges and penal charges. 
 
In this context, Mormugao Port had vide letter dated 06.01.2020 informed the Goa State 
Government to avail the OTSS scheme and pay the principal amount of Rs.35.60 (as on 
31.12.2019) crores towards outstanding storage charges of iron ore car go belonging to 
DMG, lying inside the Port premises. However on 21.02.2020, a meeting was held 
between  State Govt. and Central Govt. wherein the matter was deliberated and decided 
48

 
that Rs.13.96 cr. be shared equally between MPT and DMG.   Subsequently, DM G has 
paid and amount of Rs. 6.98 cr. to MPT.  
 
8. New Mangalore Port Trust  
As far as NMPT is concerned, the Port vide letter dated 23.01.2020 had requested the 
concerned stake holders viz. Customs and State Police Dept. who fall under this scheme to 
clear t he entire Principal amount first in order t consider waiver of the penal interest. In 
response Police dept replied vide their letter dated 15.02.2020 that they had not taken any 
action so far. The Customs dept. had not responded in stipulated time period. Port vide letter 
dated 16.03.2020 requested to Ministry to extend the scheme for six months in order to settle 
the cases. 
No Govt. agency has availed the facilities of the scheme at NMPT 
 
9. Paradip Port Trust 
 
Vide Ministry‟s letter No. PD -13/30/2018-PPP/e-334936 dated 06.11.2019 on One Time 
Settlement Scheme(OTSS), for settlement of outstanding interest/penal interest and penal 
charges claim/levied by Major Ports on Govt. Organizations, all Major Ports were adv ised to 
settle the same under this Scheme,  Paradip Port Trust has waived interest component of  
Rs.39,40,079/-(excluding taxes) against Custom Dept. with approval of the Board of Trustees 
vide Resolution  No: 07/2020-21 and  has forwarded same to the Mini stry. In response, email 
has been received from MoPS&W on dated 03rd June 2020 wherein the Ministry has agreed 
to this settlement done by PPT.  
10. Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust  
Many Government entities/organizations were approached through letters and vi rtual mode 
about "One Time Settlement Scheme” (OTSS) but response was not encouraging. 
Regularization in some cases under OTSS was under different stages of deliberation.  
No Govt. Body/Organization availed of the benefit of the “One Time Settlement Scheme ” in 
KDS. However in HDC, principal dues of SMPK amounting to Rs. 97,559/ - a/c Commercial 
Taaes, Govt. of West Bengal had been cleared by adjustment against their Security Deposit 
held with port along with waiver of accrued interest amounting to Rs.97,093/- . 
11. Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
Though VPT has implemented One Time Settlement Scheme in terms of Order dt.13 -08-
2019 by the MoS to settle the interest amount due, the concerned Govt. Depts. i.e, E.Co.Rlys. 
did not turn up to VPT‟s proposal. 
 
 
 
49

 
12. V.O Chidambaranar Port Trust 
 
1. MoS vide letter dated 13.08.2019 has announced Onetime 
Settlement Scheme (OTSS).  
2. ICG and CECRI have furnished their willingness to avail One Time Settlement 
Scheme (OTSS). M/s.CECRI settled the dues as detailed below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
SI. No. 
 
Name of the lessee 
The amount waived 
(in Rs.) 
Nature of O/S due interest, 
penalty etc. in Rs. 
1 CECRI 2,42,689 9,49,272 
50

 
Annexure – C  
 
1. Chennai Port Trust 
With regard to FSRU, since LNG facility is not available in Chennai Port, there is no plan to 
implement the FSRU. 
 
2. Cochin PortTrust 
There have not been any serious bottlenecks in the implementation of the provisions of 
PGLM, 2015 at Cochin Port. CoPT has a 5.0 MMT capacity LNG Terminal established by 
the Petronet LNG Ltd. (PLL) operating since 2013. 
 
3. Deendayal Port Trust  
There are various difficulties faced by the Deendayal Port Trust in implementation of the 
PGLM-2014, several clarifications have been issued and incorporated in the PGLM -2014 
from time to time by the Ministry. Further, DPT has neither allotted any land for the purpose 
of Floating Storage Regasification nor any demand received from the Port Users for 
establishment of Floating Storage Regasification Units (FSRU) in DPT. 
 
4. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
 With regards to the Policy guidelines for land management in Port, it is to submit that, 
1.       - The PAN India Port is currently facing various issues pertaining to existing leases, the 
renewals/ re allotment / fresh allotment of such land in Port area and the issues are peculiar to 
respective Port and related State  policies. Thus, the solution to such issues are specific to that 
Port and such customize approach need to be facilitated. 
 
2.      -  Industrial development in Port land has its challenges vis -à-vis the competitive 
policies of surrounding industrial land pockets, the State Government land policy for land 
allotment, investment criteria, lease / lease premium payment options, land rates and 
flexibility of various compliance issues. This has a impact on the response from inve stment 
for making decision of investment in Port land for industrialization. The uncertainty of the 
land allotment despite participation in e-tender process is also of concern to Investors, as they 
are provided with first come first serve basis allotment in various state industrial zones. 
 
3.       - In such scenario the review of the policy for land for industrial promotion in Port 
vicinity need to be carried out on priority. 
 
4.       - The distinction of land allotment for Port and related activity and l and for 
industrialization in Port area as per Sagarmala initiative is to be facilitated and the guidelines 
for disposal of industrial land in Port area need to be framed separately. The consideration of 
the industrial promotion vis -à-vis surrounding indust rial area promotion norms need to be 
taken in to consideration. 
 
51

 
5.      - Ease of doing measures to be incorporated for the industrial and Port related activities 
land allotment process. 
 
Presently no FRSU  is functioning at JNPT. 
 
 
5. Mumbai Port Trust  
Comments: (A) Background of Policy Guidelines for Land Management (PGLM) 2015: 
 
(1)          Mumbai Port Trust has about 275 Ha. of land falling under township areas and 
consisting of 524 Nos. of expired leases, 1977 Nos. of Monthly Tenancies & Fifteen Mon thly 
Leases and 250 Nos. of running leases. In the past when Mumbai Port Trust revised its rentals 
with effect from 1982 based on the valuation done by the Valuers in 1980, it led to a spate of 
litigations and the revision was struck down by the Hon‟ble Bo mbay High Court.   At the 
suggestions of the Hon‟ble Bombay High Court, the rates had to be substantially moderated 
under the “Compromise proposals” formulated by the Port, which was further adjudicated 
and the rates further moderated by the Hon‟ble Supreme  Court. These litigations continued 
for almost 24 (twenty-four) years with multiple litigations. Ultimately, the issue of revision of 
rent and Board‟s compromise policy was settled by the judgment given by the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court in the Civil Appeal No.5 559 of 2001 dated 13th January, 2004 and 9th 
January 2006. The prolonged litigation affected the revenue from let out land of MbPT.  
  
(2)          Policy Guidelines for Land Management (PGLM), 2015 for all Major Ports of India 
and Clarification No.1 of 20 18 and Clarification No.2 of 2019 thereon were issued by 
Ministry.  Vide these clarifications, the PGLM 2015 guidelines were extended to township 
areas of the Port land which were earlier excluded from the PGLM 2015.   Many of the 
expired leases, which coul d not be renewed in the absence of policy guidelines for township 
areas from the Ministry for leases/ renewal of leases.   By clarification No.1 of 2018 and 2 of 
2019 and para 13 of PGLM 2015, Ministry laid down procedure for renewal of expired leases 
and allotment of vacant lands by computation of Schedule of Rates (SoR) based on highest of 
5 factors on the basis of approved land values.   In case of Township of MbPT, the revised 
SoR was due from 1.10.2012 onwards, since earlier rentals were fixed in accorda nce with the 
Compromise policy modified by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court Judgment dated 13.1.2004 and 
were valid upto 30.9.2012.  
 
Bottlenecks in implementation of the PGLM 2015: 
  
(1)          Most of the leases in township areas have expired and there is lar ge number of sub-
tenants/Third parties in occupation of the existing structures constructed by the lessees. In 
most of the cases, lessees/licensees have transferred possession of lands/tenements to third 
party occupants without the approval of the Board. T hus MbPT has to engage into protracted 
52

 
litigations with these sitting occupants to get these lands/tenements vacated. In some cases, 
these litigations take up to 20 years to be finally adjudicated by the courts. 
 
(2)          (i) As per Para 11 of PGLM 201 5, fresh allotment or renewal of expired leases 
without renewal clause should be allotted through e -Tender cum auction by public notice on 
the Reserve Price as per Para 13 of PGLM 2015. 
     
         (ii) The reserve price based on the upfront premium as p er the SoR is worked out in 
accordance with para 13 of PGLM 2015 as per highest of the five factors for determination of 
land values.  The revision of SoR rate are only 36 times more than the existing rentals billed 
by MbPT as per the Hon‟ble Supreme Court  Judgement rates.   The revised SoR are not 
acceptable to any of the Lessees / Tenants / Occupants. 
 
        (iii) The existing lessee is to be given RoFR and opportunity to match the highest tender 
offer, provided they clear all past dues as per the applic able SoR from the date of expiry of 
the lease and also payment of required charges of regularisation of breaches, if any in the 
matter.  The exorbitant increase in the revised SoR and considering high reserve price and 
recovery of differential arrears for retrospective period from 1.10.2012 onwards are not 
acceptable to many lessees and is a major deterrent in renewal of expired leases. 
 
(3)          There are large scale objections to the MbPT‟s proposal for revision of SoR 
w.e.f.1.10.2012, which was submi tted to the TAMP. Many lessees/tenants/ occupants have 
contended that proposed new rents are very high in comparison with present rentals fixed 
under Hon‟ble Supreme Court (Wadia) Judgement 2004 which are almost 36 times higher on 
an average, which is not acceptable to many of the lessee/tenants. Such disputes with 
lessees/tenants could lead to protracted litigation by disputing parties and could stall the 
process of recovery of the revised rates. Even the government bodies, public sector 
undertakings, oil companies, etc., have expressed their inability to make the payment of past 
rentals which is from retrospective period, i.e. from 1.10.2012 onwards and also the high 
upfront premium payable for further period of 30 years for grant of fresh lease. 
  
(4)          PGLM 2015 do not provide any provision to the existing tenants / sub -tenants / 
lessees /actual occupants to transfer the land under expired leases in the name of actual 
occupant/sub-tenant who are in occupation of these premises for more than 30/50 y ears or 
even more.  Some of the occupants are even protected under Rent Control Act. Eviction of 
such large number of sub -tenants/Third parties and lessees by due process of law is a tedious 
and long time consuming process which takes several decades by wa y of multiple litigations 
and appeals.   
  
53

 
(5)          Existing land use and the layout plans and infrastructure in many parts of the 
township area are unutilised potential of land and are outdated with the present urban 
planning norms. There is no provision in PGLM 2015 Policy for rehabilitation and relocation 
of existing occupants/lessees/tenants at other locations by reconstitution of plots for 
redevelopment with change of use. Lack of provision in PGLM 2015 has restricted the 
untapped and under-utilized the development potential of the prime land of Mumbai City. 
  
(6)          The maximum period of lease that can be granted by Ports under PGLM 2015 is 
only 30 years and beyond 30 years, proposal needs to be recommended to Empowered 
Committee constituted by Ministry of Shipping, Government of India. Limiting period of 30 
years is also proving to be deterrent for getting good response from the market for land 
monetization of Port Trust lands falling in township areas and may be changed to 60 years. 
Two of the vacant plots were put for tender cum auction for industrial purpose but have not 
received any single bid due to high reserve price, limited lease period and due to restriction 
on subletting and transfer of the lease premises. 
  
(7)          By Clarification No.1 of 2018, Port Trust vacant plots / lands cannot be put for real 
estate development / residential development.  As most of the vacant plots of MbPT township 
land are falling under residential zones / commercial / industrial zones as per the 
Development Plan of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and not suitable for port 
related activities.  Such restrictions on proposed use are the bottlenecks in asset monetization 
of Port land.  
  
These are some of the bottlenecks / deterrent factors, w hich needs to be examined by the 
Ministry as these provisions are leading to large scale disputes and increase in litigation with 
lessee/tenants/occupants, affected revenue from let out land in Township area. The relevant 
provisions of PGLM 11, 12 & 13 may  be suitably examined to remove these bottlenecks so 
that Port Trust can generate revenue and fair rental returns by its landed assets in township 
areas. 
 
(B)        Current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification Unit 
(FSRU) – 
  
The project of FSRU is taken up on land lease Model, as per the Guidelines for setting up of 
Floating Storage Regasification Unit in Major Ports issued by the MoPSW on 7.3.2019. The 
project capacity is 5 MMTPA. The period of license is 30 years from the date of a ward of 
License (17.2.2022). The total cost of project is Rs.2600 Cr. The security clearance and the 
Environment Clearance is received. 
 
                           The letter of Intent is issued to M/s S. P. Armada Clean Energy Ventures 
Pvt. Ltd. (SPACE) o n 18.2.2021 and License Agreement is signed on 18.5.2021. The 
54

 
condition precedent period is up to 17.2.2022. The bidder is in the process of fulfilling the 
Conditions Precedent. The work will be awarded after fulfilling the Conditions. The 
construction per iod is 3 years after the work is awarded. The project is schedule for 
commission by 17.2.2025.  
 
6. Mormugao Port Trust 
Some of issues faced by the Port during implementation of provisions of Policy Guidelines 
for Land Management is given hereunder : 
1. Leasing of land inside custom bound for a maximum period of 5 years is major bottle 
neck in leasing the land for big projects which requires large investments such as storage 
of LNG and other big projects. 
 
2. Charging of transfer fee @ 50% of the total lease rent payable by the original lessee upto 
time of transfer. There are cases wherein the original lessee intends to transfer the 
balance period of lease in case of takeover of the company by other corporates. 
However, the payment of above transfer fee is a major bottle neck for implementation. 
Major Ports are expecting new Policy Guidelines to be issued by the Ministry shortly 
wherein the above issues will be resolved. 
 
7. New Mangalore Port Trust  
As far as (i) is concerned, Port has no faced any bottlenecks. 
Regarding (ii), As far as establishment of FSRU at NMPT is concerned, NMPT had 
appointed a Consultant for conducting a Feasibility Study for Development of LNG FSRU at 
NMP. As per the Final Report submitted by the Consultants, the project does not justify the 
investment. Therefore the project has been dropped for the present. 
8. Paradip Port Trust 
With regard to FSRU, there is nil Information. 
9. Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust  
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the bottlenecks being faced iif the  
implementation of some of the provisions of Policy Guidelines for Land Management. 
Further, what is the current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification Units 
(FSRU) at Major Ports in order to meet the increasing demand for Liquefied Nat ural Gas 
(LNG) in the country. 
Comments of SMPK: 
(i) Bottlenecks being faced in implementation of Land Policy Guidelines of Land 
Management. Major bottlenecks those are being faced while implementing Land Policy 
Guidelines(PGLM) are submitted below- 
55

 
a) Implementation of 3x SoR in all cases of compensation Billing and accrual of interest 
thereon; 
b) Lack of clear distinction between major and minor breaches in PGLM resulting in 
equal treatment for commission of breaches of all kinds; 
c) Absence of clear cut policy regarding encroachment/sitting occupants in areas under 
Port‟s own use; 
d) Modalities to be incorporated in PGLM to address issues relating to rising number of 
IBC/NCLT cases and matters arising out in consequence of such cases; 
e) PGLM allows no ri ght or authority to permanently dispose of those lands which  
cannot  be otherwise profitably utilized by Port; 
(ii) As Landlord Model is being pursued in Port Sector, PGLM may provide for more 
norms or stipulations in sync with changing scenario; 
(iii) Prohibition of transfer within 3 -5 years of grant of lease needs to included to prevent 
any possible land trading; 
(iv) Elaboration or further clarification is considered to be necessary with regard to social 
infrastructure, religious places and all kinds of charitable institutions; 
(v) More clarity is required regarding computation of refund of upfront premium in case 
of premature surrender of lease; 
 
Current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification Unit (FSRU) at 
SMPK 
A tender was floated for selection of an operator for setting up and operation of FSRU under 
KDS, SMPK and LoA was placed on a consortium with Mis H-Energy Private Ltd as the lead 
member on 10.08.2015. However, as the Consortium failed to comply with the last extended 
timeline, the Earnest Money Deposit was forfeited in terms of Clause VI (iii) (e) of the 
concerned NIT and the LoA was cancelled by SMPK, vide Letter dated 03.08.2018. 
SMPK has accorded no objection to the proposal for setting up of LNG receiving and 
regasification terminal of 5.0 MMTPA by Mis. Mis Bengal Concessions Private Limited 
(BCPL) at Kukrahatti in February, 2020 and the project was to be commissioned with a 
capacity of 2.5 MMTPA within 33 months as per the initial plan. Mis BCPL has already 
obtained the required land from HDA and environmental clearance for the project. Clearance 
from PESO will have to be obtained 6 months before commissioning of the project. However, 
the commissioning of the project has been delayed due to Covid. Further, SMPK has 
requested Mis. BCPL to provide LNG bunkering facilities at the riverine jetties ofKukrahatti 
10. Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) vide letter. dt. 06 -08-2021 informed that VPT has 
been selected as one of the potential location for establi shing LNG Terminal/FSRU and is 
56

 
evaluating potential with the assistance of IIT -M, Chennai. A team of Officials from M/s. 
IOCL & IIT -M visited the site on 13 -102021 & requested certain data/documents for 
evaluation & preparation of report. Accordingly, VPT vide lr. dt. 06 -11-2021 has furnished 
the requisite data to M/s. IOCL, New Delhi. 
 
11. V.O Chidambaranar Port Trust 
 
The bottlenecks being faced in the implementation of some of the provisions of 
Policy Guidelines for Land Management: 
 
1. In case of Fresh Long Te rm allotments to Central Government 
Schemes like Pradhan ManthriAawajYojna, which require more than 
30 Years, upto 99 Years allotment, the procedure tone adopted for 
fresh allotments beyond 30 Years upto 99 Years, and for transfer of 
land to Central / State  Govt. not available. For industries with high 
investments, allotment period beyond 30 years shall be considered. 
2. In case of long term allotments, where the lessee requires statutory 
clearance like CRZ/ EC, etc., a flexibility for Gestation period may be 
considered for the exaction of the proposal. 
3. The rates adopted for the allotment of the Port lands are too high 
when compared with the Local area allotment by State Govt. The 
methodology for fixing SoR requires clarity (i.e) State Govt. ready 
reckoner of land values. 
4. Methodology to follow for allotment of land on Temporary basis to 
existing lessee not clear. 
5. Method for Fixation of MGT for the lessee and commencement of 
MGT to be formed. 
6. To clarify for consideration of cargo handled by Group Company I 
sister company for MGT. 
7. Methodology for Fresh lease / regularization of allotment to the local 
Public (i.e.Fisherman) who is utilizing the piece of land for long 
period on special concessional rate to be formed. 
 
The current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification 
Units (FSRU) at Major Ports in order to meet the increasing demand for 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
 
         IPA has invited e -RFP for feasibility of setting up of FSRUs at 
suitable Major Ports of   India to meet the increasing deman d for 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG). 
  
57

 
Annexure-D 
Dry Dock & Ship Repairing Facilities at Major Ports 2020-21 (P) 
Name of Ports No. of Dry Docks and 
their size 
No. of 
Work 
shops 
No. of 
Cranes and 
Capacity 
No. of 
Vessels 
Repaired 
during 
2020-
2021 
No. of days 
Dry Dock 
Occupancy 
during 
2020-2021 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Chennai No dry dock facility available in Chennai port. 
Cochin Cochin Port Trust has leased out its dry dock for 30 years to Cochin 
Shipyard Ltd. On 11.4.2013, and as such no dry dock hire charges have 
been collected by this Port in 2020-2021. 
 
 
 
 
Deendayal Port 
Trust 
One 
Length  : 
95mtrs.+4.5mtrs. 
Extended platform 
each at FWD and AFT 
ends 
Width    : 20mtrs. 
Depth    : 5.5mtrs. 
One 
owned 
by Port. 
 
 
Full 
fledge 
private 
worksh
ops are 
also 
availabl
e 
One 
 
 
 
5 MT 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
341 
 
 
 
SMP,Haldia 
 
 
 
 
There is no fry dock facility at Haldia Dock Complex. 
 
JNPT The port doesn‟t have the facility for ship building and ship repairing. 
Kamarajar The dry dock facility is not available at Port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMP , Kolkata  
NSDD-1 
 
E*(178x32.
3x14.32) 
B@- 
(165.2x27.4
3x14.32) 
  
 
 
 
2Nos. 
3T/6T, 
1 No. 3T 
  
NSDD-2 E-
(182.88X32
.3X14.32) 
B-
(170.08X27 1 No. 5T 
58

 
 
.43X14.32)  
 
 
1 No. 7T 
KPDD-1 E-
(166.72X21
.23X7.62) 
B-
(163.98X20
.39X7.62) 
 
 
KPDD-2 E- 
(151.48X21
.233X7.46) 
B-
(148.8X20.
57X7.46) 
KPDD-3 E- 
(106.68X18
.28X7.31) 
B- 
(102.87X17
.44X7.31) 
Mormugao Port 
Trust 
The dry dock facility is not available at Port. 
 
 
 
Mumbai 
One 
 
Length
: 1000 
ft. 
Breadt
h: 100 
ft. 
Depth 
: 44 ft. 
 
 
Not available with the Port. 
NMPT The infrastructure and dry dock facility are not available at Port. 
Paradip NIL 
 
 
Visakhapatnam 
One 
Length  :140.24mtrs. 
Breadth  :18.28mtrs. 
Depth    :5.6mtrs. 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
One 
 
4T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.O. 
Chidambaranar 
Dry dock Facility not available 
59

 
Annexure-E 
Key Tourism Circuits identified by Working Group  
A) National Waterway-1 (River Ganga) 
S. 
No. 
Circuits 
Identified 
Major Religious Attractions /Places Details 
1. Allahabad 
Circuit  
KumbhMela, TriveniSangam, All 
Saints Cathedral, Patalpuri Temple 
and Akashaya Vat, Hanuman 
Mandir, Chitrakoot. 
Allahabad has a literary and 
artistic heritage; 
KumbhMela attracts 
millions from across the 
globe; Chitrakoot is an 
important pilgrimage site of 
Hindus appr oximately 70 
Kms from Allahabad and 
connected by road; rest of 
the two places are in 
Allahabad. 
2. Varanasi 
Circuit 
The Ghats, „Ganga Aarti‟,‟ Dev 
Dipawali‟ Kashi Viswanath Temple, 
SankatMochan Hanuman Temple, 
Gyanvapi Mosque, Shri Guru 
RavidassJanamAsthan 
Varanasi is widely 
considered to be the second 
oldest city in the world and 
visited by millions from 
across the globe. All the 
religious places mentioned 
here are within the city 
itself. 
3. Patna 
Circuit 
Harmandir Sahib, Mahavir 
Hanuman Mandir, Patan Devi 
Temple, Padri -Ki-Haveli, 
Bodhgaya, Gaya, Nalanda, Rajgir, 
vaishali,  
Apart from the religious 
places which isain the city, 
Gaya and Bodhgaya are 
connected by road with 
Patna. They are situated at a  
distance of around 100 
Kms. Respecti vely. 
Similarly, Nalanda and 
Rajgir are one on the same 
road route and 80 kms and 
95 kms respectively, from 
Patna. Viaishali, an 
important Buddhist tourist 
place is at a distance of 35 
kms from Patna. 
„ChathPuja‟ is  also a 
unique attraction along the 
ghats of Patna. 
4. Bhagalpur 
Circuit 
BateshwarSthan, 
VaasupujyaBhagwanMahavir  Jain 
Mandir, Mandar Hill, Sultanganj, 
Deoghar 
Mandir Hill is located about 
30 kms from Bhagalpur and 
well known for its 
mythological background. 
Sutlanganj is an important 
religious center for the 
Hindus, Situated on the bed 
of river Ganges at a 
60

 
distance of 26 km from 
Bhagalpur. It is also the 
staring point for the annual 
pilgrimage to Shiva Temple 
at Deoghar during „Sawan‟. 
5. Kolkata 
Circuit 
Ganga Sagar, Belur Math, 
Dakshineswar Temple, Pareshnath 
Jain Temple, Kalighat Temple, 
Nakhoda Mosque, St. Paul‟s 
Cathedral, St. Andrews Church, Old 
NizamatImambara, Katra Masjid. 
This circuit has important 
religious places related to 
all religions and all the 
palaces are within 20 kms 
from the river banks. 
 
B) National Waterways-2 (River Brahmaputra)  
S. 
No.  
Circuits 
Identified  
Major Religious Attractions/ Places  Details  
1. Guwahati 
Circuit 
Kamakhya Temple, Navagraha 
Temple, Bhuvaneswari Temple, 
Basistha Ashram Temple, Hayagriba -
Madhaba Temple, Umananda Temple 
These religious places 
are along the 
Brahmaputra river or 
within 20 kms by road. 
 
2. Tezpur 
Circuit 
Da Parbatia, Bamuni Hill, Agnigarh, 
BishwanathGhat (Shiva Dol), 
These religious places 
are along the 
Brahmaputra river or 
within 20 kms by road.  
3. Neamati 
Circuit 
Sivasagar, Majuli Island These religious places 
are along the 
Brahmaputra river. 
 
C) Indo-Bangladesh Protocol Corridor 
i) Mongla Port -  Swarupkathi Circuit 
ii) Swarupkathi -   Barisal Circuit 
iii) Barisal          -   Chandpur  Circuit 
iv) Chandpur      -  Narayanganj Circuit 
v) Narayanganj  -Sadarghat Circuit 
 
 
 
  
61

 
Annexure – F 
A write up on Tonnage Tax Scheme 
1. Tonnage tax is a presumptive method of taxation which gives a shipping company an 
option to have its profits derived from the operating of ships to be taxed on the net tonnage of 
the ships as against the actual variable business profits / losses. A shippin g company which 
has opted for tonnage tax has to fulfill the following statutory compliances as per provisions 
of Chapter XII -G (Special provisions relating to income of shipping companies) of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961.  
 
2. Two main requirements of Tonnage  Tax Scheme under  Income Tax Rules are i) to 
acquire new ships by utilizing minimum 20% of book profit for acquiring new ships and ii) to 
fulfill Minimum On Board Training Requirement.  
 
3. Minimum Training Requirement (MTR) for tonnage Tax Company: 
Section 115V of the Income Tax Act, 1961 deals with Minimum Training 
Requirement (MTR) to be fulfilled by a Tonnage Tax Shipping Company which highlights as 
under:  
i. A tonnage tax company shall comply with the minimum training requirement in 
respect of trainee officers in accordance with the guidelines framed by the Director -
General of Shipping and notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government. 
ii. As per present rulings 15% of Compliment as per Safe Manning Document of a 
qualifying ship shall be provid ed on Board Training on qualifying ships by a 
qualifying co. every year. 
iii. Qualifying ships are: 
a) Sea going ships or vessel with 15 net tonnage or more 
b) Ships registered under Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 or a ship registered 
outside India for which license has  been issued by the Director General of 
Shipping 
c) Following ships are not included in qualifying ships –  
Fishing vessels, factory ships, pleasure crafts, and harbor and river ferries, 
offshore installations 
62

 
iv. Qualifying Company requirements: 
 An Indian Company 
 The place of effective Management is in India 
 main objet of co. is to carry on the business of operating  ships 
 Company which own at least one qualifying ship 
 
 
 
63