98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS
 EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT ON THE ‘FUNCTIONING OF THE COMMISSION OF
 RAILWAY SAFETY’
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2006)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                              
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE              
5.MINUTES                                                                                                                                                   
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.
      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.
      Smt. Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  *Shri Janardan Dwivedi
 
LOK SABHA
11.
  Shri Ramdas  Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Sudam Marandi
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27.  Shri Manabendra Shah
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary         
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
                                                           
* Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006  vice Smt. Ambika Soni.
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-eighth Report of the
 Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its Eighty-third Report on the ‘Functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety’.
 
2.    The Eighty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the  6
th December 2004 and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 3 rd
 December 2004. 
 
3.    The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-third Report were
 received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 26
th May 2005 and 5th January 2006.
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at its meeting held on the 17th March 2006.
 
NEW DELHI ;
March 17, 2006
Phalguna 26, 1927 (Saka)
NILOTPAL BASU
 Chairman
 Department-relatedParliamentary Standing Committee
 on Transport, Tourism & Culture
 
R E P O R T
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
 observations/recommendations contained in its Eighty-third Report on the “Functioning of the Commission of Railway
 Safety”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 6 th December, 2004 and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 3rd
 December, 2004.
 
 2.         Action Taken Replies on some of the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were received
 from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 26
th May, 2005 and it was informed that the complete Action Taken Replies on


98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 the Report would be forwarded on the receipt of the views/comments of the Ministry of Railways on the issues related
 to them. Accordingly, the Action Taken Replies on the remaining observations/ recommendations were received from
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 5 th January, 2006. The Action Taken Replies received from the Government in
 respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, have been categorised as follows: -
 (i)         Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
              Para Nos.:  21, 27, 37, 60, 63, 67  and 72                                                  Total - 7
(ii)        Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government
 replies:
Para No.: 69                                                                                                 Total - 1
(iii)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
 Committee:
Para No.: 71                                                                                                 Total - 1
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 32 and 52                                                                                    Total - 2
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee  has made observations on each item of Action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Eighty-third
 Report, action taken thereon by the Government, and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
 action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
APPOINTMENT TO THE CADRE OF COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
(Recommendation at Para 21)
5.         The Committee is of the opinion that the mandate of Ministry of Civil Aviation is altogether different from the
 mandate of the Commission of Railway Safety. Therefore, the Ministry of Civil Aviation is not in a position to address
 the administrative problems of the Commission of Railway Safety adequately. In order to ensure the impartial working
 of the Commission of Railway Safety, it is essential that the Commission works outside the control of both the
 Ministries of Railways and Civil Aviation. In order to make the functioning of the Commission more effective, it is
 strongly felt that the Commission should be provided greater powers and independence. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that the Commission of Railway Safety should be made an autonomous statutory body like Election
 Commission and Union Public Service Commission. The Committee also agrees with the contention of the Ministry of
 Railways that officers below the rank of Commissioner of Railway Safety should also not be sent on deputation, rather
 they should go on absorption terms to the Commission. The Committee is of the firm view that this would make the
 Commission independent, powerful and vigilant to the fullest extent. This would definitely go a long way in dispelling
 the general impression that the Ministry of Railways unduly influences the Commission in its functioning as it is rightly
 said that justice should not only be done but it should also appear to have been done.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6.         The Commission of Railway Safety is presently placed under the administrative control of the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation. The rationale behind the separation of Railway Inspectorate (as was known earlier) was consequent to the
 recommendations of the Pacific Loco Committee 1939 that “Senior Government Inspectors of Railways should be
 placed under the administrative control of some authority other than the Railway Board”. Consequently, the
 Inspectorate was placed under the Department of Post and Air in May, 1941 and continuously thereafter under
 whichever Ministry that has held the portfolio of Civil Aviation. Thus, the Commission has always remained with the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation independent of Ministry of Railways, but for a brief period between 1985 and 1989 when the
 Department of Railways and Department of Civil Aviation were the part of Transport Ministry.
7.         The issue of placing the Commission of Railway Safety under the Ministry other than the Ministry of Railways,
 which is the safety controlling authority in respect of rail based transport operation, has been considered by the various
 high level committees including Appointments Committee of the Cabinet on different occasions and there has been
 unanimity on the views that the Commission should remain outside the control of Ministry of Railways for ensuring its
 independence.
8.         The present arrangement of the Commission of Railway Safety being placed under the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation has been working satisfactorily since May, 1967. Incidentally the ACC had decided in 1998 to maintain the
 status quo on the subject. Irrespective of the Ministry with which the Commission is attached with, the mandate of the

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 concerned Ministry will always be different than the Commission.
9.         As regards the recommendation of the Committee on making the Commission an autonomous statutory body
 like Election Commission and Union Public Service Commission, it is submitted that a proposal in this regard is
 already under consideration in the Ministry.
 10.      Regarding the Committee’s view to have officers below the rank of Commissioner of Railway Safety on
 absorption terms rather than on deputation, it is pertinent to mention that the present set up does not provide enough
 avenues of further advancement in the Commission because the scale of pay of Dy. Commissioners is much lower than
 that of the Commissioners, the next higher grade/post available in the Commission. It is, therefore, doubtful whether
 the Railway officers would be willing to join the Commission as Dy. Commissioners on absorption basis.
 
11.       Moreover, the statutory powers are vested in the Commissioner of Railway Safety who comes from the Railways
 on permanent transfer/absorption basis. The Dy. Commissioners have no statutory powers and they assist the
 Commissioners and Chief Commissioner in their field of technical expertise. As such there is no impediment in the
 independent functioning of the Commission even if the Dy. Commissioners are taken on deputation from the Railways.
 It does not in any way influence the Commission in its functioning.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12.       The recommendation of the Committee was aimed at making the Commission of Railway Safety function
 effectively with greater powers and independence and to enhance its confidence and credibility by dispelling the
 general impression that it is influenced by the Ministry of Railways. The Ministry has on the one hand claimed that the
 present arrangement of the Commission of Railway Safety being placed under the Ministry of Civil Aviation has been
 working satisfactorily since May, 1967 but on the other it has been stated that the present set up does not provide
 enough avenues to middle level officers for further advancement in the Commission, thereby railway officers would be
 unwilling to join the Commission on absorption basis. The Committee finds these submissions contradictory. The
 Committee, however, notes that a proposal on making the Commission an autonomous body like Election Commission
 / Union Public Service Commission is under consideration. The Committee recommends that the said proposal should
 be expedited within a fixed timeframe and it should also include the aspect of comprehensive cadre review so that the
 impartiality and independence of the Commission is ensured. 
       
EFFECTIVENESS OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
(Recommendation at Para 27)
13.       The Committee is of the view that although the recommendations of the Commission of Railway Safety are not
 mandatory for the Ministry of Railways yet the situation brought out by the Commission of Railway Safety is highly
 unsatisfactory. The Committee is of the view that the recommendations made by the Commission of Railway Safety
 should receive utmost importance from the Ministry of Railways. The Committee takes exception to the fact that, on
 certain occasions, the Ministry of Railways neither consults the Commission of Railway Safety before rejecting a
 recommendation nor furnishes reasons for not accepting the recommendations made by the Commission of Railway
 Safety. The Committee strongly feels that the Commission of Railway Safety is a watchdog on behalf of the public at
 large. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Railways, should honour the commitment made by
 them to the Appointment Committee of Cabinet regarding consulting the Commission before rejecting a
 recommendation. The Committee further recommends that it should be made mandatory for the Railway
 Administration not to reject or overrule any recommendations made by the Commissioners without a meeting between
 the Chairman, Railway Board and the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, where the matters can be discussed
 threadbare and agreements reached. The Committee further recommends that while expressing their inability to accept
 the recommendations, the Railway Board should give detailed reasons for not accepting the recommendations. The
 Committee also recommends that any decision taken by the Railway Board in consultation with the Commission of
 Railway Safety must not be revoked unilaterally by the Railway Board or Zonal Railway, without prior consultation
 and approval of the Commission.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
14.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation forwarded a copy of the recommendation made by the Committee to the Railway
 Board for their comments. The remarks of the Ministry of Railways and the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the remarks of the Ministry of Railways are given below: -
 
15.       Remarks of Ministry of Railways:  The recommendations made by the Commission are examined by the
 concerned Railways and in Railway Board from all angles thoroughly.  The recommendations are generally accepted

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 and instructions are issued to Zonal Railways accordingly.  If any recommendation is not found  feasible for
 acceptance, decision in this regard is taken at appropriate level and reasons thereof are communicated to the
 Commission of Railway Safety.  There is regular interaction between Railway Board and the Commission of Railway
 Safety regarding recommendations by the latter.  Making it mandatory for the Railway Board not to reject or overrule
 any recommendation runs counter to the basic principle of authority being commensurate with the responsibility.
 
16.       Views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the remarks of the Ministry of Railways: It is agreed that final
 decision to accept or reject a recommendation made by the Commission rests with the Ministry of Railways but
 discussion with Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety before rejecting his recommendation is a fair observation made
 by the Committee.  Similarly if a recommendation of the Commission has been accepted by the Ministry of Railways it
 should not be revoked/diluted subsequently without discussion with Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety.  Ministry
 of Civil Aviation is therefore in agreement with the recommendations made by the Committee.  The Ministry of
 Railways is being requested to adhere to the recommendations of the Standing Committee as also the earlier
 commitment made by the Ministry of Railways on this count.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17.       The Committee notes that the Ministry of Railways has stated that the recommendations made by the
 Commission of Railway Safety are generally accepted and if any recommendation is not found feasible for acceptance,
 reasons thereof are communicated to the Commission.  They have further stated that there is regular interaction
 between Railway Board and the Commission of Railway Safety regarding recommendations by the latter. In this
 connection, the Commission had earlier informed the Committee that the Ministry of Railways had made a
 commitment before the Appointments Committee of Cabinet in 1998 that in case the Railways had any reservation on
 any recommendation, the same is discussed with the Commission before a final decision is taken. It was also informed
 by the Commission that with the passage of time, the Ministry of Railways has changed their stand and no discussions
 are held with the Commission on any serious issue raised by it. The Committee therefore feels that the present
 comments of the Ministry of Railways are misleading when it states that there is regular interaction with the
 Commission on their recommendations. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendations that the Ministry of
 Railways shouldnot reject or overrule any recommendation made by the Commission without a meeting between the
 Chairman, Railway Board and the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety or without giving detailed reasons for not
 accepting the recommendations and that any decision taken by the Railway Board in consultation with the Commission
 of Railway Safety must not be revoked unilaterally by the Railway Board or Zonal Railway, without prior consultation
 and approval of the Commission. The Committee further recommends that the Commission of Railway Safety should
 submit half yearly reports to the Committee about the status of its recommendations indicating the discussions, if any,
 called by the Ministry of Railways on the issues of difference of opinion.         
(Recommendation at para 32)
18.       The Committee observes that a large number of new passenger trains are introduced every year to meet the
 demand of the traveling public. While it does fulfill the requirements of the public, it has to be examined as to whether
 such an action is in the interest of safety and convenience of the traveling public. The present system in the country is
 already overstressed and it is important to ensure that all infrastructure facilities cater to the safe running of additional
 trains with due safety margins. It is essential that such facilities are in position before adding any burden of additional
 trains. The introduction of additional trains involves the safety of the passengers. The Committee is not convinced with
 the reply furnished by the Ministry of Railways with regard to not seeking the concurrence of Commission of Railway
 Safety before introduction of a new passenger train. The Committee gives due weightage to the reply of the Ministry of
 Railways that before any new train is introduced, certification of available maintenance infrastructure at either end is
 given by two SAG (Joint Secretaries) Officers, in-charge of operation and maintenance, after consulting all concerned
 agencies. Ministry of Railway have also pointed out that concurrence of every new train does not fall under the legal
 duties of Commission of Railway Safety, as enumerated in the Railway Act, 1989. The main task of the Commission is
 to direct, advise and caution the railway executives through its regulation/inspectional/audit and investigatory/advisory
 functions and thereby assist them in ensuring that all stipulated measures are taken in regard to the soundness of rail
 construction and safety in train operation. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the sanction of Commission of
 Railway Safety must be necessary for Ministry of Railways before introducing any new passenger train. The
 Committee therefore, recommends that it should be made mandatory for Ministry of Railways to seek the concurrence
 of Commission of Railway Safety before introduction of any new passenger train, so as to ensure that the safety of the
 passengers is not compromised by amending the existing statutory provisions in this regard.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
19.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation forwarded a copy of the recommendation made by the Committee to the Railway
 Board for their comments. The remarks of the Ministry of Railways and the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the remarks of the Ministry of Railways are given below: -
20.       Remarks of Ministry of Railways: Introduction of new trains etc. is one of the executive functions of Ministry of
 Railways, which forms the routine business of rail transportation.  The Commission of Railway Safety has neither the
 wherewithal nor expertise to certify the various aspects to assess the adequacy of infrastructure and manpower etc.  It
 would not be desirable to burden the Commission with the newer an newer functions and it may perhaps be advisable
 for the Commission to devote its energies to discharge its duties envisaged in the Railways Act, 1989. 
21.       Views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the remarks of the Ministry of Railways:  Ministry of Railways’
 views have been noted.  However, it would be desirable that over loading of already saturated routes may be avoided
 since it may compromise the safety of passengers & Railway assets.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22.       The Committee notes the reply of Ministry of Railways and appreciates the fact that introduction of new trains
 etc. is one of the executive functions of Ministry of Railways. However, it appears that the recommendation of the
 Committee has not been understood properly. The Committee has no intention to authorise the Commission of Railway
 Safety to decide about the introduction of new passenger trains. The Committee has desired that before starting the
 actual operation of any passenger train, the safety aspects should be got approved from the Commission of Railway
 Safety. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations that the existing statutory provisions should be
 amended to make it mandatory for the Ministry of Railways to seek the concurrence of Commission of Railway Safety
 before the introduction of any new passenger train. 
 
REVISION OF ‘RULES FOR OPENING, 1933’
(Recommendation at Para 37)
23.       The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Railways has, on the insistence of Commission of Railway
 Safety, decided to make necessary amendments in the present ‘Rules of 2000’ to include the ‘one month notice’ to the
 Commissioner of Railway Safety before any line is intended to be opened. The Committee recommends that the
 necessary amendment should be carried out at the earliest. The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Railways
 have decided to modify the extant rules so that an officer of the level of Senior Administrative Grade should
 accompany the Commissioner of Railway Safety only in case the General Manager or the Principal Head of the
 Department are not able to accompany him due to unavoidable circumstances. However, the Committee would like to
 advise that an officer of the level of Senior Administrative Grade accompanying the Commissioner of Railway Safety
 on his inspection should remain an exception, as envisaged under the said provisions, than becoming the rule.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
24.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation forwarded a copy of the recommendation made by the Committee to the Railway
 Board for their comments. The remarks of the Ministry of Railways and the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the remarks of the Ministry of Railways are given below: -
25.Remarks of Ministry of Railways: Necessary amendment has been carried out to the Railways (Opening for public
 carriage of passengers) Rules, 2000 to incorporate all the revisions as suggested by the Commission of Railway Safety.
26.Views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the remarks of the Ministry of Railways:  Since the recommendation has
 been accepted and implemented, no comments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27.       The Committee notes the reply.
PUBLICATION OF REPORTS ON RAILWAY ACCIDENTS
(Recommendation at Para 52)
28.       The Committee is constrained to note that the inquiry reports of the Commission of Railway Safety on accidents
 are either not published or published too late and the people at large do not come to know of the reasons for
 concurrence of a particular accident. The Committee is of the view that the public needs to know the reasons for the
 Railway Accidents and it will serve the larger interest of the public if the accident reports are published at the earliest.
 The Committee also notes the impediments faced by the Commission of Railway Safety in undertaking the enquiries.
 The Committee feels that it is essential to provide legal protection to Commission of Railway Safety. The Committee is
 in agreement with the recommendations made by Railway Safety Review Committee 1998, quoted at para 43 above.
 The Committee recommends that these recommendations should be accepted and the relevant acts and rules should be
 amended at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that when the Commission of Railway Safety proposes to
 take up an inquiry, inquiries initiated by police or magistrate should be stopped and the civil and police authorities

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 should co-operate in the Commission’s inquiry. The Committee feels that the implementations of the steps suggested
 by the Committee will enable the Commissioners of Railway Safety in undertaking their inquiries without any
 hindrances. Thereby, the inquiry reports of the Commissioners on accidents could also be published as soon as the
 inquiry is over and the public at large would not be deprived of their vital right to information.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
29.       The recommendation made by the RSRC-98 about publication of Accident Inquiry Report and provision of legal
 immunity to the Commissioner of Railway Safety have been accepted. The Ministry has decided that the Report of the
 Commissioner can be made public once necessary provisions have been inserted in the Indian Railway Act 1989 to
 provide legal immunity. Amendment of the Act would need to be done by the Ministry of Railways.
30.       Meanwhile the Ministry has taken following decisions on the publication of Accident Inquiry Reports of the
 Commissioner of Railway Safety as an interim measure to restore public faith in the organization and to bring
 transparency in the system -
Ø
      To make all preliminary Reports of the Railway accidents inquired by the Commissioners public.
Ø      The inquiry reports of the accidents in which Railway Board’s comments have been received are being compiled
 in abstract form and published in six monthly periodicals starting from 1st January, 2004.
31.       The Committee’s observation about stopping the inquiry initiated by police and magistrate when the CRS
 decides to take up an inquiry will require necessary amendment in Railways Act, Indian Penal Code and other
 associated Acts/Codes/Rules. This will be examined further on receipt of comments of Railway Board.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32.       The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should pursue the matter
 regarding the incorporation of suitable amendments in the Indian Railway Act, 1989 with Ministry of Railways to
 facilitate smooth and expeditious progress of inquiry proceedings and the immediate publication of inquiry reports of
 the Commission of Railway Safety on railway accidents. 
 
UPGRADATION OF STATUS OF OFFICERS OF COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
(Recommendation at Para 60)
 
33.       The Committee is constrained to note that vacancies continue to exist in the Commission of Railway Safety for
 fairly long periods because of non-availability of eligible officers from the Ministry of Railways. The Committee
 recommends that any vacancy arising in the Commission of Railway Safety should be filled up at the earliest so that the
 functioning of the Commission does not suffer. The Committee is also constrained to note that the recommendations
 made by Railway Safety Review Committee 1998 are yet to be implemented by the Government. The Chief
 Commissioner of Railway Safety, being the Principal Technical Advisor to the Government of India on matters
 concerning rail safety, is the highest technical official in the Ministry of Civil Aviation for dealing with railway safety.
 The Committee is of the view that upgradation of the post of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety to the level of
 Secretary to the Government of India is absolutely essential so that he can effectively and forcefully interact with the
 nine Secretary level officers of Railway Board. Lack of such a status to the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
 works as a serious deterrent to him in discharging his duties effectively in a hierarchy conscious bureaucracy. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the status of Chief commissioner of Railway Safety should be equal to that of
 the Chairman of Railway Board in rank and pay. Likewise the status of Commissioner of Railway Safety should be
 equal to that of General Manager of a Zonal Railway in rank as well as pay. The posts of Deputy Commissioners of
 Railway Safety should be manned by Senior Administration Grade Officers. The Commissioners of Railway Safety
 should also be provided with the assistance of Deputy Commissioners. The Committee further recommends that, as
 recommended by the Fifth Central Pay Commission, the tenure of the Chief Commissioner should be five years, taking
 him beyond normal retirement age and upto 62 years. The Committee is of the firm view that these measures would
 bring to an end the current scenario of shortage of volunteers opting to join the Commission of Railway Safety. Also
 these measures will significantly enhance the status of the Commission, make it more dynamic and enable it to
 discharge its functions more effectively and its views heard and acted upon, with due importance by Railway
 Administration.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
34.       The proposals to upgrade the scale of pay of CCRS and CRS to that of Secretary to the Government of India &
 GM of Railways as also to provide a Dy. CRS with each CRS are under examination in the Ministry.

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
35.       Separately the Ministry is also examining a proposal to bring new Railway Safety Act with provision for a 3
 member Commission for Railway Safety on the lines of Election Commission of India. The concerns of the Committee
 would be taken care of to a large extent once the proposal in finalized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
36.       The Committee notes the reply and hopes that its observations/recommendations would be given due
 consideration before finalizing the proposals under examination in the Ministry so that the Commission of Railway
 Safety is accorded the desirable status and made a dynamic organization that commands the respect of the railway
 authorities and the public.
EXPOSURE TO TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS
(Recommendation at Para 63)
37.       The Committee feels that there is a genuine need of the officers of Commission of Railway Safety to get exposed
 to the latest technological advancements taking place in the railway sector in India and abroad. Otherwise there is a real
 danger that the technical knowledge of the officers of the Commission will get obsolete. The Committee recommends
 that the officers of the Commission should be exposed to latest technologies through trainings in the country and
 abroad, so that they are in a position to perform their role effectively. The officers of the Commission should also be
 given full facilities to become members of professional institutions, at par with the facilities extended by the Railway
 Administration to Railway Officers. This will help in keeping the officers of the Commission updated in their technical
 knowledge. However, for this purpose, the Commission should not depend upon the financial assistance of the Ministry
 of Railways. The Committee recommends that the Government should ensure that the budget of the Commission of
 Railway Safety should be suitably increased so that these requirements could be taken care of by the Commission itself.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
38.       A proposal to give facilities to the officers of the Commission to become members of professional institutions at
 par with the facilities extended by the Railway administration to Railway officers, is being examined. However the
 Ministry of Railways is being requested that CRS/Dy.CRS be given the exposure to latest technologies being developed
 in India & abroad. Commission of Railway Safety may also take initiative in this regard.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
39.       The Committee notes the assurance given by the Ministry and recommends that the Commission of Railway
 Safety may be directed to identify suitable training courses for its officers and send the proposal to the Ministry.
 
SUPPLY OF RAILWAY CIRCULARS ETC. TO COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
(Recommendation at Para 67)
40.       The Committee is of the view that unless the Commission of Railway Safety is kept aware of the latest
 instructions with respect to railway safety issued by the Railway Board or Zonal Railways, it cannot discharge its duties
 effectively. Ministry of Railways have admitted that copies of all important policy orders are endorsed to the Chief
 Commissioner of Railway Safety. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railways should ensure that
 Commission of Railway Safety is on the permanent mailing list of Railway Board and Zonal Railways for all policy
 Circulars having bearing on safety and all Circulars/Orders affecting safety. The Committee further recommends that
 the Commission of Railway Safety should be supplied with the proceeding of the Technical Committees of Railway
 Board so that the Commission remains informed of the safety problems encountered in the working of the railways and
 the measures taken to solve these problems.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
41.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation forwarded a copy of the recommendation made by the Committee to the Railway
 Board for their comments. The remarks of the Ministry of Railways and the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the remarks of the Ministry of Railways are given below: -
42.       Remarks of Ministry of Railways: All policy Circulars, instructions, regulations etc. issued from Railway Board
 pertaining to Railway Safety are endorsed to the Commission of Railway Safety.
43.       Views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the remarks of the Ministry of Railways:  The proceedings of all the
 technical Committee of Railway Board having bearing on safety are not being sent.  Such proceeding, if made
 available, will give insight to the Commission, the basis of making a decision.  Railway Board will be pursued in the
 matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
44.       The Committee notes the replies of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation and reiterates its
 recommendation that the Commission of Railway Safety should be supplied with the proceeding of the Technical
 Committees of Railway Board so that the Commission remains informed of the safety problems encountered in the
 working of the railways and the measures taken to solve these problems.
LACK OF OFFICE INFRASTRUCTURE
(Recommendation at Para 69)
45.       The Committee notes with concern the constraints faced by the officers of the Commission of Railway Safety in
 performing their duties due to lack of budgetary allocations and proper infrastructure and office machinery. The
 Committee feels that the Commission of Railway Safety need adequate budgetary support from the Government so that
 it does not have to look upon the Ministry of Railways for being able to effectively discharge its duties. The Committee
 recommends that the budget allocation of Commission of Railway Safety should be substantially increased so that the
 Commission could take care of its essential requirements such as funds for foreign training, air travel within India,
 nominations to various training courses, membership to professional institution etc.        
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
46.       Any request for enhancement of the budget of Commission of Railway Safety would be forwarded to the
 Ministry of Finance for favorable consideration by them.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
47.       The Committee is unhappy about the indifferent attitude of the Ministry, as can be made out from the reply. It
 shows that the Ministry is unaware of the lack of budgetary allocations and proper infrastructure and office machinery
 required for the functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
 should take initiative for identifying and processing the financial requirements of the Commission and pursue it with
 the Ministry of Finance.   
ANNOUNCEMENT OF PRIMA-FACIE CAUSE OF ACCIDENTS BY RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION
(Recommendation at Para 71)
 
48.       The Committee is of the opinion that the unwritten convention that no one would give the cause of an accident,
 when an enquiry is pending, needs to be followed by the Railway Administration. The Committee recommends that the
 Railway administration should refrain from speculating and giving the prima-facie cause of an accident, which is
 required to be statutorily enquired by the Commissioner of Railway Safety. This will ensure that the credibility of the
 Commission of Railway Safety is maintained and the Commissioners are not suspected of prejudice or bias in
 conducting their enquiries.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
49.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation forwarded a copy of the recommendation made by the Committee to the Railway
 Board for their comments. The remarks of the Ministry of Railways and the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the remarks of the Ministry of Railways are given below: -
 
50.       Remarks of Ministry of Railways:  In view of large scale public and media attention to the serious train accidents
 it is practically impossible not to announce prima facie cause based on the factual position.  This is however, is not
 speculative and it based on the preliminary facts and investigations carried out b the railway officers.  Announcement
 of prima facie cause has been in vogue from the time immemorial and does not interfere in the statutory inquiry in any
 way, which is later conducted by the Commission of Railway Safety.
 
51.       Views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the remarks of the Ministry of Railways:  The Ministry of Railways
 views have been noted.  However, it would be prudent to avoid making announcements regarding prima-facie cause of
 accidents.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
52.       The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Railways and is of the opinion that a practice cannot
 earn legitimacy for the reason of it being inexistence for a long time.  The Railway authorities, if required, may clarify

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 the statutory requirements to the public/media instead of announcing the prima facie cause of accidents.  The
 Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Railway administration should refrain from speculating
 and giving the prima-facie cause of an accident, which is required to be statutorily enquired by the Commissioner of
 Railway Safety.
 
CONCLUSION
(Recommendation at Para 72)
 
53.       The Committee is of the opinion that the Commission of Railway Safety is an important organization of the
 Government and, in the prevailing circumstances, the Commission’s hands need strengthening in all possible ways. The
 Committee recommends that the Government should bring a comprehensive legislation incorporating the suggestion
 made by the Committee in this Report so that the functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety could improve in
 the interest of the public travelling by Indian Railways.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
54.       As mentioned earlier a proposal to draft a comprehensive Railway Safety Act to make the commission
 autonomous is already under examination.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
55.       The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should bring a comprehensive legislation to
 improve the functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety in public interest and further recommends that the
 proposed Railway Safety Act should be finalized in a time bound manner.
OBSERVATIONS / CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
APPOINTMENT TO THE CADRE OF COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
 
            The recommendation of the Committee was aimed at making the Commission of Railway Safety function
 effectively with greater powers and independence and to enhance its confidence and credibility by dispelling the
 general impression that it is influenced by the Ministry of Railways. The Ministry has on the one hand claimed that the
 present arrangement of the Commission of Railway Safety being placed under the Ministry of Civil Aviation has been
 working satisfactorily since May, 1967 but on the other it has been stated that the present set up does not provide
 enough avenues to middle level officers for further advancement in the Commission, thereby railway officers would be
 unwilling to join the Commission on absorption basis. The Committee finds these submissions contradictory. The
 Committee, however, notes that a proposal on making the Commission an autonomous body like Election Commission
 / Union Public Service Commission is under consideration. The Committee recommends that the said proposal should
 be expedited within a fixed timeframe and it should also include the aspect of comprehensive cadre review so that the
 impartiality and independence of the Commission is ensured.  (Para 12)
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
            The Committee notes that the Ministry of Railways has stated that the recommendations made by the
 Commission of Railway Safety are generally accepted and if any recommendation is not found feasible for acceptance,
 reasons thereof are communicated to the Commission.  They have further stated that there is regular interaction
 between Railway Board and the Commission of Railway Safety regarding recommendations by the latter. In this
 connection, the Commission had earlier informed the Committee that the Ministry of Railways had made a
 commitment before the Appointments Committee of Cabinet in 1998 that in case the Railways had any reservation on
 any recommendation, the same is discussed with the Commission before a final decision is taken. It was also informed
 by the Commission that with the passage of time, the Ministry of Railways has changed their stand and no discussions
 are held with the Commission on any serious issue raised by it. The Committee therefore feels that the present
 comments of the Ministry of Railways are misleading when it states that there is regular interaction with the
 Commission on their recommendations. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendations that the Ministry of
 Railways shouldnot reject or overrule any recommendation made by the Commission without a meeting between the
 Chairman, Railway Board and the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety or without giving detailed reasons for not
 accepting the recommendations and that any decision taken by the Railway Board in consultation with the
 Commissionof Railway Safety must not be revoked unilaterally by the Railway Board or Zonal Railway, without prior
 consultation and approval of the Commission. The Committee further recommends that the Commission of Railway

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 Safety should submit half yearly reports to the Committee about the status of its recommendations indicating the
 discussions, if any, called by the Ministry of Railways on the issues of difference of opinion.       
(Para 17)
            The Committee notes the reply of Ministry of Railways and appreciates the fact that introduction of new trains
 etc. is one of the executive functions of Ministry of Railways. However, it appears that the recommendation of the
 Committee has not been understood properly. The Committee has no intention to authorise the Commission of Railway
 Safety to decide about the introduction of new passenger trains. The Committee has desired that before starting the
 actual operation of any passenger train, the safety aspects should be got approved from the Commission of Railway
 Safety. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations that the existing statutory provisions should be
 amended to make it mandatory for the Ministry of Railways to seek the concurrence of Commission of Railway Safety
 before the introduction of any new passenger train.
 (Para 22)
REVISION OF ‘RULES FOR OPENING, 1933’
 
            The Committee notes the reply.(Para 27)
PUBLICATION OF REPORTS ON RAILWAY ACCIDENTS
        The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should pursue the matter
 regarding the incorporation of suitable amendments in the Indian Railway Act, 1989 with Ministry of Railways to
 facilitate smooth and expeditious progress of inquiry proceedings and the immediate publication of inquiry reports of
 the Commission of Railway Safety on railway accidents.  (Para 32)
 
UPGRADATION OF STATUS OF OFFICERS OF COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
        The Committee notes the reply and hopes that its observations/ recommendations would be given due
 consideration before finalizing the proposals under examination in the Ministry so that the Commission of Railway
 Safety is accorded the desirable status and made a dynamic organization that commands the respect of the railway
 authorities and the public.(Para 36)
EXPOSURE TO TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS
            The Committee notes the assurance given by the Ministry and recommends that the Commission of Railway
 Safety may be directed to identify suitable training courses for its officers and send the proposal to the Ministry. (Para
 39)
SUPPLY OF RAILWAY CIRCULARS ETC. TO COMMISSION OF RAILWAY SAFETY
        The Committee notes the replies of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation and reiterates its
 recommendation that the Commission of Railway Safety should be supplied with the proceeding of the Technical
 Committees of Railway Board so that the Commission remains informed of the safety problems encountered in the
 working of the railways and the measures taken to solve these problems.(Para 44)
 
LACK OF OFFICE INFRASTRUCTURE
            The Committee is unhappy about the indifferent attitude of the Ministry, as can be made out from the reply. It
 shows that the Ministry is unaware of the lack of budgetary allocations and proper infrastructure and office machinery
 required for the functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
 should take initiative for identifying and processing the financial requirements of the Commission and pursue it with
 the Ministry of Finance. (Para 47)
 
ANNOUNCEMENT OF PRIMA-FACIE CAUSE OF ACCIDENTS BY RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION
            The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Railways and is of the opinion that a practice cannot
 earn legitimacy for the reason of it being inexistence for a long time.  The Railway authorities, if required, may clarify
 the statutory requirements to the public/media instead of announcing the prima facie cause of accidents.  The
 Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Railway administration should refrain from speculating
 and giving the prima-facie cause of an accident, which is required to be statutorily enquired by the Commissioner of
 Railway Safety.(Para 52)
CONCLUSION
 
        The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government should bring a comprehensive legislation to

98thReport of Committeeon Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/98threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 improve the functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety in public interest and further recommends that the
 proposed Railway Safety Act should be finalized in a time bound manner.(Para 55)
M I N U T E S
XV
 FIFTEENTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 17 th March 2006 in Committee Room 'A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Raj Babbar
7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
8. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
9. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered the Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-third Report on ‘Functioning of the
 Commission of Railway Safety’ and after some discussion the Committee adopted the said Report with minor
 modifications.   
3.         *                                  *                                  *
4.         The Committee also authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of all the four reports to
 the Parliament on 21st March, 2006.
5.         *                                  *                                  *
6.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 10.30 a.m.
* Relates to other matters
