91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
NINETY-FIRST REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  25.11.2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON   25.11.2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                          
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                          
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                               
5.MINUTES
COMPOSTION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2004-2005)
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri S.S. Chandran
Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shrimati Hema Malini
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shrimati Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Raj Babbar
Shri Anil Basu
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri Dip Gogoi
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Sudam Marandi
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Sartaj Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
Shri Umakant Yadav
 
(2005-2006)
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
Smt. Hema Malini
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Smt. Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas  Athawale
Shri Raj Babbar
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
Shri Adhir Chowdhury
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Shri Dip Gogoi
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Sudam Marandi
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Chengara Surendran
Shri Umakant Yadav
 SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-first report on
 “Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India”.
2.         The Committee considered the subject and held extensive discussions with the representatives of Ministry of
 Culture and the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers
 of the Ministry of Culture and D.G. ASI on 19
th November 2003, 29th November 2004, 27th December 2004 and 20th
 June, 2005.
3.In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee also heard the views of S/Shri S.S.Biswas and Jagat Pati
 Joshi, former D.G. National Museum and former D.G. ASI on 17th September 2004 and 1st October 2004 respectively
 on the subject.
4.         The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture, and Archaeological Survey of
 India for placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for
 clarifying the points raised by the Members.  The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of S/Shri S.S.Biswas
 and Jagat Pati Joshi, who submitted their valuable suggestions in connection with the subject.
5.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 19
th September,  2005.
 
NEW DELHI ;
 September 19, 2005
 Bhadrapada 28, 1927 (Saka)
NILOTPAL BASU
Chairman
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  Committee
 on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
Report
            India is one of the oldest civilizations in the world and its historical heritage and cultural glory has been the
 subject of interest of the entire humanity.  In a country like India, endowed with both tangible and intangible heritage of
 an immense cultural and artistic value, which also has a multi-religious cultural fabric, archaeology assumes a position
 of crucial importance.
2.         Keeping in view the importance of archaeology, the Archaeological Survey of India was established in the year
 1861 with the primary object of surveying and recording the archaeological monuments in India.  It has a long colonial
 history and its mandate has evolved at a very slow pace spread over centuries.  For the first time in the year 1880, an
 organized attempt was made to preserve the monuments from decay by appointing Mr. H.H. Cole as a curator of
 monuments, which also coincided, with the recognition of the fact that the preservation of the monument was the
 permanent responsibility of the State.  In 1899, the Archaeological Survey of India was administratively divided into
 five circles for the preservation, conservation, archaeological exploration and excavation on a permanent basis and with
 well defined polices.  With the advent of Lord Curzon as Viceroy, the Archaeological Survey of India was placed on a
 formal footing during the first decade of the 20
th century.  He appointed Mr. John Marshal as the Director General of
 Archaeological Survey of India, who undertook great excavation at Taxila, Sanchi, Sarnath etc. The concept of
 archaeological conservation of ancient monuments was added during the time of John Marshall.  Hundreds of
 monuments/sites were declared as protected monuments under the purview of the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act
 1904.  In 1944, Dr. R.E.M. Wheeler was appointed Director General of Archaeological Survey of India.  During his
 tenure he incorporated modern methods for carrying archaeological excavations and trained the staff of the Survey in
 excavations at Taxila, Arikamedu and Harappa.  Having indepth understanding and involvement he revolutionized the
 concept of archaeological excavation by introducing importance of stratigraphy.  Wheeler also started Horticulture
 Branch in Archaeological Survey of India to develop suitable gardens to create pollution free ambiance around
 monuments.  Thus, prior to independence a sound foundation was laid for the Archaeological Survey of India. 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS IN THE POST INDEPENDENCE PERIOD:
3.         With the promulgation of the Constitution of India from 26
th January 1950, ‘archaeology’ has been made a
 Concurrent subject under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, which reads :
List I (Union List), item 67: ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological sites and remains
 declared by or under law by Parliament to be of national importance.
List II (State List), item 12: libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the State; ancient
 and historical monuments and records other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national
 importance.
List III (Concurrent List), item 40: archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made by

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 Parliament to be of national importance.
4.         In fulfillment of the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament passed the “Ancient and Historical Monuments
 and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act” in 1951 by which all the monuments previously protected under the
 Ancient Monuments Preservation Act 1904 were re-declared to be of national importance.  In 1953, after the merger of
 the princely states with the rest of India, the Archaeological Survey of India took the additional responsibility of upkeep
 of the monuments in princely states.
5.         Currently, the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 and the
 Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 and Rules, 1973 are operational and empowers the Archaeological Survey of
 India in its functioning.  
PRESENT MANDATE OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
6.         The Archaeological Survey of India is the premier organization so far as the archaeological research, study,
 excavation of archaeological sites, conservation/preservation of centrally protected monuments, maintenance of site
 museums and overall regulation of antiquities and art objects are concerned. As an apex body in the field of
 archaeology, the functions of Archaeological Survey of India are very broad and varied which may be classified as
 under :-
Conservation and preservation of monuments/sites and remains;
Archaeological explorations and excavations;
Preservation of monuments and antiquarian remains;
Architectural survey of monuments;
Epigraphical and numismatic studies;
Setting up of the Site Museums;
Training in archaeology;
Archaeologial publications;
Archaeological expeditions abroad;
Implementation of Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972; and
Horticulture operation around ancient monuments and sites.
7.         Since the functions of Archaeological Survey of India are very broad and varied and India is endowed with
 tremendous historical and cultural heritage, the Committee decided to study the functioning of Archaeological Survey
 of India.  In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee decided to elicit the views of some independent
 experts in the field of archaeology.  Accordingly, the Committee heard the views of Shri S.S. Biswas, former Director
 General, National Museum and Shri Jagatpati Joshi, former Director General, Archaeological Survey of India on the
 17
th September and 1st October 2004 respectively.   On the basis of the information provided by these two independent
 experts and other documents provided to the Committee by the Ministry of Culture, the Committee took the oral
 evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and the representatives of Archaeological Survey of India on the 29
th
 November and 27th December 2004 and the 20th June 2005 to get an indepth insight into the functioning of
 Archaeological Survey of India.
MONUMMENTS/SITES UNDER PROTECTION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
8.         Archaeological Survey of India protects and maintains 3663 monuments/sites in total and also declared those
 monuments as of national importance.  All the monuments/sites protected by the Archaeological Survey of India are
 being conserved/preserved on need based requirement.  As regards classification of monuments into different
 categories, the ASI has drawn long term programme to protect all 3663 monuments/sites which are of historical,
 architectural and aesthetic value.  Classification of monuments is an ongoing process and depends upon the
 requirements and feasibility of management, protection of monuments/sites.  In view of the nature of importance,
 urgency for structural conservation, preservation and chemical preservation including environmental development and
 providing essential tourist facilities in all these monuments, the ASI has categorised the monuments as under: -
Category of Monuments
                             No. of Monuments
1. Group A                                                       18 (which are inscribed
on the World Heritage List of UNESCO and are ticketed)
2. Group B                                                      108  (These are other
ticketed monuments/sites)    
3. Group C                   3537 (Unticketed
monuments/sites)
However, the Ministry made it clear that the above categorization is not a formal one, but for the convenience sake the

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 monuments have been categorized. 
9.         The Committee notes that the ASI has drawn long-term programme to protect all 3663 monuments/sites of
 national importance out of which 3537 monuments/sites are unticketed.  These monuments have also been classified
 into three categories viz. Group A, B and C for convenience.    The Committee is however aware that there are many
 sites/monuments under the protection/maintenance of Archaeological Survey of India which are located in interior
 areas of various States but are lying unattended. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry of Culture should
 equally treat the revenue earning and not-earning sites and efforts should be made for integrated infrastructure
 development and conservation/preservation of all monuments/sites with encompassing facilities for tourists, so as to
 give a major fillip to cultural tourism in the country as well as attracting overseas visitors.                   
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP AND THE POST OF DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 SURVEY OF INDIA
10.       At present the Archaeological Survey of India is functioning as an attached office under the Ministry of Culture,
 which is headed by the Union Minister for Culture.  The Ministry of Culture has a Secretary level officer, who looks
 after various attached and subordinate office in the Ministry.  Being an attached office, the Archaeological Survey of
 India has its own head designated as Director General.  The Director General, in turn, is assisted by an Additional
 Director General, a Joint Director General and a group of Directors.  At present there are 10 Directors assisting the
 Director General in performing duties.  For administrative convenience and research purposes, the Archaeological
 Survey of India  is divided into 21 Circles headed by a Superintending Archaeologist, who is further assisted by Deputy
 Superintending Archaeologist., Deputy S.A.E., A.S.A., A.S.A.E., Ass & C.As.  There are 6 Excavation Branches, on
 Prehistory Branch, one Building Survey Project, two Temple Survey Projects, two Epigraphy Branches and one
 Science Branch functioning in the Archaeological Survey of India on different field and research project.
11.       The Archaeological Survey of India is headed by a Director General.  Some of the important functions and
 responsibilities of the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India are as under:
To function as the head of the Archaeological Survey of India which is primarily engaged on (a) basic research in
 various disciplines of archaeology, including (i)archaeological excavations and explorations (ii) protection of
 monuments/sites of national importance, their proper maintenance and upkeep and carrying of archaeological
 conservation as well as chemical preservation of these monuments/sites; prevention of vandalism/encroachment at
 these monuments/sites, setting up and maintenance of site, museums, environmental development of monuments/sites;
 (iii) bringing out of archaeological publications (iv) epigraphical research (v) operation of antiquarian law viz. Ancient
 Monuments and Archaeological sites and Remains Act-1958 and Rules 1959; as well as Antiquities & Art Treasures
 Act, 1972 and Rules 1976; (vi) bringing out of archaeological publications (vii) maintenance and upkeep of
 archaeological libraries.
Laying down of archaeological policy in the country, and to issue licences for conducting archaeological excavations by
 various states/research Institution and generally guide archaeological activities in the country.
12.       The Committee noted that the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India was being filled up by
 the Government from Indian Administrative Service (IAS) for a fairly long period.  During its interaction with one
 independent expert on the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India, the Committee was informed that the
 Government had issued a notification in May 2002, according to which  the Director General, Archaeological Survey of
 India should have a Master’s Degree in Indian History/Archaeology/allied subjects and should have eighteen years of
 administrative experience with, at least, five years in the field of archaeology. The Committee noted that the
 notification had not been implemented, and since the last 12 years, the Director General deputed to the Archaeological
 Survey of India had no basic qualification or knowledge in archaeology.
13.       The same independent expert while submitting his views before the Committee on the functioning of
 Archaeological Survey of India also emphasized that the practice of filling up the post of Director General,
 Archaeological Survey of India from Indian Administrative Service on deputation basis had adversely affected the
 functioning of Archaeological Survey of India and stated as under:
“This is relating to the appointment of all the scientific officers, specially the head of the department i.e. the Director
 General who has been coming on deputation basis from the Ministry.  This aspect is very much related to the
 functioning of the ASI.  If the bureaucrats who have little knowledge of it, are manning the scientific department or
 even the academic department, I need not tell you about the results.  If you look at the recruitment rules, you will notice
 this anomaly.  I will give you an example.  Why I am saying this is that these are very important because unless the
 appropriate leader is there, no function can be carried out properly.”
14.       In the backdrop of above information, the Committee enquired from the Ministry of Culture whether there was
 any anomaly in recruitment rules of Archaeological Survey of India with regard to the appointment of Director General

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 and whether the guidelines laid down in the official gazette, notified in May, 2002, had been followed in recruitment of
 Director General of Archaeological Survey of India. In reply, the Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the
 Recruitment Rules for appointment of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India were notified by the Ministry
 of Culture in May 2002.  The appointment to the post of Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India is
 made directly by the Government of India.  Since the year 1993, no eligible technical officer in the feeder cadre of the
 organization was available for promotion to the post of Director General.
15.       The Committee further enquired from the Ministry of Culture regarding the rationale to fill the post of Director
 General and other scientists, professionals and experts posts in Archaeological Survey of India with bureaucrats from
 outside and whether the recruitment of bureaucrats would not hamper developing Archaeological Survey of India as a
 spearhead of scientific discipline in the country.  In response, the Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that
 the Archaeological Survey of India is a multidisciplinary agency consisting of archaeologists, scientists, historians,
 engineers and architects. Therefore, appointment of a generalist administrator as DG, Archaeological Survey of India
 will not hamper the development of Archaeological Survey of India as a scientific organisation.  It was also mentioned
 that there is no objective assessment which has established that appointment of officers from outside the Archaeological
 Survey of India has hampered the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India in any way.
16.       The Committee is not in agreement with the argument put- forth by the Ministry of Culture that the appointment
 of generalist administrator as Director General will not hamper the development of Archaeological Survey of India as a
 scientific organisation.  TheCommittee is shocked to note that even after the Gazette Notification of May 2002, the
 Government has not been able to fill up the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India as per the
 requirements of the notification and has been merely filling up the post from Indian Administrative Service on
 deputation basis.  The Committee is constrained to observe that the Government preferred to fill up the highest post of
 an apex institution requiring very high standards of technical qualification with a generalist administrator.  The
 Committee is of the view that a person who has no basic qualification or knowledge of archaeology cannot handle the
 apex responsibility of a Scientific Institution like Archaeological Survey of India.  Unless the leader of the
 Archaeological Survey of India is having the professional expertise, it is very difficult to give a lead.  This has also
 dampened the spirits of the senior officers in the feeder grade of the organization who may never get the opportunities
 to serve as senior most officer of their parent organization.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that steps should be
 taken to fill up the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India as per the requirements of the Notification
 of May 2002, at the earliest.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA AS A SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DEPARTMENT
17.       During its interaction with another independent expert on the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India, it
 was brought to the notice of the Committee that the Archaeological Survey of India was declared as a Science and
 Technological Institution w.e.f. 1
st May 1989 by a Gazette Notification.  However, no action was taken to implement
 the notification.  Attention of the Committee was also drawn towards the Mirdha Committee Report submitted in the
 year 1984 in this context and the recommendations made therein.  The second recommendation of the Report stated:-
“The Archaeological Survey of India should not be considered merely an administrative organization, but in view of its
 highly specialized functions, should be accorded the status of a scientific and technical institution, enjoying autonomy
 in its functioning, like other comparable institutions under the Government.”
18.       The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Culture as to when the Archaeological Survey of India was
 declared a scientific and technical Department and whether the notification had been implemented or not.  In response,
 the Committee was informed by Ministry of Culture that, on the basis of the recommendations made by a group set-up
 by the Department of Science and Technology, the Archaeological Survey of India was declared as a Scientific and
 Technological Department vide Notification No.A.36016/2/89-Estt. dated 27.10.1989 issued by Department of Culture. 
 This Notification was operative w.e.f. 1.5.1989.  However, inspite of this, the Archaeological Survey of India continued
 to function as an attached office of the Ministry of Culture. The nature of functions and activities of Archaeological
 Survey of India were of such nature that it could not be so far made into a wholly scientific and technical institution. 
 However, efforts have been made to take advantage of technical and scientific expertise in various disciplines of
 archaeology. 
19.       The Committee further enquired from the Ministry of Culture regarding the action taken by the Ministry of
 Culture to develop Archaeological Survey of India into a scientific and technical department after the issue of the
 notification in this regard.  In response, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Culture that as a follow-up
 action to the declaration of Archaeological Survey of India as Science & Technology Department, a proposal for the
 introduction of the benefits of the Flexible Complementing Scheme to the technical officers of the Archaeological

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 Survey of India was sent to the Department of Personnel and Training on 28.2.1990.  The matter was pursued with the
 Department of Personnel and Training from time to time.  The Department of Personnel and Training referred the entire
 Flexible Complementing Scheme to the Fifth Central Pay Commission for review.  Also, a proposal for the exemption
 of recruitment to technical posts of the ASI from the purview of the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) was
 submitted to the Department of Personnel and Training on 19.12.1989 for their approval on the ground that
 Archaeological Survey of India is a Scientific & Technical organization.  The Department of Personnel and Training
 did not agree to the proposal for the exemption of the recruitment of technical posts in the Archaeological Survey of
 India from the purview of the Union Public Service Commission.
20.       The Committee was not satisfied with the replies furnished by the Ministry of Culture and, during the course of
 oral evidence of the Secretary and other representatives of Ministry of Culture held on the 27
th December 2004,
 enquired from the Secretary of the Ministry regarding the internal exercise undertaken by the Ministry to develop
 Archaeological Survey of India as a scientific and technical department.  In response, the Secretary of the Ministry
 stated as under :-
“There is no indication that any proactive work was done to take consequential action on the basis of this notification. 
 But within the Archaeological Survey of India, some work was done, because the scientific organisations have got the
 benefit of flexible complementary scheme for staff promotions etc. and they had tried to undertake the work.”
21.       The Committee impressed upon the Ministry of Culture the importance of giving Archaeological Survey of India
 the status of a scientific and technical department.  In response, the Secretary, Ministry of Culture further stated that
 there had been a lacuna in the matter which needed to be bridged.  The Secretary, thereafter, assured the Committee
 that the Ministry would form a Committee under the Chairmanship of Director General, ASI to look into all the pros
 and cons of this issue and submit the findings of the Committee within six weeks.  Ministry of Culture thereafter, set up
 a Committee with Director General, ASI as its chairman to recommend course of action for availing the benefits and
 privileges which could be extended to the Archaeological Survey of India as a Science and Technology Department.
22.       Vide their O.M. No.F.5/2/2004-plg(pt.) dated the 11
th February 2005 the Archaeological Survey of India
 intimated the Committee that after holding detailed deliberations on the implications and benefits which result from the
 declaring of Archaeological Survey of India as Science and Technology institution, the Committee set up by Ministry
 of Culture under the chairmanship of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India has inter-alia made the
 following recommendations:-
(i)         The Archaeological Survey of India may send a proposal to the Ministry of Culture for the delegation of all
 financial and administrative powers of the Ministry/Department to the DG, ASI.  This should be in addition to the
 financial powers of the DG under the Archaeological Works Code.
(ii)        Secretary (Culture) should chair the EFC for the approval of projects of ASI costing Rs.100.00 crore and above
 but less than 200.00 crore.
(iii)       The Archaeological Survey of India as a Science & Technology institution should be exempted from the
 purview of DGS&D for the purchase of store items.  Since the major component of procurements in the Archaeological
 Survey of India concerns with the conservation activities and carrying out the excavation and exploration activities,
 these are regulated by the Archaeological Works Code.
(iv)       The Archaeological Survey of India should have its own Civil Engineering Unit for examining and monitoring
 the conservation works being carried out in its monuments and archaeological sites.  The existing conservation wing in
 the Archaeological Survey of India should be restructured and converted into a an effective Civil Engineering Unit for
 proper examination of estimates and monitoring of conservation/ preservation activities of monuments and
 archaeological sites of the Archaeological Survey of India.
(v)        Since the institution of Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Ministry of Finance no longer exists, the Committee
 felt that as and when Archaeological Survey of India required additional technical posts, it should formulate a proposal
 on functional grounds for the creation of such additional technical posts and send it to the Ministry of Finance.  This
 was done by the Archaeological Survey of India  in the financial year 2003-04 when as many as 228 additional
 technical posts were sanctioned on functional grounds for the Archaeological Survey of India.
(vi)       The Archaeological Survey of India may consider sending a proposal to the Department of Personnel and
 Training for appropriate exemption of the recruitment to Group ‘A’ technical posts from the purview of the UPSC.
(vii)      DG Archaeological Survey of India, being the Head of the Science & Technical organisation should have
 powers for deputation to abroad of the technical officers working in the Archaeological Survey of India  (subject to the
 conditions).
(viii)      Since the officers of the Archaeological Survey of India in various cadres (as specified) have been performing

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 duties of technical/ scientific nature and requires technical skill, knowledge and experience specific to their sphere of
 duties, a proposal for the extension of the benefits of Flexible Complementing Scheme to them may be submitted to the
 Ministry of Culture in terms of para (vi) above.
23.       The Committee also desired to know whether the Ministry of Culture proposed to take any legislative action to
 accord Archaeological Survey of India the status of a technical institution.  In response, the Ministry of Culture in their
 written reply dated 10.2.2005 mentioned that presently no requirement was felt for any legislative action for according
 the Archaeological Survey of India the status of a technical institution. However, necessary follow up action would be
 taken up on the recommendations of the Committee referred to above.  
24.       The Committee is constrained to note that even after a lapse of fifteen years from the date of issue of the
 notification in this regard no concrete action was taken by Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India for
 developing Archaeological Survey of India as a Scientific and Technical Department, which amply indicates the
 administrative apathy towards the whole issue.  The Committee regrets that no internal exercise was undertaken by
 Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India during the last fifteen years for availing the benefits and
 privileges which could be extended to the Archaeological Survey of India as a Science and Technology department. 
 The Committee observes that there has been deviation in the working of Archaeological Survey of India and that it has
 failed in terms of developing Archaeological Survey of India not merely as an administrative body but also as a
 spearhead for consolidating the scientific discipline of archaeology in the country.  The Committee is of the view that
 the Archaeological Survey of India needs to reinvent itself, not merely as an administrative wing of the Government,
 but as an agency for protecting and safeguarding our national heritage, which involves a lot of scientific and technical
 work.  Unless the Archaeological Survey of India converts itself fully into a scientific and technical organization, the
 basic role and function of the organisation will be defeated.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture
 and Archaeological Survey of India should, without any further loss of time, take necessary follow-up action on the
 recommendations of the Committee chaired by Director General, Archaeological Survey of India so as to avail the
 benefits which accrue to a Science and Technology department.  The Committee also recommends that, if required, the
 Ministry of Culture should also take necessary legislative action to make Archaeological Survey of India Science and
 Technology department in the true sense.
SARASVATI PROJECT
25.       The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, govern excavations in India.  The
 Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India grants licenses to various excavation agencies, both government
 and autonomous, for conducting excavations on the recommendations of the standing Committee of the Central
 Advisory Board of Archaeology (CABA).  The criteria for selecting a site for excavation are as under:
bridging of missing gaps(s) in the cultural sequence of Indian archaeology,
throwing more light on lesser known cultures.
Salvage archaeology in the event of a site being submerged by a dam or being destroyed or damaged due to absolutely
 necessary development works, natural calamities.
26.       The Committee desired to know the details relating to the Sarasvati Heritage Project.  In response the Committee
 was apprised by the Ministry of Culture that the Sarasvati project aimed at conducting a multidisciplinary study of
 River Sarasvati and its basin stretching in India from the Sivaliks to the Arbian Sea, falling in the Indian states of
 Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat and formulating and implementing integrated development programmes in the area by
 creating 15 hub sites as centers of culture, tourism and good civic life.   For providing a proper orientation as well as
 implementation of the Project, the Government of India through its gazette notification S.O. 1329 (E), dated 18
th
 December 2002, New Delhi, constituted a 13 member committee namely, the Advisory Committee, for the
 Multidisciplinary Study of River Sarasvati (ACMS), under the chairmanship of the then Minister of Tourism and
 Culture.
27.       During the oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Cultural and Archaeological Survey of India held
 on the 27
th December 2004 the Committee enquired about the origin of the Sarasvati Heritage Project.  In response, the
 Director General, Archaeological Survey of India informed the Committee that “the same report was prepared in
 September 2003 on the basis of the recommendations of a Committee, which was formed in December 2002, with the
 Tourism Minister as the Chairman besides eight other Members who were experts in various fields and one Joint
 Director of Archaeological Survey of India as the Member-Secretary or Convenor of the Committee.” The Committee
 then desired to know about the historical and the scientific basis on which the report was prepared. In response, the
 Ministry informed the Committee   that there was a report of the Remote Sensing Agency in this regard which
 suggested that there was a channel.  But the name Sarasvati was not indicated. 

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
28.       Not satisfied with the reply furnished by the representatives of Ministry of Culture and ASI, the Committee
 further enquired from the Ministry of Culture as to whether the Sarasvati Heritage Project was taken up by the ASI
 under the Chairmanship of the then Minister of Tourism and Culture and whether there were any similar precedent in
 this regard.  The Committee also desired to know whether the Ministry had framed any guidelines in this regard.  In
 response, in a written reply the Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the project report for the Sarasvati
 Heritage Project was prepared initially in September 2003 at an estimated cost of Rs. 36.02 crores.  This outlay was
 reduced to Rs. 4.98 crores as reflected in the financial concurrence accorded on 1.3.2004.  The Committee was also
 informed that the former Minister for Tourism & Culture was not the Chairman of the project.  The Committee was
 also informed about the objectives of the Sarasvati Heritage Project.  It was mentioned that the Sarasvati Heritage
 Project was developed as a multi-disciplinary project with the following objectives:-
            to define the River Sarasvati and its tributaries in the basin by adopting multidisciplinary approach;
to identify special items of geotechnical studies;
to promote multidisciplinary archaeological research by way of exploration, excavation and specialized studies such as
 ceramic, metallurgical, mineralogical, botanical, zoological, geotechnical, petrological, sedimentological;
to carry out structural and chemical conservation of sites, monuments and excavated structures as well as moveable
 objects;
to accomplish environmental upgradation of the sites;
realize all these objectives in all integrated, concerted and planned manner under a special drive during a period of three
 years, to begin with.
29.       However, in the same reply the Ministry also stated that prior to the preparation of the project report, the
 Government had constituted an Advisory Committee on 18.12.2002 with Minister for Tourism and Culture as
 Chairman and other expert members drawn from outside the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Ministry further
 added that they have not framed any special guidelines for implementation of this project.
30.       The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Culture about the procedure followed by the Archaeological
 Survey of India while selecting a site for excavation and whether they consulted any experts and eminent academicians
 in the country before finalizing this project.  The Ministry replied that the archaeological excavations in the country are
 approved by the Standing Committee of the Central Advisory Board on Archaeology (CABA) based on the requests for
 permitting excavations from Universities/Research Organisations.  In light of the above replies submitted by Ministry
 of Culture, the Committee desired to know whether the Sarasvati Heritage Project was recommended by any academic
 body/university which clubbed this omnibus project under the river SarasvatiProject.  The Committee also desired to
 know whether any proper scientific and technical appraisal for defining Saraswati had been taken or not.  In response,
 the Ministry of Culture categorically informed the Committee that "no academic body or university has recommended
 the project".  The Committee was also informed that in the past, scientific surveys were conducted in the dry bed of
 River Ghaggar, identified as River Sarasvati by some geoscientists.  There were also remote sensing studies which have
 established palaeochannels, and the results of such studies have been published in journals like Journal of Arid
 Environments, Journal of Geological Society of India, Man and Environment, South Asian Archaeology, Proceedings
 of the Indian Academy of Science (Earth and Planetary Sciences), etc.”
31.       The Committee further enquired that whether any scientific or technical study had ledto the project or certain
 mythological sources had been used to determine its name. The Committee also enquired as to how a scientific
 department like Archaeological Survey of India proceeded in this matter, and from where did they get the name of the
 river Sarasvati.  To these queries, the Ministry replied that explorations and excavations in parts of Haryana and
 Rajasthan on the dry bed of River Ghaggar and River Chautang (River Drisadvati) havebrought to light several
 settlements ranging from the early Harappan times to the modern ones.  Besides, surveys carried out by various
 universities and research institutions like Kurukshetra University, Deccan College, etc. also brought to light a large
 number of sites.  There were also independent studies by scientists who had made use of the aerial photographs and
 satellite imageries to delineate the palaeo-drainage course of a river.  These studies were published in journals like Man
 and Environment, Geological Society of India Memoirs, etc.  These scientific and archaeological studies had led to the
 formulation of the project and naming it as Sarasvati Heritage Project.
32.       After going through the replies furnished by the Ministry of Culture, the Committee is of the firm view that
 Sarasvati Heritage Project did not conform to the criterion fixed for excavation of archaeological sites since no
 academic body or university had recommended the project.  The Committee also notes that there is an element of
 contradiction in the replies submitted to the Committee by the Department of Culture.  On the one hand, the Ministry of
 Culture has stated that the former Minister of Tourism and Culture was not the Chairman of the Sarasvati Heritage
 Project, while, on the other hand, the Ministry has stated that prior to the preparation of the project report, the

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 Government had constituted an Advisory Committee with the then Minister of Tourism and Culture as Chairman and
 that this Committee had recommended the Saraswati Heritage Project.  The Committee further notes that the Ministry is
 not clear as to which research agency/scientific survey actually pointed out that the dry beds of River Ghaggar and
 River Chautang (River Drisadvati) are the bed of River Sarasvati.  The Committee understands that existence of River
 Sarasvati is purely a mythological one and a scientific institution like Archaeological Survey of India has not correctly
 proceeded in the matter.   The Committee regrets to note that a major project to the tune of Rs.36.02 crores was
 prepared which was, however, subsequently reduced to Rs.4.98 crores just to excavate a mythological river whereas,
 several other monuments/heritage sites of national importance are languishing in neglect due to acute shortage of funds.
 The Committee recommends that Archaeological Survey of India should strictly adhere to the criterion fixed for
 selection of excavation of sites.  Further, decisions for excavations should be made on the basis of proper scientific and
 technical appraisal and no extraneous factors should go into the decision making.  The Committee also recommends
 that before selecting a site for excavation, the Archaeological Survey of India should very carefully examine the
 potential of the site so that funds earmarked for the same do not go waste. The Committee would like to advise the
 Archaeological Survey of India that it should prevent itself from taking up exercises without a scientific basis which
 have all potentiality for subjective interpretation of historical facts thereby, leading to controversies.
VACANCIES AND STAFF STRENGTH IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
33.       Another issue highlighted by a former Director General of Archaeological Survey of India, who appeared as an
 independent witness before the Committee, was the large-scale vacancies existing in various cadres of Archaeological
 Survey of India, which had affected the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India.  Briefing the Committee on the
 subject, the above former Director General of Archaeological Survey of India stated as under:-
“For looking after the conservation of about 5000 monuments including complexes and world heritage sites and
 monuments, there is an extreme paucity of technical and conservation staff.  Only 501 technical staff is available for
 looking after repairs about 5000 monuments.  More and more money is being pumped in, but the expertise is very
 limited.  It is high time that the expertise is increased and more technical people are inducted.  Merely giving money
 will not help.  So, the need of the day is to have more technical experts in the Archaeological Survey of India….. The
 Archaeological Survey of India has not grown during all these years.  It has only two-year diploma course in
 Archaeology for the facility of Archaeology, 45 posts were sanctioned.  Only 5-6 posts have been filled and the rest
 have not been filled up on the ground that some recruitment rules have to be changed.”
34.       In view of the position brought out in respect of vacancies existing in the Archaeological Survey of India, the
 Committee sought to know from the Ministry of Culture regarding the details of the vacancies existing in the
 Archaeological Survey of India.  In response, the Committee was informed vide O.M. No. F.5-2/2004-Plg. Dated the
 23
rd November 2004 from Archaeological Survey of India that there were 274 vacant posts laying in the
 Archaeological Survey of India in Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’.  All the Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ posts are to be filled up by Union
 Public Service Commission (UPSC) and the Staff Selection Commission (SSC).   The Group ‘C’ posts are normally
 filled by the internal DPCs, and Group ‘D’ posts are filled in the circles mostly.  About 125 Group ‘D’ posts are lying
 vacant in different circles.
35.       The Committee was also informed that continuous efforts were being made to fill up all the vacant posts in
 Archaeological Survey of India through UPSC/SSC and by holding DPCs.  The concerned circles had also initiated the
 selection process to make recruitment against all the group ‘C’ vacant posts which fall in their jurisdiction.  As regards
 about 125 Group ‘D’ posts in various categories lying vacant in various circles/Branches, the Committee was informed
 that necessary action to fill up these posts had been initiated by the concerned circle/Branch.
36.       The Committee then desired to know whether the present staff strength of ASI was sufficient to handle to task
 entrusted to the ASI.  The Committee was informed by Department of Culture that at present there are 1251 technical
 posts under Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ in the ASI as per the following break-up:-
                                    Group ‘A’                    -        206
                                    Group ‘B’                    -        407
                                    Group ‘C’                    -        638
                                   
Total                      -        1251
37.       The Committee was further informed that there was acute shortage of manpower for technical posts also.  A
 review of the technical manpower requirements in the ASI in the year 2003-04 was undertaken as a result of which the
 Ministry of Finance accorded its approval to the creation of 228 additional technical posts in the ASI and for the
 abolition of 105 non-productive posts.  That had helped to bridge a lot of gap of technical manpower in the ASI. 


91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 However, the ASI still felt shortage of manpower in the Conservation cadre and also in the Horticulture cadre to cope-
up with the requirement.  Also there was an acute shortage of the services of Conservation Architects, for which the ASI
 had made proposals to create some more posts and fill up the existing posts.
38.       The Committee notes with concern that there are large-scale vacancies in various categories in the ASI, which
 has been hampering smooth and effective functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee also
 notes that the Government had been rather lax and inactive in completing the formalities for filling up many of the
 vacancies, as can be seen from the status furnished by the Archaeological Survey of India in respect of these vacancies. 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies in the
 Archaeological Survey of India so that the works being undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India do not
 suffer.  The Committee also notes that there is an acute shortage of manpower for technical posts for which the
 Archaeological Survey of India had made proposals to create additional posts.  The Committee recommends that the
 Government should favourably consider the proposals submitted by the Archaeological Survey of India for creation of
 technical posts so that the Archaeological Survey of India is efficiently and smoothly able to carry out the voluminous
 work entrusted to it.
NON-WRITING/PUBLICATION OF EXCAVATION REPORTS
39.       The Committee had, in the last few years' reports on Demands for Grants of Ministry of Culture, repeatedly
 taken up the matter relating to the non-writing/publication of excavation reports by the Archaeological Survey of India. 
 However, inspite of repeated recommendations by the Committee for early completion of the excavation reports, the
 situation had not improved much.  The Committee, therefore, asked for a detailed status note on the delay in
 publication/non-writing of excavation reports.  The Committee also desired to know whether any time-limit had been
 fixed by the Archaeological Survey of India for expediting the reports.  In the status note submitted to the Committee,
 the Committee was informed that the ASI has carried out 292 excavations after the Independence.  Mandatory reports
 thereof have been published up to 1998-99 in the Indian Archaeology – A Review (IAR), an annual bulletin of the
 Archaeological Survey of India.  The remaining issues are in various stages of compilation, editing and publication. 
 Out of 292 excavations, 102 had been identified as requiring detailed reports, of which 45 excavations reports have
 been published, one is in press while 56 are pending for detailed report writing.
40.       The Director General, Archaeological Survey of India had constituted a Steering Committee of serving
 professionals of ASI to look into the matter of delay in publication of the pending 56 excavation reports.  The
 Departmental Steering Committee placed its recommendations on 14
th /15th October 2004 before the Standing
 Committee (SC) of Central Advisory Board of Archaeology (CABA) for their consideration.  The SC endorsed the
 findings of the Steering Committee that out of 56 excavations, 17 belong to the category of large-scale excavation and
 39 to the small-scale excavation.  It was also agreed to provide financial and technical assistance for writing reports
 with a time frame of about 6 months for small-scale excavations and 15 months for large-scale excavations.  This
 matter was under process.
41.       Meanwhile, both in service and retired officers of the Archaeological Survey of India have been requested to
 complete their pending excavation reports.  Some excavators have responded positively to this, and even suggested
 tentative time frame for completing the report.  Archaeological Survey of India has already engaged some serving and
 retired excavators to complete their pending reports.  As a result of this, detailed report on Kalibangan pending since
 1969 could be published in 2003, entitled “Kalibangan – the Early Harappans” as memoirs of Archaeological Survey
 (MASI) No. 98 Likewise, report on Adam Excavations (1988-1992) is in press as MASI No. 99.  Some excavations are
 still ongoing and some of them are at various stages of completion.
42.       Regarding delay in writing the excavation reports, the Archaeological Survey of India informed that the delay is
 due to their nature and scope, as these are supposed to be the comprehensive research documents, containing
 information on excavated structures, stratigraphical features, supported by maps, illustrations – photo-documentation
 and line-drawings of excavated structures, potteries, artifacts, and other materials.  The report also would have to
 incorporate detailed technical and scientific reports and bibliographical references.  Since a huge body of data is
 generated in course of excavation, it takes time to organize and describe that exhaustive database on factual and
 interpretative lines.  For report writing, a team of excavators, who participated in that very excavation, is required to
 discuss, prepare research notes, and correlate the excavation findings for description in terms of time and space.  This is
 true in case of all excavations.  This has been further complicated the officers were sometime transferred before they
 could complete the reports.
43.       However, the important results of all excavations carried out by the Archaeological Survey of India are
 published in the Indian Archaeology – A review (IAR), an annual publication of the Archaeological Survey of India. 

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 The latest IAR out is for the year 1998-99 and those of the subsequent years are under compilation.  Reports on
 excavations are also published, in detailed format, in the Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India  (MASI),
 another ongoing publication of Archaeological Survey of India.  The latest MASI out is No.98 on “Kalibangan – the
 Early Harappans”, published in 2003.  Besides, the excavators have also published their excavation results in form of
 research articles in a number of research and popular journals of the country and abroad for dissemination of
 knowledge among the scholars and the public.
44.       The matter also came up for discussion during the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Culture
 held on the 27
th November 2004.  Speaking on the subject, the ADG, Archaeological Survey of India stated before the
 Committee as under:
“It has been a problem with the Archaeological Survey of India for many reasons, one of which was that the officers,
 before they could really complete the task, were transferred.  We are trying to follow a transparent transfer policy,
 although on paper we do not have any genuine transfer policy.”       
45.       The Committee then desired to know from the Archaeological Survey of India regarding the transfer policy for
 staff of Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee enquired whether there was any time frame for transfer and
 whether there were any safeguards in the transfer policy to ensure that transfer of the officials did not affect the ongoing
 work assigned to them, especially in preparation of excavation reports.  In reply, the Archaeological Survey of India
 informed the Committee that there exists no specific transfer policy for the staff in the ASI.  However, according to the
 prevalent practice, efforts are being made to adjust the staff on promotion up to non-gazetted level in the same
 Circles/Branches subject to the availability of vacancies in the respective grades, failing which they are transferred to
 the next nearest Circle/branch.  Requests from the officers and staff for transfer from one Circle to another are
 considered on the basis of merit keeping in view the facts and circumstances explained by them in their applications.  In
 order to ensure the timely completion of the ongoing excavation works and their reports, it has been decided in
 principle to allow the concerned officers to complete the ongoing excavations and their detailed reports before they are
 transferred to other places.
46.       The Committee is of the view that if excavation reports are not written, then all the taxpayers’ money spent on
 them goes waste.  Also, in absence of timely publication of excavation reports, the achievements of Archaeological
 Survey of India largely remain unnoticed by the public.  The Committee is extremely dissatisfied to observe that
 despite its repeated recommendations, the position in respect of writing of excavation reports has not improved much. 
 However, the Committee is hopeful that the steps now initiated by Archaeological Survey of India for clearing the
 backlog in respect of writing excavation reports would yield some positive results.  The Committee recommends that
 the Archaeological Survey of India should enforce a fixed time frame for writing excavation reports after the
 excavation work has been completed, so that the public at large is not deprived of the vital right to information.  The
 Committee also recommends that the ASI should ensure that officials engaged in a particular excavation work are not
 transferred till such time that they complete the excavations and submit their reports.
ENCROACHMENT AND SECURITY OF MONUMENTS/SITES
47.       The Committee observed that encroachment is a constant problem in a large number of protected monuments. 
 In this connection, the Committee asked the Archaeological Survey of India to furnish detailed information regarding
 action taken for removal of encroachments at the monuments/archaeological sites.  The Archaeological Survey of India
 vide their reply F.No.5/2/2004-Plg.(Pt) dated the 22
nd February 2005 intimated the Committee that in order to restrict
 the construction and mining activities in the vicinity of protected monuments, the Government of India has issued a
 notification in 1992 under the provision of Ancient Monuments & Archaeological Sites & Remains Act, 1958
 (AMASR Act) and rules framed thereunder declaring areas falling within a radius of 100 metres and 200 metres as
 prohibited and regulated areas respectively for the purpose of mining, construction etc. activities.  While the above
 notification had helped to contain the construction activities around protected monuments after 1992, the provision of
 the notification did not apply to pre-1992 activities. 
48.       The Archaeological Survey of India further informed that they were facing problem in a large number of cases
 due to inaction by the State Administrations.  It was brought out that as soon as the encroachment comes to the notice
 of Archaeological Survey of India, they issue notices under section 19(1) of AMASR, Act, 1958 directing the
 encroachers to vacate the unauthorized occupation.  Simultaneously, a First Information Report (FIR) is lodged with the
 local police.  If the encroacher refuses to vacate the premises, the DG, ASI is empowered to issue notice under Section
 19(2) of the AMAS&R Act [read with Section 38(1) of the AMAS&R Rules 1959] ordering the illegal occupants to
 vacate the site and remove the illegal constructions.  This requisition is also sent to the District Magistrate with the
 request to forcibly demolish and remove the illegal constructions.  It was mentioned that although the Superintending

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 Archaeologists have been vested with the power of Estate Officer and authorized to issue eviction notices under the
 Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants (Act), 1971, the successful removal of encroachment depends
 entirely upon the cooperation of the police and district authorities, which was seldom forthcoming.  In actual practice,
 there is great delay/reluctance on the part of district administration to deploy police for removal of the illegal
 occupants.  The Director General, Archaeological Survey of India had on various occasions requested the State
 Governments to extend their help to remove encroachments.
49.       Whenever the above procedures fail to remove the encroachers, the only option available to the ASI is to initiate
 legal action by filing cases in the civil court.  In a large number of cases, civil cases had been filed by the
 Superintending Archaeologists.  The Archaeological Survey of India also furnished a statement indicating the number
 of monuments which had recently been freed from encroachment:-
           
            Sl.No
.              Name of Circle             No. of Monuments freed
                                                                                        from encroachment
            1.                     Agra                                                     2
2.                     Aurangabad                                          2
3.                     Bangalore                                             8
Chennai                                                6
Chandigarh                                           5
Dharwad                                              7
Delhi                                                    4
Guwahati                                              3
Hyderabad                                           2
Kolkata                                                2
Lucknow                                              5
Vadodara                                             2
     ------------
Total                            48
     ------------
50.       The issue regarding encroachment of monuments also came up for discussion during the meeting of the
 Committee held on the 29
th March 2005 for examination of Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture,
 where, speaking on the subject, the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India submitted before the Committee
 as under:
"Encroachment in and around ASI monuments is one of the problems ASI is facing.  3,658 monuments are protected.  If
 you put a reasonable number of people to protect it, it would require at least 7-8 thousand people.  If you take
 monuments like the Taj or Red Fort, each would take at least 200 people.  In fact, it is consuming one-third of the staff
 to protect just these two.  There is no physical protection at all and the encroachment is going on for several years.  We
 have powers to issue notice for the people to vacate.  But we don't have the power to compel them to vacate. This State
 Government police support hardly ever comes." 
51.       The Committee also desired to know above the security arrangements made at the monuments/archaeological
 sites and the financial implications thereof.  In response, the Archaeological Survey of India informed the Committee
 that it employs Monument Attendants for watch and ward duties at the protected monuments.  Presently, there were
 3463 Monument Attendants in Archaeological Survey of India.  However, the number of monument attendants was
 inadequate to meet the needs and ASI had requisitioned the services of a private security agency (SIS) to supplement its
 watch and ward staff.  A total number of 789 SIS personnel were deployed by Archaeological Survey of India.  Central
 Industrial Security Force (CISF) had also been deployed at two monuments namely the Taj Mahal and the Red Fort. 
 For 459 CISF personnel employed in these two sensitive monuments, the financial implication per year is Rs.9.25
 crore.  Besides, 100 State Police personnel were being paid for deployment at some monuments and museums.  The
 total payment involved to the State Police personnel is Rs.1.5 crore annually.  However, a large number of protected
 monuments all over the country are not having any security.  There is no precise estimate of the funds required for
 providing security guards to all these monuments.  However, on purely tentative estimates, it is estimated that an
 amount of Rs.100 crore may be required annually for proper physical security to all the protected monuments by way of
 deploying private security guards.
52.       The Committee was further informed that with the increase in the number of protected monuments and visitors,

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 the strength of monument attendants and private security personnel was grossly inadequate.  Subject to the availability
 of increased budget provision, the ASI proposed to deploy more private security personnel.  It was proposed to
 requisition some more security personnel for the protected monuments falling under Bhopal, Dharwad, Patna and
 Vadodara circles which may require an additional provision of Rs.2.14 crore.  The requirement in respect of other
 circles was being assessed. 
53.       The Committee is concerned about the illegal encroachment of monuments/archaeological sites under the
 protection of Archaeological Survey of India.  In this context, the Committee would like to reiterate the
 recommendation made in its 85
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture which is as under:
"The Committee expresses its anxiety over the incidents of encroachment upon the land of Centrally Protected
 Monuments.  The Committee is more concerned about the inability of Archeological Survey of India to get back the
 land from encroachers.  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that a complete assessment should be made
 regarding encroachment of monuments/sites under the protection of Archaeological Survey of India all over the
 country.  Prompt action ought be taken against the encroachers with the help of State Governments/Local
 Administrations and the matter should be pursued at the highest level.  The Committee also recommends that adequate
 budgetary provisions should be made for security arrangements and protection of monuments, as this is the most crucial
 aspect of preserving our cultural heritage and wherever possible modern gadgets like, electronic surveillance cameras
 should be installed in the monuments.  The Committee feels that security is a sovereign function.  Hence, it is the
 responsibility of Central Government to get the monuments and other important assets protected.  In view of this, the
 Committee is of the opinion that the Union Home Ministry should pay the bills towards the expenses incurred for
 paying the Central Security Agencies under this head.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Culture should pursue the matter at
 the highest level." 
CONSERVATION/PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS AND REGISTRATION OF ANTIQUITIES
54.       The Committee also enquired about the procedure adopted for conservation/preservation of the monuments.  The
 Committee was informed that whenever an ancient structure or an archaeological site/remain is considered be of
 national importance, a proposal to this effect is initiated by the circle office and sent to the Director General,
 Archaeological Survey of India along with its historical, archaeological and architectural importance.  On receipt of the
 approval of the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India, the proposal is forwarded to the State Government
 with detailed drawings for the counter signature of the Deputy Commissioner/Commissioner concerned.  On receipt of
 the revenue data duly counter signed, the Central Government issues a notification of its intentions to declare the
 monument as of national importance with a two months notice.  On the expiry of notice period and after considering the
 objections, if any, a final Gazette notification is issued for declaring the said monument as a monument of national
 importance.
55.       The State Governments are consulted if the proposed monument is State protected and is proposed to be taken
 over by the Archaeological Survey of India.  In all other cases, State Governments are involved only to the extent of
 preparation of relevant revenue papers required for the notification or subsequently, if land or building compensation is
 involved.
56.       The Committee was further informed that the basic guidelines for conservation have been framed with an
 objective to prolong the life of monuments without the loss of artistic and historical values.  It is important for
 archaeological values to preserve the original fabric of the monument to the extent possible.  Archaeological Survey of
 India follows a Conservation Manual which contains detailed guidelines for execution of conservation works.  The
 conservation and preservation of monuments aim at :
its preservation without disfigurement or alteration of its character;
its maintenance in a proper and attractive condition;
the complete examination of its remains and documentary evidence concerning it; and
 
the preparation of monographs, guide books and reports so that its historical and artistic interest may be perpetuated.
57.       Apart from this the monuments which had garden around them as part of their original design are taken up for
 restoration and maintenance and wherever it was not part of original layout/feature, beautification through landscaping
 is also undertaken.  However, it has been decided to compile a comprehensive conservation manual during the 10
th Five
 Year Plan period incorporating extant guidelines of Archaeological Survey of India and relevant features of
 internationally acceptable conservation guidelines and norms.
58.       The Committee is of the view that beautification and development of archaeological sites no doubt adds to the
 ambience of these sites.  However, the Committee recommends that while taking up work, the focus should be on

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 actual conservation/preservation of the sites and the beautification aspect should only supplement the
 conservation/preservation work undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee also recommends
 that more amount should be spent on conservation/preservation of the sites in comparison to site
 development/beautification etc. 
59.       The Committee also desired to know about the registration of numerous antiquities in the country.  The
 Committee was informed that the registration of the antiquities is carried out under sub-section 3(a) of Section 14 of the
 AAT Act, 1972 and is being implemented by the State Governments and funded by the ASI.  A data bank for the
 registered antiquities is available at Hdqrs. Office of the ASI, New Delhi and is updated periodically.  The
 Archaeological Survey of India further informed the Committee that there are 4.82 lakhs registered antiquities in India. 
 It is felt that this represents only a fraction of the antiquities wealth of India.  The Archaeological Survey of India has
 28 Registering Officers located in different parts of the country.  In addition to this, the Archaeological Survey of India
 has now proposed to nominate Assistant Superintending Archaeologists and Deputy Superintending Archaeologists
 working in the circles to act as Registering Officers.  A proposal in this regard has been forwarded to the Ministry of
 Law for their vetting.  Increasing the number of Registering Officers is expected to facilitate more registration of
 antiquities. Archaeological Survey of India is launching a National Mission on Antiquities and it is hoped that during
 the mission period of 5 years, there would be a quantum jump in the registration of antiquities as a major objective of
 the mission is the documentation of the antiquities.  The mission proposes to take steps for creating public awareness
 which would facilitate voluntary registration of antiquities.
60.       During the examination of Demands for Grants 2005-06 by the Committee, the Ministry of Culture informed
 that the Ministry had launched two Missions namely, National Mission on Antiquities and National Mission on Built
 Heritage, with following major objectives:-
·        To create widespread awareness about the antiquities and built heritage and the laws governing it.
·        Creation of a credible National Data Bank of Built Heritage and Antiquities.
·        Selected monuments from different parts of the country will be taken up for structural conservation.
·        Out reach programmes will be organized to create public awareness of our rich cultural heritage and the ways by
 which it can be sustained.  Besides attempt will be made to create synergy amongst various institutions and
 organisations working towards a similar goal.
·        Mission would help in capacity building in heritage care in State Archaeology, Museums and NGOs.
·        Mission would help the concerned authorities in the formulation of national, state and local policy in safeguarding
 and management of heritage.
61.       The Ministry has further informed the Committee that both these missions were proposed to be merged
 together.  Subsequently, the Ministry was asked to justify the rationale behind launching these missions separately and
 merging it together afterwards.  The explanation put forth by the Ministry was as follows:-
“Initially it was proposed to set up two separate Missions – National Mission on Built Heritage, Monuments and Sites
 and National Mission on Antiquities.  The estimated cost for the two Missions when the proposals were initially
 formulated was Rs.250 crore and Rs.150 crore respectively.  Based on the comments received from the Planning
 Commission, Department of Expenditure, IFD etc., the matter was reconsidered in consultation with the Archaeological
 Survey of India.  It was suggested that since the nature of work for the two Missions was complementary to each other
 both the Missions should be carried out by one structural network since in both the cases, the nodal agency was going
 to be Archaeological Survey of India.  The overall project cost of Rs.400 crore also needed to be pruned drastically
 since no provision had been made in the 10
th Five Year Plan for these Missions.  While merging and recasting the two
 Missions it was therefore decided to reduce the Missions’ outlay to about Rs.90 crore to make it compact and viable so
 that there is no time overrun beyond the five years period prescribed for the Project.  The Mission would be able to
 generate public awareness and synergy between Archaeological Survey of India and several other institutions working
 in the field.  The two Missions proposals on Built Heritage and Antiquities have been merged.  Initially two documents
 for two Missions i.e. Antiquities and Built heritage were prepared with Archaeological Survey of India as the Nodal
 Agency.  As the objectives of both the Missions were overlapping and Mission structure had been streamlined, it was
 felt that a single Mission structure for both the Missions i.e. for Built Heritage and Antiquities could undertake the
 work.  Moreover the expertise required for undertaking the work of both the Missions is similar; hence twin Mission
 proposal has been recast into a single Mission proposal.  By merging them together, the financial outlay required for
 undertaking both the Missions has been greatly reduced and the goals are also justified.”
 62.      The Director-General, Archeological Survey of India during the course of oral evidence held on the 29
th March

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 2005, submitted before the Committee as under:
 "… there is a shortage of staff in the ASI mostly on the conservation side.  We do not have conservation professionals
 in various disciplines.  So far as the mission is concerned, we will be engaging people on short-term basis.  Because the
 essential job is documentation."
 63.      In its 85th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture, the Committee had observed that the
 whole process relating to first launching and then merging the two Missions i.e. National Mission of Built Heritage and
 National Mission on Antiquities indicates confusion in the decision making process and complete lack of farsightedness
 on the part of the Ministry in planning its programmes and projects which has not only affected the rich cultural
 heritage of the country but also led to valuable wastage of time and resources.  The Committee had also expressed
 dissatisfaction regarding allocating so much additional work to Archaeological Survey of India when the organisation
 was not able to successfully complete the work already assigned to it.  In response, the Archaeological Survey of India
 informed the Committee that the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memorandum on the National Mission for
 Antiquities and Built Heritage has been modified in the light of the observations made by the Committee.  There will be
 no recruitment of additional staff except a skeleton staff at the mission headquarters.  The requirement of staff for
 documentation would be met by hiring people on contract on short-term basis.  With the existing staff and expertise,
 Archaeological Survey of India can undertake the work of National Mission for Antiquities and Built Heritage as an
 additional responsibility.
64.         The Committee notes the response of the Archaeological Survey of India to the observations made by the
 Committee in its 85
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture.  The Committee hopes that with
 the existing staff and expertise, Archaeological Survey of India would be able to successfully execute the National
 Mission for Antiquities and Built Heritage and the laudable goals of the Mission would be achieved within the fixed
 time frame.
65.       There were some reports in the print media regarding the proposal of Archaeological Survey of India to sign
 agreement with the American Institute of Indian Studies, New Delhi for handling the National Mission of Antiquities.
 Accordingly the Committee enquired from the Ministry of Culture whether the Archaeological Survey of India had
 signed or proposed to sign any agreement with the said American Institute to handle the National Mission of
 Antiquities and what was the locus-standi of that institute.  The Ministry of Culture replied that the Archaeological
 Survey of India had not signed any agreement with the American Institute of Indian Studies with regard to National
 Mission of Antiquities.  Also, the Ministry of Culture had not taken any decision to hand over the responsibility of
 National Mission of Antiquities to the American Institute of Indian Studies. 
66.       The Committee was further informed that the American Institute of Indian Studies was established in 1961.  The
 institute offers support for research in wide variety of subjects in social sciences, natural sciences, humanities including
 fine arts and performing arts.  Through its programme of research and documentation, the Institute claims expertise in
 contemporary India, its culture, history and languages.   The Institute has a center for Art and Archaeology which
 recognized presence in the documentation of Indian and South-East Asian art and architecture having covered a large
 number of monuments and sites of this region.
67.       The Committee also sought information regarding the financial estimate the American Institute of Indian Studies
 had quoted to the Ministry for the purpose of Mission of Antiquities and what was the estimate of Archaeological
 Survey of India in this regard.  In response, the Ministry of Culture, while quoting the cost quoted by the American
 Institute of Indian Studies, informed the Committee that the Archaeological Survey of India had not made any estimate
 in this regard as the Mission Project was yet to be approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  The
 Ministry of Culture further stated that “Archaeological Survey of India would prepare estimates and compare the
 estimates with other eligible parties after the sanctions are obtained.  At this stage the discussion were only for a pilot
 project, on which no final decision has been taken”. 
68.
              The Committee observes that the Ministry of Culture has decided to involve private agencies in handling the
 National Mission of Antiquities.  The Committee recommends that adequate care should be taken while
 finalizing such kind of deal so that the expenditure to be incurred on the National Mission of Antiquities is
 spent in the best interest of the nation and the valuable information about Indian Antiquities and Monuments
 are not handed over to foreign hands.  The Committee further recommends that strict criteria should be fixed
 to determine expertise and professionalism in this field.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
MONUMMENTS/SITES UNDER PROTECTION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
The Committee notes that the ASI has drawn long-term programme to protect all 3663 monuments/sites of national

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 importance out of which 3537 monuments/sites are unticketed.  These monuments have also been classified into three
 categories viz. Group A, B and C for convenience.    The Committee is however aware that there are many
 sites/monuments under the protection/maintenance of Archaeological Survey of India which are located in interior
 areas of various States but are lying unattended. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry of Culture should
 equally treat the revenue earning and not-earning sites and efforts should be made for integrated infrastructure
 development and conservation/ preservation of all monuments/sites with encompassing facilities for tourists, so as to
 give a major fillip to cultural tourism in the country as well as attracting overseas visitors.                               
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP AND THE POST OF DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 SURVEY OF INDIA
The Committee is not in agreement with the argument put- forth by the Ministry of Culture that the appointment of
 generalist administrator as Director General will not hamper the development of Archaeological Survey of India as a
 scientific organisation.  The Committee is shocked to note that even after the Gazette Notification of May 2002, the
 Government has not been able to fill up the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India as per the
 requirements of the notification and has been merely filling up the post from Indian Administrative Service on
 deputation basis.  The Committee is constrained to observe that the Government preferred to fill up the highest post of
 an apex institution requiring very high standards of technical qualification with a generalist administrator.  The
 Committee is of the view that a person who has no basic qualification or knowledge of archaeology cannot handle the
 apex responsibility of a Scientific Institution like Archaeological Survey of India.  Unless the leader of the
 Archaeological Survey of India is having the professional expertise, it is very difficult to give a lead.  This has also
 dampened the spirits of the senior officers in the feeder grade of the organization who may never get the opportunities
 to serve as senior most officer of their parent organization.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that steps should be
 taken to fill up the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India as per the requirements of the Notification
 of May 2002, at the earliest.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA AS A SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DEPARTMENT
The Committee is constrained to note that even after a lapse of fifteen years from the date of issue of the notification in
 this regard no concrete action was taken by Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India for developing
 Archaeological Survey of India as a Scientific and Technical Department, which amply indicates the administrative
 apathy towards the whole issue.  The Committee regrets that no internal exercise was undertaken by Ministry of
 Culture and Archaeological Survey of India during the last fifteen years for availing the benefits and privileges which
 could be extended to the Archaeological Survey of India as a Science and Technology department.  The Committee
 observes that there has been deviation in the working of Archaeological Survey of India and that it has failed in terms
 of developing Archaeological Survey of India not merely as an administrative body but also as a spearhead for
 consolidating the scientific discipline of archaeology in the country.  The Committee is of the view that the
 Archaeological Survey of India needs to reinvent itself, not merely as an administrative wing of the Government, but as
 an agency for protecting and safeguarding our national heritage, which involves a lot of scientific and technical work. 
 Unless the Archaeological Survey of India converts itself fully into a scientific and technical organization, the basic
 role and function of the organisation will be defeated.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture and
 Archaeological Survey of India should, without any further loss of time, take necessary follow-up action on the
 recommendations of the Committee chaired by Director General, Archaeological Survey of India so as to avail the
 benefits which accrue to a Science and Technology department.  The Committee also recommends that, if required, the
 Ministry of Culture should also take necessary legislative action to make Archaeological Survey of India Science and
 Technology department in the true sense.                                          
SARASVATI PROJECT
After going through the replies furnished by the Ministry of Culture, the Committee is of the firm view that Sarasvati
 Heritage Project did not conform to the criterion fixed for excavation of archaeological sites since no academic body or
 university had recommended the project.  The Committee also notes that there is an element of contradiction in the
 replies submitted to the Committee by the Department of Culture.  On the one hand, the Ministry of Culture has stated
 that the former Minister of Tourism and Culture was not the Chairman of the Sarasvati Heritage Project, while, on the
 other hand, the Ministry has stated that prior to the preparation of the project report, the Government had constituted an
 Advisory Committee with the then Minister of Tourism and Culture as Chairman and that this Committee had
 recommended the Saraswati Heritage Project.  The Committee further notes that the Ministry is not clear as to which
 research agency/scientific survey actually pointed out that the dry beds of River Ghaggar and River Chautang (River
 Drisadvati) are the bed of River Sarasvati.  The Committee understands that existence of River Sarasvati is purely a
 mythological one and a scientific institution like Archaeological Survey of India has not correctly proceeded in the

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 matter.   The Committee regrets to note that a major project to the tune of Rs.36.02 crores was prepared which was,
 however, subsequently reduced to Rs.4.98 crores just to excavate a mythological river whereas, several other
 monuments/heritage sites of national importance are languishing in neglect due to acute shortage of funds. The
 Committee recommends that Archaeological Survey of India should strictly adhere to the criterion fixed for selection of
 excavation of sites.  Further, decisions for excavations should be made on the basis of proper scientific and technical
 appraisal and no extraneous factors should go into the decision making.  The Committee also recommends that before
 selecting a site for excavation, the Archaeological Survey of India should very carefully examine the potential of the
 site so that funds earmarked for the same do not go waste. The Committee would like to advise the Archaeological
 Survey of India that it should prevent itself from taking up exercises without a scientific basis which have all
 potentiality for subjective interpretation of historical facts thereby, leading to controversies.          
VACANCIES AND STAFF STRENGTH IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
The Committee notes with concern that there are large-scale vacancies in various categories in the ASI, which has been
 hampering smooth and effective functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee also notes that the
 Government had been rather lax and inactive in completing the formalities for filling up many of the vacancies, as can
 be seen from the status furnished by the Archaeological Survey of India in respect of these vacancies.  The Committee
 recommends that the Ministry of Culture should take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies in the Archaeological
 Survey of India so that the works being undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India do not suffer.  The
 Committee also notes that there is an acute shortage of manpower for technical posts for which the Archaeological
 Survey of India had made proposals to create additional posts.  The Committee recommends that the Government
 should favourably consider the proposals submitted by the Archaeological Survey of India for creation of technical
 posts so that the Archaeological Survey of India is efficiently and smoothly able to carry out the voluminous work
 entrusted to it.                     
NON-WRITING/PUBLICATION OF EXCAVATION REPORTS
The Committee is of the view that if excavation reports are not written, then all the taxpayers’ money spent on them
 goes waste.  Also, in absence of timely publication of excavation reports, the achievements of Archaeological Survey of
 India largely remain unnoticed by the public.  The Committee is extremely dissatisfied to observe that despite its
 repeated recommendations, the position in respect of writing of excavation reports has not improved much.  However,
 the Committee is hopeful that the steps now initiated by Archaeological Survey of India for clearing the backlog in
 respect of writing excavation reports would yield some positive results.  The Committee recommends that the
 Archaeological Survey of India should enforce a fixed time frame for writing excavation reports after the excavation
 work has been completed, so that the public at large is not deprived of the vital right to information.  The Committee
 also recommends that the ASI should ensure that officials engaged in a particular excavation work are not transferred
 till such time that they complete the excavations and submit their reports.
ENCROACHMENT AND SECURITY OF MONUMENTS/SITES
The Committee is concerned about the illegal encroachment of monuments/archaeological sites under the protection of
 Archaeological Survey of India.  In this context, the Committee would like to reiterate the recommendation made in its
 85
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture which is as under:
"The Committee expresses its anxiety over the incidents of encroachment upon the land of Centrally Protected
 Monuments.  The Committee is more concerned about the inability of Archeological Survey of India to get back the
 land from encroachers.  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that a complete assessment should be made
 regarding encroachment of monuments/sites under the protection of Archaeological Survey of India all over the
 country.  Prompt action ought be taken against the encroachers with the help of State Governments/Local
 Administrations and the matter should be pursued at the highest level.  The Committee also recommends that adequate
 budgetary provisions should be made for security arrangements and protection of monuments, as this is the most crucial
 aspect of preserving our cultural heritage and wherever possible modern gadgets like, electronic surveillance cameras
 should be installed in the monuments.  The Committee feels that security is a sovereign function.  Hence, it is the
 responsibility of Central Government to get the monuments and other important assets protected.  In view of this, the
 Committee is of the opinion that the Union Home Ministry should pay the bills towards the expenses incurred for
 paying the Central Security Agencies under this head.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Culture should pursue the matter at
 the highest level." 
CONSERVATION/PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS AND REGISTRATION OF ANTIQUITIES
The Committee is of the view that beautification and development of archaeological sites no doubt adds to the ambience
 of these sites.  However, the Committee recommends that while taking up work, the focus should be on actual

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
 conservation/preservation of the sites and the beautification aspect should only supplement the
 conservation/preservation work undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee also recommends
 that more amount should be spent on conservation/preservation of the sites in comparison to site
 development/beautification etc. 
The Committee notes the response of the Archaeological Survey of India to the observations made by the Committee in
 its 85
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture.  The Committee hopes that with the existing
 staff and expertise, Archaeological Survey of India would be able to successfully execute the National Mission for
 Antiquities and Built Heritage and the laudable goals of the Mission would be achieved within the fixed time frame.
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Culture has decided to involve private agencies in handling the National
 Mission of Antiquities.  The Committee recommends that adequate care should be taken while finalizing such kind of
 deal so that the expenditure to be incurred on the National Mission of Antiquities is spent in the best interest of the
 nation and the valuable information about Indian Antiquities and Monuments are not handed over to foreign hands. 
 The Committee further recommends that strict criteria should be fixed to determine expertise and professionalism in
 this field.
M I N U T E S
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 19
th November, 2003 in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.
                  Shri Nilotpal Basu  – Chairman
2.                   
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
Shri S.S. Chandran
Shri K.Rahman Khan
Shri K.B.Krishna Murthy
Shri Satish Pradhan
Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao
Shri Vayalar Ravi
Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
LOK SABHA
Shri G.M.  Banatwalla
Shri Anil Basu
Shri P.S. Gadhavi
Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar
Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
Shri Chandresh Patel
Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
Shri D. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
Shri Dhanendra Kumar, Secretary (Culture)
Smt. Gauri Chatterji, Director General, ASI
Shri K. Jayakumar, Joint Secretary

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
Shri R. C. Misra, Additional Director, ASI
Dr. R. S. Bisht, Joint Director General, ASI
2.         The Committee took up the examination of the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India and heard the
 views of the Secretary, Department of Culture and Director General, Archaeological Survey of India on the subject. 
 The Director General, Archaeological Survey of India also made a powerpoint presentation regarding the functioning of
 Archaeological Survey of India.  The Director General, Archaeological Survey of India and other officials of the
 Archaeological Survey of India, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the Members on the
 subject.   On certain queries, the representatives of the Archaeological Survey of India could not give immediate
 clarifications and assured the Committee to furnish written replies on those issues.
3.         *          *          *
4.         A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.15 p.m.
__________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this report.
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 8
th September 2004 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri S.S. Chandran 
Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shri Janardhana Poojary 
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Smt. Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Anil Basu
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri Dip Gogoi 
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Sudam Marandi
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Sartaj Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.         The Committee discussed its future course of action.  It was decided that the Committee will take up two
 subjects i.e. the ‘Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India’ and ***       ***      ***. 
3.         ***                              ***                              ***
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 11.45 a.m. to meet again on the 17
th September 2004.
_________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this report.

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
IX
NINTH  MEETING
            The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Friday, the 17th September 2004 in Committee Room 'D', Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri S.S. Chandran 
Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shri Janardhana Poojary 
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Raj Babbar
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Sartaj Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
WITNESS
Shri S. S. Biswas, Former Director General, National Museum, New Delhi
2.The Committee heard the views of Shri S. S. Biswas in connection with the functioning of Archaeological Survey of
 India.  Shri S. S. Biswas, while presenting his views, replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.  To
 certain queries, the Committee requested Shri Biswas to submit detailed replies at the earliest.
3.Due to the paucity of time, the Committee could not hear the views of Shri Jagat Pati Joshi and decided to hear him on
 the subject at a later date.
4.A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5.The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m.
X
TENTH  MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 1
st October 2004 in Room No. 63,  Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
LOK SABHA
Shri Anil Basu
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Sartaj Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
WITNESS
Shri Jagat Pati Joshi, Former Director General, Archaeological Survey of           India, New Delhi
2.The Committee heard the views of Shri Jagat Pati Joshi in connection with the functioning of Archaeological Survey
 of India in detail.
4.A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5.The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.05 p.m.
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m on Monday, the 29
th November 2004 in Room No.'139', Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri S.S. Chandran 
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
LOK SABHA
Shri Anil Basu
Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Sartaj Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Shri K. Jaya Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri R.C. Misra, Additional Director General, Archaeological Survey of India
Dr. R.K. Sharma, Joint Director General, Archaeological Survey of India
Dr. Amerendra Nath, Director, Archaeological Survey of India
Shri J.R. Aggarwal, Director, Archaeological Survey of India
Shri A.K. Singh, Director, Archaeological Survey of India
Prof. R.C. Agarwal, Director, Archaeological Survey of India
2.         The Committee took up the examination of the subject - "Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India" and
 heard the views of the representatives of Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India on the subject.  The
 representatives of the Ministry of Culture, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the Members on
 the subject.  To some queries raised by the Members, the Ministry representatives were requested to give written
 replies.
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.55 p.m.
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 27th December 2004 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri S.S. Chandran
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas Athawale 
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA  
Smt. Neena Ranjan, Secretary
Shri C. Babu Rajeev, Director General, Archaeological Survey of     India  
Shri R.C. Misra, Additional Director General, Archaeological Survey of India
Dr. R.K. Sharma, Joint Director General, Archaeological Survey of India
Dr. Amerendra Nath, Director, Archaeological Survey of India
2.The Committee took up the examination of the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India and heard the views of
 the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Director General, Archaeological Survey of India on the subject.  The Secretary
 and the Director General, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.  To
 some queries raised by the Members, the Ministry representatives were requested to give written replies.
3.A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
4.The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.20 p.m.
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 15
th February 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shrimati Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
Shri Anil Basu
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
Dr. K. Dhanaraji
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Sartaj Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES
Shri P.K. Samantaray,
Working President, Indian National Port and Dock Worker’s Federation

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
2.         *          *          *         
3.         *          *          *
4.         *          *          *
5.         The Committee then took up the examination of the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India and after
 some discussions, directed the Secretariat to prepare draft report on the subject.  Some Members raised question about
 the blatant encroachment and poor security arrangements at Archaeological sites maintained by the Archaeological
 Survey of India. It was decided to obtain the replies from the Ministry of Culture thereto before going for an on-the-
spot visits to the Monuments in and around Delhi. 
6.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
___________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this report.
XXXVI
THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 20
th June 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Kamal Akhtar
Shri S.S. Chandran
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Raj Babbar
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Sudam Marandi
Shri Ravindra Naik
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Sartaj Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA  
Smt. Neena Ranjan, Secretary
Shri Jaya Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri C. Babu Rajeev, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India  
2.The Committee took up the examination of the functioning of Archaeological Survey of India and heard the views of
 the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Director General, Archaeological Survey of India on the subject.  The Secretary
 and the Director General, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the Members.   To some queries
 raised by the Members, the Ministry/Archaeological Survey of India representatives were requested to give written
 replies.
3.A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
4.   The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again on 29
th June 2005.
IV
FOURTH  MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 19th September 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Basement,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

91stReport of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/91streport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:19]
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri S. S. Chandran
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Manabendra Shah
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.The Committee considered the draft Ninety-first Report on the "Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India" and
 after some discussion adopted the report with minor modifications.    The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
 fix a date and nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the next session.
3.         *          *          *
4.         *          *          *
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.
____________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this report.