PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report on the
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/Sravana, 1939 (Saka)
251
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report on the
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/Sravana, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................  1-26
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVA TIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................................... 27-29
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................... 31-34
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 35-57

COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1 Shri Mukul Roy  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Lal Sinh V adodia
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri P . Kumar
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
19. Yogi Aditya Nath
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri P . Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
(i)

(ii)
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred and Fifty First Report on “Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the observations/
recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation”.
2. The Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 17th March, 2017 to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
Forty Fourth Report was received from the Ministry of Shipping on 21st July, 2017.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 8th August, 2017.
NEW DELHI; MUKUL ROY
August 8, 2016 Chairman,
Sravana 17, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AAI : Airports Authority of India
AD : Assistant Director
ASA : Aviation Security Assistant
ASQ : Airport Service Quality
A TC : Air Traffic Control
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
A TR : Auto Tag Reader
BCAP : Basic Cargo Awareness Programme
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CCEA : Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CCI : Competition Commission of India
CFI : Chief Flying Instructor
CHQ : Central Headquarter
DASO : Deputy Aviation Security Officer
DD : Deputy Director
DDG : Deputy Director General
DGCA : Directorate General of Civil Aviation
DIAL : Delhi International Airport Limited
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training
Dy. CFI : Deputy Chief Flying Instructor
EDP : Executive Development Programme
FIDS : Flight Information Display Software
FTO : Flying Training Organization
HCoI : Haj Committee of India
IA T A : International Air Transport Association
IGI : Airport Indira Gandhi International Airport
(iv)

(v)
IGRUA : Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi
ISTC : Including Short Term Contract
JD : Joint Director
Ltd. : Limited
MGR : Manager
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation
MoU : Memorandam of Understanding
MRO : Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
MSDE : Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
OMDA : Operation, Management and Development Agreement
PHL : Pawan Hans Limited
QAM : Quality Assurance Manual
QPNOS : Quality Packs National Occupational Standards
RBD : Reservation Booking Designators
RCF : Regional Connectivity Fund
RCS : Regional Connectivity Scheme
RDG : Route Dispersal Guidelines
RGNAU : Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University
SAOA : Selected Airline Operator Agreement
SASA : Senior Aviation Security Assistant
TAP : Turn Around Plan
TPM : Training Procedures Manual
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
V A T : Value Added Tax

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament
on 17th March, 2017.
2. Action Taken Replies were received from the Government on 21st July, 2017, in respect of
all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. The replies have been categorized as
follows:-
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 17, 19, 25, 27, 30, 33, 33B, 33D, 35, 37, 45, 46, 50, 53, 54, 56, 58,
Total: 26
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government replies:-
Total: 3
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Total: 5
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited.
Total: 13
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of
Action Taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained
in the Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and recommendations/
observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding
paragraphs:
ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18) OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee notes that ` 2702.40 crores has been allocated for the Ministry of Civil Aviation
for 2017-18 against the allocation of ` 3452.37 crores at RE stage in 2016-17. (Para 10)
61,  65,  78,  81,  82,  83,  85  and  86
Paragraph  Nos.:  22,  23  and  33F
Paragraph  Nos.  :  25A,  41,  72,  72A  and  73
Paragraph  Nos.:  14,  22A,  30A,  33C  ,  43,  48,  52,  63,  66,  76,  80,  81B  and  84

2
Reply of the Government
6. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
7. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee notes that there is considerable shortfall in budgetary allocation for 2017-18
especially on the Revenue side and that the Ministry of Finance has not intimated any reason for this
reduction. Keeping in view the considerable growth of the civil aviation sector, Committee is of the
considered view that with the present allocation, it would be difficult to run the existing schemes and
other activities undertaken by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
should actively pursue the matter of increasing the allocation in the first supplementary and at the RE
stage in the current financial year 2017-18, with the Ministry of Finance. (Para 14)
Reply of the Government
9. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The proposal for
increase in allocation of funds for Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2017-18 will be taken up with Ministry
of Finance through 1st Supplementary grant and at RE stage as well.
Further Recommendations/Observations
10. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee may be apprised of the details of the Skill Development Scheme at the implementing
stage. (Para 17)
Reply of the Government
12. The details of the Skill Development Scheme are given as under:-
(a) Ministry had engaged M/s iMaCS for conducting a comprehensive skill gap analysis and
future Road Map for skill development in Civil Aviation Sector. M/s iMaCS submitted the
final report on 15.03.2016.
(b) A workshop on raising awareness about National Skill Qualification Framework was held
on 20.10.2016 with training institutions.
(c) An MoU b/w MoCA and MSDE was signed on 20.10.2016 for collaboration on skill
development.
(d) A Workshop on Recognition of Prior Learning for Aviation Professionals in the Airline/
Airport/Ground Handling/MRO services was held on 08.02.2017. Further, through the
Workshop, Data Entry operators of Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA and BCAS have been
given training under RPL on 28th - 31st March, 2017.

3
(e) The skill development programme has been launched in the cargo sector with the introduction
of the Basic Cargo Awareness Programme (BCAP) programme at Joint Venture and AAI
Airports. The pilot BCAP was launched at Delhi i.e. IGIA Cargo Terminal on 20/10/2015.
(f) Industry validation of 38 QPNOS for civil aviation sector is in process by the AASSC and
they will be finalized in due course of time, after which NSQF aligned training can commence.
The first Executive Development Programme (EDP) was held by Rajiv Gandhi National
Aviation University (RGNAU) on 2-4 February 2017.
Further Recommendations/Observations
13. The Committee notes the reply.
TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee takes note of the projects initiated by the Ministry during the Twelfth Five year
Plan. (Para 19)
Reply of the Government
15. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
16. The Committee notes the reply.
AIR INDIA LIMITED
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee feels that the reduction in equity infusion to the tune of Rs. 787 crores will
adversely affect the financial and operational performance of the company since it may be forced to take
loans from banks and financial institutions at a higher interest rate to meet the short fall, which was
not contemplated under the Financial Restructuring Plan. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered
view that such short fall, at this stage when the company is presently placed at a critical position in
achieving the TAP targets, should be avoided. Since the committed financial support from the Government
is vital to sustain the momentum of performance of Air India, the Committee strongly recommends that
the full amount of equity infusion should be restored to Air India. The Committee recommends that in
future, the amount committed under the TAP should be allocated to Air India at the BE stage itself.
(Para 22)
Reply of the Government
18. With regard to increase in allocation of funds for the current financial year, the matter has been
taken up with Secretary (Finance). However, a formal proposal for additional funds will be taken up at
the time of 1st Supplementary grant.
Further Recommendations/Observations
19. The Committee hopes that the amount committed under the TAP would be allocated to Air
India at the RE stage.

4
Recommendation/Observation
20. The Committee was informed by the Secretary that the profit of Air India has been severely dented
to the tune of ` 1000 crore due to rupee depreciation and foreign exchange variation. The Ministry of
Finance has not taken into account the factor of rupee depreciation and foreign exchange variation while
deciding the equity infusion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that if the intention of the Ministry
of Finance is the revival of Air India, then the former should seriously consider the factors which are
beyond the control of Air India such as depreciation of rupee and foreign exchange variation, while
deciding the amount of equity infusion. (Para 22A)
Reply of the Government
21. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has requested Air India to submit a proposal on the reduction in
profit due to rupee depreciation and foreign exchange variation. Once the proposal from Air India is
received, the matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance.
Further Recommendations/Observations
22. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
23. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may take up this matter
with the Ministry of Finance for the restoration of the full amount of Equity Infusion of 
` 2587 crores
as requested for in the Annual Plan for the financial year 2017-18 by Air India Ltd.
(Para 23)
Reply of the Government
24. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The proposal for
restoration of full amount of Equity infusion of ` 2587.00 crore for 2017-18 will be taken up with
Ministry of Finance through 1st Supplementary grant and at RE stage as well.
Further Recommendations/Observations
25. The Committee hopes that the amount committed under the TAP would be allocated to Air
India at the RE stage.
Recommendation/Observation
26. The Committee appreciates Air India for making operational profits in the financial year 2015-
16. The Committee hopes that Air India would register further profits in the coming months. The
Committee emphasizes the need for micromanaging routes and timings of Air India flights to make Air
India more competitive and passenger friendly. (Para 25)
Reply of the Government
27. Air India schedule is prepared on the basis of its independent assessment of demand, availability
of requisite resources and subject to allotment of the requisite time slots at the various airports. The

5
schedule preparation is aimed at optimizing the deployment of the airline’s resources in order to meet
demands and maximize profits. With the creation of Delhi as its main hub utmost importance is given
to provide seamless and convenient connections both for the domestic as well as international passengers
travelling on its flights. The schedule is drawn with the sole purpose of maximising the yield and
enhancing the revenue on the network by providing convenient connectivity. The feeder traffic to Air
India’s International and Domestic flights have grown over the period which has resulted in better
revenue generation.
28. Air India reviews the performance of its flights on a regular basis. The carriage / load factors /
financial performance of services on its network are regularly monitored and also efforts made to
improve their performance like increase or decrease frequency on existing routes /modifying the existing
schedule by changing the departure time or equipment on a particular route etc. Inputs and suggestions
from Sales and Marketing team regarding change in departure time of a particular flight are also analyzed
for enhanced revenue and implemented subject to availability of Slots at the Airports.
29. Major route restructuring was done in winter 15 schedule with an aim to operate point to point
flights to / from major hubs thereby increasing availability of aircraft and crew for optimum utilization
of available resources and increasing revenue.
30. Following main points are considered in managing the routes operated by Air India:
1. Serve Metro markets, which account for bulk of domestic traffic with multiple daily
frequencies.
2. Aim to serve all markets nonstop to the extent feasible / viable and restructure round robin/
one halt services to nonstop.
3. Aim to serve all markets with at least a daily service, subject to feasibility and viability.
4. Endeavour to provide day return connectivity which are already served with a daily service.
5. Focus on improving connectivity between DEL and other domestic points to strengthen the
hub at DEL.
6. Gain reasonable presence in the growing low cost market segments.
7. Develop new feeder networks to increase flows on trunk and metro routes with focus on
tier-II / tier-III cities.
Further Recommendations/Observations
31. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
32. During the deliberations of the Committee, many Members of the Committee have complained that
the catering services in Air India aircrafts are not up to the mark and that it needs improvement to attract
more passengers. The Committee notes that this is an oft repeated complaint which needs serious attention
of the top management of Air India and Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee urges upon the

6
Ministry to evaluate the standards of the catering services in Air India flights and take necessary steps
to improve the same. The Committee may be informed about the action taken in this regard.
(Para 25A)
Reply of the Government
33. Air India uplifts its meal from the reputed caterers on its flights who also cater to several domestic
and international airlines and have various requisite regulatory certifications and licences. The caterers
also undergo regular audits and checks from these regulatory bodies and Air India to ensure quality.
34. Meal service is reviewed from time to time and menus are updated as per sector-wise requirements
putting emphasis on regional cuisine and also taking into consideration duration of flight, flight timings
and local infra-structural & raw material availability. It is ensured that hygienic, palatable and wholesome
meals are provided to the passengers.
35. The views of the Committee members about quality of food are noted and the caterers would be
urged to ensure and improve quality.
Further Recommendations/Observations
36. The Committee notes that there is ample scope for improvement in the standards of
catering services made available in Air India flights.
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
37. The Committee notes that earlier , the cargo sector was dominated by private airlines. The Committee
welcomes the entry of AAI into the cargo sector. (Para 27)
Reply of the Government
38. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
39. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
40. The Committee feels concerned about the huge amount of outstanding dues of AAI for a long time.
AAI, being the highest revenue generator, has to be actively helped by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
in this regard by taking it up with the defaulting Organizations and Ministries including legal recourse.
The Committee recommends that consistent steps should be taken by AAI to recover the outstanding dues.
(Para 30)
Reply of the Government
41. Statement of dues of various major airlines and concessioners is enclosed at Annexure-A. It may
be seen that there is considerable improvement in recovery of dues in all cases. In case of National

7
Carrier (Air India Group) tripartite meeting was held on 1st March, 2017 with Air India officials along
with Ministry of Civil Aviation officials to expedite the settlement/clearance of dues. Action is being taken
up accordingly.
42. Other scheduled domestic operators are also being pursued to speed up the payment process. Dues
are being monitored closely. As suggested all the Regions/Airports have been instructed to closely monitor
the dues and to report immediately to CHQ in case of any major variation/delay in realization.
Further Recommendations/Observations
43. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
44. The Committee notes that ` 294.69 crores is due from now defunct Kingfisher Airlines. The
Committee also notes that legal suit has been filed against Kingfisher Airlines to recover the dues. The
Committee observes that the Airports Authority of India allowed the accumulation of dues to such a high
level in violation of all the existing rules and procedures in practice. The Committee recommends that
Airports Authority of India should be cautious in future to ensure that no individual stakeholder/airlines
is accumulating such high levels of dues. The Committee also recommends that Airports Authority of
India may conduct an internal inquiry (i) to fix the responsibility of Airports Authority of India officials
for the accumulation of dues by Kingfisher Airlines and (ii) to strengthen the systems and procedures to
prevent the recurrence of accumulation of dues. The Committee may be intimated about the outcome of
the internal inquiry. 
Reply of the Government
45. All Regional Hqrs. and airports have been instructed to ensure that such cases are not repeated
in future. An Internal Committee has been constituted in AAI headed by the senior officer to fix the
responsibility of the officials for the accumulation of dues by Kingfisher Airlines and to strengthen the
systems and procedures further to ensure prevention of recurrence of such accumulation of dues. On
receipt of the report of the said Internal Committee further action will be taken.
46. The dues of Private Concessioners have accumulated mainly because of Arbitration, Court cases,
service tax and royalty. All the cases are consistently being followed up. Government and other PSUs
are pursued with the respective Departments.
Further Recommendations/Observations
47. The Committee desires that strict action should be taken against the responsible officials
found guilty by the Internal Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
48. The Committee hopes that the monetization of AAI land will generate considerable revenue to AAI.
(Para 33)
Reply of the Government
49. Noted.
(Para  30A)

8
Further Recommendations/Observations
50. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
51. The Committee recommends that Airports Authority of India should take initiatives to establish
sufficient commercial activities at the Kolkata airport to generate reasonable level of non-aeronautical
revenue. The Committee is afraid that the neglect of the airport may be a prelude to making it a loss
making airport which may pave the way for privatization of services at the airport.
(Para 33B)
Reply of the Government
52. To optimize utilization of available space and to increase Non-aeronautical revenue, new licenses
for various facilities have been awarded since 2016. Details of major contract is appended below:
Sl. No. Facility Space Revenue
1. Duty Free Outlet 605 sqm. `1,84,43,840/- p.m
2. Master Concessionaire for General Retail 1050 sqm. ` 86,07,500/- p.m
3. Advertisement Rights 14697 sqm. `3,13,48,701/- p.m
53. For non-aeronautical revenue of Kolkata Airport is continuously increasing year by year with
following details:
2013-14 `178.46 Crores
2014-15 `217.63 Crores
2015-16 `257.99 Crores
54. Further, endeavor is being made to exploit the available space, without encroaching into passenger
convenience and safeguarding the safety concern by introducing various new licenses to enhance AAI
Non-aeronautical revenue and to improve passenger experience.
Further Recommendations/Observations
55. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
56. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that Gir Forest which is one of the sanctuaries
for Asiatic Lion is a much visited area by the domestic as well as foreign tourists. However, there is no
air operations anywhere near the sanctuary. The Committee noticed that there is an airstrip near Gir
which can be developed to improve air connectivity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Airports
Authority of India should take the lead to enable the Gir airstrip to start commercial air operations.
(Para 33C)

9
Reply of the Government
57. Airports Authority of India owns and maintains Keshod Airport near the Gir Forest which is
approximately 92 km by road and aerial distance of 40 NM (approx.). Keshod Airport is having a runway
dimesions of 1372m x 45m is an operational airport of AAI suitable for handling ATR-42 type of aircraft
under Visual Flight Rules conditions. Airport is having a Terminal Building suitable for handling 50 peak
hour passengers at a time and two parking stand for parking ATR-72 type of aircraft. At present, no
airlines is operating scheduled flights from Keshod Airport.
Further Recommendations/Observations
58. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of operating
flights from Keshod Airport soon.
Recommendation/Observation
59. During the deliberations of the Committee, it was brought to the notice of the Committee that the
passenger amenities at the Ahmedabad airport is in bad shape. The officials of the airport are not taking
sufficient steps to improve the facilities at the airport. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Airports Authority of India should intervene immediately to ensure that passenger facilities are improved
at the Ahmedabad airport. 
Reply of the Government
60. Action taken in respect of Ahmedabad Airport is as under:
1. Restaurant: Restaurant is available at International Terminal (Terminal-2). For Domestic
Terminal (Terminal-1) tendering is in process.
2. Passenger Chairs: Upholstery and painting work for passenger chairs is in progress to
improve quality of passenger comfort during their waiting time.
3. FIDS Boards: All FIDS boards are going to be replaced with bigger size and latest technology
boards.
4. In-line Baggage System: In-line Baggage System at Domestic Terminal to reduce waiting
time of baggage screening with adding ATR (auto tag reader) for more passenger security
aspect. At International Terminal procurement of in-line baggage system is under process
at CHQ.
5. It has been ensured that passenger baggage trolleys must be available at all the time at trolley
slots.
6. For any enquiry/help/assistance shift duty in-charge available in round the clock in both
Domestic & International Terminals.
7. Self Boarding kiosks have been installed at Terminal-1.
(Para  33D)

10
Further Recommendations/Observations
61. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
62. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation made in its 231st Report that the senior
positions of BCAS may be held exclusively by the cadre officials of BCAS. The Committee further
recommends that the Recruitment Rules of BCAS should be amended in such a way that the cadre officers
may, without any hindrance, be promoted up to the level of Joint Director General. The Committee
desires that the Ministry may submit a note in this regard for the consideration of the Committee.
(Para 33F)
Reply of the Government
63. Consequent to the approval of ‘re-structuring of BCAS’, proposal for creation of one additional
post of Joint Director General (formerly known as Joint Commissioner of Security (CA)) is under
submission for the approval of the Cabinet. Further, the re-structuring plan provides for an additional post
of Deputy Director General (the erstwhile post of Additional Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation))
in BCAS.
1. Process of amendment of RRs for Post of Joint Director General (JDG) would be initiated
after the additional post is approved by the Cabinet.
2. The recruitment rules for the post Deputy Director General (DDG) are currently being
examined wherein one post of DDG has been earmarked for filling through promotion
“failing which” on deputation. Once it is approved at appropriate level, the necessary action
would be taken in this regard.
3. RRs of Group ‘A’  posts pertaining to Asst. Director (AD), Deputy Director (DD) and Joint
Director (JD) has been approved by the DOP&T and UPSC. While submitting the RRs for
the above posts to UPSC/DOP&T, it was proposed to keep Ten per cent of total number
of posts for promotion. However, UPSC after examining the proposal has recommended the
following percentage of total posts for promotion “failing which” on deputation: -
(a) For AD: Seven (7) Per cent
(b) For DD: Five (5) Per cent
(c) For JD:
(i) 1/24(One post) by way of composite method [deputation(ISTC) plus promotion];
and
(ii) 23/24 (23 posts) by way of deputation (ISTC).
These would be notified in due course after approval of Competent Authority.

11
Further Recommendations/Observations
64. The Committee notes the reply.
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA)
Recommendation/Observation
65. The Committee notes the allocation made for DGCA. (Para 35)
Reply of the Government
66. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
67. The Committee notes the reply.
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI (IGRUA)
Recommendation/Observation
68. The Committee desires that IGRUA may be allocated adequate funds to ensure that the steps taken
to make IGRUA self sufficient turn out to be fruitful. (Para 37)
Reply of the Government
69. This Ministry has sought ` 5.00 crore for replacement of diesel engine training aircraft at IGRUA
in 1st Supplementary demands for Grants 2017-18. Also, a Cabinet Note is under inter-ministerial
circulation seeking subsidy for IGRUA.
Further Recommendations/Observations
70. The Committee notes the reply.
PAWAN HANS LTD.
Recommendation/Observation
71. The Committee notes that Pawan Hans is a profit making Organization. However, this profit alone
will not be adequate for its own fleet expansion and fleet replacement. The Committee is sure that the
investment made in Pawan Hans Ltd. would generate adequate returns to the Government. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation made in its 231st Report that giving 
` 600 crores to Pawan Hans
as one time grant for its ambitious expansion plan needs to be seriously considered. Keeping in view the
urgent need for fleet replacement and augmentation, the Committee recommends that adequate provisions
may be made in the budget for Pawan Hans to cater to its imminent requirements.
(Para 41)
Reply of the Government
72. As the process of Strategic Disinvestment of PHL has started, the guidelines categorically states
“the fact company has been identified for strategic disinvestment must be kept in mind before any major

12
investment decision is taken”. In view of the above, M/o Finance has also returned the proposal for
replacement of 09 medium helicopters to be funded by Government equity.
Further Recommendations/Observations
73. The Committee fails to understand why strategic disinvestment has been started for Pawan
Hans which is a profit making Organization.
Recommendation/Observation
74. The Committee hopes that the heliport at Rohini will become operational soon. The Committee
is of the view that the helicopter industry has tremendous potential to provide services in the tourism
sector, disaster management etc. The Committee desires that more such heliports may be set up throughout
the country. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that Air India and Pawan Hans can work
together to ensure seamless travel on hub and spokes basis- bringing passengers from smaller places to
various tourist spots. The passengers are facing lot of travel problems due to the location of airports
in faraway places in Hyderabad and Bengaluru. The Committee desires that the Government may explore
the possibility of utilising the Pawan Hans helicopters to operate air taxis for providing last mile
connectivity from airports such as Bengaluru and Hyderabad to the city areas. (Para 43)
Reply of the Government
75. Rohini Heliport has been inaugurated by Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviation and operationalized on
28.02.2017. This is the first of the four Heli-hubs (large size Heliports) envisaged in the New National
civil aviation policy 2016.
76. Air India and Pawan Hans are working together to ensure seamless travel on hub and spokes basis-
bringing passengers from smaller places to various tourist spots. A committee has been formed by PHL
and Air India represented by the officers from Air India and Pawan Hans and are discussing about
prospects of working together to take up the proposal made by the Parliamentary Committee.
Further Recommendations/Observations
77. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
78. The Ministry has stated in its reply that a token provision has been made under the said scheme
for 2017-18 as the requisite approval from the Cabinet for the scheme of revival of airports has not been
received yet. The head has been created only to cater to the revival of airports and not for the entire
scheme of regional connectivity which is being funded through the Regional Connectivity Fund (RCF).
RCF is being funded through a levy on passenger tickets and not through budgetary support. Once the
CCEA approval is obtained for the revival of airports, then funds would be sought in the Supplementary
Demands for Grants. (Para 45)

13
Reply of the Government
79. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved the revival of/development of 50
unserved and underserved airstrip of State Govt., AAI, Civil Enclave and CPSU by December 2018 at
a total cost of `4500 crores with the budgetary support of Government of India. The process for
allocation of funds will be taken up in the First Supplementary Grants.
Further Recommendations/Observations
80. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
81. The North Eastern States of the country has been neglected for a long time as far as air
connectivity is concerned. The Committee is aware of the fact that a large number of small cities of the
North Eastern States are yearning for air connectivity for so many years. The Committee is of the view
that the Government should understand that the terrain of the States are such that road and rail
connectivity is a difficult proposition in many areas. Air connectivity is the main mode of transport for
majority of the population of North East to other parts of the country and these States are demanding
overall economic development. The Committee feels that better air connectivity is the only solution to
opening up the economy of North Eastern States. Therefore, the Committee notes that it is very essential
to give a differential treatment to the North Eastern States as far as air connectivity is concerned. The
Committee recommends that the North Eastern States should get more regional air connectivity scheme
in addition to the one proposed in the National Civil Aviation Policy. (Para 46)
Reply of the Government
82. With regard to improvement of air connectivity to North East region, it is stated that, as per
approved Summer Schedule-2017 (effective from 26/03/2017 to 28/10/2017), routes connecting North—
East region is placed at Annexure-F.
83. Regional Connectivity Scheme is demand driven mechanism. Accordingly, development of regional
air connectivity routes, is proposed to be left to market forces such that airlines undertake assessment
of demand and nature of supply required on particular routes and lead the process under RCS.
84. In 1st round bidding, proposal for the network of Shillong (Barapani)->Silchar->Shillong (Barapani)
->Imphal->Shillong (Barapani) ->Dimapur ->Shillilong (Barapani) ->Aizawl ->Kolkata ->Aizawl ->Shillong
(Barapani) ->Agartala ->Shillong ->(Barapani) was received. M/s. Deccan Charters Private Ltd. has been
identified as selected Airline Operator. RCS flight operation is likely to start within six months of signing
Selected Airline Operator Agreement (SAOA).
85. With a view to achieve better regulation of air transport services taking into account the need of
air transport services of different regions of the country including North-East (NE) region, Jammu &
Kashmir, Andaman & Nicobar Island and Lakshdweep, the Government has laid down Route Dispersal
Guidelines (RDG). In accordance with these RDG, all Scheduled Airlines who operate on Category-I
(Metro) routes are required to deploy 10% of the capacity deployed on Category-I routes, on Category-

14
II routes. Category-II routes are those connecting stations in North East region, Jammu & Kashmir,
Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep. The operators are also required to deploy at least 50% in
Category III (small cities) of the capacity deployed in Category I route. Further, Central Government vide
order dated 19/04/2016 has broadened the existing routes connecting stations in Category II of Route
Dispersal Guidelines (RDGs) by including the States of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Further, in
compliance with the National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP)-2016, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has
revised the extant Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDGs). However, revised categorization of routes under
Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) will apply from the Winter Schedule of 2017.The Ministry will review
routes under different categories once every 5 years.
Further Recommendations/Observations
86. The Committee notes the reply.
COMBINED HEADQUARTER BUILDING
Recommendation/Observation
87. The Committee is aware that the construction of Headquarter to these agencies are lingering for
a long period. The Committee desires that steps should be taken by the Ministry to ensure that the
construction of the combined Headquarter building are initiated at the earliest. (Para 48)
Reply of the Government
88. Approval of the competent authority has been obtained for the construction of a combined
headquarter building at a cost of ` 303 crore. MoU has been signed with AAI. DGCA & BCAS have
released ` 34.90 crore and ` 16.54 crore respectively in 2016-17.
Further Recommendations/Observations
89. The reply furnished by the Ministry is not clear as to whether funds were allocated for the
construction of Headquarter for the period 2017-18.
GREENFIELD AIRPORT IN KUSHINAGAR, UTTAR PRADESH
Recommendation/Observation
90. The Committee notes that Kushinagar airport has a great potential to attract a large number of
tourists especially the Buddhist tourists who are visiting India and for overall economic development of
the surrounding region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government of India should take
necessary steps in co-ordination with the Government of Uttar Pradesh to ensure that the Kushinagar
airport is ready for operationalisation soon. (Para 50)
Reply of the Government
91. Kushinagar Airport is a Greenfield Airport being established by Government of Uttar Pradesh.
Government of Uttar Pradesh has taken up the development of Aerodrome through M/s. RITES.
• Boundary wall work is near completion (approx. 500 mtrs. balance).

15
• Runway work is in progress (for A-320/B-737 type of aircraft).
• ATC Building- Tender has been floated.
• The State Government of Uttar Pradesh needs to commence construction of Terminal
Building.
Further Recommendations/Observations
92. The Committee notes the reply.
ONGOING WORK AT CALICUT AIRPORT
Recommendation/Observation
93. The Committee notes that the renovation work of the Calicut airport has been going on for a long
time causing inconvenience to the travelling public. The Committee desires that the renovation work at
the Calicut airport may be completed at the earliest and that the progress of the work may be closely
monitored. The Committee further notes that the strengthening of the runway has been completed.
(Para 52)
Reply of the Government
94. (i) The progress of work is being closely monitored by holding regular progress review
meetings.
(ii) Executive Director (Engg)-SR visited Calicut Airport on 05.01.2017 and reviewed all the
packages of project.
(iii) Again a progress review meeting was taken by ED (Engg)-SR on 24.03.2017 at CHQ
alongwith executing agency to review & expedite the progress of work.
(iv) The rate of progress is slow due to following reasons:
- Renovation works in existing building are taken up in phases to avoid inconvenience
to passengers.
- Shifting to existing operation services from falling in expansion area and rains.
(v) It is being ensured to complete the project in all respects by June, 2018.
Further Recommendations/Observations
95. The Committee hopes that the renovation work of the Calicut airport would be completed within
the scheduled time frame.
Recommendation/Observation
96. The Committee notes that after having done the major renovation works at the Calicut airport
recently, the airport has now got the operational capacity to handle major type of aircraft including
4D category. (Para 53)

16
Reply of the Government
97. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
98. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
99. The Committee was informed that with the completion of the strengthening of runway, the Calicut
airport is fully functional now. The Committee notes that the area in and around Kozhikode is inhabited
by a large number of Muslim population who used to undertake Haj Pilgrimage. Therefore, starting Haj
operations from the Calicut airport may help a large number of people economically. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Haj Services may be started from Calicut Airport while continuing the Haj
Services at Kochi airport also. (Para 54)
Reply of the Government
100. Since the process for this year’ s Haj operations has already been initiated and also taking into
consideration the extra financial implication on account of increase in airfare as only narrow bodied
aircraft can operate from Calicut airport, the Ministry of Minority Affairs and the Haj Committee of India
(HCoI) had decided that for Haj-2017, the status quo may be maintained with regard to embarkation
points. However, it has been decided that the demand for restoration of Calicut in place of Cochin
Embarkation Point may be examined by the HCoI for Haj-2018.
Further Recommendations/Observations
101. The Committee notes the reply.
REVIV AL OF AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
102. The Committee desires that commercial, economic and trade potential may be the criteria for
revival of airports. The Committee hopes that the Cabinet approval for the revival of unserved and
underserved airports will materialize soon. The Committee desires that sufficient funds may be made
available for the scheme. The Committee recommends that the airports at Cooch Behar and Durgapur
may also be considered for its revival soon. (Para 56)
Reply of the Government
103. Cooch Behar: Airport belongs to Airports Authority of India and has a runway dimension of 1069m
x 30m suitable for handling 2B (20 seater) Aircraft. Airport has a Terminal Building to handle 100 peak
hour passengers at a time and one parking stand for parking ATR-42 type of aircraft. M/s. Deccan
Charter Pvt. Ltd. has been given LOA to operate flight from Cooch Behar Airport under Regional
Connectivity Scheme (RCS).
104. Dur gapur Airport : Kazi Nazrul Islam Airport, Andal, Durgapur is an operational Greenfield operation
Airport. M/s. Deccan Charter Pvt. Ltd. has been given LOA to operate flight from Durgapur Airport with
M-28 (18 seater) aircraft under Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS).

17
Further Recommendations/Observations
105. The Committee notes the reply.
NEW AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
106. The Committee takes note of the proposals for new airports, accepted by the Government. The
Committee hopes that the construction of these airports will be taken up with the State Governments at
the earliest. (Para 58)
Reply of the Government
107. The list of the airports granted with “in-principle” approval by Government of India/MoCA is given
in Annexure-B and “Site Clearance” in Annexure-C.
Further Recommendations/Observations
108. The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY
Recommendation/Observation
109. The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Civil Aviation Ministry and hopes that the
implementation of the National Civil Aviation Policy will establish an integrated eco system in the civil
aviation industry which will lead to significant growth in the civil aviation sector. (Para 61)
Reply of the Government
110. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
111. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
112. The Committee takes note of the unfilled posts in various organizations of the Ministry. The
Committee is of the view that the existence of vacancies will hamper the effective functioning of the
organizations. The Committee desires that the Ministry should pursue the matter with UPSC and other
concerned agencies so that the bottlenecks in this regard are sorted out. The Committee further desires
that the amendment of Recruitment Rules may be completed at the earliest. The Committee recommends
that advance action may be taken based on the assessment of expected vacancies. (Para 63)
Reply of the Government
113. DGCA: DGCA is in constant touch with UPSC and DoPT to sort out bottlenecks in filling up of
vacancies and amendment of RR’s.
114. BCAS: The Recruitment Rules (RRs) for the post of Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ have been formulated
in consultation with DOP&T and UPSC.

18
1. The RRs for the Group ‘A’  posts i.e. Asst. Director (AD), Deputy Director (DD) and Joint
Director (JD) have been approved by the DOP&T and UPSC and will be notified shortly.
2. The current status of RRs for the Group ‘B’ posts i.e. Civil Aviation Security Liaison Office
(CASLO) Coordinator, Senior Aviation Security Of ficer (SASO), A viation Security Officer
(ASO) and Staff Car Driver (Special Grade) respectively is as under:-
(a) CASLO Coordinator: Forwarded to Ministry of Law for vetting through MOCA.
(b) SASO: Being submitted to UPSC for approval. Forwarded to Ministry of Law for
vetting through MOCA.
(c) ASO: Being submitted to UPSC for approval. Forwarded to Ministry of Law for
vetting through MOCA
(d) Staff Car Driver (Special Grade): Submitted to UPSC.
3. The status of RRs for the Group ‘C’ posts is as under:-
(a) Deputy Aviation Security Officer (DASO): Submitted to Ministry of Law for vetting.
(b) Senior Aviation Security Assistant (SASA): Submitted to Ministry of Law for vetting.
(c) Staff Car Driver (Grade I): Submitted to Ministry of Law for vetting.
(d) Staff Car Driver (Grade II): Submitted to Ministry of Law for vetting.
(e) Aviation Security Assistant (ASA): Notified and nominations have been invited to fill
the posts.
(f) Staff Car Driver (Ordinary Grade): Notified and nominations have been invited to fill
the posts.
(g) Despatch Rider: Notified and nominations have been invited to fill the posts.
Further Recommendations/Observations
115. The Committee desires that the Ministry shall expedite necessary steps/efforts to fill up
the vacancies.
AIR SEW A
Recommendation/Observation
116. The Committee notes that the Air Sewa initiative has integrated various stakeholders in aviation
sector with whom an air traveller has to interact during the air travel. The Committee appreciates this
initiative which has been launched for the benefit of the air travellerr. (Para 65)
Reply of the Government
117. Noted.

19
Further Recommendations/Observations
118. The Committee notes the reply.
NEED FOR GREATER CO-ORDINATION AMONG THE UNION MINISTRIES
Recommendation/Observation
119. The Committee feels that an effective co-ordination mechanism among the Ministry of Culture,
Ministries of Tourism, Civil Aviation and Road Transport & Highways is needed in order to ensure that
the places of tourist and cultural importance are integrated seamlessly with well connected roads and
airports and are provided with required facilities like budget hotels, taxis, souvenir shops, restaurants etc.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may co-ordinate in formulating
an action plan with the above said Ministries in this regard and that the Ministry of Tourism may be
made the nodal Ministry for this purpose. (Para 66)
Reply of the Government
120. The directions of the Committee have been duly noted for action.
Further Recommendations/Observations
121. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
EXORBITANT AIRFARES
Recommendation/Observation
122. The Committee takes note of the fact that there are no existing rules and regulations which are
working in the way of regulating airfares after the repeal of Air Corporation Act in 1994. The Committee
desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should specify the limitations, legal and otherwise, which need
to be amended or other measures to be put in place to tackle this problem after consulting all the
stakeholders. We are a developing country and many of the pricing mechanism applicable to the developed
countries may not suit the Indian people and Indian conditions. The Ministry should consider fixing an
upper limit for every sector, especially in the economy class of air fares. (Para 72)
Reply of the Government
123. Under the provision of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135, Aircraft Rules 1937, airlines are free to fix
reasonable tariff having regard to all relevant factors, including the cost of operation, characteristics of
services, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff. Air fare so established by the airlines is
published on their respective website under the provision of Sub Rule (2) of Rule 135, Aircraft Rules
1937.
124. In order to prevent excessive charging and sudden surges in airfares and to promote transparency
by scheduled domestic airlines, DGCA has also issued Air Transport Circular 02 of 2010 wherein airlines
are required to display on their respective websites the tariff sheet route-wise across their network in
various fare categories and the manner it is offered in the market. The intention behind the above
directions is to keep the passengers informed of pricing pattern of airlines. DGCA has also set up a Tariff
Monitoring Unit in 2010 that monitors airfares on certain routes selected on random basis to ensure that
the airlines do not charge airfares outside the range declared by them.

20
Further Recommendations/Observations
125. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is protected from
predatory airfares.
Recommendation/Observation
126. The Committee has noticed that the airfares from airports of Kerala to the Gulf Sector are quite
exorbitant compared to the foreign carriers which are offering a very less air fare. Many of the travelers
who are utilizing the Gulf sectors are migrant labourers and their helplessness should not be exploited
by the airlines. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation and DGCA should
intervene effectively to control the artificially created exorbitant prices in the Gulf Sector.
(Para 72A)
Reply of the Government
127. The routes between India and Gulf are characterized by a mix of Full service and Budget carriers.
On international routes, including Kerala - Gulf , the fares being offered are reasonable and have been
constructed based on market considerations such as fares offered by competitors, seasonality, extent of
competition and product features like frequency, timing’s, direct / indirect operations etc. All fares
offered by Air India are published fares with given validity and are not changed arbitrarily to take
advantage of holiday / festival season. Closer to departure higher fares may be available as low fares get
sold out first.
Further Recommendations/Observations
128. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is protected from
predatory airfares.
Recommendation/Observation
129. The Committee also notes that even after 50% reduction of the ATF prices over a period of time,
the airlines have not passed on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the consumers. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should take effective steps to ensure that the airlines pass on the benefit
to the travellers by reducing the air fares and inform the Committee about the specific steps taken in
this regard and the outcome thereof. (Para 73)
Reply of the Government
130. Airfares are not regulated by the Government and airlines are free to fix reasonable charges/fee
subject to compliance with rule 135 of Aircraft Rules 1937. The prices are fixed by airlines keeping in
mind the market demand, seasonality and other market forces. Air fares established by the airlines under
the provision of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of Aircraft Rules 1937, considering all relevant factors,
including the cost of operation, characteristics of service, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing
tariff. The airfares so established are required to be displayed under the provisions of Sub Rule (2) of

21
Rule 135 of Aircraft Rules 1937. Airline remains compliant to the regulatory provisions of Rule 135 as
long as the fare charged by them does not exceed the fare established and displayed on their website.
131. The domestic airline pricing runs in multiple levels (bucket or Reservation Booking Designator
(RBD)) which are in line with the practice followed globally. Usually, the lower levels of the fare in the
fare bucket are assigned to advance purchase (popularly known as Apex Fares) bookings (e.g. up to 90,
60, 30, 14 and 07 days before departure). As time lapses and date of journey approaches closer (from
07 days to date of departure), the fare in higher side of fare bucket are available for purchase. Airline
remains compliant to the regulatory provisions of Rule -135 as long as the fare charged by them does
not exceed the fare established and displayed on their website. In order to prevent excessive charging
and sudden surges in airfares and to promote transparency by scheduled domestic airlines, DGCA has
issued Air Transport Circular 02 of 2010 wherein airlines are required to display on their respective
website the tariff sheet route- wise across their network in various fare categories and the manner it is
offered in the market. The intention behind the above directions is to keep the passengers informed of
pricing pattern of airlines. DGCA has also set up a Tariff Monitoring Unit in 2010 that monitors airfares
on certain routes selected on random basis to ensure that the airlines do not charge airfares outside the
range declared by them.
132. With regard to have maximum retail price on airline tickets, the petition filed with Competition
Commission of India (CCI) in a matter on charges of arbitrary high air fare case No. 68/2012 for issue
of direction to DGCA, Secretary (CA) to fix MRP for airlines, CCI has stated in their order that
Commission cannot give direction to this effect. In fact that will be contrary to the spirit of competition
law. Today, the forces of demand and supply govern the airfares.
Further Recommendations/Observations
133. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is protected from
predatory airfares.
HIGH PRICE OF AVIATION TURBINE FUEL
Recommendation/Observation
134. The Committee takes note of the fact that a major difficulty being faced by airlines is the high
cost of ATF which is further aggravated by taxes and that due to the distortion in the price structure
caused by the taxation policies, the financial liability of airlines is getting strongly affected. In this
regard, the Committee urges that the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas may consider reducing the
basic price of ATF , the Ministry of Finance may consider reducing the excise duty levied on ATF and
the State Governments may consider reducing the VAT on ATF. (Para 76)
Reply of the Government
135. The Ministry of Civil Aviation had taken up the issue of inclusion of Air Turbine Fuel (ATF) in
the category of ‘Declared Goods’ with the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. This issue was
deliberated upon by the Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers and unanimously agreed by

22
the States that A TF should not be notified as ‘Declared Goods’. The VAT on A TF is a state matter,
therefore, Ministry has been taken up the matter of reduction in V AT on Air Turbine Fuel (ATF) with
State Governments to boost aviation activities in their states. Some of the State Governments have
responded positively and reduced the rate of tax on ATF to 4-5% or less. Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF)
has however been kept out of the purview of GST.
Further Recommendations/Observations
136. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in
this regard.
INSTITUTES FOR PILOT TRAINING
Recommendation/Observation
137. The Committee notes that there has been a huge jump in the number of aircrafts used for scheduled
operations by various airlines. This implies the need for addition of pilots in the coming years. The
Committee observes that there is an imminent need for pilots/commanders which can be catered to by
the pilot training institutes. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take steps to look into the
reasons for the institutes for pilot training being made non-operational and revive them.
(Para 78)
Reply of the Government
138. At present there are 30 DGCA approved Flying Training Organisations (FTO) for Pilot training in
India (copy of list attached). Any applicant may apply for approval/renewal/revival of Flying Training
Organisation provided they complies with the requirements of CAR Section7Series D Part land CAR
Section 7 Series I Part V. As on date no application is pending regarding revival setting up of new FTO.
139. Measures taken by DGCA for opening / revival of Flying Training Organisations:
DGCA has recently revised Civil Aviation Requirements(CAR)pertaining to approval of FTO and their
Post Holders. Some of the salient features of revised Civil Aviation Requirements are as under:
• Clearly lays down the requirements and processes involved in approval/ renewal/revival of
FTO ’s in a transparent manner.
• Contains specified application proforma for approval/ renewal /revival of FTOs and CFI/Dy.
CFI/CGI who are the post holders of FTO.
• Detailed application proforma are provided for getting approval of Training Procedures
Manual (TPM) and Quality Assurance Manual (QAM) as per the checklist provided in CAR.
140. Restriction of having one Chief Flying Instructor (CFI) and one DY . CFI has been removed, FTOs
are allowed to have requisite no. of CFIs/Dy. CFIs as per the size and scope of approval
Further Recommendations/Observations
141. The Committee notes the reply.

23
Recommendation/Observation
142. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the number of buggies in all the four metro airports
should be increased according to the requirement of elderly and physically challenged passengers and
buggy services should be made available near the arrival and departure gates to save time. Any
dereliction in this regard should be treated as deficiency of services and violation of OMDA Agreement
and appropriate penalty may be imposed on the airport operator . (Para 80)
Reply of the Government
143. At IGI Airport, buggy services are provided for the movement of persons with reduced mobility,
senior citizens and pregnant women. In addition, buggies are also provided for the movement of dignitaries.
Buggy operations are handled by dedicated vendor who is accountable to service level agreements set
by DIAL. Buggy services are available to passengers on request through the concerned airline, who bears
the primary responsibility to facilitate their passengers; besides having buggy stands at various locations
in the terminal where passengers can place the request directly. Provision of Buggy services is a
voluntary service provided at T3 of the IGI Airport. This is not a stipulated service to be provided under
the terms of the OMDA. Hence any dereliction regarding the Buggy services should not be treated as
deficiency of the services provided by DIAL as violation of OMDA.
Further Recommendations/Observations
144. The Committee notes that any dereliction in providing adequate number of buggies is
against the service level agreements set by DIAL. Therefore, adequate care should be taken to
ensure that enough buggies are made available at the IGI Airport, Delhi.
Recommendation/Observation
145. During the deliberations of the Committee, the Committee learned that there are a large number
of shops in the Delhi airport which are cluttering and encroaching into the public area meant for
passenger amenities. This is also affecting the movement of buggies. The Committee urges upon the
Ministry of Civil Aviation to prevent the Delhi Airport authorities from opening of shops in an unscrupulous
way which are jeopardizing the passenger amenities. (Para 81)
Reply of the Government
146. There has been no encroachment of public spaces meant for passengers of IGI Airport and there
is adequate seating for passengers, movement areas for buggies as well as essential services available
for passengers. ASQ scores achieved by Delhi Airport over the years is a testimony to this.
147. DIAL is guided by OMDA which stipulates that the space for commercial activities at the domestic
and international terminals is allocated as per Section J7.1 of the IATA Airport Development Reference
Manual that has been referred to in the OMDA Schedule 1 (Development Standards and Requirements).
As per IATA Airport Development Reference Manual, in major airports the space for commercial purposes
in a terminal can be used up to 20% whereas in the case of IGI Airport, DIAL has actually used space
for commercial purpose only to the extent to 5.9% of terminal area as against upto 20% standard of

24
IATA. DIAL, from time to time undertakes studies on commercial space allocation based on factors such
as Consumer preference on categories, brands, adjacencies amongst other factors. Space allocation has
been scientifically planned based on such studies. Commercial layout is designed keeping in mind the
objective to fulfil and enhance the passengers experience by ensuring availability of choice of products
and services at the terminals while ensuring utmost comfort and convenience. It is noteworthy that every
retail outlet is provided an approval by BCAS prior to commencement of operations. Passengers flow
and comfort have been given utmost priority.
Further Recommendations/Observations
148. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
149. The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the replies of the audit paras without further
delay under intimation to the Committee. (Para 81B)
Reply of the Government
150. Noted for compliance. The present status of pending Audit Paras is attached at Annexure-D.
151. Majority of the paras pertain to Commercial Audit Report. Civil Audit paras pending are only of
the latest report which are under submission.
Further Recommendations/Observations
152. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that the pending Action Taken
Notes may be submitted at the earliest.
Recommendation/Observation
153. The Committee was informed that Indigo airlines is getting priority over other airlines in take off
and landing. The Committee has taken a serious view on the reported special privilege to a specific
airline. The Committee recommends that the DGCA and Ministry of Civil Aviation should conduct an
inquiry into the reported matter of priorities issue and intimate the Committee about its outcome.
(Para 82)
Reply of the Government
154. A copy of the Study Report including finding on the issue is enclosed herewith Annexure E.
Further Recommendations/Observations
155. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
156. The Committee was informed that the President and Prime Minister of India are eligible for
priority landing and take off in any airports of India whereas the Governors and Chief Ministers are
denied such facilities even in their own States. The Committee observes that Governor and Chief Minister

25
are the Head of State and Head of Government in their respective States and they should get priority
landing rights at par with the President of India and Prime Minister of India. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should modify the relevant rules and regulations to enable
the Governors and Chief Ministers for priority landing in their respective States. (Para 83)
Reply of the Government
157. Expansion of the list of dignitaries for priority handling of their arrivals and departures at airports
may delay the other aircrafts at airport or in air, which may lead to passenger inconvenience and
congestion at airports and in air. This may also lead to safety concerns at airports and in airspace.
Further, as the Governors and the Chief Ministers of many states travel by scheduled flights also, this
would cause complications in according priority landing/taking off.
Further Recommendations/Observations
158. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
159. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Rules and Procedure of the Customs
Department differ from airport to airport resulting in avoidable harassment to exclusively domestic
passengers when they are compelled to board/alight at International terminals. The Committee desires
that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may evolve domestic passenger friendly uniform treatment system in
this regard at the airports. (Para 84)
Reply of the Government
160. The issue highlighted by the Parliamentary Standing Committee is related to Airport Operators, and
no core aviation security issues are involved. Evolving domestic passenger friendly uniform custom
Procedures at airports may involve policy issue. The nodal organisation for this purpose will be the
Central Board of Excise and Customs under the Ministry of Finance.
Further Recommendations/Observations
161. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may take up the issue with the
Central Board of Excise and Customs for appropriate action.
Recommendation/Observation
162. The Committee has noted that the international connectivity to European countries and USA and
Canada is non-existent from the Kolkata airport. A large number of passengers have to go either to Delhi
or Mumbai to catch their connecting flights to such destinations. The Ministry may take up the issue
with the scheduled airlines to start operations from Kolkata to European countries, USA and Canada.
(Para 85)
Reply of the Government
163. It may be informed that at present Kolkata is available as a point to Call to USA, Canada, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, France, Germany, Netherland, Poland, Romania,

26
Slovak Republic, UK, Greece, Finland and Spain. However, the start of operations depends upon the
commercial judgement of airlines and Government does not interfere in their operation plan.
As per the available data the current market potential between Kolkata-Europe is 286 passengers
per day, from Kolkata to the US / Canada is 214 passengers per day. The average daily traffic* from
Kolkata to major destinations in Europe, USA and Canada is detailed below:
Kolkata-Europe
DESTINATIONS
Origin London Paris F rankfurt Manchester Rome Birmingham Other T otal
Kolkata 91 17 10 9 8 10 141 286
Kolkata-USA / Canada
Origin DESTINATIONS
New San Chicago Los W ashington T oronto Others T otal
Y ork Francisco Angeles
Kolkata 41 21 15 13 10 07 107 214
Source: DDS Data for the year ending Jan, 2017*
164. It may be observed that currently the market from Kolkata to any single destination in Europe and
USA / Canada is not large enough to sustain viable direct operations with the kind of aircrafts deployed
by Air India on Europe and the US routes.
165. Air India is a network carrier and caters to the major source markets such as Kolkata through
a Hub and spoke pattern of operations. Air India has its hubs at Delhi / Mumbai and provides seamless
connectivity from Kolkata to various destinations in Europe and USA / Canada through these hubs.
Further Recommendations/Observations
166. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
167. The Committee appreciated the fact that there is an overall improvement in the Civil Aviation
sector during the tenure of the current Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee also would
like to appreciate that Air India is showing signs of revival and making operational profits with the
active leadership of its current Chairman and Managing Director. (Para 86)
Reply of the Government
168. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
169. The Committee notes the reply.

27
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS— AT A GLANCE
ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18) OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 7)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 10)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 13)
12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 16)
AIR INDIA LIMITED
The Committee hopes that the amount committed under the TAP would be allocated to Air
India at the RE stage. (Para 19)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 22)
The Committee hopes that the amount committed under the TAP would be allocated to Air
India at the RE stage. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 31)
The Committee notes that there is ample scope for improvement in the standards of
catering services made available in Air India flights. (Para 36)
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 39)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 43)
The Committee desires that strict action should be taken against the responsible officials
found guilty by the Internal Committee. (Para 47)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 50)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 55)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of operating
flights from Keshod Airport soon. (Para 58)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 61)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 64)
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 67)
27

28
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI (IGRUA)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 70)
PAWAN HANS LTD.
The Committee fails to understand why strategic disinvestment has been started for Pawan
Hans which is a profit making Organization. (Para 73)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 77)
REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY SCHEME
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 80)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 86)
COMBINED HEADQUARTER BUILDING
The reply furnished by the Ministry is not clear as to whether funds were allocated for the
construction of Headquarter for the period 2017-18. (Para 89)
GREENFIELD AIRPORT IN KUSHINAGAR, UTTAR PRADESH
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 92)
ONGOING WORK AT CALICUT AIRPORT
The Committee hopes that the renovation work of the Calicut airport would be completed
within the scheduled time frame. (Para 95)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 98)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 101)
REVIV AL OF AIRPORTS
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 105)
NEW AIRPORTS
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 108)
NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 111)
The Committee desires that the Ministry shall expedite necessary steps/efforts to fill up
the vacancies. (Para 115)
AIR SEW A
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 118)

29
NEED FOR GREATER CO-ORDINATION AMONG THE UNION MINISTRIES
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 121)
EXORBITANT AIRFARES
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is protected from
predatory airfares. (Para 125)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is protected from
predatory airfares. (Para 128)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is protected from
predatory airfares. (Para 133)
HIGH PRICE OF AVIATION TURBINE FUEL
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in
this regard. (Para 136)
INSTITUTES FOR PILOT TRAINING
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 141)
The Committee notes that any dereliction in providing adequate number of buggies is
against the service level agreements set by DIAL. Therefore, adequate care should be taken to
ensure that enough buggies are made available at the IGI Airport, Delhi. (Para 144)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 148)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that the pending Action Taken
Notes may be submitted at the earliest. (Para 152)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 155)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 158)
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may take up the issue with the
Central Board of Excise and Customs for appropriate action. (Para 161)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 166)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 169)

MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th August, 2017 in Committee Room 'E'
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Mukul Roy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
3. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
4. Kumari Selja
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
13. Shri Dushyant Singh
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari
18. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
33

34
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P .P . Raumon, Committee Officer
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
WITNESS
1. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following draft Reports:
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in its Two Hundred and Forty Fourth Report on the Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
8. The Committee decided to present/lay these Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 10th
August, 2017. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Lal Sinh
Vadodia, M.P. and in his absence Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya
Sabha. Shri Harish Chandra Meena, M.P. and in his absence Shri Rahul Kaswan, M.P. was authorized
to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017.
9. The meeting then adjourned at 4:43 
P.M.
*relates to other matters.

35
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
Statement showing dues of major airlines as on 31.03.2017
Provisional
Name of Party Outstanding Outstanding ( ` in Crores) Remarks
Dues Dues
As on As on SD(Cash) SD(BG)
31.12.2016  31.03.2017
Excluding Excluding
Interest Interest
12 3 4 5 6
Scheduled National Carriers
Air India 1508.62 1410.66
Air India Express 274.56 275.03
Alliance Air 99.67 101.02
Indian Airlines 644.46 597.51
T
OTAL 2527.31 2384.22 2.97* *Air India Group SD is ` 2.97
crores
Pawan Hans 1.68 1.05 0 0.75
Domestic Scheduled Airlines
(In Operation)
Jet Airways 42.54 27.73 2.08 100.00
Spicejet 16.54 35.47 7.10 77.90 Payment Increase daily from
Rs 1.20 crs. to Rs 2.5 crs.
Indigo 68.82 55.34 6.33 220.50
Go Air 20.59 27.56 1.03 30.05
Air Asia India (Ltd.) 8.12 5.80 4.12 18.00
Air Costa Ltd. 3.93 3.05 0.23 - Cash and Carry
T
OTAL 160.54 154.95
Foreign Airlines **Collection Through IATA
Air Arabia 9.46 6.67 0.90 14.50
Emirates 39.86 18.19 1.29 61.26
Thai Airways 19.56 14.08 0.45 22.05
Air Asia Berhad - Malaysia 6.50 4.13 1.80 11.50
37

38
12 3 4 5 6
Malaysian Airlines 4.60 - 0.0036 0.03 10.00
Qatar Airways 24.57 12.72 0.59 35.59
Turkmenistan Airlines 3.76 3.16 0.14 0.01 Cash and Carry
Etihad Airlines 16.01 9.60 - 37.80
Singapore Airlines Cargo 1.45 0.88 0.35 1.85
Gulf Air 2.87 1.70 - 5.66
Tashi Air Pvt. Ltd. (Bhutan) 5.14 6.37 1.78 -
Druk Air (Bhutan) 7.41 4.84 0.51  -
Regent Airways (Bangla desh) 4.11 6.30 0.55 4.40 ` 2.14 received on 13.04.2017
Total 145.30 88.64
(` in Crores)
Oil Companies
BPCL 30.45 22.70 0.43 1.84
IOCL 141.06 111.33 0.26 11.20
HPCL 37.91 28.96 0.07 2.00
Total 209.42 162.99
Private Concessionaries
TDI-Advertisement 85.88 70.67 1.02 59.09 Arbitration
Bhadra- Ground Handling 136.76 152.16 14.74 1.45 Arbitration
Flemingo Duty Free 31.85 34.19 11.68 54.28 Service Tax
Taj Sats- Inflight Catering 34.86 36.80 - 0.16 Dispute on Royalty
Air India Sat Ground Handling 1.01 1.74 0.33 - Dispute on Royalty
AB Hotels (Raddison Delhi) 83.93 85.08 - - Arbitration
Nav Bharat Enterprise (Car Parking) 4.36 4.36. 0.68 2.18
The Leela Hotel - Mumbai 163.49 155.92 - - Court Case, Eviction Process
Garuda Aviation Services 11.19 9.27 0.02 6.38 Service Tax
(Car Parking)
PK Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. (F&B) 6.09 5.10 0.26 4.81
Novia Int. Consulting (GH) 20.32 22.52 0.20 1.56

39
12 3 4 5 6
Graphis Ads (Advertisement) 4.75 4.76 - -
Total 584.49 582.57
Govt. and PSU Others
Speed Post Office 1.75 1.75 0.004 -
Immigration Department 3.17 4.29 0.008 -
BSNL 4.93 4.38 0.28 -
ITDC 5.34 5.36 0.004 -
Department of Customs 16.91 17.52 0.86 -
Govt. of MP 0.47 0.38 0.01 -
Govt. of U.P . 0.52 0.48 0.01 -
T
OTAL 33.09 34.16 -

40
ANNEXURE-B
List of Greenfield Airports with ‘in principle’ approval and their developers
Sl. Name of the Project/ Name of the Remarks
No. Date of Receipt Promoters
of proposal
12 3 4
1. Mopa Airport, Goa State Government To bo developed by GMR.
International Foundation stone laid by Hon’ble PM
in Nov.2016.
2. Navi Mumbai International City & Industries Tender in process.
airport, Maharashtra Development Corporation
of Maharashtra Limited
(CIDCO)
3. Sindhudurg Airport, Maharashtra Industrial Work in progress.
Maharashtra Development Corporation
(MIDC)
4. Bijapur Airport, Karnataka State Government Stale Govt. of Karnataka to take
action to start the work.
5. Gulbarga Airport, Karnataka State Government State Govt. of Karnataka to take
action to start the work.
6. Hassan Airport, Karnataka State Government Stale Govt. of Karnataka to take
action to start the work.
7. Simoga Airport, Karnataka State Government State Govt. of Karnataka to take
action to start the work.
8. Kannur International Airport, M/s KINFRA Work in Progress. Commercial
Kerala operations planned by end of
September, 2017.
9. Dabra Airport, Gwalior, M/s Gwalior Agriculture State Govt. of Madhya Pradesh to
Madhya Pradesh Company Limited start the work.
10. Pakyong airport, Sikkim Airports Authority of India Work in progress. Expected to be
completed by September, 2017.
11. Kushinagar in Uttar Pradesh, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh State Govt. of Uttar Pradesh has
International started the work.
12. Karaikal in Pudducherry Karaikal Airport Private Land acquisition not completed.
Limited.
40

41
12 3 4
13. Shirdi in Ahmednagar District, Maharashtra Airport Work in progress.
Maharashtra-International Development Corporation
Ltd.
14. Dholera at Navagam village, M/s Dholera International State Govt. of Gujarat to take
Ahmedabad, International Airport Company Limited. action to start the work.
15 Bhogapuram in Vizianagaram Bhogapuram Inte rnational State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh to
Distt. near Visakhapatnam Airport Corporation Limited take action lo start the work.
(BIACL).
16 Dagadarthi Mandal, Nellore Bhogapuram International State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh to
Distt. Airport Corporation Limited take action to start the work.
(BIACL).
17 Oravakallu in Kurnool Distt, Bhogapuram International State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh to
Andhra Pradesh. Airport Corporation Limited take action to start the work.
(BIACL).
Note: 1. *Kazi Nazrul Islam Airort, Andal, Durgapur, West Bengal has been completed and Scheduled Operation commenced
w.e.r. 18th May, 2015.

42
ANNEXURE-C
‘Site Clearance’ granted by MoCA for obtaining in-principal approval for the following
Greenfield Airports.
Sl. No. State Name of the Project Name of the Promoters
1. Arunachal Pradesh Itanagar Airports Authority of India.
2. Jharkahand Jamshedpur Of M/s TATA Steel.
3 Punjab Machiwara, Ludhiana M/s Bengal Aerotropolis Project Limited
(BAPL)
4 Rajasthan Kotkasim Tehsil in Alwar, M/s DMICDC
distt.(Bhiwadi) in Rajasthan
5 Telangana Kothagudem, Distt. M/s Telangana State Industrial
Khammam Infrastructure Corporation Limited
(TSIICL)
42

43
ANNEXURE-D
List of Pending C&AG Audit Paras
Airport Authority of India
Sl. Para/Report No. Brief Subject Status
No.
12 3 4
1. Para No.2.2 of Procurement of Communication, Navigation and ATN Submitted to
Report No. 3 Surveillance Equipments audit
of 2011-12 Lack of synchronization of activities in procurement
(Commercial) of equipments, side preparedness and installation and
commissioning, resulted in payment of demurrage
charges, lapse of warranty period even before
installation and commissioning of equipments and
delay in getting the intended benefits of upgraded
technology.
2. Para No.2.5 Favour to a contractor by awarding a construction ATN Submitted to
of Report No. contract against unacceptable offer and allotment audit
8 of 2012-13 of land free of charge
(Commercial) Airports Authority of India awarded a contract to a
M/s ITD-ITD CEM JV for (a) construction of
Integrated Terminal Building at Kolkata Airport at
higher rates in violation of its own guidelines under
works manual; and (b) also extended undue favour
of ` 12.69 crore to the contractor by allotting land
free of charge in deviation of its own policy on land
allotment.
3. Para No.3.1 of Land Management ATN is under
Report No. 13 The Land management Department was responsible to process
of 2013 keep proper record and to establish ownership of land
(commercial) vested with AAI. Out of 37455.729 acres of land test
checked in Audit, 14053.202 acres of land was not
mutated in the name of AAI. Further, 888.44 acres of
land was under encroachment (March 2012) due to
which AAI had to defer creation/operationalisation of
certain facilities. Many agencies were unauthorisedly
occupying land at various airports. However, in absence
of agreements with the parties AAI was unable to
realize license fee/lease rent due.
43

44
12 3 4
4. Para No.2.4 of Injudicious investment on development of airport ATN Submitted to
Report No. 3 at Coochbehar audit
of 2011-12 AAI made an injudicious investment of ` 30.92 crore
(commercial) on   development   of  Coochbehar  Airport  without
ensuring availability of adequate runway length resulting
in the Airport remaining  non-operational for more than
3 years. The  Authority had  also  incurred  additional
expenditure of ` 3.14crore on maintenance
5. Para No.2.1 of Allotment of land for setting up and operations of ATN is under
Report No.21 frying clubs process
of 2015 There was inordinate delay in formulation of a  policy
(commercial) regarding levy of airport charges and allotment of land
to flying clubs and the attempt of  framing  policy  in
2007, did not bear any result even till August 2014. In
the absence of timely action and  mechanism to verify
the eligibility under Category I or II, flying clubs which
were involved in  other  commercial activities and also
otherwise  not   entitled to   avail   the   benefits  of
concessional  rates  continued  to  enjoy   the  same.
Further, in absence of any agreement with the parties,
most of the flying clubs raised disputes regarding rates
and did not clear their dues.  Moreover,  AAI suffered
losses due  to  delay  in  identification  of  sites  and
issuance of required clearances.
6. Para No.2.3 of Loss due to failure in taking timely action as per ATN Submitted to
Report No.21 approved credit policy audit
of 2015 AAI did not take action as per credit policy and
(commercial) allowed M/s Kingfisher Airlines Limited to continue its
operations on credit basis even after withdrawal of the
credit facility. AAI also did not act timely on the advice
of MoCA to take all legal means beside encashing bank
guarantee of the airline. This resulted in loss of revenue
of ` 172.69 crore apart from loss of interest of
Rs 117.03 crore (up to February 2014).
7. Para No.2.4 of Non-recoverv of cost of manpower and absence of ATN Submitted to
Report No.21 provision to safeguard AAI’s interests audit
of 2015 As per JV agreement signed with Maharashtra Airport
(commercial) Development Company Limited (MADC), AAI deployed

45
1      2                    3         4
its manpower at Multi Modal International Passenger
and Cargo Hub Airport at Nagpur (MIHAN) for
Operation Support Period (OSP) of five years from
2009-10 to 2013-14 against payment of manpower
cost by MIHAN India Limited (MIL). Against
manpower cost of Rs 64.99 crore incurred by AAI,
MIL has paid an amount of Rs 9.09 crore so far
(January 2015). AAI also did not include any clause
in the JV agreement to mitigate the financial risk in
the event of non-absorption of AAI employees by the
JV partner.
8. Para No.8.1 of Irregular payment of allowances and perks beyond ATN submitted to
Report No.21 admissible ceiling Audit
of 2015 Non-adherence to guidelines of Department of Public
(commercial) Enterprises (DPE) regarding grant of allowances and
perks to executives to a maximum ceiling of 50
percent resulted into irregular payment of ` 543.77
crore and ` 29.33 crore to the employees of AAI and
CIL respectively
9. Para no. 2.1 of Management  and  execution of terminal building ATN submitted to
Report No. 3 construction    projects ** Audit
of 2011-2012 The  audit  objective  of conducting this thematic
(commercial) study was to assess whether execution and
Management of construction projects for new terminal
buildings at the airports selected for audit were
economic, efficient and effective.
10. Para No.3.2 of Loss of revenue ATN Submitted to
Report No. 13 In order to ensure credit of revenue share of revenue audit
of 2013 share    accruing   to   AAI,  OMDA  provided  for
(commercial) appointment of an  Independent  Auditor  by  AAI  in
consultation with DIAL. The revenue share was to be
calculated on the basis  of  quarterly revenue of DIAL
as certified  by  the  said  Independent  Auditor.  The
independent  Auditors  appointed  highlighted  in Audit
reports for  the  quarter  ended  31.03.2012  on  the
revenue of DIAL that as against ` 6.47 per unit being
charged  by the service provider i.e. BSES limited for
High Tension (HT) and Low Tension (LT) both. DIAL

46
1      2                    3         4
was  collecting  from  the  concessionaires electricity
charges at the rate approximately  Rs 9.66 per unit in
case of LT and at RS 6.91 per unit in  case  of  HT.
The independent Auditor highlighted  inits  report  that
DIAL did not share with AAI an additional  amount in
its report  that  DIAL  did  not  share  with  AAI  an
additional amount  of  Rs 13.52 crores collected from
Concessionaries, during the period April 2010 to March
2012, over and above the per unit rate payable to BSES
limited. As per  the  definition  of  revenue  mentioned
above,  any  recovery  in excess of the amount paid to
service providers shall  be considered  as  revenue  of
DIAL.  Accordingly,  AAI  was  entitled  to get its due
share of 45.99% in the  above  amount  of  Rs  13.52
crore i.e. Rs 6.22 crores
11. Para No.3.3 of Non-realization of due share in the revenue of DIAL ATN is under
Report No. 13 DIAL utilized the value of Duty Credit Scrip amounting process
of 2013 to ` 91.83 crore,  earned  under  Served  From  India
(commercial) Scheme (SFIS), for payment of import duty but did not
account  for  the same as ‘Income’. This deprived the
AAI from getting 45.99 per cent share of the above
revenue, i.e. ` 42.33 crore receivable as per OMDA.
The AAI further sustained loss of Rs 9.84 crore (till
January 2013) towards interest due to non-realisation of
the above amount.
12. Para No.2.2 of Disregard of provisions of Shareholders Agreement ATN is under
Report No.21 by MoCA and AAI resulted in additional burden on process
of 2015 the travelling public in the form of Development
(commercial) Fee in IGI Airport, Delhi
MoCA and AAI failed to bring to the notice of AERA the
provisions of Shareholders Agreement which mandated
affirmative vote of AAI till such time AAI held 10
per cent equity shares in DIAL, in respect of special
resolution under the Companies Act, 1956 and Reserved
Board Matters. This led to levy of Development Fee by
DIAL, resulting in additional burden on the travelling
public of Rs 3415.35 crore
13. Para No.2.3 of Non-realisation of revenue share as per provisions ATN submitted to
Report No. 15 of agreement Audit
of 2016 Airports  Authority  of  India  (AAI)  did not take the
(commercial) required action to protect its financial interests in terms

47
1      2                    3         4
of  the  provisions  of  Operation,  Management  and
Development  Agreements signed with MIAL and DIAL
which resulted  in  non realisation of share of ` 29.62
crore by AAI in the revenues of MIAL and DIAL. AAI
also sustained loss of  interest to the extent of ` 13.86
crore (till March 2015) on the unrealised amount.
14. Para No.2.4 of Irregular payments towards encashment of half pay
Report No. 15 leave
of 2016 AAI allowed to its employees encashment of half pay ATN submitted to
(commercial) leave/earned leave, on their retirement/superannuation/ Audit
death,beyond the prescribed ceiling of 300 days,in
contravention of GoI/DPE guidelines, which resulted in
irregular payment of’  30.30 crore during the period
from January 2006 to March 2015.
15. Para No.2.5 of Poor    utilization   of  infrastructure  developed  with ATN submitted to
Report No. 15 Government funds  at  Birsi airport, Gondia resulting in Audit
of 2016 recurring losses for its maintenance
(commercial)
16. Para No.2.1 of Potential loss of revenue to Airports Authority of India ATN Submitted to
Report No. 15 (AAI) resulting from flaw in agreement between MIAL audit
of 2016 and private developer HDIL for removal of
(commercial) encroachments from Airport Land
17. Para No.2.2 of Short r ealization of Annual Fee from MIAL resulting ATN is under
Report No. 15 in loss of revenue to AAI process
of 2016 As per OMDA, MIAL had to share 38.7 per cent of its
(commercial) pretax  gross  revenues  with  AAI  except  for  those
specifically exempted. In contravention of OMDA terms,
MIAL did  not share revenues earned as non-refundable
deposits  made  by  bidders  and  additional water and
electricity charges collected over and above the rates at
which it paid to concerned  authorities.  AAI  failed  to
recover  these  monies long after these violations were
pointed by the independent auditors appointed by it.
18. Para No.2.1 of Lack of appropriate action by AAI led to loss of its ATN is under
Report No. 9 revenue and undue benefit to contractor preparation.
of 2017 Airports Authority of India extended undue benefit by
allowing credit facilities violating the terms of contract

48
1      2                    3         4
which had resulted in non-recovery of dues. Further,
by not issuing notice for vacating advertising sites after
the contract period was over, the Authority had suffered
a loss of revenue amounting to 41.68 crore.
19. Para No.2.2 of Loss of revenue due to non-inclusion of land in ATN is under
Report No. 9 lease agreement preparation.
of 2017 Airports Authority of India allotted (April 2007), a built
up space at Bijwasan, to Delhi International Airport
Limited (DIAL) for the purpose of providing dormitory
accommodation for CISF personnel deployed at Indira
Gandhi International Airport (IGIA), New Delhi. While
signing the agreement, AAI did not include in the lease
agreement (March 2008), the area of land along with
the built up space and the lease rent payable for the
same. On it being pointed out by Audit in July 2014,
AAI raised (January 2015) invoices for lease rent
towards land measuring 19,525 sqm, however, DIAL
refused payment on the ground that there was no
agreement to charge rent for such land. Thus, AAI
sustained loss of ` 28.67 crore.
20. Para No.2.3 of Idling of civil enclaves due to absence of realistic ATN submitted to
Report No. 9 assessment of their requirement Audit
of 2017 AAI did not carry out a realistic assessment of the
requirement of Civil Enclaves at Jaisalmer, Bhatinda and
Bikaner, due to which investment of ` 100.59 crore on
creation of facilities at these Civil Enclaves remained
idle since their operationalisation. AAI also incurred a
recurring loss in the form of depreciation charges
amounting to ` 40.06 crore.
AIR INDIA LTD.
21. Para No.2.1 of Wasteful expenditure due to non-utilisation of ATN Submitted to
Report No. 8 leased premises for cargo warehouse audit
of 2012-13 Failure to surrender leased premises without usage for
(Commercial) the last nine years ended March 2012 resulted in a
wasteful expenditure of ` 14.30 crore towards lease
rent, council tax and utility charges.
22. Para No.2.2 of Extra expenditure in Air India Limited ATN Submitted to
Report No. 8 (a) Acceptance of abnormally higher rates in a non- audit

49
1      2                    3         4
of 2012-13 competitive manner by Washington office of Air India
(Commercial) for hiring transport for the teams accompanying Special
Charter Flights on visits of Prime Minister to USA
resulted in extra expenditure of ` 75.26 lakh.
(b) Prot Authority of New York and New Jersey
notified a rate of 8% Port Fee to be charged on the
permit holders suing its resources. Air India Ltd.,
however, paid the Port Fee at a higher rate of 8.7% to
its catering contractor operating at New York and
Newark airports resulting in overpayment of `63.22
lakh.
23. Para No.2.3 of Review of Operations ATN Submitted to
Report No. 8 Airline Allied Services Ltd. was unable to operate cost audit
of 2012-13 effectively its fleet of six old vintage freighter aircrafts.
(Commercial) As regards passenger operations, the Company did not
have  adequate  stock  coverage   in  the maintenance
contract/engine support leading to infructuous payment
of lease rent in respect of ATR and CRJ aircrafts. The
Company   also   failed   to  reassess  its  manpower
requirements timely and continued to have 10-22 pilots
in excess of its requirement every month from May
2010 to November 2010.
24. Para No.2.2.1 Extra expenditure due to acceptance of higher rates ATN Submitted to
of Report No. for catering services audit
CA24 of 2009- Acceptance of higher rates for catering services for its
10 (Commercial) own flights than the rates for Air India Express flights
finalized by the company with the same caterers on the
same dates resulted in extra expenditure of ` 8.49 crore.
25. Para No.2.5 of Unfruitful expenditure due to imprudent acquisition Submitted to audit
Report No.21 of aircraft on dry lease
of 2015 Air India Charters Limited renewed dry lease 1 of four
(commercial) aircraft disregarding the rationale for acquisition of 18
new aircraft, shortage of crew and loss making routes
which led to unfruitful expenditure of Rs 405.83 crore
between March 2011 to May 2014 towards lease related
charges.
26. Para No.2.6 of Avoidable expenditure on ferry flights to Mumbai ATN is under
Report No.21 for maintenance. process.
of 2015 Air India Charters Limited (AICL) delayed establishment
(commercial) of hangar project at Thiruvananthapuram and

50
1      2                    3         4
consequently performed the flight maintenance at
Mumbai, resulting in avoidable expenditure of Rs 18.07
crore.
27. Para No.2.7 of Review of implementation of Passenger Reservation ATN is submitted
Report No.21 Svstem and RAMCO Inventory System to Audit
of 2015 Failure on the part of the Company to design and
(commercial) activate necessary controls in the Passenger Reservation
System and the Inventory System, inappropriate
customization, lack of validations in line with business
processes and improper data migration resulted in the
Company not achieving the full potential of the automated
systems. The Company resorted to manual interventions
and had a high degree of dependence on multiple vendors.
Lack of an integrated system coupled with the manual
interventions and weak security controls exposed the
system to the risk of manipulations, unauthorized use
and unreliability of data.
28. Para No.2.8 of Avoidable expenditure due to under-utilisation of ATN is under
Report No.21 own simulators process.
of 2015 Air India Limited and its subsidiary viz. Air India
(commercial) Charters Limited failed to optimally utilize its own
simulators for want of proper planning and maintenance,
which resulted in avoidable expenditure of ` 8.47 crore
during July 2009 to March 2014 on purchase of
simulator slots at third parties’ simulators for training
the pilots.
29. Para No.2.4 of Non-realisation of potential rental income ATN is under
Report No. 9 Inordinate delay in taking decision on renting out two process
of 2017 properties coupled with delay in granting approval for
renovation of a property, resulted in non-realisation of
potential rental income of nearly HKD 66.75 lakh
(` 4.96 crore).
30. Para No.2.5 of Short coming in tendering process in renewal of ATN is under
Report No.9 of Aviation Insurance resulting in a loss of USD process
2017 30,89,959 to Air India Limited
Air India awarded the contract for Aviation Insurance
Policies for the year 2009-10 to a consortium led by

51
1      2                    3         4
Reliance General Insurance Company Limited (RGICL).
After awarding the contract but before commencement
of the Policy an aircraft of AIL caught fire at Mumbai.
Considering this as additional risk RGICL demanded
additional premium of USD 30,89,959, and deducted the
same from the claim relating to subsequent incidence of
an aircraft crash at Mangalore. This resulted in additional
expenditure of ` 14.40 crore (USD 30,89,959).
31. Para No.2.6 of Irregular award of Contract ATN is under
Report No. 9 Award of contract to M/s. IBM India Private Limited, process
of 2017 at a cost of ` 155.70 crore, on nomination basis for
SAP ERP Implementation, Application Management and
Maintenance Services and Supply of Hardware and
Software in violation of the conditions applicable for
awarding contracts on the basis of Rate Contracts of
DGS&D and guidelines issued by the Central Vigilance
Commission.
PA WAN HANS LIMITED
32. Para No. 1.3.4.6 Shortfall in dividend declared by government ATN Submitted to
Report No.2 of companies PAC
2009-10 PHL did not comply with the government directive to
(Commercial) pay minimum dividend of 20% either on equity or on
post-tax profit while declaring dividend for the year
2008-09
33. Para No. 3.5 of Operations of Helicopters ATN submitted to
Report No. 13 PHL had shortage of average 22 to 18 Pilots during the Audit
of 2013 period 2009-12 for its Dauphin fleet of helicopters at its
(commercial) Wes tern Region from where operations  to  one  of  its
largest customer viz. ONGC  were catered  to. ONGC
deducted an amount of  Rs  16.98  crore  (FMC  and
liquidated damages) towards AOG of helicopters due to
non availability of helicopters  mainly  for  shortage of
Pilots. There were instances of excess procurement of
AS-4 kits, sliding doors, engines,  delayed  procurement
of critical items, resulting in loss of FMC which indicate
the need for an efficient inventory control system. There
was no system for timely recovery  of  debts  due  to
which there was huge outstanding of `171.87 crore as
on 31.03.2012 necessitating  implementation  of  credit
control procedure.

52
ANNEXURE-E
Report on the issue of preferential treatment given to some airlines (Indigo)
while landing/takeoff:
1 Air Traffic Services are provided to all the airlines as per provisions the provisions of ICAO PAN
ATM Doc 4444 (AAI’s Manual of Air Traffic Services) and National rules/regulations. The approach
sequence is established in a manner which will facilitate arrival of the maximum number of aircraft
with the least average delay. In case of extended delays due to congestion, runway closures/
maintenance, airspace activities etc. the approach sequence is judiciously established on the principle
of accommodating maximum number of aircraft (including departures) irrespective of the airlines,
with least average delay by taking into consideration the total track mileage from touchdown,
respective positions and flight levels, performance profiles etc.
2 Priority is given to:
(a) An aircraft which anticipates being compelled to land because of factors affecting the safe
operation of the aircraft (engine failure, shortage of fuel, etc.);
(b) Hospital aircraft or aircraft carrying any sick or seriously injured person requiring urgent
medical attention;
(c) Aircraft engaged in search and rescue operations; and
(d) VIP I (President), VIP II (Vice President), VIP III (Prime Minister) and VIP V (Foreign
Heads of State/Govt.) aircraft.
3 In order to investigate the issue, two teams, each one comprising of senior Officers, were
constituted at each of six Metro airports (Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad and
Bengaluru) which accounts for more than 60% of air traffic in India. One team was required to
monitor traffic pattern and handling of traffic in Aerodrome Control Tower and other team was
required to do the same in Approach Radar Unit for a duration of one hour during peak traffic
hour of that airport.
4 Analysis of reports received from Metro Airports, revealed the following:
(a) During the observation period of one hour of peak traffic at six Metro airports on 06.03.2017,
it was noted that provisions as stated in para 1 and 2 above were followed meticulously.
(b) Distribution of flights operated by the different airlines were as appended-
Distribution of flights during one hour peak traffic at six Metro on 06.03.2016
Delhi Mumbai Bengaluru Kolkata Chennai Hyderaba d Total
Movements
1 2345 67 8
Operator 1015-1115 1030-1 130 0900-1000 0940-1040 1030-1130 0930-1030
Indigo 15 11 8 8 8 6 56
Jet Airways+ 16 12 5 4 3 1 41
Jetlite
52

53
1 2345 67 8
AIR India + 14 5 1 5 2 1 28
Alliance Air
Spicejet 6160 36 2 2
International 6532 34 2 3
Operators
G o  A i r 44 l2 12 1 4
Vistara 6221 01 1 2
Air Asia 1030 00 4
Others 4202 40 1 2
Total 72 42 29 24 24 21 212
5 The above chart clearly indicates that at a given time Indigo flights are significantly more than
other airlines, particularly with respect to Air India. The Indigo Airlines have about two times
traffic share (26% of total traffic) compared to Air India (13% of total traffic) during the period
of observation of one hour on 06.03.2017.
6 DGCA sources (http://dgca.nic.in/operator/sch-ind.htm) reveal that Air India / Alliance Air and
Indigo Airlines have 131 and 129 number of aircraft respectively as on 07.03.2017. But at a given
time, the number of aircraft of Indigo Airlines in the air were more than the number of aircraft
of any other airlines including Air India, probably because of their quick turnover of aircraft on
the ground.
7 It can be easily seen from the above facts that no advantage / preference is extended to Indigo
Airlines over other airlines including Air India.
Air Asia,
4,2%

54
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Directorate of Air Traffic Management
Subject : including the Governor and Chief Minister in the list of dignitaries for priority landing
at the airports within their states - Regarding.
Reference may please be made to ministry of civil aviation letter No. A V. 15029/4/2016 - DG dated
17/02/2017 on the above mentioned subject.
In accordance with the ICAO guidelines, the priority handling for (arrivals and departures) is
accorded to
1. An aircraft which anticipates being compelled to land because of factors affecting the safe
operation of the aircraft;
2. Hospital aircraft or aircraft carrying any sick or seriously injured person requiring urgent medical
attention;
3. Aircraft engaged in search and rescue operations; and
4. Other aircraft as may be determined by the appropriate authority.
As per existing instructions, the following VIPs are being accorded priority handling:-
1. The aircraft carrying the President of India (VIP I)
2. The aircraft carrying the Vice president of India (VIP II)
3. The aircraft carrying the Prime minister of India (VIP III)
4. The aircraft carrying foreign head of State (VIP V)
The matter of according priority to aircraft carrying the Chief Minister & Governor of a state
while operating at airports within their state has been examined and AAI has no objection to the proposal.
However, AAI can provide this facility only at those airports where air traffic services are being provided
by AAI.
Since, Chief Minister & Governor of many states travel by scheduled flights also, MoCA may
consider issuing appropriate instructions to AAI in this regard
(S Chadha)
General Manager (ATM-ATS)
For executive director (ATM)
Tele-Fax No. 011-24642236
Sh. Kameshwar Mishra, U.S. to the Govt. of India, MoCA. New Delhi
Uo No. AAI/ATM/OPS/30-20/2012 Dated, 01 March, 2017
54

55
ANNEXURE-F
Operations To/From North-East Region (Summer 2017)
Airline Routing Frequency/ Airports Connected in NER
Week
12 3 4
Air India Kolkata-Dibrugarh-Kolkata 5 Agartala, Aizwal, Dibrugarh,
Kolkata-Dimapur-Kolkata 6 Dimapur
Kolkata-Aizawl-Kolkata 5 Guwahati, Imphal, Silchar
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 7
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata 14
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata 7
Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal & VV 7
Kolkata-lmphal-Kolkata 4
Kolkata-Aizawl -Imphal-Kolkata 1
Kolkata-lmphal -Aizawl -Kolkata 1
Kolkata-Imphal-Kolkata 1
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata 4
Alliance Air Kolkata-Shilong-Kolkata 6 Guwahati, Lilabari, Shillong,
Kolkata-Guwahati-Lilabari & VV 4 Tezpur
Kolkata-Guwahati-Tezpur & VV 3
Jet Airways Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 29 Aizwal, Dibrugarh, Guwahati,
Kolkata-Aizawl-Kolkata 8 Imphal,Silchar
Kolkata-lmphal -Kolkata 3
Kolkata-Silchar & VV 7
Kolkata-Guwahati-Dibrugarh & VV 7
Silchar-Guwahati & VV 7
JetLite Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi 7 Aizawl, Guwahati, Jorhat,
Delhi-Guwahati-Aizawl & VV 7
Kolkata-Guwahati-Jorhat & VV 7
55

56
12 3 4
Indigo Ahmedabad-Mumbai-Guwahati-Bagdogra- 7 Agartala, Dibrugarh, Dimapur
Kolkata-Bangalore Guwahati.lmphal
Bangalore-Kolkata-lmphal & VV 7
Mumbai-Kolkata-Guwahati & VV 7
Kolkata-Guwahati & VV 28
Kolkata-lmphal-Agartala-Kolkata 4
Kolkata-Agartala 7
Kolkata-Agartala & VV 7
Kolkata-Agartala-lmphal-Kolkata 3
Kolkata-Bagdogra & VV 7
Kolkata-Bagdogra-Guwahati-Mumbai 7
Delhi-Kolkata-Dibrugarh & VV 7
Delhi-Kolkata-Dimapur & VV 7
Delhi-Kolkata-Agartala & VV 7
Delhi-Dibrugarh-Guwahati-Delhi 7
Delhi-Guwahati & VV 7
Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal & VV 14
Delhi-Bagdogra & VV 7
Goa-Mumbai-Guwahati & VV 7
Hyderabad-Bangalore-Guwahati-Agartala 7
Imphal-Kolkata-Ahmedabad 7
Agartala-Kolkata-Vishakhapatnam 7
Agartala-Guwahati-Bangalore-Hyderabad 7
Bagdogra-Delhi 7
Ranchi-Delhi-Bagdogra 7
Jaipur-Kolkata-Guwahati & VV 7
Lucknow-Kolkata-Guwahati & VV 7
Chennai-Kolkata-Guwahati & VV 7

57
12 3 4
Chennai-Kolkata-Agartala & VV 7
Chennai-Kolkata-Bagdogra & VV 7
Chennai-Guwahati & VV 7
Chennai-Hyderabad-Guwahati & VV 7
Pune-Kolkata-Imphal 7
Spicejet Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 14 Agartala, Guwahati, Aizawl, Silchar
Delhi-Guwahati-Agartala & VV 7
Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi 7
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata 7
Kolkata-Silchar-Guwahati & VV 7
Chennai-Guwahati & VV 7
Bangalore-Guwahati-Bangalore 7
Kolkata-Aizawl-Guwahati & VV 7
Kolkata-Agaratala-Kolkata 14
Go Air Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 7 Guwahati
Kolkata-Bagdogra-Kolkata 7
Delhi-Guwahati-Bagdogra & VV 7
Delhi-Bagdogra-Guwahati & VV 7
Vistara Delhi-Guwahati-Bagdogra 7 Guwahati
Kolkata-Guwahati & VV 7
Air Asia Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi 14 Guwahati, Imphal
Bangalore-Guwahati-Bangalore 7
Deihi-Guwahati-lmphal & VV 7
Total 549
Total Airports Connected (11): Agartala, Aizwal, Dibrugarh, Dimpaur, Guwahati, Jorhat, Imphal, Lilabari, Shillong, Silchar
and Tezpur