 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
334
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fourteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fourteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-v 
4. REPORT                                1-56 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   57-59 
6. ANNEXURES        60-67 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
68-70


i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty Fourth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee  contained in its Three 
Hundred Fourteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
2. The Three Hundred  Fourteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  14th March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fourteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 3rd 
June and 13th July, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  15th 
December, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 15, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAIB Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau  
AAICLAS AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited  
AAR Allen Aircraft Radio 
AAS As A Service 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority  
AHU Air Handling Units  
AIAHL Air India Asset Holding Limited 
AIESL Air India Engineering Services Limited 
AME Aircraft Maintenance Engineer  
AMO Aircraft Maintenance Organization 
ANS Air Navigation Services 
APD Airport Director 
APU Auxiliary Power Unit 
ASA Air Service Agreement 
ATC Air Traffic Control 
ATCO Air Traffic Controller  
ATF Aviation Turbine Fuel 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BE Budget Estimate 
BFFC Basic Fire Fighters Course  
BMS Bachelor of Management Studies  
CAPEX Capital Expenditure 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CDR Conditional Route 
CEMILAC Centre for Military Airworthiness and Certification 
CM Chief Minister 
COD Commercial Operation Date  
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPL Commercial Pilot License  
DFT Directorate of Flying Training  
DGAQA Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DGR Dangerous Goods Regulation 
DO Demi-Official 
DoR Department of Revenue 
DPE Department of Public Enterprise 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade  
EASA European Union Aviation Safety Agency  
EU European Union  
FAA Federal Aviation Administration  
FATA Foreign Aircrew Temporary Authorization  

iv 
 
FC Flight Crew 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment  
FEGP Fixed Electric Ground Power 
FTO Flying Training Organisation 
FUA Flexible Use of Airspace 
FY Financial Year 
GE General Electric 
GFA Greenfield Airport 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GIA Grants-In-Aid  
GMR Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
HEPA High Efficiency Particulate Air  
HMCA Honourable Minister of Civil Aviation 
HQ Headquarters 
HR Human Resources 
IAA Indian Aviation Academy  
IAF Indian Air Force 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization  
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi  
IGST Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
ILS Instrument Landing System 
ISHARE Indian Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 
Engineers 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
KPI Key Performance Indicator 
KSIDC Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation  
LOI Letter of Intent 
MERV Minimum Efficiency Reporting Values  
MoC Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoD Ministry of Defence 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRO Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
MRP Maximum Retail Price  
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
MT Metric Ton 
NASP National Air Sports Policy 
NCAP National Civil Aviation Policy  
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NSDC National Skill Development Corporation  
NSDF National Skill Development Fund  
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OLODE Online On Demand’ Examination 

v 
 
PBB Passenger Boarding Bridge  
PCA Pre-Conditioned Air 
PGDAO Postgraduate Diploma in Airport Operations  
PIB Public Investment Board 
PLI Production-Linked Incentive  
PMG Project Monitoring Group  
PoS Place of Supply 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSF Passenger Service Fee  
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RE Revised Estimates 
RED Regional Executive Director 
RGNAU Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University  
RoFR Right of First Refusal 
SAO Selected Airline Operator  
SAS Small Aircraft Scheme  
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
STP Standard Training Package 
TEFS Techno-Economic Feasibility Study 
TRA Temporary Reserved Airspace  
UAS Unmanned Aircraft System 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UDF User Development Fee  
UP Uttar Pradesh 
USA United States of America  
UT Union Territory 
UTM Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management  
UVGI Ultra Violet Germicidal Irradiation  
VIP Very Important Person 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its T hree Hundred Fourteenth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation which was presented 
to both the Houses of Parliament on 14th March, 2022.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 3rd June, 2022  and 13 th 
July, 2022 in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The 
replies have been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  8, 9, 12, 24, 28, 39, 74, 98, 115 and 116 
Total: 10 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 16, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 34, 35, 38, 42, 44, 56, 61, 65, 71, 78, 80, 82, 85, 
91, 97, 104, 110 & 112 
Total: 24 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  13, 23, 48, 51, 55, 62, 76, 94, 99 & 105 
Total: 10 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that while the projected  demand of the Ministry for 2022 -23 was 
Rs. 11,183.10 crores, an allocation of Rs. 10,667.00 [Rs. 10,590.54 (Revenue) + Rs. 76.46 
(Capital)] crores has been made, which indicates a shortfall of Rs. 516.10 crores. It also noted 
that shortfall is mainly on a ccount of decreased allocations for AIAHL and RCS, while budget 
for projects and programmes have been adjusted as per priority of execution. The Committee is 
of the opinion that the decreased allocation for AIAHL is justified, in view of the fact that the 
process of disinvestment of Air India is almost complete, however, not agreeing to the 
projections for the RCS by a staggering amount of Rs. 101.28 crores is cause of concern. The 
Committee feels that the RCS Scheme, which has given a big boost to affordab le connectivity, 
should have been encouraged by the Government, through sufficient budgetary support. A 
curtailment of funds at this stage may hamper the smooth development of this important scheme. 
The Committee is aware that the Civil Aviation sector is reeling under stress and different 
players have also suffered massive losses due to COVID -19 pandemic and need a helping hand 
from the Government at this critical juncture, yet the Ministry has not been allocated the desired 
projected amount for B.E. 2022 -23. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry‟s 
request for additional funds for all schemes/ heads, including RCS scheme at the R.E. 2022 -23 
stage may be favourably considered by the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The observations of the Committee have been noted. Regarding the budgetary provision 
under RCS Scheme, it is submitted that the budget allocation under the scheme  at BE 2022 -23 
has been made considering the status of the progress of the projects  covered under R CS. The 
status of the UDAN airport  is reviewed from time to time and if required, the Ministry will take 
up the matter with MoF for enhanced budget at RE stage in FY 2022-23. 
 

3 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee also notes the decrease in allocation for B.E. 2022 -23 (Revenue) as 
compared to projected amount for 2022 -23 for DGCA by Rs. 37.08 crores, BCAS by Rs. 22.62 
crores and National Aviation University by Rs. 8.60 crores. There has also been a decrease in 
B.E. 2022-23 (Capital) for BCAS by Rs. 13.31 crores and AAIB by Rs. 3.40 crore, where less 
than one-fourth of the projected amount of Rs. 4.40 crores has been allocated. The Committee 
expresses serious concern at the decrease in funds for the agencies looking after the security and 
safety in Civil Aviation sector such as DGCA; BCAS; and AAIB, despite the increased security 
concerns in the sector and recommends that Ministry should be given additional funds at R.E. 
2022-23 stage. 
(Para 9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The recommendations of th e Committee for allocation of additional funds  for DGCA, 
BCAS and National Av iation University have been noted and depending upon request received 
from these organizations, the matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at RE 2022 -23 
stage. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that over the last five years, the percentage of allocated budget at 
R.E. stage, on projected demand has varied from 56.36%, 59.19% and 34.78%. While in 2020 -
21, it was substantially raised to 84% of the projected demand. In 2021 -22, the Ministry was 
allocated Rs. 72,652 crores, which was more than the projected demand of Rs. 67,844.62 crores 
and the higher allocation was on ac count of “Disinvestment of Air India Limited‟. For this year 
also, 86.80% of the total allocation of Rs. 10,667.00 crores was for AIAHL (SPV), leaving only a 
meager portion of 13.2% amounting to Rs. 1407.09 crores for allocation to the rest of the heads. 
The Committee is of the opinion that such a low allocation over the years will seriously affect the 
growth of the Civil Aviation sector, which is already suffering from a downturn caused by 
COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of low allocation 
may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at R.E. stage and need for higher allocations may 
be stressed upon. 
(Para 12) 

4 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The observation of the Committee regarding low allocation over the years has been noted 
and depending upon request received from different organizations of the Ministry, the matter will 
be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at R.E. 2022-23 stage for higher allocations. 
 
Greenfield Project, Brownfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee noted that in the next two to three years, there would be a proposal for six 
to seven new Greenfield airports. From the recent experiences, it has been noticed that the 
Greenfield airports which were developed during the last decade have saturated on their existing 
capacities and need further expan sion and augmentation of facilities, however, lack of land 
availability is limiting the scope of expansion of Greenfield airports. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that every Greenfield airport must be planned in such a way that it should meet the 
requirements of at least next 40 years. Necessary land for the airport may be acquired based on 
the futuristic planning; construction; and development can be undertaken in the future 
depending on the requirements. 
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Noted. The Master Plans are developed for Airports considering the future forecast. 
However, the development plans are prepared for undertaking the construction in phases. Due to 
the dynamic nature of development, the Master Plans are reviewed regularly based on the revised 
growth forecast. Based on the futuristic traffic projections adequate facilities are  created and 
planned at the airports, such that it would be able to meet all the future traffic demand. 
 
Defence Brownfield Projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. In addition to the aforesaid land transfer issues between MoD and AAI, another issue 
relates to the restrictions imposed by the MoD and creation of “no fly zones” over defence 
airfields for over flying by civilian aircrafts. The Committee understands that though restrictions 
are justifiable for civilian aircrafts over flying high security defence airports, yet it feels that the 
problems faced by the civilian aircrafts must be kept in mind. The civilian aircrafts in such cases 

5 
 
have to traverse a longer route to avoid “no fly zones” which results in longer duration of flights 
and higher fuel consumption and leads to higher passenger fares. The Committee is of the 
opinion that wherever possible, the MoD should allow domestic airlines to fly over defence 
airfields in consultation with the Ministry. Hence, the Ministry should take up this issue 
expeditiously with the MoD. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation in coordination with Ministry of Defence has undertaken the 
issues of FUA (Flexible Use of Airspace) under which the upper airspace of Restricted Airspace 
Volume, at and above 33,000 feet in the Northern Sector and above 25,000 feet in the Southern 
Sector, have been converted as Temporary Reserved Airspace (TRA). 119 Conditional Routes  
(CDRs) have been promulgated so far. Moreover, 24 danger areas have been de -notified in 
coordination with Army.  
 
Airports Authority of India 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is also of the view that security and safety measures, presently available 
at the airports are generally not upto standards, due to which there are frequent security lapses. 
The ILS systems are also lacking at airports, which makes night landing and landing during 
rainy seasons risky. The Committee, therefore, recommend s that at all under construction 
airports, security and safety equipment of world -class level should invariably be installed. The 
latest ILS systems and night landing facilities should also be incorporated at the planning stage 
of airports, so that the flights can operate smoothly even in bad weather conditions, reducing the 
need for diversion of flights. The Committee is also of the view that planning for airport 
construction should be futuristic, so that there is no need for expansion and alterations for 
installation of ILS or security/ safety apparatus, at a later stage, which inconveniences the 
passengers and also disturbs the flight operations at airports. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and the sugge stions/ observations of 
the Committee will be adhered to, while developing airports in future. 

6 
 
Installation of HEPA Filters at Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that HEPA filters are not effective against 
COVID-19 virus and that it is also not technically feasible to install such systems at airports. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that as per ISHARE guidelines, UVGI systems and 
MERV-13 filters may be installed at all the airports in the country, espec ially the ones where 
there is international arrivals from countries where COVID -19 cases are still prevalent. The 
Committee desires to know the airport-wise status of installation of UVGI systems and MERV-13 
filters across the country and the action plan o f the Ministry to combat future waves of COVID -
19. 
(Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Action for installation of UVGI system and MERV -13 filters in the existing AHUs 
depending upon feasibility at AAI Airports has already been initiated in accordance with the 
guidelines issued by ISHARE on "Operating of Air conditioning and ventilation system to 
control spread of Corona Virus Disease (COVID - 19) in Residence, Workspaces and Healthcare 
Facilities". 
  
7.2 At 30 AAI airports, UVGI system has been installed, wh ile 2 AAI airports have been 
installed with MERV -13 filters. Action is being taken to install UVGI and MERV -I3 filters at 
balance airport depending upon the feasibility.  At 28 airports, installation of UVGI system and 
MERV-13 filters is not feasible due absence of centralized air-conditioning system. 
  
7.3 The airport wise details are attached Annexure - A. Status report of UVGI and MERV 13 
filters at Airport operated by State Government and PPP partners is attached under Annexure – 
A1. 
 
Connectivity of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. Considering the importance of the issue, the Committee had earlier taken up the issue in 
its 297th Report on the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of India‟. The Ministry in its 

7 
 
action taken notes on the aforesaid Report informed that the project of National Master Plan 
incorporating the Airports, Roadways, Railways, Shipping, Gas pipe lines, Power (existing and 
proposed) all have been combined to create a National Master Plan, which will be inaugurated 
by Hon‟ble Prime Minister. Additionally, letters have been sent by Chairperson, AAI to Chief 
Secretaries of various State Governments to align and relate the City Master Plans also with the 
Airport Master Plans. 
(Para 98) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Noted. 
 
Leveraging Tourism through Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee feels that airports act as a first gate of entry for both the domestic and 
international tourists visiting a particular city with iconic destinations. Hence, the visuals at the 
airports leave a lasting impact on the mind of a tourist and also create interest in them to 
explore the places of tourist interest. In view of this, the Committee feels that leveraging tourist 
places through airports assumes significance. The Committee, t herefore, recommends that 
besides offering tourist destinations suggested by Ministry of Tourism for RCS -UDAN bidding 
for promoting tourism, MoCA should also design airports to portray the local art and culture of 
the city at the airports through statues, murals, paintings and sculpture displays. The Committee 
recommends that promotional signages for promoting tourism can be explored through 
commercial concessionaires. The AAI can explore the possibility of completely removing rentals 
for Government agencie s instead of charging 50% concession on rental for promoting tourism. 
At the Jaipur airport, the Ministry may impress upon the PPP partner for synchronising the 
Master Plan of the airport, portraying the local theme, art and culture. The Ministry can also 
explore the possibility of engaging marketing personnel at airports to provide professional 
assistance and guidance, especially to the international tourists, which will help in promotion of 
tourism in the country. 
(Para 115) 
 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The suggestions of the Committee regarding promotion of tourism and portraying of local 
art and culture of the city at the airports through statues, murals, paintings and sculpture displays 
have been noted.  
 
9.2 With regard to synchronizing the Master Plan of Jaipur Airport, portraying the local 
theme, art & culture, it is to inform that the Concessionaire i.e. Jaipur International Airport 
Limited vide their email dated 15.12.2021 have informed that the Master Planning of Jaipur 
Airport for the future development has been considered to have sense of place with local theme. 
 
Evacuation of Stranded Indians in Ukraine 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes that the Government has embarked upon a massive operation 
namely, „Operation Ganga‟, to evacuate stranded Indian nationals, especially, students, from the 
war torn region of Ukraine. Some private airlines and Indian Air Force are engaged in this 
effort, through special flights. The Committee understands that the Government of India is also 
exploring options for evacuating the stranded nationals through corridor/ cross border roads to 
neighbouring countries and thereafter bringing them back to the country by air. The Committee 
applauds this well-coordinated humanitarian efforts of the Ministries of Civil Aviation; Defence; 
and External Affairs and recommends that airlift and all the other possible means of evacuation 
efforts should continue till all the stranded Indian nationals in Ukraine are evacuated safely. 
Presumably, the Ministry would also bear the requisite cost of transport, if required and make 
arrangements for their transport to their native places. 
(Para 116) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The Ministry of Civil Aviation notes with gratitude the words of encouragement from  the 
Committee. Around 22,500 Indian nationals returned from Ukraine to India from 1 February – 
11 March, 2022. 90 evacuation flights were operated under Operation Ganga, including 14 
Indian Air Force flights. The air fare for all the flights operated under Operation Gang a has been 
borne by the Government of India. 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Budget Allocation for Combined Headquarter Building 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that a Combined Headquarters (HQ) building has been planned for 
DGCA, BCAS, AAIB & AERA and allocation has been made under the B.E. (2022 -23) Capital 
Section and all the four aforesaid organizations will be contributing for the expendit ure of the 
said building. The Committee appreciates the fact that all the four organizations viz., DGCA, 
BCAS, AAIB and AERA, which are dealing with the security and safety in Civil Aviation Sector 
are being housed in the same building which will ensure be tter coordination among them and 
will ensure best results in the civil aviation security. The Committee, however, notes that no 
capital allocation has been made for B.E. (2022 -23), though Rs. 20.00 crores has been given as 
„Grants-in-Aid‟ to AERA in B. E. 2022-23 (Revenue) head. The Committee desires to know the 
reasons for no allocation at AERA under Capital Head and how the Ministry proposes to ensure 
contribution on the part of AERA for timely completion of its HQ building. The Committee also 
desires to know whether there are any expected cost and time overruns for construction of HQ 
building. The Committee recommends that the HQ building may be built within a fixed timeline 
so as to avoid cost escalation at a later stage. The Committee may be provided wi th a brief Note 
on the proposed Combined Headquarters. 
(Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Regarding allocation of budget under Capital Section for AERA, it is clarified that AERA 
being an autonomous body, the entire expenditure for its maintenance, Salary  and Capital 
creation is provided through Grants -in-aid from the budget of MoCA. The budgetary allocation 
of Rs 20.00 crore for the FY 2022-23, as Grants-in-aid, is inclusive of Rs 8.00 crore as GIA – for 
Creation of Capital Assets and this amount of alloc ation will be utilised by AERA for payment 
of its share of cost of construction of combined office complex. 
 
 

10 
 
1.2 It may be stated that a Civil Aviation Office Complex at Safdarjung Airport has been 
approved by the competent authority at a cost of Rs. 303. 80 crore. It will accommodate the 
offices of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation/(DGCA), Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security/(BCAS), Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau/(AAIB) and Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority/(AERA). Presently, these offic es are scattered in different places in 
Delhi.  The present office premises of these organizations are not able to accommodate all 
the personnel at one place.  
 
1.3 The execution of the project has been entrusted to Airport Authority of India/(AAI), a 
statutory organiz ation under this Ministry. An Mo U has been signed on 24th November 2016 
among AAI, DGCA, BCAS, AAIB and AERA.  As on 31.05.2022, 82% of the construction has 
been completed. AAI has informed that the probable date of completion of the project is  
31.12.2022.  
  
1.4 A review committee in accordance with Rule 141, GFR 2017 consisting representative 
each from the Administrative Ministry, Internal Finance Wing and Executing Agency has been 
constituted to consider issues pertaining to the construction of the combined operational office 
building inter-alia including time and cost overrun of the project.  
 
Greenfield Project, Brownfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The committee feels that the Ministry is off mark as regards the understanding on 
creation of white paper for policy makers, as to how and why Green Field Projects are the future 
of the nation. The Ministry has had a long experience of developing airports which were owned 
by the State Governments or by Airport Authority of India. While a long time vision is always 
envisaged for an Airport project to grow for next few decades, however the Committee feels that 
the Brown Field Projects are important to enhance  the footprint of aviation network in the 
country but given an option of redoing an existing airport to that of a Green Field project, there 
should be a clear and ambitious policy of the Government to identify locations for furtherance of 
New Airports. Ind ia being a country with large population, the comparison of number of 

11 
 
aircrafts per person in India is far less than those of United States of America and China which 
have a comparable population figure and geographical area. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Greenfield airport is conventionally referred as an aviation facility being developed on 
empty land or previously undeveloped land and an airport whose commissioning, planning & 
construction process is carried out from the scratch / grass root level. 
 
2.2 Advantages of Greenfield Airports are:  
 Sites can be planned as per the governing guidelines for intended critical aircraft. Land is 
available & is comparatively cheaper than land at Brownfield airports. 
 Land for future expansion of Airport can be earmarked at initial stage & kept as reserved 
for future growth. 
  
2.3 However, to enhance the footprint of aviation network in the country, 
upgradation/modernization of existing brownfield Airports is also being done. In this regard, 
Private Airport Concessionaires and   AAI has embarked upon a CAPEX plan of more than Rs. 
90,000 crore during year 2019 -2024 for development/ upgradation/ modernization of various 
airports in the country to meet the requirement of Air traffic which includes New Greenfield 
airports, expansion/ modification of existing terminal, new terminals, expansion/ strengthening 
of existing runways, aprons, ANS works like control tower, technical block etc. Such works 
leads to more Aircraft Parking Bays, Better runway efficiency and safety, i ncrease operational 
efficiency, capacity of terminal building which will further facilitate seamless movement of 
Aircraft and enhance the passengers' experience. 
 
2.4 Government of India (GoI) has formulated a Greenfield Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008 
which provides guidelines, procedure and conditions for establishment of new Greenfield 
Airports in the country. As per the Policy, an airport developer or the respective Sta te 
Government willing to establish an airport is required to send a proposal to the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation (MoCA) in the prescribed format available at www.civilaviation.gov.in. There is a 2 -
stage process for approval of the proposal i.e., 'Site Cleara nce' followed by 'In -Principle' 

12 
 
approval.  In accordance with this policy, MoCA receives proposals from the State Governments 
or Airport Developers from time to time for establishment of airports. After due examination, the 
approval for development of a ne w Greenfield Airport is granted. The responsibility for project 
implementation such as land acquisition, project funding, obtaining other mandatory clearances, 
etc. lies with the concerned airport developer or the State Government, as the case may be. 
Under the GFA Policy, GoI has accorded 'In -Principle' approval for development of 21 
Greenfield airports, out of which 08 airports have been operationalized. 
 
2.5 Ministry of Civil Aviation launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN 
(UdeDeshkaAamNagrik) to stimulate regional air connectivity and making air travel affordable 
to the masses. The primary objective of RCS is to facilitate / stimulate regional air connectivity 
by connecting unserved/underserved airports/heliports/water aerodromes. UDAN is a m arket 
driven scheme. Interested airlines based on their assessment of demand on particular routes 
submit their proposals at the time of bidding under UDAN. An airport which is included in the 
awarded routes of UDAN and requires upgradation / development fo r commencement of RCS 
operations, is developed under "Revival/upgradation of unserved and underserved 
airports/heliports/water aerodromes" Scheme. The Government of India has approved a budget 
of Rs. 4500 crore for revival of existing unserved / underserve d airports / airstrips of the State 
Governments, Airports Authority of India, Public Sector Undertakings and Civil Enclaves. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. Committee would like to clarify further this point with the example of the Patna Airport 
in which over thousand crores is being spent without adding any operational advantage and still 
continuing with all the limitations, which existed as far operations is concerned, would remain 
there even after spending a thousand crores. The reason why the Committee h as been 
emphasizing the need of having a distinct plan of action is a case study of Patna and proposed 
Bihta Airport, which is yet to go for a PIB clearance with an estimated investment of around 800 
Crores. The committee is fully aware that Bihta Airport is going to be another duplication of 
existing facility in Patna, without any additional commensurate advantages, as it is a Defence 
Brown Field project. Therefore, it requires a fresh thinking to optimally utilize public resources 
with a view to create wo rld class facilities and provide an edge in civil aviation infrastructure. 

13 
 
The State of Bihar could have benefited immensely from a Green Field Project, if this matter was 
well explained by the Central Government to the State Government when the Central te am on its 
own had forwarded a proposal of redeveloping the Bihta Airport. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 A DO letter dated 29.09.2021 was sent by HMCA to Hon‟ble CM of Bihar, enclosing a 
comparative chart of Civil Enclave at Bihta vis -à-vis Suggested Greenfield Airport at Saran, 
requesting to indicate the stand of Government of Bihar  (GoB) for the location of alternate 
airport to Patna Airport. 
  
3.2 GoB vide a letter dated 04.10.2021 clearly indicating its opinion to develop Bihta airport, 
has requested to commence the development work on the 108 acre of land handed over to AAI 
for Bihta airport. However, for operation of wide -bodied aircraft (Code-E type such as B777) to 
facilitate international operations and growth of cargo, additional requirement o f 191.5 acre of 
land for runway extension and 8 acre land on city side to shift Terminal Building, is being 
projected to GoB. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that it would be far too clear if the Government spells out the 
advantages and how Green Field Projects would completely change the face of Aviation in this 
country. Taking another example of Devanahalli Airport Bangalore, which emerged as a Green 
Field Project, while there were two Airports existing in the city of Bangalore. One was  
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and other was Yelahanka Airbase of the Air Force. The 
State Government along with the Central Government chose to ignore both these airports to 
develop an international airport and today there is quantum jump in the Air Traffic of Bangalore 
and also emerging as a Major International Hub in the south. With these examples, which the 
Airport Authority and the Ministry of Civil Aviation already has, it would be pertinent for the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation to spell out, why p rospects of a Green Field Project are far superior 
and have distinct advantages in terms of economics, passengers movement, increasing 
passengers footprint and future expansion possibilities and growth looking at the market size in 
India. 

14 
 
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Greenfield Airport: 
4.1 The word "Greenfield" literally denotes or relates to previously undeveloped sites for 
commercial development. On the similar ground, Greenfield airport is conventionally referred as 
an aviation facility being developed on empty land or previously undeveloped land and an airport 
whose commissioning, planning & construction process is carried out from the scratch / grass 
root level. 
  
4.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation, in this regard has formulated a Greenfield Airport Pol icy and 
guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airport. The airports Greenfield in nature are given 'ln -
Principle' approval as per criteria, guidelines and procedures formulated in Greenfield Airport 
Policy. 
Advantages of Greenfield airport: 
i. Airport at Greenfield sites can be planned as per the governing guidelines for intended 
critical aircraft. Land is available & is comparatively cheaper than land at existing 
airports. 
ii. Land for future expansion of Airport can be earmarked at initial stage & kept as reserved 
for future growth. 
iii. Multi modal Connectivity can be planned at Greenfield airports in consultation with all 
Stakeholders at initial stage itself. 
Existing airports are always having land constraints. 
 
Defence Brownfield Projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Ministry also informed that due to the consistent and persistent efforts and the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee for transfer of land to Bagdogra Airport, 
working permission was granted for defence land meas uring 5.93 acres by Ministry of Defence 
(MoD) vide letter dated 10.01.2022 and the same has been included in the land barter matrix 
which has been forwarded from Chairman AAI to Secretary, MoD vide letter dated 17.01.2022. 

15 
 
The Committee notes that expediti ous follow -up action is required from Airports Authority of 
India to further develop the Bagdogra airport. 
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The State Govt. of Bengal has handed over a land measuring 98.72 acre to AAI on 
16.03.2022 for development of Bagdogra airport. The action being taken by Airports Authority 
of India for development of the airport is as follows:  
a. Tender has been called for appointment of Architectural & Engineering Consultant for 
taking up the work of “Development of New Civil Enclave at Bagdogra Airport” and is 
likely to be awarded in mid June‟22.  
b. Chairman, AAI vide letter dated 07.03.2022 requested Air Chief Marshal, Chie f of Air 
Staff, VayuBhawan, New Delhi for completing the modalities for working permission on 
Defence land measuring 5.93 acre expeditiously and convey the same to AAI. 
 
Defence Brownfield Projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that lon g pending issues between MoD, MoCA and AAI were 
resolved through continuous efforts by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to resolve the issues. The 
Committee appreciates the positive development at resolving pending issues at Bagdogra and 5 
other airports whi ch will benefit the nation at large. This should act as a guiding example and 
other pending land transfer issues should be cleared with MoD to develop the airports which 
will augment the Civil Aviation capacity. The Committee recommends that Land Barter Ma trix 
formula between AAI and MoD should be thoroughly examined by AAI and taken up with MoD 
and a coordinated policy should be evolved to solve the pending issues. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The land Barter Matrix regarding transfer of Defence Land to AAI and transfer of AAI 
land to Defence Establishment has been formulated by AAI and forwarded to Ministry of 
Defence on 17th Jan, 2022. Requirement of land is a continuous process and further requirements 
of land by IAF or by AAI are projected as revisions to the Barter Matrix. 
  

16 
 
6.2 As a coordinated system of Land transfer based on the Barter Matrix, AAI applies for 
land in the Land Management Portal of Ministry of Defence. And based on the Application 
received the decision is taken/ approval is g ranted for construction in the monthly meetings held 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Defence. 
  
6.3 Further for the working permissions for Taxi tracks and pavements on the Defence land, 
AAI applies on the Management Portal of Ministry of Defence and based on the application, 
working permission is granted on payment of lease amount. 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes with serious concern that out of the total MRO services turnover of 
Rs. 15,353 crores, the annual turnover of the Indian MRO industry is just Rs. 2,300 cro res, 
which is just 15% of India‟s civil MRO expense. The balance 85% MRO services amounting to a 
colossal amount of Rs. 13,053 crores are availed from MROs b ased abroad in Singapore, 
Malaysia, Middle East, EU and USA etc. The massive amount of the MRO services availed from 
abroad can be gauged from the fact that the amount is more than the total B.E. allocation of Rs. 
10,667 crores for 2022 -23. The Committee l aments the huge outgo of avoidable foreign 
exchange. It is of the opinion that Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) organizations play 
a major role in the economy of airline operations. Since, 85% of these activities are carried out 
abroad, there is a strong case to bring these MROs to India as the MRO expenditure is expected 
to grow further with the growth in civil aviation sector. The issues which come within the ambit 
of foreign suppliers can also be addressed by giving them incentives to operate in th is country. 
India with its large technical manpower base can easily provide the manpower for MRO 
services. The reasons for carrying out MRO services abroad, include tax anomaly with global 
MROs in terms of GST/ levies/ surcharges etc.; high airport charges  for land rentals, airport 
royalty, lack of availability of hangar space etc. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should take up the aforesaid issues with the Ministry of Finance and other concerned agencies 
and try to address the issues at the earliest. The issues which are within the ambit of the Ministry 
itself viz. airport charges, hangar space etc. should be expeditiously resolved by the Ministry and 
AAI. 

17 
 
(Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Keeping in view India‟s growing aviation market, technology and skill base, Government 
announced new MRO Guidelines on 1st September, 2021 with a view to create a congenial 
atmosphere in the country for the development of MRO industry for aircraft/ helicopter/ drones 
and their engines and other parts. The salient features of the guidelines are as follows: 
a. Concession fee, in any manifestation including royalty, shall not be leviable on new/ 
renewal of existing contracts. 
b. Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of land/ space under rationalized land/ 
space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of existing MRO contracts, shall be 
through e-tender by AAI. 
c. The renewal of the existing land leases/ space license of MRO service providers/ 
Aircraft Maintenance Organizations (AMOs) shall be on the basis of bidding wherein 
Right of First Refusal (RoFR) shall be given to the existing lessee/ licensee to match the 
first rank bid in terms of the selection criteria provided its bid is within 15% of the most 
competitive bid received. 
d. The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @15% after every 3rd year. 
e. The maximum period of contract, new or renewal, for allotment of land/ space shall be 
30 years from the date of handing over of site.  
 
7.2 The new guidelines would encourage the MRO organizations and OEMs to setup 
workshops in India and create a conducive environment towards making India global hub of 
MRO.  
 
7.3 Airports Authority of India (AAI) had initiated tenders in October 2021 for 12 MRO sites 
at 5 Airports viz. Bhopal, Chandigarh,  Chennai, Begumpet (Hyderabad) and  Juhu Airports. 
Against the bids received, AAI issued Letters of Intent (LOI) to the selected bidders for 3 sites of 
Bhopal on 22.02.2022. The agency vide letter dated 21.03.2022 has confirmed AAI that, they are 
accepting 2 sites of Bhopal Airport and has not shown willingness for 3rd site of Bhopal Airport 
nor paid the Bid Security towards same. AAI is in the process of initiating tender action for 

18 
 
MRO Round-2 for Begumpet (Hyderabad), Chennai and Juhu and additional sites of Tirupati (2 
nos) and Kolkata (04 nos) Airport. 
 
7.4 Other Steps taken by Government of India: - 
i. GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full input tax credit from 1 
April, 2020 so as to promote Indan MRO industry and ease cash flow issues for the 
MRO and aviation industry. 
ii. Transactions sub-contracted by foreign OEMs/ MROs to domestic MRO are treated 
as "exports" with zero-rated GST w.e.f. 1 April, 2020. 
iii. The Place of Supply (PoS) of MRO services has been changed to location of recipient 
to ensure level playing field to MRO located in India and to incentivize setting up of 
MRO in India by Indian or foreign entrepreneurs. 
iv. Rules have been simplified for export of leased aircraft in complete or knocked -down 
conditions, opening up new opportunities in re -delivery checks and aircraft 
component recycling. 
v. Custom duty has been waived on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs. 
vi. 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has been permitted via automatic route for 
MRO. 
vii. Simplified clearance processing of parts 
viii. Relaxed restrictions on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years 
 
7.5 The above changes have ensured level playing field to MROs set up in India. There has 
been growth in Indian MRO industry as a to tal of 10 new MROs have been approved in India 
since GST on MRO was reduced from 18% to 5%. 
 
7.6 DGCA has framed the requirements and guidelines for granting the approval to 
Maintenance and Repair organizations (MRO) under Civil Aviation Requirement i.e CAR-145 
for maintaining Indian registered aircraft. The regulation are based on ICAO standards and have 
been harmonized with EASA regulations. These regulations are amended from time to time 
based on amendment to ICAO standards and EASA regulations for ena bling Indian MRO 
industry to obtain EASA approval/ certification. 

19 
 
7.7 The Government of India has already taken initiative to invite engine/ aircraft 
manufacturer, maintenance facility (MRO/AMO) in the country, few OEMs have established 
MRO facilities as follows: 
i. Airbus and Boeing have signed collaboration agreements with GMR and Airworks 
respectively in February, 2021. 
ii. Pratt & Whitney has started aircraft engine repairs in association with Air India 
Engineering Services Limited (AIESL) 
iii. General Electric (GE ) established an engine/ overhaul repair facility at Nagpur, the 
first phase of engine MRO is operational and till date quick turn repairs of engines 
has been carried out at Nagpur engine test cell preparatory area. 
iv. There are total 122 Aircraft Maintenance Organizations (AMOs), MROs approved in 
India out of which seven are capable of carrying out overhaul of planes. 
 
7.8 The Ministry has also taken up the outstanding issues regarding MROs with the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments: 
i. The issue of easing of DG CA norms by harmonising them with norms of European 
Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
were taken up with MRO industry and DGCA. Upon detailed examination of the 
issues raised by MRO Association, DGCA has concluded that DGCA regulations are 
in compliance with ICAO laid down standards and also harmonised  with EASA 
regulations. 
ii. The following MRO -related taxation issues have been taken up with Ministry of 
Finance: 
 Uniform application of IGST rate @5% for all parts of aircraft/ aircraft engines 
and APU irrespective of the Chapter of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 in which the 
item is covered: MoCA provided a list of Aircraft parts/Aircraft engine and APU 
list obtained from Industry attracting GST >5% to Department of Revenue  (DoR) 
has informed that the matter will be placed before GST Council. 
 Discontinuation o f GST – on re -import of Engines repaired abroad/ and allow 
Input Tax Credit (ITC) on goods: Regarding IGST exemption on part for 
exchange, further comments of the MRO industry has been shared with DoR. 

20 
 
 Rationalization of higher Insurance cost component for  MRO industry: D/o 
Financial Services has stated that while there is not much scope for price 
reduction in aviation as well as MRO covers due to the dominance of 
international markets controlling the price and coverage, a possible reduction in 
the premium could be explored between underwriters and re -insurers if MROs 
can group themselves to pool their risk and go for a group cover. 
iii. The issues related to civil -defence convergence have been taken up at the level of 
Hon‟ble Minister of Civil Aviation: 
 Lack of synergy in training/ skilling and Lack of Certification/ Process synergies 
has been taken up with Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), 
Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance (DGAQA), Centre for 
Military Airworthiness and Certification (CEMILAC), Indian Air Force (IAF) etc. 
 A report has been sought from industry on the proposal of a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for civil-defence aerospace. 
 
7.9 Several meetings have been held with top MRO players viz. Pratt & Whitney, Airb us, 
Boeing, Allen Aircraft Radio  (AAR) Corp, General Electric ( GE) Aviation, Air India 
Engineering Services Limited  (AIESL) to identify the issues to be taken up in context of 
development of MRO sector in India. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that one of the reasons why MRO 
services are availed abroad is that OEMs based abroad are not willing to partner with local 
MROs to protect their repair shops abroad and they provide spares at 10 -12% of their cost, to 
the local MROs which makes overhaul by local MROs unviable. The Committee seriously 
expresses its concerns on this attitude of the OEMs based abroad and feels that the Ministry 
should frame guidelines making it obligatory for OEMs based abroad and who are getting 
business from Indian airlines companies to set up repair shops in India itself. Besides, it should 
also be made mandatory for the foreign OEMs to supply spare parts at the same rates available 
abroad or manufacture their spare parts in India in collaboration with local MROs. 
(Para 35) 

21 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Keeping in view India‟s growing aviation market, technology and skill base, Government 
announced new MRO Guidelines on 1st September, 2021 with a view to create a congenial 
atmosphere in the country for the development of MRO industry for aircraft/ helicopter/ drones 
and their engines and other parts. The salient features of the guidelines are as follows: 
a. Concession fee, in any manifestation including royalty, shall not be leviable on new/ 
renewal of existing contracts. 
a. Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of land/ space under rationalized land/ 
space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of existing MRO contracts, shall be 
through e-tender by AAI. 
b. The renewal of the existing land leases/ space license of MRO service providers/ 
Aircraft Maintenance Organizations (AMOs) shall be on the basis of bidding wherein 
Right of First Refusal (RoFR) shall be given to the existing lessee/ licensee to match 
the first rank bid in terms of th e selection criteria provided its bid is within 15% of the 
most competitive bid received. 
c. The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @15% after every 3rd year. 
d. The maximum period of contract, new or renewal, for allotment of land/ space shall be 
30 years from the date of handing over of site.  
 
8.2 The new guidelines would encourage the MRO organizations and OEMs to setup 
workshops in India and create a conducive environment towards making India global hub of 
MRO.  
 
8.3 Airports Authority of India (AAI) had initiated tenders in October 2021 for 12 MRO sites 
at 5 Airports viz. Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai, Begumpet (Hyderabad) &  Juhu Airports. 
Against the bids received, AAI issued Letters of Intent (LOI) to the selected bidders for 3 sites of 
Bhopal on 22.02.2022. The agency vide letter dated 21.03.2022 has confirmed AAI that, they are 
accepting 2 sites of Bhopal Airport and has not shown willingness for 3rd site of Bhopal Airport 
nor paid the Bid Security towards same. AAI is in th e process of initiating tender action for 
MRO Round-2 for Begumpet (Hyderabad), Chennai &  Juhu and additional sites of Tirupati (2 
nos) and Kolkata (04 nos) Airport. 

22 
 
8.4 Other Steps taken by Government of India: - 
i. GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5%  with full input tax credit from 1 
April, 2020 so as to promote Indan MRO industry and ease cash flow issues for the 
MRO and aviation industry. 
ii. Transactions sub-contracted by foreign OEMs/ MROs to domestic MRO are treated 
as "exports" with zero-rated GST w.e.f. 1 April, 2020. 
iii. The Place of Supply (PoS) of MRO services has been changed to location of recipient 
to ensure level playing field to MRO located in India and to incentivize setting up of 
MRO in India by Indian or foreign entrepreneurs. 
iv. Rules have been simplified for export of leased aircraft in complete or knocked -down 
conditions, opening up new opportunities in re -delivery checks and aircraft 
component recycling. 
v. Custom duty has been waived on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs. 
vi. 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has been permitted via automatic route for 
MRO. 
vii. Simplified clearance processing of parts. 
viii. Relaxed restrictions on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years 
 
8.5 The above changes have ensured level playing field to  MROs set up in India. There has 
been growth in Indian MRO industry as a total of 10 new MROs have been approved in India 
since GST on MRO was reduced from 18% to 5%. 
 
8.6 DGCA has framed the requirements and guidelines for granting the approval to 
Maintenance and Repair organizations (MRO) under Civil Aviation Requirement i.e . CAR-145 
for maintaining Indian registered aircraft. The regulation are based on ICAO standards and have 
been harmonized with EASA regulations. These regulations are amended fr om time to time 
based on amendment to ICAO standards and EASA regulations for enabling Indian MRO 
industry to obtain EASA approval/ certification. 
 

23 
 
8.7 The Government of India has already taken initiative to invite engine/ aircraft 
manufacturer, maintenanc e facility (MRO/AMO) in the country, few OEMs have established 
MRO facilities as follows: 
i. Airbus and Boeing have signed collaboration agreements with GMR and Airworks 
respectively in February, 2021. 
ii. Pratt & Whitney has started aircraft engine repairs in association with Air India 
Engineering Services Limited (AIESL) 
iii. General Electric (GE) established an engine/ overhaul repair facility at Nagpur, the 
first phase of engine MRO is operational and till date quick turn repairs of engines 
has been carried out at Nagpur engine test cell preparatory area. 
iv. There are total 122 Aircraft Maintenance Organizations (AMOs), MROs approved in 
India out of which seven are capable of carrying out overhaul of planes. 
 
8.8 The Ministry has also taken up the outstanding issues regarding MROs with the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments: 
i. The issue of easing of DGCA norms by harmonising them with norms of European 
Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) & Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
were taken up with MRO industry and DGCA. Up on detailed examination of the 
issues raised by MRO Association, DGCA has concluded that DGCA regulations are 
in compliance with ICAO laid down standards and also harmonised with EASA 
regulations. 
ii. The following MRO -related taxation issues have been taken u p with Ministry of 
Finance: 
 Uniform application of IGST rate @5% for all parts of aircraft/ aircraft engines 
and APU irrespective of the Chapter of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 in which the 
item is covered: MoCA provided a list of Aircraft parts/Aircraft e ngine and APU 
list obtained from Industry attracting GST >5% to DoR. Department of Revenue 
has informed that the matter will be placed before GST Council. 
 Discontinuation of GST – on re -import of Engines repaired abroad/ and allow 
Input Tax Credit (ITC) on  goods: Regarding IGST exemption on part for 
exchange, further comments of the MRO industry has been shared with DoR. 

24 
 
 Rationalization of higher Insurance cost component for MRO industry: D/o 
Financial Services has stated that while there is not much scope for price 
reduction in aviation as well as MRO covers due to the dominance of 
international markets controlling the price and coverage, a possible reduction in 
the premium could be explored between underwriters and re -insurers if MROs 
can group themselves to pool their risk and go for a group cover. 
iii. The issues related to civil -defence convergence h ave been taken up at the level of 
Hon‟ble Minister of Civil Aviation: 
 Lack of synergy in training/ skilling and Lack of Certification/ Process synergies 
has been taken up with Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), 
Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance (DGAQA), Centre for 
Military Airworthiness and Certification (CEMILAC), Indian Air Force (IAF) etc. 
 A report has been sought from industr y on the proposal of a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for civil-defence aerospace. 
Several meetings have been held with top MRO players viz. Pratt & Whitney, 
Airbus, Boeing, AAR Corp, GE Aviation, AIESL to identify the issues to be 
taken up in context of development of MRO sector in India. 
 
Airports Authority of India 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee hopes that the construction of airports at Mopa in Goa, Navi Mumbai in 
Maharashtra and expansion of Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad airports a nd the construction 
which has already been delayed due to COVID-19 lockdowns, would be expedited and completed 
as per the revised schedule. The Committee notes that the concessionaires are required to take 
over the commercial operations within 180 days of signing of agreements. The Committee 
desires to know whether commercial operations has been taken over by concessionaires at 
Mangaluru, Lucknow and Ahmedabad airports as 180 days had lapsed. For the proposed 
airports at Guwahati, Jaipur and Thiruvananthapu ram, the Committee would like to know the 
status of COD and whether they are likely to take over operations by the targeted date. The 
Committee also desires to know whether the AAI imposes penalty on concessionaires in case of a 
default as regards delay in COD. 

25 
 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The construction of airports at Mopa in Goa, Navi Mumbai in Maharashtra and expansion 
of Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad airports are in progress and will be completed as per the revised 
schedule. 
  
9.2 With regards to  second observation it is submitted that the Concession Agreements for 
leasing out Mangaluru, Lucknow, and Ahmedabad were signed on 14.02.2020. Whereas, in case 
of Guwahati, Jaipur and Thiruvananthapuram airports, the Concession Agreements were signed 
on 1 9.01.2021. The Concessionaires of aforementioned 06 Airports have already taken over 
commercial Operation of the respective Airports.  The details are as under: - 
Airport Name Date of Handing over 
Ahmedabad 07.11.2020 
Lucknow 02.11.2020 
Mangaluru 31.10.2020 
Jaipur 11.10.2021 
Guwahati 08.10.2021 
Thiruvananthapuram 14.10.2021 
  
9.3 As regards delay in taking over of the Airports the Concessionaires of Lucknow, 
Ahmedabad and Mangaluru airports had sought 205 days extension for taking over Commercial 
Operation of these airports due to lockdown imposed in the wake of COVID -19 first wave 
invoking the Force Majeure  provision as per Concession Agreement. AAI granted 3 months 
extension of time. 
 
9.4 In case of Guwahati, Jaipur and Lucknow airports, the Concessionaires sought six months 
additional time for taking over the airports due to COVID -19 second wave invoking the Force 
Majeure provision as per Concession Agreement. AAI granted 3 months‟ additional time for 
taking over the airports by the Co ncessionaires. Since the extension granted to the 
Concessionaires was in accordance with the provisions of Concession Agreement, therefore, 
AAI did not impose any penalty on the Concessionaires. 

26 
 
Construction of new Airports-  
Hollongi Airport 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee appreciates the fact that the construction of Hollongi airport, which has 
time and again been recommended by the Committee in its earlier Reports, has been accorded 
priority. The Committee is of the opinion that  the airport is of prime significance, as it will 
increase faster connectivity and access to the remote North -Eastern region. The Committee also 
notes that the project has achieved 50% physical and 36% financial progress. The Committee 
hopes that all impediments both financial and otherwise get resolved, to ensure that the Hollongi 
airport is operationalized at the earliest. 
(Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The construction of the Hollongi airport is in progress and Probable Date of Completion 
is in November 2022. Further, all efforts are being made to complete Phase -I of the project and 
commission all facilities of Phase-I by August, 2022. 
 
Jaipur Airport 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes that for the Jaipur Airport, the concerned concessionaire is 
obligated to develop and expand the airport though AAI is not required to make any investment. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may monitor the work of the concessionaire and 
ensure that the Jaipur airport is operationalized at the earliest. This will also help in boosting 
tourism as Jaipur is a prime tourism centre drawing both domestic and international tourist 
traffic. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Jaipur Airport was taken over by Jaipur International Airport Limited („ Concessionaire‟) 
on 11.10.2021.   As per the provisions of the Concession Agreement, the Concessionaire is 
obligated to develop and expand the airport in accordance with Master Plan which needs to be 
updated periodically every 5 years or earlier in order to  ensure that the Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) are met. Additionally, an independent Engineering Firm has been appointed by 

27 
 
AAI and the Concessionaire to monitor the implementation of the provisions of the Concession 
Agreement. 
 
Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes the acute shortage of skilled manpower and proper training 
institutes in the Civil Aviation industry which has the potential of creation of employment 
opportunities for the youth. The Committ ee observes that other than the highly specialized jobs 
like commercial pilots and aircraft engineers, there are non -technical jobs like airhostess, flight 
attendants, flight pursers, cabin crew, ground/ cargo handling staff, administrative/ sales staff, 
where there can be a lot of job creations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that proper 
training institutes at low cost, may be setup all across the country to provide requisite training in 
the aforesaid airlines services, so that the youth of the country may be gainfully employed. 
(Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Government has taken several steps to meet the demand of skilled manpower in 
aviation sector in the country. These include the following:  
(i) The Airports Authority of India (AAI) have signed two tripartite Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoUs) with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and 
National Skill Development Fund (NSDF) for setting up of Multi Skill Development 
Centre at Chandi garh and Mumbai. The details and outcomes of the MoU are as 
follows:  
(1) The number of candidates trained in span of three years in Chandigarh are 1,681 
and Mumbai are 720.  
(2) Job roles identified for the aviation centre in Chandigarh and Mumbai include s 
airline customer service executive, airline reservation agent, airline cargo 
assistant, airline ramp executive, airline flight load controller, airline security 
executive, airport x-ray qualified staff, airport facility services and airline baggage 
handler.  
(3) The training programme aims at skilling as well as up -skilling in the Aviation 
sector.  

28 
 
(ii) The Indian Aviation Academy (IAA), a joint venture of the Airports Authority of 
India (AAI) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and Bureau of Civ il 
Aviation Security (BCAS) imparts training to employees of aviation stakeholders to 
augment their knowledge and skills. Some of the technical training programmes 
conducted by Indian Aviation Academy are: Aviation Safety Management System, 
Aviation Securi ty, Dangerous Goods Regulation (DGR), induction and discipline -
specific training for operation, engineering, HR, Finance employees and International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standard training packages (STP) etc.  
(iii) The Indira Gandhi Rashtriya  Uran Akademi (IGRUA), Amethi, UP is India's largest 
Flying Training Organisation (FTO) established in 1986. It has now started providing 
training in drone operations since 2021. In addition, there are 34 other FTOs across 
the country. Nine more FTOs are l ikely to be established by the private sector at AAI 
airports during 2022-23.  
(iv) IGRUA has been permitted to carry out pilot training in Gondia (Maharashtra) and 
Kalaburagi (Karnataka) to enhance its flying hours and aircraft utilisation, which get 
severely affected during winter months due to low visibility. IGRUA has commenced 
operating on all weekends and holidays. It completed 19,019 flying hours during the 
year 2021 as compared to 15,137 hours in the pre -Covid year 2019, an increase of 
over 25%.  
(v) Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU), Amethi, UP started its first 
batch in August 2019. RGNAU is offering the following courses in collaboration with 
aviation stakeholders:  
1) Post Graduate Diploma in Airport Operations (PGDAO)  
2) Bachelor of Management Studies (BMS) - Aviation & Cargo  
3) Basic Fire-Fighter Course (BFFC)  
(vi) The Airports Authority of India (AAI) has brought out a liberalised Flying Training 
Organisation (FTO) policy wherein the concept of airport royalty (revenue share 
payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished and land rentals have been 
significantly rationalised.  
 

29 
 
(vii) AAI issued award letters on 31 May 2021 and 29 October 2021 for nine FTOs to be 
established at five airports i.e., two at Belagavi (Karnataka), two at  Jalgaon 
(Maharashtra), two at Kalaburagi (Karnataka), two at Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) 
and one at Lilabari (Assam). Soft launch of two FTOs at Kalaburagi was done on 15 
August 2021 and at Lilabari on 12 April 2022. 
 
Handling of Air Cargo 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes with serious concern that over the last five years, the bulk of the Air 
Cargo has been handled by the International freighters and the Indian freighters have handled 
less than 40% of the total share. The AAICLAS, a company wholly dedicated to development of 
air cargo, logistics and allied services, was set up, as late as 2016, which shows the lack of 
concern on part of the Ministry to increase the share of Indian cargo freighters. The Committee 
feels that the Indian air cargo sector has immense potential, which is seen from the fact that 
strong resilience has been shown by the sector, even during the COVID -19 pandemic. The 
Committee notes the initiatives of the Ministry and recommends that all out efforts s hould be 
made to increase the share of the Indian cargo freighters in the near future, so that the outgo of 
foreign exchange can be reduced. The growth in this sector will also create new avenues of 
employment and aid the country‟s economic growth. 
(Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The number of freighter aircraft deployed by Indian carriers has been increased from 7 in 
2018 to 28 in 2021. As a result, the share of Indian carriers in international freighter movements 
has increased from 2% to 19% over last two years. 
 
13.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation has already reviewed the Open Sky Policy for Foreign Cargo 
carriers as promulgated vide AIC18/1992 dated 11.05.1992, and changes have been made with a 
view to ensure fair and equal opportunity in the air cargo capacity offered by Indian registered 
airlines and airlines registered elsewhere. The revised open sky policy has been promulgated 
vide AIC 41/2020 dated 31.12.2020. Under the revised policy, the operations of foreign ad hoc 
and pure non-scheduled freighter charter service flights have been restricted to 6 airports, namely 

30 
 
Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Mumbai, and Operations of scheduled 
cargo operations by foreign carrier is permitted as per the provisions of the Bilateral Air Service 
Agreement (ASA) with the respective Country.  
 
13.3 Air Cargo: a growth area 
 Strong resilience shown by India‟s air cargo sector despite severe challenges posed by 
the pandemic. 
 Besides growing month-on-month, air cargo operations are already performing strongly 
with the resurrection of the economy, supported by a robust rebound in business 
confidence, and boosted by resilient domestic demand, including through e -commerce. 
The total air cargo tonnage carried in October, 2021 reached 3.01 lakh MT which 
surpassed the pre Covid level (2.81 lakh MT). However, the tonnage came down to 2.46 
lakh MT in January, 2022. 
 Air freight capacity also added with 150 passenger aircraft deployed on the basis of 
passenger to cargo conversion 
 Focus on medical/pharma cargo; agri-produce since March 2020 
 Cargo Terminals kept open 24x7 with suitable measures for safety of personnel 
 50% waiver of demurrage to incentivize removal of import cargo from airports in Phase-
I Lockdown 
 Non-scheduled cargo operations by foreign carriers restricted to six major airports. 
 Scheduled cargo services to be operated as per bilateral agreements. 
 Comprehensive National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP) launched in 2016 for promoting 
rapid growth of the sector, ease of doing business and advanced regional connectivity. 
 AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited (AAICLAS) set up as a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of Airports Authority of India (AAI) in 2016 for business 
development of air cargo, logistics and allied services at AAI managed airports. 
 Domestic air cargo is being handled through Passenger Terminals at 13 AAI managed 
airports namely Adampur, Belagavi, Darbhanga, Dibrugarh, Dimapur, Gwalior, 
Jabalpur, Jalgaon, Lilabari, Prayagraj, Rajkot, Tuticorin, Udaipur and one State 
Government operated Shirdi airport. 

31 
 
 During the pandemic, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) gave special 
permission to modify the passenger aircraft into freighters known as Passenger to Cargo 
or P2C aircraft, for efficient freight movement. 
 AAICLAS has operatio nalised 20 International Cargo Terminal facilities, 33 Domestic 
Cargo Terminal facilities and 02 Courier Terminal facilities. 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN (UdeDeshkaAamNagrik) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the present budgetary allocation is 
sufficient to meet the requirements of the UDAN Scheme in accordance with the status of 
development of the project. The Committee hopes that all out efforts would be made to make the 
UDAN Scheme a success a nd realize the dream of the common man to avail of affordable civil 
aviation. 
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN 
(UdeDeshkaAamNagrik) to stimulate regional air connectivity and  making air travel affordable 
to the masses. UDAN scheme has been proving a successful scheme and translating the dream of 
the common man into reality of flying in UDAN flights at affordable airfare across the country. 
Under the Scheme 67 RCS airports, inc luding 2 water aerodromes & 8 heliports have been 
operationalized so far, in last five years.  
 
14.2 Four round of bidding under UDAN have been conducted so far and 948 valid routes 
have been awarded to various Selected Airline Operators connecting 154 RCS airports including 
14 water aerodromes & 36 Helipads in 31 States/UTs for operation of RCS flights in the country. 
As on 17 -03-2022, 409 RCS routes commenced connecting 66 airports have been 
operationalized including 2 Water Aerodrome & 8 Heliports.  
 
14.3 UDAN has transformed the way people travel in Tier -2 and Tier -3 cities. Regional 
airports like Jhar suguda, Kishangarh, Belgaum, Darbhanga, etc. have been witnessing 
exponential growth in air traffic. UDAN is an ongoing scheme where bidding rounds are 

32 
 
conducted periodically for covering more destinations/stations and routes under the scheme. 
Efforts are being made to provide last mile connectivity across the country under the scheme by 
offering Small Aircraft Scheme.  
 
Delays in operation of some RCS Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee notes that the Government deserves appreciation for operationalizing the 
long delayed RCS projects. The Committee also notes that the reasons for the delay in operations 
at the aforesaid RCS routes are mostly operational or lack of compliance of agreements by the 
SAOs. At places like Gauchar and Amravati, s ome issues are pending with the concerned State 
Governments. At RCS Pithoragarh, the SAO has defaulted and the operations could not 
commence. The Committee recommends that before allotment of RCS routes, the credentials and 
past performance of the SAO may be thoroughly scrutinized, so that difficulties are not faced at a 
later stage. The Committee further recommends that heavy penalties should be imposed on SAOs 
for defaulting and also for not meeting deadlines. The Committee also recommends that a close 
coordination may be maintained with the concerned State Governments to remove bottlenecks in 
the operationalization of RCS routes. 
(Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Noted. Further, Airlines Operator(s) are selected through transparent e -bidding. Airports 
Authority of India, the Implementing Agency also take into account past performance of airlines 
before awarding bid besides other eligibility criteria. Airports Autho rity of India, the 
Implementing Agency, also monitors the performance of the Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) 
regularly. In case of slackness, notices are served to SAOs concerned. The awarded 
networks/routes are terminated by imposing the appropriate pen alty on the Selected Airline 
Operates (SAOs) to forfeit the Performance Security.  
 
15.2 COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected the aviation sector which led to suspension 
of scheduled commercial operations and posed several challenges. Consequently, financial health 
of the airlines was adversely impacted coupled with high fixed costs resulting into a liquidity 
crunch.  

33 
 
15.3 Moreover, passenger demand came down very low Post COVID -19, the operation of 
RCS Flight became unviable. Therefore, MoCA is of the  opinion that it may not be appropriate 
to impose heavy penalties on SAOs for defaulting and not meeting deadlines. Most airlines are 
new entrants and trying hard to survive in the present scenario of Civil Aviation Sector.  
 
Facilities in case of Cancellation of Flights 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee notes the provisions of the CAR and recommends that all the provisions 
should be strictly enforced so that passengers are not inconvenienced. It also strongly 
recommends that in the case of cancellation or delay of flights, a provision should be 
compulsorily made by airlines to provide a waiting hall/ VIP lounge for the passengers and food, 
water and snacks should also be served to them and the expenses for the same should be borne 
by the concerned airlines. The Committee also directs the Ministry to do a ground survey of all 
the airports and check whether the DGCA guidelines in this regard are being followed. 
(Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 DGCA has issued Civil Aviation Requirement (CAR ) Section 3, Series M, Part IV titled 
as 'Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due to denied boarding, cancellation of 
flights and delays in flights' in order to reduce inconvenience caused to the passengers due to 
cancellations of the fligh ts by the airlines, without due notice to the passengers booked on the 
flight. As per the provision of the CAR, if the passenger is not informed of the cancellation of 
flight the airline shall provide meals and refreshments to the passenger who have alread y 
reported for their original flight at the airport while waiting for the alternate flight. 
 
Passenger Amenities at Airports 
High prices of Food and Beverages at the Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but observes that food/ beverage prices are 
very expensive at all airport food outlets. Tea, coffee and refreshments may be available at 
reasonable cost, affordable to a common man. In this regard, the Committe e recommends that 

34 
 
the Ministry/ AAI should ensure that its Circular on food prices is being strictly followed at all 
the airports and packaged food is not sold at higher than MRP. 
(Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 AAI ensures sale of packaged goods at M RP at AAI Airports. AAI has been issuing 
directions in this regard from time to time. To ensure strict compliance of the same, a fresh 
circular has been issued on 01.04.2022 to all REDs/ APDs. A copy of the circular is enclosed as 
Annexure – B. Airport operated by State Government and PPP partners also ensure that 
packaged goods are sold at MRP. 
 
Water and Snacks for Passengers in Airlines 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee feels that atleast a policy may be considered for providing a small 
complimentary water bottle, keeping in view the tradition of the country to give highest regard to 
guests and offer water on arrival. Besides, a small packet of biscuits could also be provided free 
of cost to every passenger on demand, in all the flights. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Travel by air is a contractual matter between airline and passenger, which is commercial 
in nature. Serving water/biscuits/food is the business policy of airlines and Government does not 
interfere with the commercial practice of airlines. However, all airlines serve water as per the 
request of the passengers. 
 
Accessibility features at airports for disabled passengers 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee applauds the sensitivity and care shown towards the needs  of the 
differently abled persons and also appreciates that 79 out of 87 AAI airports are already 
equipped with the 10 accessibility features as shared by Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. The Committee recommends that the remaining 8 AAI airport s should also be 
provided the said features at the earliest. The Committee recommends that while constructing 
new airports, these 10 accessibility features should invariably be included in the Master Plan. 

35 
 
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 As of now, the number of airports with ten accessibility features has increased from 79 to 
83. AAI is making all the efforts to provide these features at remaining 4 airports also at an early 
date.  
  
19.2 Moreover, harmonized guidelines and space standard s for barrier free built environment 
and services for persons with reduced mobility for airports in India has been formulated along 
with Ministry for Social Justice and empowerment. After incorporating the comments received 
from Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities and public opinion on the draft feasibility 
report, the final copy of guidelines for aviation sector which includes airports, airlines and 
security components has been forwarded to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for 
notification under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rule -2017 after which the features 
mentioned in the guidelines will be implemented at all airports. 
 
Rationalisation of Air Fares and Cancellation Charges in Domestic Sectors 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. As regards pricing of the tickets, the Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that at 
present, air fare is neither regulated nor fixed by the Government and airlines are free to fix the 
reasonable tariff under the provision of Sub -rule (1) of Rule 1 35, Aircraft Rules, 1937 having 
regard to all relevant factors including the cost of operation, characteristics of service, 
reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff. Also, as regards the concern of the 
Committee regarding extra fare for seat s election, the Ministry has stated that travel by air is a 
contractual matter between airline and passenger, which is commercial in nature. The 
Committee is of the opinion that for Civil Aviation sector to grow in an open market, it is 
justifiable that the private airline operators should be given a free hand to fix the air fares as 
they are governed by competition. However, the Committee would like to draw the attention of 
the Ministry to the provision of the  Aircraft Rules, 1937, which  specifically mention s that the 
fares should be reasonable and should maintain reasonable profit. In the above context, the 
Committee feels that the reply of the Ministry stating that air travel is purely a contractual 
matter between the airline and the passenger, is not at al l justified. The Committee is of the 

36 
 
opinion that a balance also must be maintained between the commercial interests of the airlines 
and the interest of the passengers. The Committee feels that the passengers should not be fleeced 
in the garb of commercial ization and therefore recommends that the Ministry should maintain a 
close watch on the fare pricing by the airlines to ensure that it is not exorbitant. It also 
recommends that at least for the same sector, route and duration of flight, in all the private  
airlines, the Ministry should issue guidelines so as to ensure similar or least variation in fares 
among all airlines. The Committee is also of the opinion that fixing of different fares for 
selection of seats in the same flight is arbitrary and unjustifi able. Hence, Committee on the 
principle of equity feels that all the seats in a same flight should have same fare. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry should strictly enforce the DGCA Charter and ensure that 
under no circumstances, the airlines  levies cancellation charges more than the basic fare plus 
fuel surcharge. The Committee may be informed about the mechanism adopted by the Ministry to 
ensure that the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and DGCA Charter is being followed in letter and spirit by 
all private airlines. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Under the provisions of Sub Rule(1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every air 
transport undertaking engaged in scheduled air services require to establish tariff having regard 
to all relevant fact ors, including cost of operation, characteristics of services, reasonable profit 
and the generally prevailing tariff. Airlines are free to charge reasonable air fares as per their 
operation viability subject to compliance of above said provision. The airli nes remain compliant 
to the Sub Rule (2) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 as long as fare charged by them is in 
line with fare displayed on their website. 
 
20.2 Further, fare capping was also put in place by the Government during the COVID -19 
pandemic as a special measure in order to safeguard the passengers' interest. The lower as well as 
upper air fares (excluding User Development Fee (UDF), Passenger Service Fee (PSF) and GST) 
were fixed sector -wise on the basis of duration of flight time. The far e capping is currently 
applicable on rolling basis for a 15 days' cycle. 
 

37 
 
20.3 With a view to maintain transparency, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
started monitoring of airfares on certain routes selected on random basis to ensure that the 
airlines do not charge airfares outside the range declared by them. 
 
Connectivity of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee is of the opinion that adequate connectivity of airports with roads and 
railways is of paramount importance to ensure the successful and optimum utilization of 
airports. The Committee emphasizes the urgent need to ensure that proper coordination is 
achieved between the concerned Ministries/Departments, in order to connect airports with all 
other means of transport such as  roads, metros and railways, so that tourists/flyers reach their 
destinations, from the airports, in a smooth and safe manner. Further, the Committee is also of 
the firm opinion that Ministry should collaborate with the State Governments and other 
stakeholders to ensure that land is allocated within a specific time frame for ensuring adequate 
road and rail connectivity to the airports. The Government has announced the Gati Shakti 
programme and to make the programme successful, every airport must be connecte d through 
road and rail. The Committee also recommends that every functional airport should be directly 
linked with the nearby National Highways. All the upcoming airports should be connected to the 
nearest metro network and proper signage should also be i nstalled indicating the direction of 
metro from the airport terminal and vice versa. The Committee specifically recommends that the 
new airport coming up at Jewar (UP) should invariably be linked to the Delhi airport through 
high speed metro connectivity. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 Better road/rail connectivity is of paramount importance for the Airports. The Concerned 
Airport Operators, in consultation with concerned agencies/ departments, make Continuous 
efforts to improve road/ rail/ metro conn ectivity. Further, a Project Monitoring Group (PMG) 
under the aegis of DPIIT has been setup which monitors all the issues including rail/ road 
connectivity of projects having CAPEX above Rs. 500 crore. Ministry of Civil Aviation 
regularly reviews the proje cts demanding such physical connectivity issues at the airport, with 
concerned Ministries/State Govt/Project Proponent/Airport Operators to resolve in a time bound 

38 
 
manner. Metro connectivity to Noida International Airport, Jewar has been planned in 
consultation with stakeholders. 
 
Helicopter operations in the country 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee is of the opinion that transportation of both passengers and cargo by 
helicopter holds a great potential in our country, especially in hilly areas, where it is difficult to 
construct airports due to land availability constraints. Besides, helicopter transportation is fast 
and provides assistance during natural calamities as well. The Committee notes that the Ministry 
has requested the State/ Union Ter ritories (UT) Governments to consider setting up of helipads 
in each district for promoting helicopter operations and recommends that the proposal may be 
proactively taken up by the Ministry with State/ UT Governments. The Committee notes that only 
a nominal allocation of Rs. 0.01 crore has been made in B.E. 2022-23 as the demerger scheme of 
Pawan Hans Limited and Rohini Heliport Limited is under consideration. The Committee desires 
to know the status of demerger scheme. 
(Para 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 As of now, Rohini Heliport is part of Pawan Hans Limited. Matter has been up with M/o 
Corporate Affairs for approval of the Demerger. It will be taken over by Rohini Heliport Ltd on 
approval of scheme of Demerger. 
 
22.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation has rel eased a policy for promotion of helicopter operations 
across the country. The policy covers various aspects like concessional ground handling charges, 
parking deposit, landing charges, service charges, credit facility with ATC and training for Air 
Traffic Control with a view to making helicopter operations viable. The helicopter policy 
encourages the airport operators/State Governments/UTs to develop heliports. As per the policy, 
State Governments/UTs are required to set up an Institutional mechanism to fac ilitate helicopter 
operations by obtaining permissions, approvals, clearances, etc. Ministry of Civil Aviation has 
also requested the State Governments and UTs to consider setting up helipads in each district for 
promoting helicopter operations. The Govern ment through this policy, aims to stimulate air 

39 
 
traffic and enhance air connectivity through helicopters by facilitating helicopter operations 
across the country including Bihar. 
 
Promotion of Drone Industry 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee is of the firm opinion that drones offer significant benefits to almost all 
sectors of the economy. Drones can create employment potential for the youth and can aid the 
economic growth of the country in a big way, if it is given a proper policy direction. Bes ides, due 
to ease of use and versatility of drones, it can be used in remote and inaccessible areas of the 
country. The Committee is also of the opinion that since our country is primarily an agricultural 
country, use of drones in agriculture can help incr ease the agricultural productivity of any crop. 
The Committee commends the enactment of Liberalised Drone Rules, 2021; Drone Airspace 
Map; PLI Scheme for Drones; UTM Policy Framework; Single Window DigitalSky Platform; 
Certification Scheme for Drones; and Drone Import Policy to encourage the growth of Drone 
Industry in the country. The Committee especially notes the PLI Scheme for drones & 
components and recommends that all out proactive efforts may be made by the Ministry in 
coordination with Ministry of M icro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and proper 
guidance and follow -up with the Drone start -ups to ensure that the scheme succeeds in its 
objectives. 
(Para 110) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 The Central Government has carried out a series of reform measu res in order to promote 
drones which are as follows: 
i) Liberalised Drone Rules, 2021 has been notified on 25th August 2021 
ii) Drone Airspace Map has been published on 24th September 2021, opening up nearly 
90% of Indian airspace as a green zone for drone flying up to 400 feet 
iii) Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for drones has been notified on 30th 
September 2021 
iv) UAS Traffic Management (UTM) Policy Framework has been published on 24th 
October 2021 

40 
 
v) Monetary grant program for purchase of agricultural drones wa s announced by the 
Union Agriculture Ministry on 22nd January 2022.  
vi) All five application forms under Drone Rules, 2021 have been made online on the 
DigitalSky Platform on 26th January 2022 
vii) Drone certification scheme has been notified on 26th January 2022,  making it easier 
to obtain type certificate by drone manufacturers. 
viii) Mission „Drone Shakti‟ has been announced for supporting drone startups and 
promoting Drone-as-a-Service (DrAAS) as part of the Union Budget on 1st February 
2022.  
ix) Drone import policy has  been notified on 9th February 2022, banning import of 
foreign drones and freeing up import of drone components 
x) Drone (Amendment) Rules, 2022 has been notified on 11th February 2022, 
abolishing the requirement of a drone pilot licence. 
xi) Applications from dr one and drone component manufacturers for PLI scheme for 
drones and drone components were invited between 10th and 31st March 2022.   
xii) First provisional list of beneficiaries under PLI scheme for drones and drone 
components released on 20th April 2022. 
 
23.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) will seek suggestions and guidance from the Ministry 
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) for the PLI scheme for drones and drone 
components. MoCA shall follow -up with the drone start -ups and industry to ensu re that the 
scheme succeeds in its objectives. 
 
Development of Aero Sports 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee notes that a mere token allocation of Rs. one crore has been made for the 
development of Aero Sports by the Ministry of Finance for the financial year 2021 -22 and even 
in B.E. 2022-23. The Committee is of the opinion that Aero Sports, which i s one of the adventure 
sports, has gained popularity among the youth worldwide and in India as well. India with its 
breathtaking views of the mountains, sea beaches and the countryside, has a great potential for 
Aero Sports. It can act as a boost for adven ture tourism in the country, thereby generating 

41 
 
employment in the countryside. It also expresses its concern at the lack of interest shown by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in this promising field. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should expedite  the process of framing National Aero Sports Policy, which would ensure the 
organized development of Aero Sports in the country. 
(Para 112) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 The proposed National Air Sports Policy (NASP 2022) is in draft stage. It was released in 
January 2022 for public comments . The Government has received several comments from the 
public on the draft NASP 2022 and the same are currently being considered. 

42 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee also notes that though the R.E. allocations by the Ministry of Finance fell 
far short of the projected R.E. demands, yet the actual expenditure of the Ministry has always 
been lesser than the R.E. allocations from 2017 -18 to 2020 -21. For the year 2021 -22 also, the 
actual expenditure till January, 2022, which is Rs. 69,194.09 crores falls short of the budget 
allocation (R.E.) of Rs. 72,652.00 crores by Rs. 3,457.91 crores. This point towards the lack of 
planning on part of the Ministry to utilize the funds allocated. The Committee expresses concern 
at the unrealistic projections of the Ministry and also feels that it has n ot been able to justify its 
projections before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also desires to know the actual 
expenditure for the year 2021-22 and the reasons for the shortfall in fund utilization, if any. 
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The actual expenditure against the RE 2021 -22 allocation of Rs 72,652.00 crore of the 
Ministry was Rs 71917.79 crore which accounts for 98.99% of the RE allocation.  In this regard 
it is further to clarify that the funds for actual expenditure, due to incr ease in budgetary 
allocation at RE stage were made available by MoF through Third and Final batch of 
Supplementary Grant during the second/third week of March 2022.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.2 The Committee is of the opinion  that shortfall in fund utilization over the last four 
years i.e. 2017-18 to 2020 -21, is a matter of concern and needs to be corrected , at the 
earliest possible. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, but again reiterates that 
the Ministry should focus on making realistic projections to the Ministry of Finance.     
 
 
 

43 
 
Greenfield Project, Brownfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry has so far not conducted any study 
or published any blueprint regarding the advantages and disadvantages of Greenfield and 
Brownfield projects. The Committee understands that for Highways construction, the NHAI 
under MoRTH has already drawn out such guidelines. The Committee expresses  concern that 
though both Highways and Airports construction are infrastructure projects, yet the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation has lagged behind in this regard. The Committee feels that though the MoCA has 
notified a Greenfield Airport policy since 2008, yet  for hastening the construction of airports, a 
proper blueprint or guidelines regarding both Greenfield and Brownfield airports is the need of 
the hour and therefore recommends that it may be formulated at the earliest. The Committee also 
expresses its con cern that though 21 airports had received „in -principle‟ approval of the 
Ministry, since notification of Greenfield Airport policy in 2008, yet only 8 airports have been 
operationalized. The Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to focus on the 
operationalization of the remaining airports and feels that the formulation of a guideline, as 
noted above, will expedite the development of airports. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The recommendation of the committee with regard to proper blueprint or   guidelines for 
both Greenfield and Brownfield airports is noted by MoCA. Further, as noted by the committee, 
21 airports had received 'in -principle' approval of the Ministry, since notification of Greenfield 
Airport policy in 2008, out of which 8 airports have been operationalized.   In this regard it is 
submitted that out of remaining 13 airports, nine  Greenfield Airports namely Mopa, Navi 
Mumbai, Jewar, Hollongi, Hirasar , Dholera, Hassan, Shimoga, and Bijapur are u nder various 
stages of development and will be operational in the upcoming years. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.2 The Committee desires to know the action plan of the Ministry as regards 
formulation of a proper blueprint or guidelines for Greenfield and Brownfield projects. It 
also urges the Ministry to expedite the development of the nine Greenfield airports and 
would like to be apprised about the expected schedule by when these airports will be 

44 
 
operationalised. The Committee would further like to know the details of the remaining 
four airports and whether any timeline has been fixed to operationalize them.     
 
Sabarimala Airport 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee desires to know the status of Techno -Economic feasibility study by the 
State Government of Kerala. The Ministry may proactively take up this issue with MoD and 
KSIDC for clearance as Sabarimala is an important pilgrimage centre and visited by lakhs of 
pilgrims, both domestic and international every year and it will give a tremendous boost to 
pilgrimage tourism. The Committee also notes that this airport is near the developed tourist 
circuits of Coch in and Thiruvananthapuram and hopes that efforts would be made in 
coordination with Ministry of Tourism to include and link Sabarimala as well, to this tourist 
circuit. 
(Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 This Ministry has received a proposal from M/s. Kerala State Industrial Development 
Corporation (KSIDC) for grant of 'site clearance' for setting up of Greenfield Airport at 
Kottayam near Sabarimala. 
 
3.2 The proposal was examined in Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) in consultation with 
Ministry of Def ence, Airports Authority of India (AAI) and Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA). KSIDC was advised  that many of the observations of DGCA/AAI and their 
compliance depend upon the updated Techno Economic Feasibility Study (TEFS) Report. 
Hence, obser vations/compliance based on the updated TEFS report was requested to be 
submitted to this Ministry. KSIDC vide letters dated 29.12.2021 and 11.02.2022 had informed 
that TEFS report updation is still ongoing and the requisite information would be submitted by 
31st March, 2022. However, the updated TEFS report alongwith requisite comments are still 
awaited from KSIDC. 
 
 
 

45 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.3 The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take follow up action and impress upon 
the M/s KSIDC to furnish the updated Techno -Economic Feasibility Study (TEFS) Report 
at the earliest, so that a Greenfield Airport may be setup at Kottayam which will benefit 
lakhs of pilgrims visiting Sabarimala every year.   
 
Requirement of Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes with serious concern that there is a huge backlog of 708 vacancies 
in the post of ATCOs. Despite this fact, most of the posts of ATCOs at different levels were 
created in 2013, 2014 and 2015 only. Since the year 2017, there has been no post creation at any 
level for ATCOs. The proposal for creation of 340 additional posts of ATCOs has been taken 
with DPE only recently. The Committee is of the opinion that the demand for ATCOs will rise 
exponentially with the growth of the aviation sector in the country and feels that the Ministry 
should have anticipated the requirement of more number of ATCOs well in advance and inducted 
ATCOs continuously over the years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that proc edural 
issues regarding manpower requirements of ATCOs should be addressed immediately to ensure 
operationalization of new airports that are being constructed in near future do not suffer due to 
lack of ATCOs. 
(Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 To address the shortage of ATCOs, AAI has already initiated the process to cover the 
present shortfall of ATCOs by filling up the existing vacant posts expeditiously.  Moreover, in 
order to mitigate the shortage of ATCOs, approval of Department of Public Enterprises has been 
obtained for creation of 340 new posts of ATCOs. AAI has been advised to take necessary steps 
to fill the posts expeditiously.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2 The Committee reiterates its concern at the undue and avoidable delay in 
recruitment of ATCOs and strongly recommends the AAI to fill up the vacancies without 
any further delay.   

46 
 
Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee notes that there would be a growing requirement of around 1000 pilots 
every year in the near future. The Committee also notes that a liberalized FTO policy has also 
been brought out, wherein new and attractive incentives have been given to pr ivate entities who 
want to start an FTO. The Committee supports the new initiatives of the Ministry as it is of the 
opinion that with the expected growth of the Civil Aviation Sector in the country, there would be 
increased demand for trained pilots. The M inistry should therefore gear up for the requirement 
of FTOs and set up FTOs in a time bound manner. The Committee also notes that the Ministry 
has taken up the issue of reduction of GST on AvGas and funding support to FTOs as a priority 
sector, with the M inistry of Finance and it has also taken up relevant issues with State 
Governments and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The Committee recommends that the 
issues may be forcefully taken up with the concerned stakeholders and the Committee may also 
be apprised of the progress in this regard. The Committee also recommends that keeping in view 
of the Atmanirbhar Bharat, sufficient Flight Training Organisations (FTOs) may be established 
in various parts of the country to ensure that our boys and girls are not going to foreign 
countries to get pilot training.  
(Para 55) 
5.1 Reply of the Ministry 
i) There are currently 35 DGCA -approved Flying Training Organisations (FTO) in the 
country.  IGRUA at Amethi (UP) is under the administrative control of the Central 
Government. Eight FTOs are under State Governments and 26 are owned by the private 
sector. Indian FTOs had 229 aircraft for flying training as on 30 Nov 2021.  
ii) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) follows a five -phase certification 
process for setting up a FTO to check all the laid down rules and regulations. The 
Directorate of Flying T raining (DFT) at DGCA conducts scheduled annual inspections 
and unscheduled spot checks at FTOs.  
iii) India had 28 FTOs as on 31 st March 2016.  The number of FTOs was above 40 in 2015, 
but was reduced drastically after a comprehensive review of all FTOs by DGCA in 2015 
and subsequent closure of FTOs that did not meet the specified requirements.  

47 
 
iv) From 28 FTOs in March 2016, the number of FTOs is likely to increase to 43 by 
December 2022 and to 58 by December 2023, that is, an over 100% increase in a matter 
of two years.  
v) Airports Authority of India (AAI), on 25 September 2020, approved a liberalised Flying 
Training Organisations (FTO) policy wherein the concept of airport royalty (revenue 
share payment by FTOs to AAI) was abolished and land rental charges were 
significantly rationalised.   
vi) Under the old policy, around 13% royalty was charged on FTO revenue and land rentals 
were linked to local land rates.  These contributed to the financial distress, closure of 
training operations and long-drawn legal disputes between the FTOs and AAI.   
vii) Due to the investor-friendly liberalised FTO policy, AAI received bids for all nine FTO 
slots in March 2021 despite the airline sector going through a serious financial crisis due 
to Covid.   
viii) AAI issued award letters on 31 May 2021  and 29 October 2021 for nine FTOs to be 
established at five airports at Belagavi (Karnataka), Jalgaon (Maharashtra), Kalaburagi 
(Karnataka), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) and Lilabari (Assam). Soft launch of two 
FTOs at Kalaburagi was done on 15 August 2021 and at Lilabari on 12 April 2022.  
ix) In the second round of FTO creation, tender process is in progress for establishing 15 
FTOs at 10 Airports viz Cooch Behar, Tezu, Jharsuguda, Deoghar, Meerut, Kishangarh, 
Hubli, Kadapa, Bhavnagar and Salem Airports. 
x) DGCA has introduced new Online On Demand Examination (OLODE) for the AME 
and flight crew (FC) candidates with effect from November 2021. These license 
examinations provide an opportunity to the candidates to choose date and time to appear 
in the examination as per his/her choice on the available slots of the examinations. 
xi) DGCA has modified its regulations to empower Flying Instructors with the right to 
authorise flight operations at FTOs. This will help increase the flying hours and aircraft 
utilisation at each FTO and lead to faster completion of the CPL requirements. 
xii) Currently there is no shortage of pilots in the country. However, there is a shortage of 
commanders on certain types of aircraft and the same is being managed by utilizing 
foreign pilots by issuing Foreign Aircrew Temporary Authorization (FATA). Currently, 
there are 87 FATA holders in India.  

48 
 
xiii) Currently, there are around 9,000 pilots employed with various airline operators in 
India. Given the fleet projections, it is felt that India may require aroun d 1000 pilots per 
annum over the next five years.   
xiv) The number of pilots recruited in the country during the last three years is as under: 
 2019 2020 2021 
Number of pilots 
recruited 
2,368 400 296 
xv) The total number of flying hours at Indian FTOs increased from 1.20 lakh hours in the 
pre-Covid period (2019) to 1.62 lakh hours in 2021.  
xvi) DGCA issued 862 Commercial Pilot Licenses (C PL) in 2021, an all -time high. The 
number of CPLs issued in India over the last five years is as follows:  
xvii) The number of CPLs issued in India to cadets from Indian and foreign FTOs is as 
follows:  
Year CPL issued to 
cadets from 
Indian FTOs 
CPL issued to 
cadets from foreign 
FTOs 
Total Share of cadets 
from foreign 
FTOs 
2017 358 194 552 35% 
2018 415 225 640 35% 
2019 430 314 744 42% 
2020 335 243 578 42% 
2021 504 358 862 41% 
xviii) The number of CPL holders produced by Indian FTOs in 2021 is 504, an all-time high.  
xix) The good performance by Indian FTOs in 2021 is despite severe disruptions due to the 
Covid second wave, Cyclone Yaas, Cyclone Tauktae, early onset of monsoons and a 
rising cost of imported aviation fuel. 
xx) Typically, around 40% of Indian CPL holders do their flying training at a foreign FTO.  
Based on stakeholder feedback, the cost of doing flying training abroad is around Rs. 
1.2-1.5 crore per cadet.  This works out to a direct loss of foreign exchange to t he tune 
of Rs. 500 crore annually.  The multiplier effect in terms of loss of revenue and jobs on 
account of this exodus is far higher and needs to be reversed, under the Atmanirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan.  

49 
 
xxi) Cost of AvGas used by FTOs is a challenge. AvGas is not manufactured in India and 
hence we are completely dependent on imports. The IGST levied on import of AvGas is 
18%, additionally 18% GST is levied on the sale of AvGas.  The landed price for FTOs 
works out to Rs. 184.5 per litre as on March 9, 2022.  
xxii) Cost of AvGas is at a 98% premium to the cost price of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF), 
which is being sold to airlines at Rs. 94 per liter at Delhi, as on March 3, 2022. It may 
be noted that, to begin with, the cost of ATF in India itself is one of the highest in t he 
world. 
xxiii) In value terms, the IGST earned by the Government from AvGas imports is a mere Rs. 
3-5 crore per annum.  The tax levied on AvGas is ultimately recovered from a small 
base of flying schools. These flying schools have no option but to  charge the students. It 
increases the cost of training for students. In order to make cost of training affordable to 
children from all the sections of our society and not just the affluent, it is important to 
reduce IGST/GST on import and sale of AvGas to „Zero‟ or a bare minimum level. 
xxiv) Ministry of Civil Aviation has requested Ministry of Finance to consider requesting the 
GST Council to reduce the IGST and GST levied on import of AvGas from 18% to zero 
or one percent; This, along with various measures being undertaken by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation will go a long way in making our FTOs stronger and India a global 
training hub by 2030. 
xxv) Under Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan, Indian Oil is planning to produce AvGas at Koyali 
Refinery located in Vadodara (Gujarat).  The first  batch of AvGas is expected to be 
dispatched in June 2022, subject to quality certification by competent authorities.  
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.2 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government to increase the 
number of FTOs in the country , specially  the introduction of the new liberalized FTO 
policy. The Committee desires to know whether  the second round of FTO creation for 
addition of 15 more FTOs, is progressing as per schedule . The Committee also notes that 
due to high taxation rates on AvGas, the cost of pilots training increases substantially, 

50 
 
making it affordable only for the affluent sections of the society. The Committee 
recommends that the iss ue of reduction of taxation rate on AvGas may be taken up 
forcefully with the Ministry of Finance, to reduce the training cost and making pilot 
training affordable for all sections of the society.   
 
Handling of Air Cargo 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee during the course of its deliberations, raised the issue of lack of cargo 
facilities in the North -Eastern Region, especially in the States of Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh 
and Assam. The Committee is of the opinion that the economy of the North -Eastern Region is 
primarily based on horticulture, agriculture and tea cultivation, which can prosper only if 
proper markets are created for the sale of these products. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the existing Dibrugarh airport which is a major airport in the North -Eastern 
Region, may be developed as a standard airport for transport of horticulture, agriculture and tea 
products to all the regions of the country. 
(Para 62) 
6.1 Reply of the Ministry 
 At Dibrugarh, Old Terminal Building has been modified and Security Clearance has been 
applied to BCAS. The BCAS approval is awaited. 
 However, Domestic Air cargo movement facilitated through Passenger Terminal w.e.f. 
August 2021 with BCAS approval. 
 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2 The Committee recommends that BCAS approval for development of Dibrugarh 
airport for transport of horticulture; agriculture; and tea products, may be expedited, 
which will result in development of the North-Eastern region.  
 
Passenger Amenities at Airports 

51 
 
Facility of Aerobridges 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that despite charging passengers, 
PBB or aerobridge facilities are not being used by private airlines to reduce operational cost. 
Due to this, passengers, especially the aged ones have to bear the brunt and have to climb the 
stairs of the parking stand to board an aircraft. The Committee deplores this apathetic and 
unreasonable attitude of the private airlines and strongly recommends that its circular on the 
aforesaid subject may be strictly enforced. The Committee also recomme nds that regular 
surprise checks should also be carried out by the Ministry to ensure compliance of the circular 
and in case there is a default, the concerned private airlines should be penalized. 
(Para 76) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 DGCA has discussed the matter with airport &airline operators. The airlines have 
informed that the usage of Bridge Mount Equipment (such as Aerobridges) at  airports are 
attributed to commercial issues i.e. at times it adds to financial burden and increases turn -around 
time of the aircrafts and hence is not commercially viable to use such facilities at airports. Since 
this is a  commercial issue between an airport & an airline and it does not affect the safety of 
operations, DGCA/Ministry cannot issue directions for mandatory usage  of Bridge Mount 
Equipment (PCA/FEGP) at airports. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.2 The Committee notes that the DGCA/Ministry cannot issue directions to airport or 
airlines for mandatory usage of aerobridges at airports which causes major issues to 
passengers, especially the aged ones.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
the Ministry may at least issue necessary instructions to all the airports/ airlines to provide 
assistance to aged/differently abled passengers to board an aircraft  with the usage of 
passenger boarding ramps, wheelchairs and hydraulic lifts.        
 
Seaplane Policy 
Recommendation/Observation 

52 
 
8. The Committee expresses serious concern that the seaplane policy is still not in place and 
is still being finalized in consultation with stakeholders. The Committee also laments the fact that 
the first seaplane that was operationalized, was stopped due to technical reasons. It expresses 
concern at the lack of seriousness of the Ministry, as regards Seaplane policy. The Com mittee 
has repeatedly pointed out the need for Seaplane policy in view of the fact that our country is 
endowed with rivers and lakes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a feasibility study 
may be conducted in the North -Eastern Region for operation o f Seaplanes in the big lakes and 
rivers of the North -Eastern Region. The Committee also stresses on the expeditious finalization 
of Seaplane policy. It also recommends that proper planning should be done before start of the 
operations, so that the operations are not halted. 
(Para 94) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 India has about 400 airstrips lying unused and about 7500 km long coastline. As such, 
there is vast potential to operationalise these airstrips and coastline with small aeroplanes, 
helicopters and seaplanes to provide last mile air connectivity to the common people living in far 
flung and remote areas of the country. 
 
8.2 Accordingly, Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) after extensive consultations with 
States/ UTs, Airlines and other key stakeholders of  the Industry has proposed to promote small 
aircraft operations including seaplanes and helicopters with more focus to the small aircraft 
operations for last mile connectivity and introduce a sub-scheme under UDAN. 
 
8.3 Small Aircraft Scheme (SAS) includin g the operation of seaplane has been issued by the 
Honourable Minister of Civil Aviation launched on 26.03.2022 at WINGS Hyderabad.  As per 
the provisions for Seaplanes in SAS, proposals are being invited from airlines under the special 
round of bidding UDA N 4.2 for cancelled routes of previous rounds and the Sea Plane routes 
proposed by Sagarmala. Start date of submission of the bid is 28.04.2022. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.4 The Committee notes that Small Aircraft Scheme (SAS) which includes the 
operation of Seaplane was launched on 26.03.2022 , however a Seaplane Policy has yet not 

53 
 
been finalized by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
that a S eaplane Policy may be formulated expeditiously in consultation with various 
stakeholders, which will provide last mile air connectivity to the common people living in 
far flung and remote areas of the country. The Committee also desires to know the status of 
the bidding process for the seaplane routes proposed by Sagarmala.   
 
Connectivity of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. In view of the above reply, the Committee in its 308th Action Taken Report on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in its  Two Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report on 
the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of India‟, had noted the proactive action taken by 
the Ministry, to ensure connectivity, and that a letter had been sent by Chairperson, AAI to Chief 
Secretaries of va rious State Governments to align and relate the City Master Plan with the 
Airport Master Plan. The Committee may also be informed of the opinion of the States across the 
country, especially as regards land acquisition, proper compensation and rehabilitatio n of the 
land owners, as it is a teething problem in infrastructure projects. The Committee may be 
informed about the views of the State Governments on the proposal of aligning City Master Plan 
with the Airport Master Plan. 
(Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 None of the States has come forward with its view on the proposal of aligning City 
Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan. However, AAI has been advised to take up the issue 
afresh with State Governments.             
9.2 In the meanwhile, the Gati Shakti, National Master Plan has stressed the need to improve 
multi-modal infrastructure connectivity through convergence of developmental work and 
adoption of a holistic approach on major infrastructure projects. Accordingly, this asp ect is taken 
into consideration while planning all Greenfield projects of airport development.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 

54 
 
9.3 The Committee expresses surprise at the fact that none of the States has come 
forward with its view on the proposal of aligning City Master Plan with the Airport Master 
Plan which will ultimately benefit the economy of the State and the Nation at  large. 
However, the Committee strongly recommends that the AAI may proactively take up this 
matter with the State Governments and expedite their replies as the opinion of State 
Governments is imperative for the alignment of the City Master Plan with the Airport 
Master Plan.  
 
Helicopter operations in the country 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee appreciates the launch of „HeliSewa‟ portal to provide a single window 
access to operator and authorities to communicate information about helicopter operations. The 
Committee also notes that States/ UTs have been asked to populate requisite data on the portal. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest status of updation and the response of the 
States/ UT Governments and whether any timeline has been set for the process. The Committee 
also appreciates the new initiative „ Heli-Disha‟ wherein administrative guidance would be 
provided for civil helicopter operations. The Committee hopes that this will facilitate and help in 
the growth of helicopter operations in the country. 
(Para 105) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Ministry has organized a few workshops with the State/UT authorities for hand holding 
to facilitate helisewa portal for helicopter operations. Ministry of Civil Aviation is also regularly 
interacting with State/UT authorities for uploading/updating the details of distr ict-wise 
permanent helipads by District Authorities in the „HeliSewa‟ portal for seamless operations by 
using credentials of Parichay login. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.2 The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Ministry to facilitate ‘HeliSewa’ 
portal for helicopter operations. The Committee stresses upon the dissemination and 
adoption of ‘Heli-Disha’ by district authorities which will provide administrative guidan ce 
for civil helicopter operations.   
  

55 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil - 
 
***** 
 
  

56 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry 
The Committee is of the opinion that shortfall in fund utilization over the last four years i.e. 
2017-18 to 2020 -21, is a matter of concern and needs to be corrected, at the earliest 
possible. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, but again reiterates that the 
Ministry should focus on making realistic projections to the Ministry of Finance.     
(Para 1.2) 
Greenfield Project, Brownfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project 
The Committee desires to know the action plan of the Ministry as regards formulation of a 
proper blueprint or guidelines for Greenfield and Brownfield projects. It also ur ges the 
Ministry to expedite the development of the nine Greenfield airports and would like to be 
apprised about the expected schedule by when these airports will be operationalised. The 
Committee would further like to know the details of the remaining fou r airports and 
whether any timeline has been fixed to operationalize them.     
(Para 2.2) 
Sabarimala Airport 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take follow up action and impress upon the 
M/s KSIDC to furnish the updated Techno -Economic Feasibility Study (TEFS) Report at 
the earliest, so that a Greenfield Airport may be setup at Kottayam which will benefit lakhs 
of pilgrims visiting Sabarimala every year.   
(Para 3.3) 
Requirement of Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) 
The Committee reiterates its concern at the undue and avoidable delay in recruitment of 
ATCOs and strongly recommends the AAI to fill up the vacancies without any further 
delay.   
(Para 4.2) 

57 
 
Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Gov ernment to increase the number of 
FTOs in the country, specially the introduction of the new liberalized FTO policy. The 
Committee desires to know whether the second round of FTO creation for addition of 15 
more FTOs, is progressing as per schedule. The Co mmittee also notes that due to high 
taxation rates on AvGas, the cost of pilots training increases substantially, making it 
affordable only for the affluent sections of the society. The Committee recommends that the 
issue of reduction of taxation rate on A vGas may be taken up forcefully with the Ministry 
of Finance, to reduce the training cost and making pilot training affordable for all sections 
of the society.   
(Para 5.2) 
Handling of Air Cargo 
The Committee recommends that BCAS approval for development of Dibrugarh airport 
for transport of horticulture; agriculture; and tea products, may be expedited, which will 
result in development of the North-Eastern region.  
(Para 6.2) 
Passenger Amenities at Airports 
Facility of Aerobridges 
The Committee notes that the DGCA/Ministry cannot issue directions to airport or airlines 
for mandatory usage of aerobridges at airports which causes major issues to passengers, 
especially the aged ones. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry 
may at least issue necessary instructions to all the airports/ airlines to provide assistance to 
aged/differently abled passengers to board an aircraft with the usage of passenger boarding 
ramps, wheelchairs and hydraulic lifts.        
(Para 7.2) 
Seaplane Policy 
The Committee notes that Small Aircraft Scheme (SAS) which includes the operation of 
Seaplane was launched on 26.03.2022, however a Seaplane Policy has yet not been finalized 
by the Ministry. The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that a Seaplane 
Policy may be formulated expeditiously in consultation with various stakeholders, which 
will provide last mile air connectivity to the common people living in far flung and remote 

58 
 
areas of the country. The Committee also desires to know the status of the bidding process 
for the seaplane routes proposed by Sagarmala.   
(Para 8.4) 
Connectivity of Airports 
The Committee expresses surprise at the fact that none of the States has come forward with 
its view on the proposal of aligning City Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan which 
will ultimately benefit the economy of the State and the Nation at  large. However, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the AAI may proactively take up this matter w ith 
the State Governments and expedite their replies as the opinion of State Governments is 
imperative for the alignment of the City Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan.  
(Para 9.3) 
Helicopter operations in the country 
The Committee notes the steps be ing taken by the Ministry to facilitate ‘HeliSewa’ portal 
for helicopter operations. The Committee stresses upon the dissemination and adoption of 
‘Heli-Disha’ by district authorities which will provide administrative guidance for civil 
helicopter operations.   
(Para 10.2) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

Annexure-'9
North€rn Region
s.
No. Airport
Current status of insrallation of
UVGI
Curr€nt status ofinstallation of
MERV-I3 filters
Rcnlark
Complet€d In-progress \ot Feasible ( ompleted In-
Progress
Not
F€asible
I Dehrrdun
2 Jammu
Jodhpur
.l Amritsar
5 Prayagraj
() Bikaner Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is nor
available at airport.
Udaipur
ri Varanasi
Srinagar
t0 CATC,
Prayagraj
Southern Region
lt
Chennai
Airport
t2 Belagavi
ll Calicul
I,1 Agatti Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
I5 Coimhatore
t6 H ubli
t7 Kalaburgi Not feasible as c€nterlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
l8 Kadapa Not feasible as centerlized afu conditioning is not
arailable al
l9 Madurai
20 l\4vsore
2l Pondicherry
22 Rajahmundry
23 Salem Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
a\,ailable tt ai
24 Iirupali
25 Trichy
26 Tuti(jorin Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available xl
21 Vijayawada
Airport
l8 Visakhapatnam
vbw.
Status Renort on Irstsllarion of [,rVGI & MERV-13 filters at AAI _4.irnorts
[-l L
I---l
[-_l
--------------
Annexure- A
61

s.
No. ,\irport
Current status of installation of
UVGI
Curr€nt stetus oI installation of
MERv-13 filtcrs
Remarks
Completed ln-progress Nol lrcesihlc Completed In-
progress
Edstern Region
29 Kolkata
i0
Jharuguda Not feasible to provide MERV-I3 filters as no
space available.
3t
Bagdogra
Not feasible as cenierlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
32 Bhubneswar
33 Caya
3+ Patna
35 Port Blair
36 Pakyong
Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
3',l Raipur
38
Cooch Behar
Not Gasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport-
WESTERN REGION
40 Akola Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
-11 Aurangabad
12 Bhavnagar Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
43 Bhopal
4-l Bhuj
,t5 Diu Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
a\ailahle ct airpon.
16 Goa
41 Gondia Airport Presently no commercial flight operation from
Gondia Airport.
t8 Indore
49 Jabalpur
50 Jalgaon Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
5l Jamnagar
52 J uhu Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airpon.
53 Kandla Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is noi
available at airporl.
54 Keshod Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airpon.
55 Kolhapur Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is nol
available at airpon
i6 Nagpur Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
)*A)/
Not
Fe.sible
Ranchi
39
FI
t--
[-l
62

s.
No. Airporl
Current status oI inst{lhtion of
UvGI
Current status ofinslallation of
MERV-13 filters
Rcnrarks
Complet€d ln-progress Not lieasiblc Complcted ln-
progress
Not
Feas,ble
5'l Porbandar
58 Pune
59 RajkoI
60 Solapur Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airpon.
6l Surat
6). Vadodara
Norlh Eastern Region
6i Agartala
6,1 Barapa i Not feasible as cenlerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
6;i Dibrugarh
66 Dimapur Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airpon.
67 Lilabari Not feasible as centerlized ai. conditioning is not
available at airport.
68
Jorhat Not feasible as cenlerlized air conditioning is not
available at ai.port.
70 Silchar Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
'7t Tezu Not feasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at airport.
'72 Tezpur Nol leasible as centerlized air conditioning is not
available at aieon.
r.\h/l-v
1.8
lmphal
/\
I
63

Status report of UVGI and MERV 13 filters at Airport operated by 
State Government and PPP partners. 
 
 Airport  Status of installation of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters 
1. Delhi IGI airport has UVGI system installed at strategically located Re -
circulatory Air Handling Units (312 nos.) feeding passenger areas across 
Terminal 3, including International Arrivals. 
Airport also has bag filters of MERV 14 / EU8 specification in AHUs 
across Terminal 3. 
 
2. Shirdi  Airport Operator MADC is in the process of procurement of UVGI and 
MERV- 13 filters. 
3.  Nagpur  Airport Operator MIHAN is in the process of procurement of UVGI and 
MERV- 13 filters. 
4. Jaipur Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
5. Guwahati Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
6. Trivandrum  Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
7. Lucknow Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
8. Ahmedabad  Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
9. Mangalore Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
10. Mumbai Airport Operator will take decision after conducting the feasibility study 
of UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters. 
11. Bangalore Bangalore Airport Operator  (BIAL) has informed that it  is  using Merv-8 
filters at KIAB Air handling units as these are old units. In case Merv -13 
filters are installed , it will automatically result in increase in the static 
pressure and reduction in the airflow which is not desirable. However, 
BIAL has already installed UVGI systems for the Air-handling units in the 
International arrivals. Further, fresh air intake into the system  have been 
increased as well as periodic infusion of disinfectant in the system to 
reduce the impact. Further, Air-conditioning system of the upcoming 
KIAB Terminal 2 is provided with Merv -13 filters and UVGI systems. 
12. Hyderabad Airport op erator GHIAL has installed MERV -13 filters in all existing 
terminals. Currently, Airport Operator is  in the process of checking 
feasibility for installation of UVGI system. 
13. Kannur Adequate steps taken from the initial stage o f the pandemic,  which 
includes cleaning of Air filter s, providing adequate ventilation (fresh air 
and exhaust) and regular inspection of indoor unit coils at the Airport. 
The Toilet and kitchen exhausts fan are always kept in operating mode 
and the Heat recovery  wheel (H RW) is in off mode to reduce cross 
contamination and the wheels are sanitized at the rime of restarting. 
The Terminal room temperature is maintained in between 24 degrees 
Celsius and 30 degrees  Celsius and relative humidity is maintained 
between 40% and 70%. 
14. Cochin  Airport operator CIAL is in the process of implementing the UVGI 
systems and MERV-13 filters. 
Annexure- A1
64

t qrrftq ftqFTqil{ qrtr{,-tpr
ATRPoRTS AurHoRlrv oF INDIA
F, No. Clrro 4gfto|zozq-Cammercial )lY Dated: or.o4.zozz
To
Thc Regional,Executlve Directors
Airyorts Authority of Infia
(NR/WR/SR/ER/NBR)-
New DelhilMumbafl Chennai/Kolkata/Cuwalud
The Airport Directors
"{iraorts Authorlty of India' Chennai/Kolkata Atiport
Chennai/Kolkata -
Commercial Circular: i6lao-ee
' Subject: Pricing of Packaged Prnducte at AAI Ah?ort8 - reg-
This is in continuatioo of CHQ Circular No. AAI/CHQ/MRP/oual MRLF/eo18
dated rr.rz.zor8, on the subiect noted above, vide which it was directed to ensure that
thc packaged products .are sold ut Unp only by the Concessi&aires at all AAI
Airports. (Copy enct6sed)
e. The Parliament. Stantling Committee, rturing the discussions o-'r demands
fqr Grants (zozz-4) inthe Parliament, has recommended that the packaged food
products are to be sold only at MRP's and tbe circuldr on the priees of the
p4ckaged food products are tobe strictJy adhered to.
In the. above backdrop, all REDs/APDs (Chennai/Kolkatai are requested to
ensure compliance of the directions (at all AAI airpore) issued by CHQ vitle
dated rr.rz.zorS.
(Sanj al
Executive Director (Co
Encl: as above
Copvtb:
All Airport Directors
t{I
n
.,r'
ffi1rht lrc,
R4tu Gsn&l Bha,van
{ulc : 24532950
Phone : 2463?$50
REd,r Fd qqEr Tt HF1tmot
SafdarlurE AiIport, Ne\i D€lhi-110003
Annexure- B
65

t
sM(coMML)
'llr
Sulrjo!t:
linpl-i_4r_alrol&. .
c<)try-lru
All Air.pot,t I)ircc[ols
qn-fiq ft{rqw{ vrfu6-{q 
601
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
1 1 1997
r,'. No. AAr/crre/MRr?/DUAr. M Ri'l,2otsll4s7 -' i+A1
'l'hc Rtgionul tlxccnlivc DirccLor' .. .
Airpoits Atthor.ity of Indit
NolLhorrrf Wcstirir/Sou thern/tlastern/{or.th-Iias tcrn Rcgio n
Nov l)clhilMrrrnhai/Chcnnai/I(trlkata/Guwahati
'Ihc Airport Dirirctors,
Airporl$,Aut hority of Indir,
Chcnn4i/Kolkata Air.ports
Clrcnnai/Kolltata,
Datcd!tr,r.,o',e.
, CIIICUTAIT
Itricing ofpacl<agc<I conrnroditics nt ,lirpo[ts - r'cg.
.' . .ln continirrr.iorr o[ iomnrclcinl Insrruction No. tz/zor7 clatcd zg.6.zorz, on thc suhicct
,rtotc<l alrovc' r'idc rvhich.iL rvls <.liractcd to culh pr.acticc ofovcrcirarying i,ipni,t ,,i.a .,,rrinn,i'iii*at iurports ils r.ho s mc is absolutc violation of provisions of l.cgul-Mcirolirgy Act,. zoog anrl thc1..{ial Iuctiol()sv (packagccrcomrnoairiosir{ulci, zoi, d,,r,y-";il;i.,i?;,:*.iiry roiui.nJ"j.- - "'-
t.D ll,wcvcr', a fcrv incidonLs r:f .ovcrclrarging and duar ilr.icing, havs bccn rcportcd ilt c[()-Conrmcrcirrl, thr.ough Corpnratc Mgilancc l)ift;i;mtc. ---- "
t' - In vicrv of abovc,,thc.dirccr.ions givcn hy commcrciar Instr.uction No. rz/zorz da1(:(lz3.6.zo17 arcrcitcrarctr for srricr. compriantc of trrc sa*. oLrii,tai oir[*i-,,,',r*',iffi.KiXili,r. .
' dl rlrc lcgat Mcrroto*y Acr, ,,1".0,1r.i iig;iM.i;;i.diru.r-^g",t Commodirics)tr*tcs, 2rrr aci:in'iplcr.cntctl in lruc ]crtcr & q:i.it at Ar\r airpouls i.[., io pui-l compluLc ban on thc pra.ctict: oft^r'tcltittgins.attd d.tral plicins ot thc idcnticai conrmotlty' ii ,.y urtn i"l"-i r.i',r,liilrii,ii,rac'tausc lcliarrrirrg sarc orpacltagcd ploducr. on Mlil, is d;ri in;;ipolntetl in il ;;;',"",i,,il*};,riocrrnrcrts, rllrcr.cvcr applicithlc. -' '---.'' -. i
3, , All Ailprrrt l)ircctors ;,r. o,trirot ,n unruru ,ho, or*osii",,rt.i,,i'i'iur'riii ""ii,. r,'",.iril., rr rs oirc"t.J to ais;tilffiil1[1tr,::,::rt"-TlTTj',i'^l]il-iiTl
,nrultiplc locarious for.easy visihility ro ull ltrc airpolill;,; '^'t
(K. I.. ShaIlxcctitivc J)irector (()rmmcrcial ,tQ
)
Raliv Gandhl Bhawan
safda{ung Alrpo(, N6w Oelhl.11000g
Wfu Ti4 rrc-{ , nnqlli-zr Esr{ f{sI d fufr-rrbooa
i
!
1
I
I
l
l
l
'I
ri
,^'i
i
Ij
i
l
:
q{qFr : 24632960 ,
. Phon6:24E32950
66

oi6
' 111997U20A2/O/o GM(COMML)
[nttEv'u(E- A
NOTICE
AII the Passengers are hereby informed that all the
packaged items are sold at MRP only at this airport'
Any passenger having grievance on overcharging
on MRP may Please write to @aai.aero
(email id of PGO at the airport / commercial in-
charge)
BY ORDER
AIRPORT DTRECTOR
67

1 
 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
68

2 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V.Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A.Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
12. Shri Tapir Gao 
13. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
14. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
15. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
17. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
18. Shri Prince Raj 
19. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
20. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
21. Shri Dushyant Singh 
22. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
23. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
24.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
69

3 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members  of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e.,  
 
(i) to consider and adopt the various Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its following Reports;  
a) xxx xxx xxx 
b) 314th Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
c) xxx xxx xxx 
d) xxx xxx xxx 
 
(ii) xxx  xxx xxx 
  
2. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted the 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor modifications of 
typographical and factual errors. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
A.A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 
2022. Shri Ram Margani Bharat, M.P., and in his absence, Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
M.P. were authorized to lay the abovementioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20 th 
December, 2022.  
(After the four draft Reports have been considered and adopted) 
 
Witnesses: - 
   xxx xxx xxx 
4. xxx xxx xxx 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The meeting adjourned at 5:12 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                              Swarabji B.  
15th December, 2022                                                                                                   Director 
 
_______________ 
xxx Relate to other matters. 
70